Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Western world 2 Significantly influenced countries 3 Views Toggle Views subsection 3.1 Kishore Mahbubani 3.2 Samuel P. Huntington 3.3 Edward Said 4 Process Toggle Process subsection 4.1 Colonization and Europeanization (1400s–1970s) 4.2 In the Americas and Oceania 4.3 In Asia 4.3.1 East Asia 4.3.1.1 China 4.3.1.2 Korea 4.3.1.3 Japan 4.3.2 South Asia 4.3.2.1 India 4.3.3 Southeast Asia 4.3.3.1 Thailand 4.3.3.2 Vietnam 4.3.4 West Asia 4.3.4.1 Iran 4.3.4.2 Turkey 4.4 In Europe 4.4.1 Russia 4.5 Globalization (1970s–present) 5 Consequences Toggle Consequences subsection 5.1 Linguistic influence 5.2 Sports importance in Westernization 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Westernization 38 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Русский Shqip Српски / srpski Suomi Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Westernize ) Global adoption of western culture and values Westernization (or Westernisation , see spelling differences ), also Europeanisation or occidentalization (from the Occident ), is a process whereby societies come under or adopt what is considered to be Western culture , in areas such as industry , technology , science , education , politics , economics , lifestyle , law , norms , mores , customs , traditions , values , mentality , perceptions , diet , clothing , language , writing system , religion , and philosophy . During colonialism it often involved the spread of Christianity .

[ 1 ] A related concept is Northernization , which is the consolidation or influence of the Global North .

[ 2 ] Westernization has been a growing influence across the world in the last few centuries, with some thinkers assuming Westernization to be the equivalent of modernization , [ 3 ] a way of thought that is often debated. The overall process of Westernization is often two-sided in that Western influences and interests themselves are joined with parts of the affected society, at minimum, to become a more Westernized society, with the putative goal of attaining a Western life or some aspects of it, while Western societies are themselves affected by this process and interaction with non-Western groups.

Westernization traces its roots back to Ancient Greece .

[ citation needed ] Later, the Roman Empire took on the first process of Westernization as it was heavily influenced by Greece and created a new culture based on the principles and values of the Ancient Greek society. The Romans emerged with a culture that grew into a new Western identity based on the Greco-Roman society. Westernization can also be compared to acculturation and enculturation . Acculturation is "the process of cultural and psychological change that takes place as a result of contact between cultural groups and their individual members".

[ 4 ] After contact, changes in cultural patterns are evident within one or both cultures. Specific to Westernization and the non-Western culture, foreign societies tend to adopt changes in their social systems relative to Western ideology, lifestyle, and physical appearance, along with numerous other aspects, and shifts in culture patterns can be seen to take root as a community becomes acculturated to Western customs and characteristics – in other words, Westernized. The phenomenon of Westernization does not follow any one specific pattern across societies as the degree of adaption and fusion with Western customs will occur at varying magnitudes within different communities .

[ 5 ] Specifically, the extent to which domination, destruction, resistance, survival, adaptation, or modification affect a native culture may differ following inter-ethnic contact.

[ 6 ] Western world [ edit ] Main article: Western world The Western world The West was originally defined as the Western world . A thousand years later, the East-West Schism separated the Catholic Church and Eastern Orthodox Church from each other. The definition of Western changed as the West was influenced by and spread to other nations. Islamic and Byzantine scholars added to the Western canon when their stores of Greek and Roman literature jump-started the Renaissance . The Cold War also reinterpreted the definition of the West by excluding the countries of the former Eastern Bloc . Today, most modern uses of the term refer to the societies in the West and their close genealogical , linguistic , and philosophical descendants. Typically included are those countries whose ethnic identity and dominant culture are derived from Western European culture . Though it shares a similar historical background, the Western world is not a monolithic bloc, as many cultural, linguistic, religious, political, and economic differences exist between Western countries and populations.

Significantly influenced countries [ edit ] The following countries or regions experienced a significant influence by the process of Westernization: Armenia : [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Geographically located in the Caucasus region of West Asia , Armenia's culture has been increasingly influenced by the process of Westernization. Throughout its history, Armenia has been influenced by Western and Eastern civilizations. Armenia became the first state in the world to adopt Christianity as its official religion in 301 AD. The traditional Armenian homeland composed of Eastern Armenia and Western Armenia came under the rule of the Roman , Byzantine , Persian, Arab, Ottoman, and Russian empires. Current Armenia gained its independence in 1991, following the collapse of the Soviet Union . Today, the Government of Armenia maintains positive relations with Iran, Russia, and the West, including the United States and the EU . The country participates in various organizations linked to the EU, such as the Eastern Partnership , the Euronest Parliamentary Assembly and is a member of the Council of Europe , the European Political Community , the OSCE , the BSEC , La Francophonie , and NATO's Partnership for Peace and Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council . In 2017, Armenia signed an extensive agreement with the EU; the CEPA agreement further strengthens economic and political ties. Armenia is also a member of various European organisations for sports, education, and cultural events such as UEFA , the European Olympic Committees , and the European Higher Education Area , and participates in the Eurovision Song Contest .

Azerbaijan : [ 12 ] Geographically located in the Caucasus mountain range (natural border between Western Asia and Eastern Europe ). Azerbaijan borrowed Western traditions mainly as a result of imperial Russian influence, with the Muslim world's first opera and secular democracy being established there before its invasion by the Soviets . Currently, the country participates in various European organizations including the EU's Eastern Partnership , the Council of Europe , and GUAM . It is also a member of European organisations for sports such as UEFA and the European Olympic Committees , and regularly participates in the Eurovision Song Contest . Despite this, the country remains an authoritarian regime with considerable human rights and press freedom issues.

Cape Verde : [ 13 ] An insular country in West Africa , Cape Verde has influences of European culture (particularly Portuguese) and, together with the Azores and Madeira ( Portugal ), and the Canary Islands ( Spain ), it is part of the archipelagos of Macaronesia . Due to this, the country has shared close diplomatic and cultural relations with both Iberian countries and has even tried to approach Western organizations, like the EU and NATO .

Hong Kong , Macau , and Singapore : [ 14 ] Despite their geographical positions in East and Southeast Asia , due to the heavy influences of European heritage (particularly British and Portuguese ) culture, they are at-least partially westernized.

Israel : [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Although Israel is geographically located in Western Asia , many Western cultural influences were brought in Israel by Jewish settlers from the diaspora , particularly countries like Canada , France , Germany , the United Kingdom , and the United States . It is a member of the OECD . It is often a member of European organisations for sports and cultural events such as UEFA and Eurovision , which is due in large part to Israel's ouster from their respective Asian counterparts. According to Sammy Smooha , a professor emeritus of sociology at Haifa University, Israel is described as a "hybrid," a modern and developed "semi-Western" state. With time, he acknowledged, Israel will become "more and more Western." But as a result of the ongoing Arab–Israeli conflict , full Westernization will be a slow process in Israel.

[ 16 ] Japan , South Korea , and Taiwan : [ 17 ] Although they are geographically located in East Asia , the three countries have westernized themselves by adopting democratic forms of government, free market economic systems, major contributions to Western science and technology, and could be described as "hybrid", "semi-Western" states.

Americas : [ 18 ] Most countries in Americas are considered Western countries, largely because most of its peoples are descended from Europeans (Spanish and Portuguese settlers and later immigration from other European nations ), and their society operates in a highly Westernized way. Most countries in the Americas use either English , French , Spanish or Portuguese as their official language. According to the CIA World Factbook , there has also been considerable immigration to South America, particularly to Argentina , Brazil , Chile , and Uruguay , from European nations other than Spain and Portugal (for example, from Germany , Italy , the Netherlands , etc.—see Immigration to Argentina , Immigration to Brazil , Immigration to Chile , and Immigration to Uruguay ).

[ citation needed ] Lebanon : [ 19 ] Geographically located in Western Asia, Lebanon is the most Westernized country in the Arab world. In ancient history, Lebanon was ruled by the Hellenistic and Roman empires. Even though it was later ruled by the Caliphate, Lebanon has the highest proportion of Christians in the Arab world, and Christians have dominated the country politically, economically and culturally. Since it was historically a French mandate , France promotes French culture and European-style education in Lebanon. At that time, Beirut was known as the "Little Paris of the Middle East". Currently, French language is still widely spoken and Lebanon is a member of the Organization of la Francophonie .

Philippines : [ 20 ] Geographically located in Southeast Asia , due to heavy influences of European (particularly Spanish ) and American cultures in Filipino culture , the country is considered Westernized. Moreover, nearly 90% of the Filipino population practices Christianity.

Turkey : [ 21 ] Although geographically only 3% of Turkey lies in Europe ( East Thrace ) and the rest in Western Asia , Turkey is one of the most Westernized Turkic countries. The country has a similar economic system, has a customs union with the European Union in addition to being an official candidate for membership , and is a member of several European & Western organizations such as the OECD , OSCE , the Western European and Others Group , the Council of Europe ,  the European Political Community , the BSEC , Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council , and NATO . It is also a member of European organisations for sports such as UEFA and the European Olympic Committees , and has participated in the Eurovision Song Contest .

Views [ edit ] Kishore Mahbubani [ edit ] Kishore Mahbubani 's book entitled The Great Convergence: Asia, the West, and the Logic of One World (Public Affairs), is very optimistic.

[ why?

] It proposes that a new global civilization is being created. The majority of non-Western countries admire and adhere to Western living standards. It says this newly emerging global order has to be ruled through new policies and attitudes. He argues that policymakers all over the world must change their preconceptions and accept that we live in one world. The national interests must be balanced with global interests and the power must be shared. Mahbubani urges that only through these actions can we create a world that converges benignly.

Samuel P. Huntington posits a conflict between "the West and the Rest" and offers three forms of general action that non-Western civilizations can react toward Western countries.

[ 22 ] Non-Western countries can attempt to achieve isolation to preserve their own values and protect themselves from Western invasion. He argues that the cost of this action is high and only a few states can pursue it.

According to the theory of " band-wagoning " non-Western countries can join and accept Western values .

Non-Western countries can make an effort to balance Western power through modernization. They can develop economic, and military power and cooperate with other non-Western countries against the West while still preserving their own values and institutions.

Mahbubani counters this argument in his other book, The New Asian Hemisphere: The Irresistible Shift of Global Power to the East . This time, he argues that Western influence is now "unraveling", with Eastern powers such as China arising. He states: …the 5.6 billion people who live outside the West no longer believe in the innate or inherent superiority of Western civilization. Instead, many are beginning to question whether the West remains the most civilized part of the world. What we are witnessing today…is the progressive unwrapping of these many layers of Western influences.

[ 23 ] He explains the decline of Western influence, stating reasons as to the loss of Western credibility with the rest of the world.

There is an increasing perception that Western countries will prioritize their domestic problems over international issues, despite their spoken and written promises of having global interests and needs.

The West has become increasingly biased and close-minded in their perception of "non-Western" countries such as China, declaring it an "un-free" country for not following a democratic form of government.

The West uses a double standard when dealing with international issues.

As the biggest Eastern populations gain more power, they are moving away from the Western influences they sought after in the past. The "anti-Americanism" sentiment is not temporary, as Westerners like to believe – the change in the Eastern mindset has become far too significant for it to change back.

Samuel P. Huntington [ edit ] In contrast to territorial delineation, others, like the American political scientist Samuel P. Huntington in The Clash of Civilizations , consider what is "Western" based on religious affiliation, such as deeming the majority- Western Christian part of Europe and North America the West, and creating 6 other civilizations, including Latin America , Confucian , Japanese, Islamic , Hindu and Slavic-Orthodox , to organize the rest of the globe.

[ 24 ] Huntington argued that after the end of the Cold War , world politics had been moved into a new aspect in which non-Western civilizations were no more the exploited recipients of Western civilization but become another important actor joining the West to shape and move the world history.

[ 25 ] Huntington believed that while the age of ideology had ended, the world had only reverted to a normal state of affairs characterized by cultural conflict. In his thesis, he argued that the primary axis of conflict in the future will be along cultural and religious lines.

[ 26 ] Edward Said [ edit ] In Orientalism Edward Said views Westernization as it occurred in the process of colonization , an exercise of essentializing a "subject race" in order to more effectively dominate them. Said references Arthur Balfour , the British Prime Minister from 1902 to 1905, who regarded the rise of nationalism in Egypt in the late 19th century as counterproductive to a "benevolent" system of occupational rule. Balfour frames his argument in favor of continued rule over the Egyptian people by appealing to England's great "understanding" of Egypt's civilization and purporting that England's cultural strengths complemented and made them natural superiors to Egypt's racial deficiencies. Regarding this claim, Said says, "Knowledge to Balfour means surveying a civilization from its origins to its prime to its decline – and of course, it means being able to...The object of such knowledge is inherently vulnerable to scrutiny; this object is a 'fact' which, if it develops, changes, or otherwise transforms itself...[the civilization] nevertheless is fundamentally, even ontologically stable. To have such knowledge of such a thing is to dominate it." The act of claiming coherent knowledge of a society in effect objectifies and others it into marginalization, making people who are classified into that race as "almost everywhere nearly the same." Said also argues that this relationship to the "inferior" races, in fact, works to also fortify and make coherent what is meant by "the West"; if "The Oriental is irrational, depraved (fallen), childlike, "different..." then "...the European is rational, virtuous, mature, normal." Thus, "the West" acts as a construction in the similar way as does "the Orient" – it is a created notion to justify a particular set of power relations, in this case, the colonization and rule of a foreign country.

Process [ edit ] See also: Western influence on Africa and Anglicisation Colonization and Europeanization (1400s–1970s) [ edit ] Main article: Colonialism See also: European diaspora and American diaspora From the 1400s onward, Europeanization and colonialism spread gradually over much of the world and controlled different regions during this five centuries long period, colonizing or subjecting the majority of the globe.

Following World War II , Western leaders and academics sought to expand innate liberties and international equality. A period of decolonization began. At the end of the 1960s, most colonies were allowed autonomy. Those new states often adopted some aspects of Western politics such as a constitution, while frequently reacting against Western culture.

[ citation needed ] In the Americas and Oceania [ edit ] See also: North American frontier and Americanization The racial mixing of Spaniards and indigenous Latin Americans.

Due to the colonization of the Americas and Oceania by Europeans , the cultural, ethnic, and linguistic make-up of the Americas and Oceania has been changed. This is most visible in settler colonies such as: Australia and New Zealand in Oceania, and the United States , Canada , Argentina , Brazil , Chile , Costa Rica , and Uruguay in the Americas, where the traditional indigenous population has been predominantly replaced demographically by non-indigenous settlers due to transmitted disease and conflict. This demographic takeover in settler countries has often resulted in the linguistic, social, and cultural marginalisation of indigenous people. Even in countries where large populations of indigenous people remain or the indigenous peoples have mixed ( mestizo ) considerably with European settlers, such as countries in Latin America and the Caribbean: Mexico , Peru , Panama , Suriname , Ecuador , Bolivia , Venezuela , Belize , Paraguay , South Africa , Colombia , Guatemala , Haiti , Honduras , Guyana , El Salvador , Jamaica , Cuba , or Nicaragua , relative marginalisation still exists.

Latin America was shaped by Iberian culture, with local religious forms also mixing with Christian influences.

[ 27 ] In Mexico, indigenous people adopted writing alongside their traditional oral and pictorial forms of communication.

[ 28 ] In Asia [ edit ] King Amanullah Khan of Afghanistan attempted to Westernize his country in the 1920s, but tribal revolts caused his abdication.

General reactions to Westernization can include fundamentalism , protectionism , or embrace to varying degrees. Countries such as Korea and China attempted to adopt a system of isolationism but have ultimately juxtaposed parts of Western culture into their own, often adding original and unique social influences, as exemplified by the introduction of over 1,300 locations of the traditionally Western fast-food chain McDonald's into China.

[ 29 ] Specific to Taiwan , the industry of bridal photography (see Photography in Taiwan ) has been significantly influenced by the Western idea of "love". As examined by author Bonnie Adrian, Taiwanese bridal photos of today provide a striking contrast to past accepted norms, contemporary couples often displaying great physical affection and, at times, placed in typically Western settings to augment the modernity, in comparison to the historically prominent relationship, often stoic and distant, exhibited between bride and groom.

[ 30 ] Though Western concepts may have initially played a role in creating this cultural shift in Taiwan, the market and desire for bridal photography has not continued without adjustments and social modifications to this Western notion.

East Asia [ edit ] China [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Eastward spread of Western learning .

[ edit ] The eastward spread of Western learning ( simplified Chinese : 西学东渐 ; traditional Chinese : 西學東漸 ) refers to the spread of Western technologies and ideologies in China since the late Ming dynasty , which is contrast with the westward spread of Eastern learning ( simplified Chinese : 东学西传 ; traditional Chinese : 東學西傳 ) that introduced Chinese technologies and ideologies to the West.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] Korea [ edit ] See also: Seohak In Korea , the first contact with Westernization was during the Joseon Dynasty , in the 17th century. Every year, the emperor dispatched a few envoy ambassadors to China and while they were staying in Beijing, the Western missionaries were there. Through the missionaries, Korean ambassadors were able to adopt Western technology. In the 19th century, Korea started to send ambassadors to the foreign countries, other than Japan and China . While Korea was being Westernized slowly in the late 19th century, Korea had the idea of "Eastern ways and Western frames (東道西器)", meaning that they accepted the Western "bowl", but used it with Eastern principles inside.

[ citation needed ] Japan [ edit ] See also: Japanization An example of 19th-century Westernization of Japanese society: ballroom dancing at the Rokumeikan , Tokyo , 1888 In Japan , the Netherlands continued to play a key role in transmitting Western know-how to the Japanese from the 17th century to the mid-19th century, because the Japanese had only opened their doors to Dutch merchants before US Navy commodore Matthew C. Perry 's visit in 1853 . After Commodore Perry's visit, Japan began to deliberately accept Western culture to the point of hiring Westerners to teach Western customs and traditions to the Japanese starting in the Meiji era . Since then, many Japanese politicians have encouraged the Westernization of Japan with the use of the term Datsu-A Ron , which means the argument for "leaving Asia" or "Good-bye Asia". In Datsu-A Ron , "Westernization" was described as an "unavoidable" but "fruitful" change. In contrast, despite many advances in industrial efficiency, Japan has sustained a culture of strict social hierarchy and limited individualization.

[ 34 ] South Asia [ edit ] See also: Anglicisation § South Asia India [ edit ] See also: Cultural history of India § Colonial era At the turn of the 19th century, when India was being conquered by the East India Company , some of its native kingdoms sought Western education to learn how to deal with the threat.

[ 35 ] [ better source needed ] India's later independence movement also took inspiration from Western ideas about democracy and human rights.

[ 36 ] India's ruling class after independence in 1947 remained somewhat Westernized; India's first Prime Minister, Jawaharlal Nehru , had such a substantial Britishness that he once described himself as "the last Englishman to rule India." [ 37 ] In 2014, however, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) won power on the back of perceptions of the ruling class being insufficiently Indian .

[ 38 ] Southeast Asia [ edit ] Thailand [ edit ] Although Thailand is geographically located in Southeast Asia , through the 18th and 19th centuries, Siam faced imperialist pressure from France and the United Kingdom , including many unequal treaties with Western powers and forced concessions of territory; it nevertheless remained the only Southeast Asian country to avoid direct Western colonization. The country became westernized by itself, the Siamese system of government was centralized and initially organized into a modern unitary absolute monarchy during the reign of Chulalongkorn , later as a constitutional monarchy following the Siamese revolution of 1932 .

[ 39 ] In the late 1950s, Thailand became a major ally of the United States , and played a key anti-communist role in the region as a member of the SEATO . Currently, Thailand continues to have strong ties to Western countries.

Vietnam [ edit ] Starting from the period of the Nguyễn dynasty as a protectorate of France, the Vietnamese transitioned from chữ Hán and chữ Nôm writing systems to the Vietnamese alphabet ( chữ Quốc ngữ ). Between the late 19th to early 20th centuries, a number of French style buildings were built in Saigon and Hanoi , becoming two of several locations in Asia claiming to be the Paris of the East . Vietnam is also a member of the International Organisation of La Francophonie. Under the Nguyễn dynasty, Christianity became established as a minority religion for currently around 7% of the population. After the abdication of Emperor Bảo Đại and the August Revolution that took place during the end of World War II, Vietnam would incorporate socialist and American values as it underwent industrialization and economic development during and after the period of political division .

[ 40 ] West Asia [ edit ] Another example of Westernization: Prince Yorihito Higashifushimi of Japan in typical Western naval dress uniform with white gloves, epaulettes , medals and hat.

Similarity with U.S.

General John C. Bates 's uniform.

Iran [ edit ] In Iran , the process of Westernization dates back to the country's attempt to westernize during the beginning of the 1930s, which was dictated by Shah Rezā Khan and continued by his son during the Cold War and agitated the largely conservative Shia Muslim masses of the country which was partly responsible for the 1979 Iranian Revolution .

[ 41 ] Turkey [ edit ] In Turkey , the synchronization process with the West is known as the Tanzimat (reorganization) period. The Ottoman Empire began to change itself according to modern science, practice, and culture. The Empire took some innovations from the West. Also, with the contribution of foreign engineers, the Empire repaired its old arm systems. Newly-found schools, permanent ambassadors, and privy councils were an essential improvement for the Empire. As a result, Turkey is one of the most Westernized majority-Muslim nations.

In Europe [ edit ] See also: Greater Europe Russia [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Westernizer .

[ edit ] Westernizers ( / ˈ z ɑː p ɑː d n ɪ k / ; Russian : за́падник , romanized : západnik , IPA: [ˈzapədnʲɪk] ) were a group of 19th-century intellectuals who believed that Russia 's development depended upon the adoption of Western European technology and liberal government. In their view, Western ideas such as industrialisation needed to be implemented throughout Russia to make it a more successful country. The Russian term was зáпадничество ( západnichestvo , "westernism"), and its adherents were known as the за́падники ( západniki , "westernists").

[ 42 ] In some contexts of Russian history, zapadnichestvo can be contrasted with Slavophilia , whose proponents argued that Russia should develop its own unique identity and culture, based on its Slavic heritage.

[ 43 ] Globalization (1970s–present) [ edit ] Westernization is often regarded as a part of the ongoing process of globalization . This theory proposes that Western thought has led to globalisation, and that globalisation propagates Western culture, leading to a cycle of Westernization. On top of largely Western government systems such as democracy and constitution , many Western technologies and customs like music, clothing, and cars have been introduced across various parts of the world and copied and created in traditionally non-Western countries.

Westernization has been reversed in some countries following war or regime change. For example: Russia in aftermath of the Russian Revolution in 1917 and Iran by the Iranian Revolution in 1979.

[ 44 ] The main characteristics are economic and political ( free trade ) democratisation, combined with the spread of an individualised culture . Often it was regarded as opposite to the worldwide influence of communism . After the break-up of the USSR in late 1991 and the end of the Cold War , many of its component states and allies nevertheless underwent Westernization, including privatization of hitherto state-controlled industry.

[ 45 ] With debates still going on, the question of whether globalization can be characterized as Westernization can be seen in various aspects. Globalization is happening in various aspects, ranging from economics, politics, and even food or culture. Westernization, to some schools, is seen as a form of globalization that leads the world to be similar to Western powers. Being globalized means taking positive aspects of the world, but globalization also brings the debate about being Westernized. Democracy, fast food, and American pop culture can all be examples that are considered as Westernization of the world.

According to the "Theory of the Globe scrambled by Social network: a new Sphere of Influence 2.0", published by Jura Gentium ( University of Florence ), the increasing role of Westernization is characterized by social media . The comparison with Eastern societies, who decided to ban American social media platforms (such as Iran and China with Facebook and Twitter), marks a political desire to avoid the Westernization process of their own populations and ways to communicate.

[ 46 ] Consequences [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Westernization" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Linguistic influence [ edit ] See also: Englishisation Due to colonization and immigration, the formerly prevalent languages in the Americas, Oceania, and part of South Africa , are now usually Indo-European languages or creoles based on them: English ( Australia , New Zealand , United States , and Canada without mainly French-speaking Quebec ); English along with English-based creole languages ( Anglophone Africa , Antigua and Barbuda , Bahamas , Barbados , Dominica , Federated States of Micronesia , Fiji , Grenada , Guyana , Hong Kong , India , Jamaica , Kiribati , Marshall Islands , Nauru , Palau , Vanuatu , Papua New Guinea , the Philippines , Saint Kitts and Nevis , Saint Lucia , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , Samoa , Singapore , Solomon Islands , Sri Lanka , Tonga , Tuvalu , and Trinidad and Tobago ).

French ( Quebec , New Brunswick and parts of Ontario in Canada and Saint Pierre and Miquelon ); French along with French-based creole languages ( Francophone Africa , French Guiana , Guadeloupe , Haiti , Vanuatu , Martinique , and Saint-Barthelemy ).

Spanish ( the Americas , Equatorial Guinea , Western Sahara , and the Philippines ).

Portuguese ( Brazil , Lusophone Africa , East Timor , Macau , Goa , and other members of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries ).

Dutch along with Creole languages ( Suriname , Aruba and the Netherlands Antilles ).

Afrikaans along with English (parts of South Africa and Namibia ).

German along with Creole languages (along with Afrikaans in Namibia and some areas in the US, such as Pennsylvania ( Pennsylvania Dutch )) Many indigenous languages are on the verge of becoming extinct. Some settler countries have preserved indigenous languages; for example, in New Zealand, the Māori language is one of three official languages, the others being English and New Zealand sign language, another example is Ireland, where Irish is the first official language, followed by English as the second official language.

[ citation needed ] Sports importance in Westernization [ edit ] See also: Western sports and Muscular Christianity The importance of sports partly comes from its connection to Westernization. The insight by Edelman, R., & Wilson, W. (2017) explains “This new system of thought and practices imbued with positive values in the exertion and strategic deployment of the human body, embracing the Anglo-American notion that physical activity was meaningful in and of itself, conducive to values such as learning and character-building. Modern athletics and competitive sports, avatars of this new body culture, elicited largely willing local receptions in North Asia, though there were no doubt isolated cases of coercive foisting better characterized as cultural imperialism.” [ 47 ] See also [ edit ] Acculturation – Adjusting to a new cultural environment Anti-globalisation – Worldwide political movement against multinational corporations Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Christianization – Process by which Christianity spreads in a society or culture Colonial mentality – Internalized attitude of ethnic or very cultural inferiority Colonialism – Control by foreign groups Colonisation – Establishment and development of settlements by people or animals Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Cultural assimilation – Adoption of features of another culture Cultural diversity – Quality of diverse or different cultures Cultural imperialism – Cultural aspects of imperialism The Culture of Nakedness and the Nakedness of Culture – Study of Islamic and western views on clothing and culture Democratisation – Society becoming more democratic East-West Cultural Debate – Historical Chinese debate on West vs East Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Global citizenship – Idea that all people have rights and responsibilities from being a member of the world Globalisation – Spread of world views, products, ideas, capital and labor Indigenization – Form of cultural change McDonaldization – Sociological concept Melting pot – Monocultural metaphor Modern culture – Historical period and socio-cultural norm or attitude Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Modernization – Explanation for the process of modernization within societies Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Multiculturalism – Existence of multiple cultural traditions within a single country Pop culture – Widespread norms in a society Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Post-Westernization – Conjectured era without Western dominance Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Western education – Education from the Western world References [ edit ] ^ Thong, Tezenlo (July 2012). " 'To Raise the Savage to a Higher Level': The Westernization of Nagas and their Culture".

Modern Asian Studies .

46 (4): 893– 918.

doi : 10.1017/S0026749X11000412 .

JSTOR 41478422 .

S2CID 145414470 .

ProQuest 1011622231 .

^ Lloyd, Paulette D (2005).

An Empirical Test of Theories of World Divisions and Globalization Processes: An International and Comparative Regional Perspective (Thesis).

ProQuest 305033607 .

[ page needed ] ^ Hayford, Charles. "Westernization". In Pong, David (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Modern China . Charles Scribner's Sons.

^ "Acculturation".

Encyclopedia of Applied Psychology . Oxford: Elsevier Science & Technology.

^ McLeish, Kenneth (1993). "Westernization".

Bloomsbury Guide to Human Thought . Bloomsbury Publications.

ISBN 978-0-7475-0991-2 .

^ Kottak, Conrad Phillip (2007).

Window on Humanity: A Concise Introduction to General Anthropology with Powerweb . McGraw-Hill Higher Education.

ISBN 978-0-07-325893-5 .

OCLC 1245991011 .

[ page needed ] ^ ( Garsoïan, Nina (1997). R.G. Hovannisian (ed.).

Armenian People from Ancient to Modern Times . Vol. 1.

Palgrave Macmillan . p. 81.

) ^ "Donald Tusk: "I feel at home in Armenia" " , MediaMax , 2020-09-24 .

^ "92% of the Armenian public considers relations with the EU as very good, FM says at EaP ministerial" , Armenpress , 2020-09-24 .

^ "Europe Square inaugurated in Yerevan, Armenia" , Armenpress , 2020-09-24 .

^ "The future of the Trio Plus Strategy 2030: building a future of Eastern Partnership" (PDF) .

^ "Azerbaijan & the West" . 29 March 2017.

^ "Cape Verde display different interests in integration" .

Afrol News .

^ Puga, Rogério Miguel (2013).

The British Presence in Macau, 1637–1793 .

Royal Asiatic Society .

Hong Kong : Hong Kong University Press .

ISBN 978-988-8139-79-8 .

LCCN 2013383538 .

OL 25637013M . Retrieved 2022-03-22 .

^ Arndt, Richard T.; Rubin, David Lee (1993).

The Fulbright Difference: 1948-1992 . Transaction Publishers. p. 53.

ISBN 978-1-4128-2424-8 .

^ a b Sheldon Kirshner (2013-10-16).

"Is Israel Really a Western Nation?" . Sheldon Kirshner Journal . Retrieved 2013-11-09 .

^ "Early Westernization & Modernization in Japan 1868-1900 | Japan Experience" .

^ Huntington, Samuel P. (1991).

Clash of Civilizations (6th ed.). Washington, D.C. pp.

38–39 .

ISBN 978-0-684-84441-1 – via Internet Archive .

The origin of western civilization is usually dated to 700 or 800 AD. In general, researchers consider that it has three main components, in Europe, North America and South america. [...] However, South America has followed a quite different development path from Europe and North America. Although it is a scion of European civilization, it also incorporates more elements of indigenous American civilizations compared to those of Northern America and Europe. It also currently has a more corporatist and authoritarian culture. Both Europe and Northern America felt the effects of Reformation and the combination of Catholic and Protestant cultures. Historically, many countries in the Americas has been only Catholic, although this may be changing. [...] the Americas could be considered, or a sub-set, within Western civilization, or can also be considered a separate civilization, intimately related to the West, but divided as to whether it belongs with it.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "Lebanon at a Glance" .

The New York Times . 23 January 1976.

^ Heydarian, Richard (2015-01-12).

"Philippines' Shallow Capitalism: Westernization Without Prosperity" .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved 19 November 2016 .

^ Cagaptay, Soner (2014).

The Rise of Turkey: The Twenty-First Century's First Muslim Power . Potomac Books. p. 44.

ISBN 978-1-61234-651-9 .

^ Huntington, Samuel P. (2000). "The Clash of Civilizations?".

Culture and Politics . pp.

99– 118.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-349-62397-6_6 .

ISBN 978-1-349-62399-0 .

^ Mahbubani, Kishore (2009).

The New Asian Hemisphere: The Irresistible Shift of Global Power to the East . PublicAffairs. pp.

129– 130.

ISBN 978-1-58648-628-0 .

^ Graham, James.

"Samuel P. Huntington's Clash of Civilizations" . History Orb . Retrieved 12 April 2013 .

^ Murden, Simon (2011). "Cultures in world affairs". In Baylis, John; Smith, Steve; Owens, Patricia (eds.).

The Globalization of World Politics: An Introduction to International Relations . OUP Oxford. pp.

414– 427.

ISBN 978-0-19-956909-0 .

^ mehbaliyev (30 October 2010).

"Civilizations, their nature and clash possibilities (c) Rashad Mehbal…" .

[ self-published source?

] ^ Carmagnani, Marcello; Frongia, Rosanna M. Giammanco (2011).

The Other West: Latin America from Invasion to Globalization (1 ed.). University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-24798-7 .

JSTOR 10.1525/j.ctt1ppz4m .

^ Gruzinski, Serge (1993).

The Conquest of Mexico: The Incorporation of Indian Societies Into the Western World, 16th-18th Centuries . Polity Press.

ISBN 978-0-7456-0873-0 .

^ "McDonald's China Plans To Open A New Store Every Day" .

HuffPost . 29 July 2011.

^ Adrian, Bonnie (2003).

Framing the Bride: Globalizing Beauty and Romance in Taiwan's Bridal Industry . Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press.

^ Liu, Dachun (2018).

Western Learning Spreads Eastward (in Simplified Chinese). Beijing: China Renmin University Press.

ISBN 978-7-300-26325-0 .

OCLC 1089442491 .

^ Kuang, Shuping (2016-09-21).

"Eastward Transmission of Western Learning and the Evolution of Modern Sports in Shanghai, 1843–1949" .

The International Journal of the History of Sport .

33 (14): 1606– 1625.

doi : 10.1080/09523367.2017.1288106 .

ISSN 0952-3367 .

S2CID 152205041 .

^ Koerbs, Christoph (2008), "East and West: China in the Transmission of Knowledge from East to West" , in Selin, Helaine (ed.), Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures , Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp.

712– 717, doi : 10.1007/978-1-4020-4425-0_9121 , ISBN 978-1-4020-4425-0 , retrieved 2022-06-14 ^ Dore, Ronald (1984). "Unity and Diversity in World Culture". In Bull, Hedley; Watson, Adam (eds.).

The Expansion of International Society . Clarendon Press. pp. 407–424 [416].

ISBN 978-0-19-821942-2 .

^ "What a false quote about Bengal reveals about our past" .

Hindustan Times . 2024-09-22. Archived from the original on 2024-09-24 . Retrieved 2024-12-25 .

^ McLane, John R. (1977).

Indian Nationalism and the Early Congress . Princeton University Press.

JSTOR j.ctt13x1cv8 .

[ page needed ] ^ Nanda, B. R. (1998). "Nehru and the British".

Jawaharlal Nehru . pp.

253– 263.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195645866.003.0013 .

ISBN 978-0-19-564586-6 .

^ Dhingra, Sanya (2023-08-14).

"How Hindu Nationalists Redefined Decolonization in India" .

New Lines Magazine . Retrieved 2024-09-14 .

^ Leventon, Melissa; Gluckman, Dale Carolyn (June 2013). "Modernity Through the Lens: The Westernization of Thai Women's Court Dress".

Costume .

47 (2): 216– 233.

doi : 10.1179/0590887613Z.00000000025 .

^ Nguyen, Quynh Thi Nhu (2016).

"The Vietnamese Values System: A Blend of Oriental, Western and Socialist Values" .

International Education Studies .

9 (12): 32– 40.

doi : 10.5539/ies.v9n12p32 .

^ del Giudice, Marguerite (2008). "Persia: ancient soul of Iran".

National Geographic .

214 (2): 34– 67.

^ Westernizer – Britannica Online Encyclopedia ^ Howard F. Stein, "Russian Nationalism and the Divided Soul of the Westernizers and Slavophiles." Ethos 4.4 (1976): 403-438.

online ^ Priborkin, Emily (8 April 2019).

"40 Years Later: Iran after the Islamic Revolution" .

American University .

^ "Consequences of the Collapse of the Soviet Union" .

Norwich University .

^ Peccia, Tiziano (2014).

"The Theory of the Globe Scrambled by Social Networks" .

Jura Gentium .

^ Edelman, Robert; Wilson, Wayne (2017).

The Oxford Handbook of Sports History . Oxford University Press. p. 273.

ISBN 978-0-19-985892-7 .

Further reading [ edit ] ' Bonnett, Alastair (2004).

The Idea of the West: Culture, Politics, and History . Basingstoke, Hampshire; New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1-4039-0034-0 .

The Limits of Westernization: American and East Asian Intellectuals Create Modernity, 1860-1960 (2019) Routledge , written by Jon Thares Davidann The Decline of the West (1918), written by Oswald Spengler .

The End of History and the Last Man (1992), written by Francis Fukuyama .

The Clash of Civilizations (1996), written by Samuel P. Huntington .

The Triumph of the West (1985) written by Oxford University historian J.M. Roberts .

Ankerl, Guy (2000).

Global communication without universal civilization . INU societal research. Vol. 1: Coexisting contemporary civilizations: Arabo-Muslim, Bharati, Chinese, and Western. Geneva: INU Press.

ISBN 978-2-88155-004-1 .

Watters, Ethan (2011).

Crazy like us . London.

ISBN 978-1-84901-577-6 .

OCLC 751584971 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Gardels, Nathan (1997) 'Clash of civilizations: modernization without Westernization', The National Times, May/June: 8-10.

v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization v t e Cultural assimilation Africanisation Albanisation Americanisation immigrants names Native Americans Anglicisation Arabisation Armenians Berbers Blacks Jews Araucanisation Azerbaijanisation surnames Talysh Belarusisation soft Bengalisation placenames Bosniakisation Bulgarisation Canadianisation Celticisation Chilenisation Colombianisation Creolisation Croatisation Czechisation Dutchification Estonianisation Europeanisation Westernisation Finnicisation Francisation Brussels Gaelicisation Georgification Germanisation Hawaiianisation Hellenisation Hispanicisation or Castilianisation Filipinos Indianisation placenames Indigenisation Indonesation Israelisation names Italianisation Japanisation Japanification Javanisation Jewish assimilation Kazakhisation Koreanisation Kurdification Latvianization Lithuanisation Magyarisation or Hungarianisation Macedonianisation Malayisation Mexicanisation Mongolisation Montenegrinisation Norwegianisation Pakistanisation Pashtunisation Northern Afghanistan Persianisation societies Polonisation Romanianisation Romanisation or Latinisation names Russification Finland Saffronisation Sanskritisation Serbianisation Sinhalisation Sinicisation Manchus Tibet Vietnam Slavicisation Slovakisation Sovietisation Swahilisation Swedification Talibanisation Taiwanisation Tamilisation Thaification Turkification placenames surnames Turkmenisation Ukrainisation Uzbekisation Vietnamisation Westernisation Wolofisation Zairianisation Assimilation by religions Christianisation Hinduisation Islamisation Judaisation Assimilation by writings Cyrillisation Soviet Union Romanisation of the writings Soviet Union Opposite trends De-arabisation De-communisation De-stalinisation Dehellenization of Christianity De-nazification De-russification Korenizatsiia Latinisation Ukraine De-sinicisation Negation of the Diaspora Vergangenheitsbewältigung Related concepts Cultural genocide Cultural globalisation Cultural imperialism Dominant culture Forced assimilation Forced religious conversion Globalisation Identity politics Internal colonialism Jewish assimilation Language shift Melting pot Monoculturalism v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal Authority control databases National Germany Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐45knb
Cached time: 20250818093409
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.355 seconds
Real time usage: 1.734 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9453/1000000
Revision size: 49281/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 222840/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7944/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 32/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 207736/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.939/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17044653/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1493.063      1 -total
 30.38%  453.550      1 Template:Reflist
 19.35%  288.977      2 Template:Excerpt
 15.97%  238.458     23 Template:Annotated_link
  9.07%  135.450     21 Template:Cite_book
  8.25%  123.206      1 Template:Langx
  8.13%  121.379      5 Template:Cite_journal
  7.47%  111.502     11 Template:Fix
  5.20%   77.703      1 Template:Western_culture
  5.05%   75.438      5 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:504014:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818093409 and revision id 1306426040. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Westernization&oldid=1306426040 " Categories : Westernization Global culture Cultural assimilation Cultural geography Imperialism Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2024 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2023 CS1 maint: location missing publisher All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from April 2023 CS1 Simplified Chinese-language sources (zh-hans) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2011 Articles with excerpts Articles with unsourced statements from March 2017 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from December 2024 Articles needing additional references from July 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Pages using div col with small parameter Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link CS1: long volume value This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 17:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Westernization 38 languages Add topic

