Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Schwenter and the Scioptric Ball 3 Schwenter and the Fountain Pen 4 References 5 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Daniel Schwenter 7 languages Deutsch Français Italiano Kreyòl ayisyen مصرى Piemontèis Slovenščina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German mathematician (1585–1636) A portrait of Daniel Schwenter from Geometriae practicae novae et auctae tractatus Daniel Schwenter ( Schwender ) (31 January 1585 – 19 January 1636) was a German Orientalist , mathematician , inventor , poet , and librarian .

Biography [ edit ] Schwenter was born in Nuremberg . He was professor of oriental languages and mathematics at the University of Altdorf . This is achieved by a preface written by Schwenter in the book Kurtzer, gründtlicher, warhaffter, gebesserter und vermehrter Underricht, Zuberaitung und Gebrauch deß Circkels, Schregmeß und Linial from George Galgemair and by an old chronicle of the University of Altdorf.

[ 1 ] His works include Delicia Physico-Mathematicae ( Nuremberg , 1636) and Geometriae practicae novae et auctae tractatus I-IV (published posthumously in 1641). Among other topics, Geometriae practicae covers the art of baculometry - the measuring of inaccessible distances via staves.

[ citation needed ] As a linguist, Schwenter was familiar with Greek , Hebrew , Arabic , Syriac , and Aramaic . He was also an authority on Euclid .  He died in Altdorf bei Nürnberg .

Schwenter and the Scioptric Ball [ edit ] A diagram showing the various angles of cut of a cone required to produce a parabola , hyperbola , and ellipse .  From Schwenter's Geometriae practicae novae et auctae tractatus .

He is credited with developing the scioptric ball in 1636.  This is a universal joint that allows a microscope, mounted on the ball, to be swiveled into any position.  Its invention was inspired by Schwenter's studies of the human eye .  The scioptric ball provided a firm anchor for a microscope or telescope while allowing the telescope to be swiveled in all directions in order to follow the course of an eclipse or for drawing panoramic views .  The microscope or telescope passes through the center of the ball, the essential function being similar to that of the ball (or pan-and-tilt) head on a modern photographer's tripod.

Schwenter and the Fountain Pen [ edit ] Deliciae physico-mathematicae , 1636 Schwenter did not invent the fountain pen , but in 1636, in his Deliciae Physic-Mathematicae , he described a pen made in two parts, using portions of seven quills .

[ 2 ] One part served as a reservoir for ink and included the writing point. The second part provided the pen body (a full-length feather) and served as a plug in the back end of the first part.  The ink was sealed inside first part by the second.  Squeezing the pen forced ink to flow through a small hole in one of the first part's quill fragments and from there to the writing point.

References [ edit ] ^ Ralf Kern: Wissenschaftliche Instrumente in ihrer Zeit. Volume 2. Cologne, 2010. pp. 276-277.

^ Binder, Richard.

"Who Really Invented the Fountain Pen?" .

RichardsPens.com . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

Sources [ edit ] (in English) Portrait of Daniel Schwenter (in English) Another Portrait (in English) The Camera Obscura (in English) Scioptric Ball (in English) Picture of an 18th century scioptric ball (in English) Plates from Geometriae practicae novae et auctae tractatus External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Daniel Schwenter .

From the Harry Houdini Collection in the Rare Book and Special Collection Division at the Library of Congress Deliciae physico-mathematicae, Volume 1 Deliciae physico-mathematicae, Volume 2 Deliciae physico-mathematicae, Volume 3 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Sweden Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Artists FID People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Daniel_Schwenter&oldid=1301276114 " Categories : 1585 births 1636 deaths 17th-century German inventors 17th-century German mathematicians Linguists from the Holy Roman Empire Engineers from Nuremberg Christian Hebraists Academic staff of the University of Altdorf 17th-century German engineers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 01:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Daniel Schwenter 7 languages Add topic

