Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ethics and axiology 2 Objectives 3 History 4 Opposed views 5 Criticism 6 References Toggle the table of contents Axiological ethics Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ethical theory about values Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e In philosophy , axiological ethics is concerned with the values by which people uphold ethical standards , and the investigation and development of theories of ethical behaviour.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Axiological ethics investigates and questions what the intellectual bases for a system of values are. Axiological ethics explores the justifications for value systems, and examines if there exists an objective justification, beyond arbitrary personal preference, for the existence and practise of a given value system. Moreover, although axiological ethics are a subfield of ethical philosophy, axiological investigation usually includes epistemology and value theory .

Ethics and axiology [ edit ] Main articles: Axiology , Value theory , and Ethics To understand axiological ethics, an understanding of axiology and ethics is necessary.

Axiology is the philosophical study of goodness (value) and is concerned with two questions. The first question regards defining and exploring understandings of 'the good' or value. This includes, for example, the distinction between intrinsic and instrumental values.

[ 4 ] The second area is the application of such understandings of value to a variety of fields within the social sciences and humanities.

Ethics is a philosophical field which is concerned with morality, and in particular, the conduction of the right action. The defining of what the 'right' action is influenced by axiological thought in itself, much like the defining of 'beauty' within the philosophical branch of aesthetics .

Objectives [ edit ] Axiological ethics can be understood as the application of axiology onto the study of ethics. It is concerned with questioning the moral grounds which we base ethical judgements on. This is done through questioning the values in which ethical principles are grounded on. Once there is recognition and understanding of the underlying values hidden within ethical claims, they can be assessed and critiqued. Through breaking ethics down to an examination of values, rather than the good, morality can be reconstructed based on redefined values or confirmed on already set values.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Franz Brentano 's descriptive psychology constitutes an important precursor of axiological ethics.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] He classifies all mental phenomena into three groups: representations, judgments and phenomena of love. Of particular interest for axiological ethics are phenomena of love since they constitute the basis for our knowledge of values: an object has value if it is fitting to love this object.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] This insight into what is good then informs the discipline of ethics: "the right end consists in the best of what is attainable".

[ 9 ] Max Scheler , one of the main early proponents of axiological ethics, agrees with Brentano that experience is a reliable source for the knowledge of values.

[ 10 ] [ 6 ] Scheler, following the phenomenological method , holds that this knowledge is not just restricted to particular cases but that we can gain insight a priori into the essence of values.

[ 11 ] This insight reveals that there are different types of values, which form a hierarchy from lower to higher values: pleasure, useful, noble, good and true and beautiful, sacred.

[ 12 ] This order is essential to ethics: we ought to promote the higher values rather than the lower ones in our actions.

[ 11 ] The order of values is objective but our perception of this order is subjective and may therefore be distorted. Such distortions may lead us to prefer the lower values to the higher ones.

[ 6 ] Nicolai Hartmann builds in many important aspects on Scheler's axiological ethics.

[ 13 ] He also provides a platonist metaphysics of values, complementing the intuitive insight a priori into values.

[ 6 ] John Niemeyer Findlay , a moral philosophy and metaphysics professor at Yale University, wrote Axiological Ethics in 1970.

[ 3 ] Findlay's book is a modern historical account of academic discussion around axiological ethics. As such, it contains discussion of other philosophers' and his own concluding remarks regarding the topic. Findlay advocates for inquiry into values behind ethical theories and what justifications exist for them. Through assessing the thoughts of his academic peers, Findlay's final thoughts on the topic is that an objective justification for values would be unlikely. Rather, since validation is recognized as coming from the subject, values would have to be assessed internally.

Opposed views [ edit ] Proponents of axiological ethics often contrast their view with both Kantian ethics and eudaimonism .

[ 14 ] [ 6 ] Kantian ethics is rejected mainly on grounds of its formalism , which is exemplified e.g. in Kant's formulation of the categorical imperative : "Act only according to that maxim whereby you can at the same time will that it should become a universal law".

[ 15 ] The main criticism of ethical formalism is that it tries to define right action in purely formal terms without reference to whether the resulting action is valuable in any sense. It ignores that our actions are guided by various values which we try to realize.

[ 6 ] [ 10 ] The critique of eudaimonism is not that it ignores values altogether but that its view of what is valuable is too narrow.

[ 14 ] Our actions should be guided by a wide variety of values, including promoting pleasure and avoiding pain, but also other values like health, beauty, etc. This can be seen in Scheler's hierarchy of values, in which only one level of values, the lowest, is reserved for pleasure and pain.

[ 11 ] Criticism [ edit ] Axiological ethics has been criticized for its epistemology and metaphysics.

[ 6 ] [ 8 ] Most of its proponents rely on the idea that we can gain an insight a priori into the essence of values. While this thesis is itself controversial, it becomes even more problematic when combined with the idea of value-blindness, the thesis that some people may be (for various reasons) unable to properly intuit the essences of values.

[ 11 ] This can easily lead to a dogmatic position where the proponent of axiological ethics justifies her own view through intuition and dismisses opposing views as misguided due to value-blindness.

[ 6 ] The metaphysical critique of axiological ethics concerns the tendency to reify values and treat them as proper entities of their own.

[ 6 ] This tendency is present in many proponents of axiological ethics but it is most explicit in Hartmann's position.

References [ edit ] ^ "Axiological ethics".

Oxford Reference 'Axiological Ethics' . 2005.

doi : 10.1093/acref/9780199264797.001.0001 .

ISBN 9780199264797 . Retrieved April 11, 2019 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ "What is axiological ethics?" .

Life Persona . Retrieved April 11, 2019 .

^ a b c Findlay, J. N. (John Niemeyer), 1903-1987. (1970).

Axiological ethics . London: Macmillan.

ISBN 0333002695 .

OCLC 105218 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Schroeder, Mark (2016), "Value Theory" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2016 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved April 11, 2019 ^ Findlay, J. N. (1970). "II. Brentano and Meinong".

Axiological Ethics . New York: St. Martin's Press.

^ a b c d e f g h i Düwell, Marcus; Hübenthal, Christoph; Werner, Micha H. (2006). "II.7 Wertethik".

Handbuch Ethik . J.B. Metzler.

^ Huemer, Wolfgang (2019).

"Franz Brentano" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved December 27, 2020 .

^ a b Eaton, Howard O. (1933).

"The Validity of Axiological Ethics" .

International Journal of Ethics .

43 (3): 253– 268.

doi : 10.1086/intejethi.43.3.2378111 .

S2CID 144105591 .

^ Kriegel, Uriah (2018). "9. Ethics: The Goods".

Brentano's Philosophical System: Mind, Being, Value . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ a b Mittelstraß, Jürgen (2005). "Wertethik".

Enzyklopädie Philosophie und Wissenschaftstheorie . Metzler.

^ a b c d Davis, Zachary; Steinbock, Anthony (2019).

"Max Scheler" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved December 27, 2020 .

^ Kelly, Eugene (2011). "2. The Phenomenology of Value".

Material Ethics of Value: Max Scheler and Nicolai Hartmann . Springer.

^ Kelly, Eugene (2011). "1. The Idea of a Material Value-Ethics".

Material Ethics of Value: Max Scheler and Nicolai Hartmann . Springer.

^ a b Eaton, Howard O. (1932).

"The Unity of Axiological Ethics" .

International Journal of Ethics .

43 (1): 20– 36.

doi : 10.1086/208037 . Retrieved December 28, 2020 .

^ Kant, Immanuel (1993) [1785].

Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals . Translated by Ellington, James W. (3rd ed.). Hackett. p.

30 .

ISBN 0-87220-166-X .

It is standard to also reference the Akademie Ausgabe of Kant's works. The Groundwork occurs in the fourth volume. Citations throughout this article follow the format 4:x. For example, the above citation is taken from 4:421.

v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Axiological_ethics&oldid=1292252019 " Categories : Axiology Normative ethics Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2014 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 00:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Axiological ethics Add languages Add topic

