Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Family 2 Function and representation 3 Urania as Muse 4 In popular culture Toggle In popular culture subsection 4.1 Urania in astronomy and navigation 4.2 Other uses of "Urania" 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Urania 53 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kaszëbsczi Kurdî Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Magyar Македонски مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Muse of astronomy in Greek mythology For other uses, see Urania (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Aphrodite Urania .

Urania Goddess of Astronomy Member of the Muses Urania on an antique fresco from Pompeii Abode Mount Olympus Symbols Globe Genealogy Parents Zeus and Mnemosyne Siblings Euterpe , Polyhymnia , Calliope , Clio , Erato , Thalia , Terpsichore , Melpomene and several paternal half-siblings Consort Apollo , Hermes , Amphimarus Children Linus , Hymen Urania ( / j ʊəˈr eɪ n i ə / yoor- AY -nee-ə ; Ancient Greek : Οὐρανία , romanized : Ouranía ; meaning "heavenly" or "of heaven") was, in Greek mythology , the muse of astronomy and astrology . Urania is the goddess of astronomy and stars, her attributes being the globe and compass .

The muse Urania is sometimes confused with Aphrodite Urania ("heavenly Aphrodite ") because of their similar name.

Family [ edit ] Urania was the daughter of Zeus by Mnemosyne and also a great-granddaughter of Uranus .

[ 1 ] Some accounts list her as the mother of the musician Linus [ 2 ] by Apollo [ 3 ] or Hermes [ 4 ] or Amphimarus , [ 5 ] son of Poseidon .

Hymenaeus is also said to have been a son of Urania.

[ 6 ] Function and representation [ edit ] Urania depicted with a celestial globe with stars above her head.

Allegorical Portrait of Urania, Muse of Astronomy by Louis Tocqué .

Urania is often associated with Universal Love. Sometimes identified as the eldest of the divine sisters, Urania inherited Zeus' majesty and power and the beauty and grace of her mother Mnemosyne .

Urania dresses in a cloak embroidered with stars and keeps her eyes and attention focused on the Heavens . She is usually represented with a celestial globe to which she points with a little staff, [ 7 ] and depicted in modern art with stars above her head. She is able to foretell the future by the arrangement of the stars.

[ 8 ] Urania as Muse [ edit ] Urania, a restored Roman copy after a Greek original of the 4th century BC, Hadrian's Villa .

Those who are most concerned with philosophy and the heavens are dearest to her. Those who have been instructed by her she raises aloft to heaven, for it is a fact that imagination and the power of thought lift men's souls to heavenly heights.

[ 9 ] Urania, o'er her star-bespangled lyre, With touch of majesty diffused her soul; A thousand tones, that in the breast inspire, Exalted feelings, o er the wires'gan roll— How at the call of Jove the mist unfurled, And o'er the swelling vault—the glowing sky, The new-born stars hung out their lamps on high, And rolled their mighty orbs to music's sweetest sound.

—From An Ode to Music by James G. Percival During the Renaissance , Urania began to be considered the Muse for Christian poets.

[ 10 ] In the invocation to Book 7 of John Milton 's epic poem Paradise Lost , the poet invokes Urania to aid his narration of the creation of the cosmos, though he cautions that it is "[t]he meaning, not the name I call" (7.5).

In popular culture [ edit ] A monumental conical pendulum clock by Eugène Farcot depicting the Greek goddess, 1862.

Urania in astronomy and navigation [ edit ] The planet Uranus , though mostly named after the Greek god personifying the sky , is also indirectly named after Urania.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Urania is the namesake for astronomical observatories in Berlin , Budapest , Bucharest , Vienna , Zürich , Antwerp , and Uraniborg on the island of Hven . The main belt asteroid (30) Urania was also named after her.

The official seal of the U.S. Naval Observatory portrays Urania. Hr. Ms.

Urania is a sail training vessel for the Royal Netherlands Naval College . There has been a Hr. Ms. Urania in the Royal Netherlands Navy since 1832.

Urania is featured on the seal of the Royal Astronomical Society of Canada , as well of its motto: Quo ducit Urania ("Where Urania leads").

Other uses of "Urania" [ edit ] Urania is the name traditionally given to the eighth book of Herodotus ' Histories .

Aphrodite Urania (heavenly Aphrodite ) is often an epithet given to Aphrodite in contrast with her more earthy aspect Aphrodite Pandemos (Aphrodite for all people).

[ 13 ] Urania is the muse for books 7 and 9 of Paradise Lost .

See also [ edit ] Muses in popular culture References [ edit ] ^ Hesiod , Theogony 78 ; Ovid , Fasti 5.55 ^ Suidas s.v.

Linos ^ Smith, s.v. Urania (1) ; Hyginus , Fabulae 161 ^ Suda, lambda, 568 ^ Pausanias , 9.29.6 ^ Catullus lxi. 2.

^ Hirt, Mythol. Bilderb.

p. 210.

^ Statius , Thebaid 8.548 ff.

^ Diodorus , 4.7.1 ^ Dolloff, Matthew (August 2006).

"Mediating the muse : Milton and the metamorphoses of Urania" .

The University of Texas Libraries : 14 . Retrieved 6 November 2024 .

^ Wood, Janet (31 January 2007).

Nuclear Power .

ISBN 9780863416682 .

^ "Uranus, Neptune and Pluto" .

^ "Aphrodite Titles & Epithets" .

Theoi . Retrieved 21 October 2024 .

Sources [ edit ] Diodorus Siculus , Library of History , Volume III: Books 4.59-8 , translated by C. H. Oldfather , Loeb Classical Library No. 340, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press , 1939.

ISBN 978-0-674-99375-4 .

Online version at Harvard University Press .

Online version by Bill Thayer .

Hesiod , Theogony , in The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White , Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press ; London, William Heinemann Ltd., 1914.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Internet Archive .

Hyginus, Gaius Julius , Fabulae , in The Myths of Hyginus , edited and translated by Mary A. Grant, Lawrence: University of Kansas Press, 1960.

Online version at ToposText .

Ovid , Ovid's Fasti : With an English translation by Sir James George Frazer , London, William Heinemann Ltd.; Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, 1959.

Internet Archive .

Smith, William , Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology , London (1873).

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1870). " Urania 1.

".

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Urania .

Urania: Goddess Muse of Astronomy , Theoi Project Britannica Online Encyclopedia Warburg Institute Iconographic Database v t e Muses Nine Muses Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Other Muses Aoede Apollonis Arche Borysthenis Cephisso Hypate Melete Mese Mneme Nete Polymatheia Thelxinoë Related Zeus (father) Mnemosyne (mother) Mouseion Pierian Spring Muse (person) Muses in popular culture v t e Ancient Greek deities Primal elements Aether Chaos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx The Ourea Pontus Tartarus Uranus Titans Twelve Titans Coeus Crius Cronus Dione Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Descendants of the Titans Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Olympian deities Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Olympian Gods Asclepius Eileithyia Enyo Eris Iris Harmonia Hebe Heracles Paean Pan Muses Daughters of Zeus Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Daughters of Apollo Apollonis Borysthenis Cephisso Boeotian Muses Aoide Melete Mneme Muses of the Lyre Hypate Mese Nete Muses at Sicyon Polymatheia Charites (Graces) Aglaia Euphrosyne Hegemone Pasithea Thalia Horae (Hours) Dike Eirene Eunomia Children of Styx Bia Kratos Nike Zelus Water deities Sea deities Amphitrite Benthesikyme Brizo Calliste Calypso Ceto Eurybia Glaucus Leucothea Melicertes Nereus Nerites Oceanus Phorcys Pontus Poseidon Proteus Rhodos Tethys Thalassa Thaumas Thetis Triton Oceanids Acaste Admete Asia Callirhoe Ceto Clymene (consort of Helios) Clymene (wife of Iapetus) Clytie Dione Dodone Doris Electra Eurynome Idyia Melia (consort of Apollo) Melia (consort of Inachus) Metis Perse Philyra Pleione Plouto Styx Telesto Theia Zeuxo Nereids Amatheia Amphithoe Amphitrite Arethusa Cymatolege Cymo Dynamene Galatea Galene Protomedeia Psamathe Sao Spio Thalia Thetis River gods Achelous Alpheus Anapus Asopus Asterion Axius Caanthus Cebren Cephissus Enipeus Kladeos Meander Nilus Numicus Phyllis Peneus Sangarius Scamander Selemnus Simoeis Strymon Naiads Aegina Achiroe Aganippe The Anigrides Argyra Bistonis Bolbe Caliadne Cassotis Castalia Cleocharia Creusa Daphne Drosera Harpina The Ionides Ismenis Larunda Lilaea Liriope Melite Metope Minthe Moria Nana Nicaea Orseis Pallas Pirene Salmacis Stilbe The Thriae Corycia Cleodora Melaina Tiasa Personifications Children of Eris Algos Amphillogiai The Androktasiai Atë Dysnomia Horkos Hysminai Lethe Logoi Limos Machai Neikea Phonoi Ponos Pseudea Children of Nyx Apate Eris Geras Hesperides Hypnos The Keres The Moirai Atropos Clotho Lachesis Momus Moros Nemesis Oizys The Oneiroi Philotes Thanatos Others Achlys Adephagia Aergia Aidos Aion Alala Alastor Aletheia Alke Amechania Anaideia Ananke Angelia Anteros Apheleia Arete The Arae Astraea Caerus Chronos Chrysus Corus Deimos Dikaiosyne Dyssebeia Eiresione Ekecheiria Eulabeia Eupraxia Eusebeia Ersa Eros Erotes Gelos Hedone Hedylogos Heimarmene Hermaphroditus Homados Homonoia Horme Hymen Iacchus Ioke Kakia Koalemos Kydoimos The Litae Lyssa The Maniae Methe Nomos Palioxis Peitharchia Peitho Penia Penthus Pepromene Pheme Phobos Phrike Phthonus Poine Polemos Poros Praxidice Proioxis Prophasis Soter Soteria Thrasos Tyche Other deities Sky The Anemoi Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Hesperus Phosphorus Phaethon Astrape and Bronte Aura The Hesperides The Hyades Nephele The Pleiades Alcyone Sterope Celaeno Electra Maia Merope Taygete Sirius Tritopatores Agriculture Aphaia Demeter Despoina Eunostus Opora Philomelus Plutus Health Asclepius Aceso Epione Iaso Hygieia Paean Panacea Telesphorus Rustic deities Aetna Agdistis The Alseids Amphictyonis Aristaeus Attis Britomartis The Cabeiri Comus The Dryades Erato The Hamadryades Chrysopeleia The Epimelides Hecaterus Leuce The Maenades The Meliae Hyperborean maidens The Oreads Echo Priapus Rhapso Silenus Telete Others Aphroditus Arke Auxesia Enodia Circe Enyalius Hecate Orthanes Palaestra Pasiphaë Phanes Sosipolis Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Israel People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Urania&oldid=1305589924 " Categories : Muses (mythology) Daughters of Zeus Ancient Greek astronomy Metamorphoses characters Female lovers of Apollo Women of Hermes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2021 Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM with a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM Commons category link is defined as the pagename This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 00:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Urania 53 languages Add topic

