Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Subdivisions 2 Buildings 3 Images 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard Yard 8 languages العربية বাংলা Cebuano Deutsch Español Français 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′28″N 71°07′02″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.37447°N 71.11719°W ﻿ / 42.37447; -71.11719 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Oldest part of the Harvard University campus United States historic place Harvard Yard Historic District U.S. National Register of Historic Places U.S. Historic district Harvard Yard in December 2015 Location of Harvard Yard in Massachusetts Show map of Massachusetts Harvard Yard (the United States) Show map of the United States Location Cambridge, Massachusetts , U.S.

Built 1673 Architectural style Georgian and Federal NRHP reference No.

73000287 [ 1 ] (original) 87002137 (increase) Significant dates Added to NRHP February 6, 1973 Boundary increase December 14, 1987 Harvard Yard is the oldest and among the most prominent parts of the campus of Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts . The yard has a historic center and modern crossroads and contains most of the freshman dormitories , Harvard's most important libraries, Memorial Church , several classroom and departmental buildings, and the offices of senior university officials, including the president of Harvard University .

The Yard grew over the centuries around Harvard College's first parcel of land, purchased in 1637.

[ 2 ] Today it is a grassy area of 22.4 acres (9.1 ha) bounded principally by Massachusetts Avenue , Cambridge Street, Broadway, and Quincy Street. Its perimeter fencing – principally iron, with some stretches of brick – has twenty-seven gates .

[ 3 ] Subdivisions [ edit ] Harvard Yard and environs, from the southeast. The Yard's most prominent buildings bound Tercentenary Theatre: Widener Library (center left), Memorial Church (opposite Widener), University Hall (just beyond Widener, white with white chimneys), and Sever Hall (red roof, opposite University Hall). The Old Yard is the treed area beyond University Hall.

The center of the Yard, known as Tercentenary Theatre , is a wide grassy area bounded by Widener Library , Memorial Church , University Hall , and Sever Hall . Tercentenary Theatre is the site of annual commencement exercises and other convocations .

The western third of Harvard Yard, which opens onto Peabody Street (often mistaken for nearby Massachusetts Avenue) at Johnston Gate and abuts the center of Harvard Square to the south, is known as the Old Yard.

[ 4 ] Most of the freshman dormitories cluster around the Old Yard, including Massachusetts Hall (1720), Harvard's oldest building and the second-oldest academic building in the United States.

[ 5 ] Massachusetts Hall also houses the offices of the President of Harvard University.

The original Harvard Hall in the Old Yard housed the College library, including the books donated by John Harvard —​all but one of which were destroyed when the building burned in 1764. Rebuilt in 1766, the current Harvard Hall now houses classrooms.

Across the Old Yard from Johnston Gate is University Hall (1815), whose white-granite facade was the first to challenge the red-brick Georgian style until then ascendant; [ 6 ] between its twin west staircases stands the John Harvard statue . University Hall contains major administrative offices, including those of the Dean of the Faculty of Arts and Sciences and the Dean of Harvard College .

Buildings [ edit ] Libraries in the Yard are Widener Library , its connected Pusey Library annex, Houghton Library for rare books and manuscripts, and Lamont Library , the main undergraduate library. Classroom and departmental buildings include Emerson Hall, Sever Hall , Robinson Hall, and Boylston Hall. The Harvard Bixi , a Chinese stele with inscribed text, is located near Widener.

The freshman dormitories of Harvard Yard include the upper levels of Massachusetts Hall , and Wigglesworth Hall , Weld Hall , Grays Hall , Matthews Hall , Straus Hall , Mower Hall , Hollis Hall , Stoughton Hall , Lionel Hall , Holworthy Hall , Canaday Hall , and Thayer Hall .

Nestled among Mower, Hollis, Lionel, and Stoughton Halls is Holden Chapel , home of the Holden Choirs . Nearby is Phillips Brooks House, dedicated to student service to the community .

Administrative buildings in the Yard include the aforementioned University Hall and Massachusetts Hall; Loeb House, on the east side of the Yard; and Wadsworth House, on the south side. Loeb House is the home of Harvard's governing bodies: the Harvard Corporation and the Board of Overseers . Wadsworth House houses the Harvard University Librarian and the Office of the University Marshal , among others.

Lehman Hall , at the southwestern corner of the Yard, provides administrative services for students who live off-campus.

Images [ edit ] Massachusetts Hall John Harvard statue The Yard in winter The Yard ca. 1920 Wadsworth House, August 6, 1920. Boston Public Library, Arts Department See also [ edit ] National Register of Historic Places listings in Cambridge, Massachusetts "Park the car in Harvard Yard" References [ edit ] ^ "National Register Information System" .

National Register of Historic Places .

National Park Service . April 15, 2008.

^ "College Yard purchased" . Harvard University. October 9, 2009 . Retrieved October 9, 2009 .

^ Hammond, Mason (Fall 1983).

"The Enclosure Of The Harvard Yard" .

Harvard Library Bulletin . pp.

340– 383. Archived from the original on October 5, 2013 . Retrieved October 2, 2013 .

^ "Harvard Yard Historic District - MACRIS Details" .

Inventory of Historic Assets of the Commonwealth . The Massachusetts Historical Commission. June 23, 1986 . Retrieved January 7, 2011 .

Old Cambridge; Harvard Square ^ Massachusetts Hall and the Wren Building at the College of William and Mary are both often described as the oldest; however, the Wren Building was built before Massachusetts Hall.

^ "The art of architecture" .

Harvard Gazette . February 16, 2011 . Retrieved May 21, 2019 .

External links [ edit ] 42°22′28″N 71°07′02″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.37447°N 71.11719°W ﻿ / 42.37447; -71.11719 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Harvard Yard .

Campus map showing Harvard Yard v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons v t e U.S. National Register of Historic Places in Massachusetts Topics Contributing property Keeper of the Register Historic district History of the National Register of Historic Places National Park Service Property types Lists by county Barnstable Berkshire Bristol Dukes Essex Franklin Hampden Hampshire Middlesex Nantucket Norfolk Plymouth Suffolk Worcester ( northern ) Lists by city Barnstable County Barnstable Harwich Bristol County Fall River New Bedford Taunton Essex County Andover Gloucester Ipswich Lawrence Lynn Methuen Salem Hampden County Springfield Middlesex County Arlington Cambridge Concord Framingham Lexington Lowell Marlborough Medford Newton Reading Sherborn Somerville Stoneham Wakefield Waltham Weston Winchester Norfolk County Brookline Milton Quincy Suffolk County Boston northern southern Worcester County Southbridge Uxbridge Worcester eastern northwestern southwestern Other lists Bridges Cape Cod National Seashore National Historic Landmarks Boston Category National Register of Historic Places portal United States portal Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_Yard&oldid=1293004920 " Categories : Harvard Square Harvard University buildings Landmarks in Cambridge, Massachusetts Historic districts in Middlesex County, Massachusetts Historic districts on the National Register of Historic Places in Massachusetts National Register of Historic Places in Cambridge, Massachusetts Harvard University University and college campuses in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Articles using NRISref without a reference number Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from August 2023 NRHP infobox with nocat Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 May 2025, at 03:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard Yard 8 languages Add topic

