Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Critique of non-cognitivism 3 Morality and reasons Toggle Morality and reasons subsection 3.1 "Why be moral?" – early work 3.2 "Why be moral?" – middle work 3.3 "Why be moral?" – later work 4 Ethics, aesthetics and political philosophy 5 Selected works 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Philippa Foot 33 languages العربية Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kapampangan മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English philosopher (1920–2010) This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Philippa Foot" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Philippa Foot FBA Foot in 1939 Born Philippa Ruth Bosanquet ( 1920-10-03 ) 3 October 1920 Owston Ferry , Lincolnshire , England Died 3 October 2010 (2010-10-03) (aged 90) Oxford , England Education Alma mater Somerville College, Oxford Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic philosophy Aretaic turn Aristotelianism Institutions Somerville College, Oxford UCLA Main interests Ethics , aesthetics Notable ideas Trolley problem , modern revival of virtue ethics Philippa Ruth Foot FBA ( née Bosanquet ; 3 October 1920 – 3 October 2010) was an English philosopher and one of the founders of contemporary virtue ethics . Her work was inspired by Aristotelian ethics . Along with Judith Jarvis Thomson , she is credited with inventing the trolley problem .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Biography [ edit ] Born Philippa Ruth Bosanquet in Owston Ferry , North Lincolnshire , she was the daughter of Esther Cleveland (1893–1980) and Captain William Sidney Bence Bosanquet (1893–1966) of the Coldstream Guards of the British Army . Her paternal grandfather was barrister and judge Sir Frederick Albert Bosanquet , Common Serjeant of London from 1900 to 1917. Her maternal grandfather was the 22nd and 24th President of the United States, Grover Cleveland .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Foot was educated privately and at Somerville College, Oxford , 1939–1942, where she attained a first-class degree in philosophy, politics, and economics . Her association with Somerville, interrupted only by government service as an economist from 1942 to 1947, continued for the rest of her life. She was a lecturer in philosophy, 1947–1950; fellow and tutor, 1950–1969; senior research fellow, 1969–1988; and honorary fellow, 1988–2010. She spent many hours there in debate with G. E. M. Anscombe and learnt from her about Wittgenstein's analytic philosophy and a new moral perspective: Foot said "I learned every thing from her".

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In the 1960s and 1970s, Foot held a number of visiting professorships in the United States, including at Cornell , MIT , Berkeley , and City University of New York . She was appointed Griffin Professor of Philosophy at the University of California, Los Angeles in 1976 and taught there until 1991, dividing her time between the United States and Britain.

[ 7 ] Contrary to common belief, Foot was not a founder of Oxfam . She joined the organization about six years after its foundation. She was an atheist .

[ 8 ] She was once married to the historian M. R. D. Foot , [ 9 ] and at one time shared a flat with the philosopher and novelist Iris Murdoch .

[ 10 ] She died in 2010 on her 90th birthday.

[ 11 ] She lived at 15 Walton Street from 1972 until 2010, and is commemorated by an Oxfordshire Blue Plaque on the house.

[ 12 ] Critique of non-cognitivism [ edit ] Foot's work in the 1950s and 1960s sought to revive Aristotelian ethics in modernity, competing with its major rivals, modern deontology and consequentialism (the latter a term dubbed by Anscombe). Some of her work was crucial to a re-emergence of normative ethics within analytic philosophy , notably her critiques of consequentialism , non-cognitivism , and Nietzsche . Foot's approach was influenced by the later work of Wittgenstein , although she seldom dealt explicitly with his materials. She had the opportunity to listen to Wittgenstein lecture once or twice.

[ 13 ] In her earlier career, Foot's works were meta-ethical in character, pertaining to the nature and status of moral judgment and language. Her essays "Moral Arguments" and "Moral Beliefs" were significant in dethroning non-cognitivism as the dominant meta-ethical theory of preceding decades.

[ citation needed ] Though non-cognitivism may be traced back to Hume 's Is–ought problem , its most explicit formulations are found in the works of A. J. Ayer , C. L. Stevenson , and R. M. Hare , who focused on abstract or "thin" ethical concepts such as good/bad and right/wrong. They argued that moral judgments do not express propositions, i.e., that they are not truth-apt, but express emotions or imperatives. Thus, fact and value are independent of each other.

[ citation needed ] This analysis of abstract or "thin" ethical concepts was contrasted with more concrete or "thick" concepts, such as cowardice, cruelty, and gluttony. Such attributes do not swing free of the facts, yet they carry the same "practicality" that "bad" or "wrong" do. They were intended to combine the particular, non-cognitive "evaluative" element championed by the theory with the descriptive element. One could detach the evaluative force by employing them in an "inverted commas sense", as one does in attempting to articulate thoughts in a system one opposes, for example by putting "unmanly" or "unladylike" in quotation marks. That leaves purely descriptive expressions that apply to actions, whereas employing such expressions without the quotation marks would add the non-cognitive extra of "and such action is bad ".

[ citation needed ] Foot objected to this distinction and its underlying account of thin concepts. Her defense of the cognitive and truth-evaluable character of moral judgment made the essays crucial in bringing the question of the rationality of morality to the fore.

[ citation needed ] Practical considerations involving "thick" ethical concepts – "but it would be cruel", "it would be cowardly", "it's for her to do", or "I promised her I wouldn't do it" – move people to act one way rather than another, but remain as purely descriptive as any other judgment pertaining to human life. They differ from thoughts such as "it would be done on a Tuesday" or "it would take about three gallons of paint" not by admixing what she considers a non-factual, attitude-expressing, "moral" element, but simply by the fact that people have reason not to do things that are cowardly or cruel. Her lifelong devotion to the question is apparent in all periods of her work.

[ citation needed ] Morality and reasons [ edit ] It is on the "why be moral?" question (which for her may be said to divide into the questions "why be just?", "why be temperate?", etc.) that her doctrine underwent a series of reversals.

"Why be moral?" – early work [ edit ] In "Moral Beliefs", Foot argued that the received virtues – courage, temperance, justice, and so on – are typically good for their bearer. They make people stronger, so to speak, and condition to happiness. This holds only typically, since the courage of a soldier, for instance, might happen to be precisely his downfall, yet is in some sense essential: possession of sound arms and legs is good as well. However, damaged legs may happen to exclude someone from conscription that assigns contemporaries to their deaths. So people have reason to act in line with the canons of these virtues and avoid cowardly, gluttonous, and unjust action. Parents and guardians who want the best for children will steer them accordingly.

[ citation needed ] The "thick" ethical concepts that she emphasized in her defense of moral judgment's cognitive character were precisely those associated with such "profitable" traits, i. e., virtues; this is how such descriptions differ from randomly chosen descriptions of action. The crucial point was that the difference between "just action" and "action performed on Tuesday" (for example) was not a matter of superadded "emotive" meaning, as in Ayer and Stevenson , nor a latent imperative feature, as in Hare . It is just that justice makes its bearer strong, which gives us a reason to cultivate it in ourselves and our loved ones by keeping to the corresponding actions.

[ citation needed ] So Foot's philosophy must address Nietzsche and the Platonic immoralists: perhaps the received ostensible virtues in fact warp or damaged the bearer. She suggests that modern and contemporary philosophers (other than Nietzsche) fear to pose this range of questions because they are blinded by an emphasis on a "particular just act" or a particular courageous act, rather than the traits that issue from them. It seems that an agent might come out the loser by such act. The underlying putative virtue is the object to consider.

[ citation needed ] "Why be moral?" – middle work [ edit ] Fifteen years later, in the essay "Morality as a System of Hypothetical Imperatives", she reversed this when it came to justice and benevolence, that is, the virtues that especially regard other people. Although everyone has reason to cultivate courage, temperance and prudence, whatever the person desires or values, still, the rationality of just and benevolent acts must, she thought, turn on contingent motivations.  Although many found the thesis shocking, on her (then) account, it is meant to be, in a certain respect, inspiring: in a famous reinterpretation of a remark of Kant, [ 14 ] she says that "we are not conscripts in the army of virtue, but volunteers"; [ 15 ] : 170 the fact that we have nothing to say in proof of the irrationality of at least some unjust people should not alarm us in our own defence and cultivation of justice and benevolence: "it did not strike the citizens of Leningrad that their devotion to the city and its people during the terrible years of the siege was contingent".

[ citation needed ] "Why be moral?" – later work [ edit ] Foot's book Natural Goodness attempts a different line. The question that we have most reason to do ties into the good working of practical reason. This in turn is tied to the idea of the species of an animal providing a measure of good and bad in the operations of its parts and faculties. Just as one has to know what kind of animal is meant, for instance to decide whether its eyesight is good or bad, the question of whether a subject's practical reason is well developed depends on the kind of animal it is. This idea is developed in the light of a concept of animal kinds or species as implicitly containing "evaluative" content, which may be criticized on contemporary biological grounds. However, it is arguable even on that basis that it is deeply entrenched in human cognition. In this case, what makes for a well-constituted practical reason depends on us being human beings marked by certain possibilities of emotion and desire, a certain anatomy, neurological organization, and so forth.

[ citation needed ] Once this step is taken, it becomes possible to argue in a new way for the rationality of moral considerations. Humans begin with the conviction that justice is a genuine virtue. So a conviction that well-constituted human practical reason operates with considerations of justice means that taking account of other people in that sort of way is "how human beings live together." (The thought that this is how they live must be understood in a sense compatible with the fact that actual individuals often do not – just as dentists understand the thought that "human beings have n teeth" in a way that is compatible with many people having fewer.) There is nothing incoherent in the thought that practical reasoning that takes account of others and their good might characterize some kind of rational and social animal.

[ citation needed ] Similarly, there is nothing incoherent in the idea of a form of rational life. Such considerations are alien, where they can only be imposed by damaging and disturbing the individual. There is nothing analytical about the rationality of justice and benevolence. Human conviction that justice is a virtue and that considerations of justice are genuine reasons for action assumes that the kind of rational being we are, namely human beings, is of the first type. There is no reason to think such a rational animality is impossible, and so none to suspect that considerations of justice are frauds.

[ citation needed ] It might be suggested that this is precisely not the case, that human beings are of the second kind, thus that the justice and benevolence we esteem are artificial and false. Foot would hold that machismo and ladylikeness considerations are artificial and false; they are matters of "mere convention", which tend to put one off the main things. As far as justice is concerned, that was the position of the "immoralists" Callicles and Thrasymachus in Plato 's dialogues , and as far as benevolence is concerned, that was the view of Friedrich Nietzsche .

[ citation needed ] With Callicles and Nietzsche, this is apparently to be shown by claiming that justice and benevolence respectively can be inculcated only by warping the emotional apparatus of the individual. Foot's book ends by attempting to defuse the evidence Nietzsche brings against what might be called the common-sense position. She proceeds by accepting his basic premise that a way of life inculcated by damaging the individual's passions, filling one with remorse, resentment and so forth, is wrong. She employs exactly the Nietzschean form of argument against some forms of femininity, for example, or exaggerated forms of etiquette acceptance. However, she claims that justice and benevolence "suit" human beings and there is no reason to accept Callicles' or Nietzsche's critiques in this case.

[ citation needed ] Ethics, aesthetics and political philosophy [ edit ] Nearly all Foot's published work relates to normative or meta-ethics. Only once did she move into aesthetics – in her 1970 British Academy Hertz Memorial Lecture, "Morality and Art", in which certain contrasts are drawn between moral and aesthetic judgements.

[ citation needed ] Foot appears never to have taken a professional interest in political philosophy .

[ citation needed ] Geoffrey Thomas of Birkbeck College , London, recalls approaching Foot in 1968, when he was a postgraduate at Trinity College, Oxford , to ask if she would read a draft paper on the relation of ethics to politics. "I've never found political philosophy interesting," she said, adding, "One's bound to interest oneself in the things people around one are talking about," so implying correctly that political philosophy was largely out of favour with Oxford philosophers in the 1950s and 1960s. She still agreed to read the paper, but Thomas never sent it.

[ 16 ] : 31–58 Selected works [ edit ] Virtues and Vices and Other Essays in Moral Philosophy , Berkeley: University of California Press /Oxford: Blackwell , 1978 (there are more recent editions) Natural Goodness . Oxford: Clarendon Press , 2001 Moral Dilemmas: And Other Topics in Moral Philosophy , Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2002 Morality and Art , The British Academy , read 20 May 1970, copyright 1971.

Warren Quinn, Morality and Action , ed. Philippa Foot (Introduction, ix–xii), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , 1993 See also [ edit ] Judith Jarvis Thomson G. E. M. Anscombe Rosalind Hursthouse Thought experiment Trolley problem References [ edit ] ^ Philippa Foot, The Problem of Abortion and the Doctrine of the Double Effect Archived 24 August 2019 at the Wayback Machine in Virtues and Vices (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1978) (originally in the Oxford Review , No. 5, 1967).

^ Edmonds, Dave (2013).

Would You Kill the Fat Man? The Trolley Problem and What Your Answer Tells Us about Right and Wrong . Princeton University Press. p. 35.

ISBN 9780691154022 .

"Philippa Foot set Trolleyology going, but it was Judith Jarvis Thomson, a philosopher at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, who delivered its most high-voltage jolt. Struck by Foot's thought experiment she responded with not one but two influential articles on what she labelled The Trolley Problem.

" ^ O'Grady, Jane (5 October 2010).

" The Guardian : Philippa Foot" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 4 November 2019 . Retrieved 17 December 2016 .

^ Zack, N.

, The Handy Philosophy Answer Book ( Canton, MI : Visible Ink Press , 2010), p. 354 .

^ Ortiz Millán, Gustavo (28 June 2023).

"Benjamin J.B. Lipscomb, The Women Are up to Something. How Elizabeth Anscombe, Philippa Foot, Mary Midgley, and Iris Murdoch Revolutionized Ethics" .

Crítica (México D. F. En línea) .

55 (164): 99– 107.

doi : 10.22201/iifs.18704905e.2023.1430 .

ISSN 1870-4905 .

Archived from the original on 10 December 2023 . Retrieved 26 November 2023 .

^ Hacker-Wright, John.

"Philippa Foot" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2024 . Retrieved 26 November 2023 .

^ Hursthouse, Rosalind (28 November 2012).

"Philippa Ruth Foot, 1920–2010" (PDF) .

Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the British Academy . Vol. XI. OUP/British Academy. pp.

179– 196.

ISBN 9780197265307 . Archived from the original on 5 December 2016.

^ Voorhoeve, Alex (2003).

"The Grammar of Good. An Interview with Philippa Foot" (PDF) .

The Harvard Review of Philosophy .

XI : 32– 44.

ISSN 2153-9154 .

OCLC 25557273 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 1 February 2007 .

^ Eilenberg, Susan (5 September 2002). "With A, then B, then C".

London Review of Books .

24 (17): 3– 8.

^ Grimes, William (9 October 2010).

"Philippa Foot, Renowned Philosopher, Dies at 90" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 28 November 2018 . Retrieved 25 April 2014 .

^ "Philippa Foot obituary" .

The Guardian . 5 October 2010.

Archived from the original on 4 November 2019 . Retrieved 17 December 2016 .

^ "Philippa FOOT (1920–2010): Moral Philosopher – 15 Walton Street, Oxford" . UK: Oxfordshire Blue Plaques Board .

Archived from the original on 27 May 2023 . Retrieved 27 May 2023 .

^ Foot, Philippa (March 2023).

"Moral Skepticism" .

Philosophy Overdose .

Archived from the original on 25 May 2023 . Retrieved 25 May 2023 .

^ Critique of Practical Reason , Book 1, Chapter 3 , "[W]e pretend with fanciful pride to set ourselves above the thought of duty, like volunteers.... [B]ut yet we are subjects in it, not the sovereign," ^ Virtues and Vices , p. 170 .

^ J. Hacker-Wright, Philippa Foot's Moral Thought (London: Bloomsbury Publishing , 2013), pp. 31–58 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Philippa Foot .

Links to biographical memoirs of fellows of the British Academy, including Philippa Foot Iris Murdoch : Memoir of Philippa Foot Interview with Philippa Foot in Philosophy Now magazine, 2001.

Interview with Foot by Alex Voorhoeve A revised and slightly expanded version of this interview appears in Alex Voorhoeve, Conversations on Ethics.

Oxford University Press, 2009.

A bibliography of Foot's works through 1996 "Philippa Foot, Renowned Philosopher, Dies at 90," by WILLIAM GRIMES, The New York Times , 9 October 2010 "Phillipa Ruth Foot" in Find a Grave .

v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal v t e Grover Cleveland 22nd (1885-1889) and 24th (1893–1897) President of the United States 28th Governor of New York (1883–1885) Life Grover Cleveland Birthplace New York Institute for Special Education 1881 Buffalo mayoral election 1882 New York state election Mugwumps Westland Mansion Gray Gables Presidencies 1884 presidential election Campaign Democratic National Convention First inauguration Wedding to Frances Folsom Foreign policy Presidential Succession Act of 1886 Electoral Count Act Interstate Commerce Act of 1887 Interstate Commerce Commission Tenure of Office Act Dependent and Disability Pension Act Hatch Act of 1887 Agricultural Experiment Stations Act of 1887 Texas Seed Bill Berlin Conference Scott Act Dawes Act Indian Appropriations Act of 1889 Federal judges appointed 1888 presidential election Campaign Democratic National Convention Murchison letter 1892 presidential election Campaign Democratic National Convention Second inauguration Panic of 1893 Sherman Silver Purchase Act Wilson–Gorman Tariff Act Coxey's Army Pullman Strike Overthrow of the Hawaiian Kingdom Venezuelan crisis of 1895 Enabling Act of 1889 National Democratic Party Public image Cleveland National Forest Cleveland Park Grover Cleveland High School Buffalo, New York Los Angeles Queens Cleveland, Mississippi Mount Cleveland (Alaska) Mount Cleveland (Vermont) SS President Cleveland (1920) SS President Cleveland (1947) Family Frances Cleveland (wife) Ruth Cleveland (daughter) Esther Cleveland (daughter) Richard F. Cleveland (son) Francis Cleveland (son) Philippa Foot (granddaughter) Richard Falley Cleveland (father) Rose Cleveland (sister) Richard Falley Jr.

(great-grandfather) ← Chester A. Arthur ←Benjamin Harrison→ William McKinley → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Croatia Sweden Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philippa_Foot&oldid=1304276966 " Categories : 1920 births 2010 deaths 20th-century English philosophers 21st-century English philosophers Alumni of Somerville College, Oxford Analytic philosophers Aristotelian philosophers Atheism in the United Kingdom Atheist philosophers British atheists Cornell family English atheists English people of American descent English women philosophers Fellows of Somerville College, Oxford Fellows of the British Academy Family of Grover Cleveland Moral realists People from the Borough of North East Lincolnshire British philosophy writers University of California, Los Angeles faculty Virtue ethicists Wittgensteinian philosophers Women ethicists Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2023 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with style issues from August 2023 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from August 2021 Use British English from September 2012 Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 02:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philippa Foot 33 languages Add topic

