Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Composition 3 Motivations 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Patriot (American Revolution) 22 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Dansk Deutsch فارسی Français Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Colonists who opposed British rule during the American Revolution A group of patriots during the American Revolutionary War , depicted in an 1875 portrait by Archibald Willard Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Patriots (also known as Revolutionaries , Continentals , Rebels , or Whigs ) were colonists in the Thirteen Colonies who opposed the Kingdom of Great Britain 's control and governance during the colonial era and supported and helped launch the American Revolution that ultimately established American independence. Patriot politicians led colonial opposition to British policies regarding the American colonies, eventually building support for the adoption of the Declaration of Independence , which was adopted unanimously by the Second Continental Congress on July 4, 1776.

After the American Revolutionary War began the year before, in 1775, many patriots assimilated into the Continental Army , which was commanded by George Washington and which ultimately secured victory against the British Army , leading the British to end their involvement in the war and acknowledge the sovereign independence of the colonies, reflected in the Treaty of Paris , which led to the establishment of the United States in 1783.

The patriots were inspired by English and American republican ideology that was part of the Age of Enlightenment , and rejected monarchy and aristocracy and supported individual liberty and natural rights and legal rights . Prominent patriot political theorists, including Thomas Jefferson , John Adams , and Thomas Paine , spearheaded the American Enlightenment , which was in turn inspired by European thinkers such as Francis Bacon , John Locke , and Jean-Jacques Rousseau . Though slavery existed in all of the Thirteen Colonies prior to the American Revolution, the issue divided patriots, with some supporting its abolition while others espoused proslavery thought .

The patriots included members of every social and ethnic group in the colonies, though support for the patriot cause was strongest in the New England Colonies and weakest in the Southern Colonies . The American Revolution divided the colonial population into three groups: patriots, who supported the end of British rule; loyalists , who supported Britain's continued control over the colonies; and those who remained neutral.

African Americans who supported the patriots were known as Black Patriots , with their counterparts on the British side being referred to as Black Loyalists .

Terminology The critics of British policy towards the Thirteen Colonies called themselves "Whigs" after 1768, identifying with members of the British Whig party who favored similar colonial policies.

[ citation needed ] Samuel Johnson writes that, at the time, the word "patriot" had a negative connotation and was used as a negative epithet for "a factious disturber of the government".

[ 1 ] Prior to the American Revolution , colonists who supported British authority called themselves Tories or royalists , identifying with the political philosophy of traditionalist conservatism as it existed in Great Britain. During the American Revolution, these persons became known primarily as Loyalists . Afterward, some 15% of Loyalists emigrated north to the remaining British territories in the Canadas . There they called themselves the United Empire Loyalists . 85% of the Loyalists decided to stay in the new United States and were granted American citizenship.

Composition Prior to the formal beginning of the American Revolution, many patriots were active in groups including the Sons of Liberty . The most prominent patriot leaders are referred to today as the Founding Fathers , who are generally defined as the 56 men who, as delegates to the Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia , signed the Declaration of Independence .

Patriots included a cross-section of the population of the Thirteen Colonies and came from varying backgrounds. Roughly 40 to 45 percent of the white population in the Thirteen Colonies supported the patriots' cause, between 15 and 20 percent supported the Loyalists, and the remainder were neutral or kept a low profile regarding their loyalties.

[ 2 ] The great majority of Loyalists remained in the Thirteen Colonies during the American Revolution; a minority, however, fled the nation for Canada, Great Britain, Florida , or the West Indies .

[ 3 ] Motivations Historians have explored the motivations that pulled men to one side or the other.

[ 4 ] Yale historian Leonard Woods Labaree used the published and unpublished writings and letters of leading men on each side, searching for how personality shaped their choice. He finds eight characteristics that differentiated the two groups. Loyalists were older, better established, and more likely to resist innovation than the patriots. Loyalists felt that the Crown was the legitimate government and resistance to it was morally wrong, while the patriots felt that morality was on their side because the British government had violated the constitutional rights of Englishmen. Men who were alienated by physical attacks on Royal officials took the Loyalist position, while those who were offended by British responses to actions such as the Boston Tea Party became patriots. Merchants in the port cities with long-standing financial attachments to Britain were likely to remain loyal, while few patriots were so deeply enmeshed in the system. Some Loyalists, according to Labaree, were "procrastinators" who believed that independence was bound to come some day but wanted to "postpone the moment", while the patriots wanted to "seize the moment". Loyalists were cautious and afraid of anarchy or tyranny that might come from mob rule; patriots made a systematic effort to take a stand against the British government. Finally, Labaree argues that Loyalists were pessimists who lacked the patriots' confidence that independence lay ahead.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The patriots rejected taxes imposed by legislatures in which the taxpayer was not represented. " No taxation without representation " was their slogan, referring to the lack of representation in the British Parliament. The British countered that there was "virtual representation" in the sense that all members of Parliament represented the interests of all the citizens of the British Empire. Some patriots declared that they were loyal to the king, but they insisted that they should be free to run their own affairs. In fact, they had been running their own affairs since the period of " salutary neglect " before the French and Indian War . Some radical patriots tarred and feathered tax collectors and customs officers, making those positions dangerous; according to Benjamin Irvin, the practice was especially prevalent in Boston where many patriots lived.

[ 7 ] See also List of Patriots (American Revolution) References ^ "patriot, n. and adj" .

OED Online . Oxford University Press . Retrieved July 6, 2021 .

^ Robert M. Calhoon, "Loyalism and neutrality" in Jack P. Greene; J. R. Pole (2008).

A Companion to the American Revolution . John Wiley & Sons. p. 235.

ISBN 9780470756447 .

^ Thomas B. Allen, Tories: Fighting for the King in America's First Civil War (2011) p. xviii ^ On patriots see Edwin G. Burrows and Michael Wallace, "The American Revolution: The Ideology and Psychology of National Liberation," Perspectives in American History, (1972) vol. 6 pp. 167–306 ^ Leonard Woods Labaree, Conservatism in Early American History (1948) pp. 164–65 ^ See also N. E. H. Hull, Peter C. Hoffer and Steven L. Allen, "Choosing Sides: A Quantitative Study of the Personality Determinants of Loyalist and Revolutionary Political Affiliation in New York," Journal of American History, 65#2 (1978), pp. 344–66 in JSTOR Archived February 23, 2020, at the Wayback Machine ^ Benjamin H. Irvin, "Tar and Feathers in Revolutionary America," (2003) Archived 2010-06-18 at the Wayback Machine Bibliography Ellis, Joseph Founding Brothers: The Revolutionary Generation (2002), Pulitzer Prize Kann, Mark E.; The Gendering of American Politics: Founding Mothers, Founding Fathers, and Political Patriarchy , (1999) online version Archived November 21, 2010, at the Wayback Machine Middlekauff, Robert ; The Glorious Cause: The American Revolution, 1763–1789 (2005) online version Archived May 24, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Miller, John C.

Origins of the American Revolution.

(1943) online version Archived May 25, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Miller, John C.

Triumph of Freedom, 1775–1783 (1948) online version Archived May 24, 2012, at the Wayback Machine Previdi, Robert; "Vindicating the Founders: Race, Sex, Class, and Justice in the Origins of America", Presidential Studies Quarterly, Vol. 29, 1999.

Rakove, Jack .

Revolutionaries: A New History of the Invention of America (2010) excerpt and text search Raphael, Ray.

A People's History of the American Revolution: How Common People Shaped the Fight for Independence (2002).

Roberts, Cokie .

Founding Mothers: The Women Who Raised Our Nation (2005).

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Patriot_(American_Revolution)&oldid=1306460333 " Categories : Patriots in the American Revolution 1768 establishments in the Thirteen Colonies 1787 disestablishments in the United States Tarring and feathering in the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use American English from April 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from June 2019 Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 21:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Patriot (American Revolution) 22 languages Add topic

