Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Position 2 Light curve 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents De Stella Nova 6 languages Čeština Español فارسی Français Português Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book by Johannes Kepler De Stella Nova in Pede Serpentarii et qui sub ejus exortum de novo iniit, Trigono igneo Book opened to display image with the Supernova located in the foot of the serpent bearer Author Johannes Kepler Language Latin Publisher Paul Sessius Publication date 1606 Publication place Kingdom of Bohemia Pages [6] leaves, 212 pages, 35 pages, [2] leaves Website https://mdz-nbn-resolving.de/details:bsb10873675 De Stella Nova in Pede Serpentarii (On the New Star in the Foot of the Serpent Handler), generally known as De Stella Nova was a book written by Johannes Kepler between 1605 and 1606, when the book was published in Prague .

[ 1 ] Kepler wrote the book following the appearance of the supernova SN 1604 , also known as Kepler's Supernova . This star appeared in the constellation Ophiuchus , the Greek (Ὀφιοῦχος Ophioukhos) "serpent-bearer" which is also known in Latin as Serpentarius.

The SN 1604 supernova was observable for almost a year, from October 1604 to October 1605. Observation conditions were good, particularly when it was first visible.  A conjunction of Jupiter and Mars happened to be taking place near the place where the supernova appeared, meaning that astronomers happened to be looking in its direction.

[ 2 ] As a result there were many witnesses to its appearance, but Kepler's observations were particularly meticulous.  The care he took not only to record his own observations but to compile the observations of other astronomers make De Stella Nova a very important record both of the supernova itself, and of the astronomy of the early 17th century.

[ 2 ] Position [ edit ] As soon as the ‘new star’ appeared, Kepler began recording his observations, measuring its angular distance from known stars such as σ Sagittarii , η Ophiuchi , α Ophiuchi , ζ Ophiuchi , α Aquilae and α Scorpii . With a typical error of less than one minute of arc , remarkable for observations made with the naked eye, he established that it had no noticeable movement.

[ 3 ] The low declination of the supernova over the latitude Kepler was observing from (Prague, around 50° north) likely caused atmospheric refraction , explaining most of Kepler’s errors. It is hard to be sure however, since Kepler’s book gives no indication of the times or atmospheric conditions of his observations. Kepler also mentions the measurements made by David Fabricius in Osteel , which agreed with his own. (They were so precise that in 1943 they allowed Walter Baade to locate the supernova remnant , SNR G4.5+6.8 ).

[ 4 ] Kepler’s measurements allowed him to be certain that the ‘new star’ showed no parallax . Thus, as suggested by the supernova observed 32 years previously by Tycho Brahe ( SN 1572 ), were too far away for any kind of parallax to be noticed with the instrumentation of the time.

Light curve [ edit ] Kepler also mentioned his measures of the object’s brightness, which compared it with Jupiter , Venus , Mars and several nearby stars. These were sufficiently precise and extended over a year, allowing the supernova’s light curve to be reconstructed.

References [ edit ] ^ "On the New Star in the Foot of the Serpent Handler" .

Galileo . University of Oklahoma. 23 June 2015 . Retrieved 21 January 2018 .

^ a b David H. Clark; F. Richard Stephenson (22 October 2013).

The Historical Supernovae . Elsevier Science.

ISBN 978-1-4832-7928-2 .

^ Britannica Educational Publishing (2012-12-01).

Scientists and Inventors of the Renaissance . Britannica Educational Publishing. pp. 55–.

ISBN 978-1-61530-884-2 .

^ Donald E. Osterbrock; Walter Baade (2001-10-14).

Walter Baade: A Life in Astrophysics . Princeton University Press. pp. 93–.

ISBN 0-691-04936-X .

External links [ edit ] Media related to De Stella Nova at Wikimedia Commons v t e Johannes Kepler Scientific career Kepler conjecture Kepler's laws of planetary motion Kepler orbit Kepler triangle Kepler's equation Kepler polyhedra Kepler's Supernova Keplerian telescope Works Mysterium Cosmographicum (1596) De Stella Nova (1606) Astronomia nova (1609) Epitome Astronomiae Copernicanae (1618, 1620-21) Harmonice Mundi (1619) Rudolphine Tables (1627) Somnium (1634) Related Die Harmonie der Welt (opera) Katharina Kepler (mother) Jakob Bartsch (son-in-law) Kepler (opera) Kepler space telescope Johannes Kepler ATV Astronomers Monument List of namesakes Authority control databases Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=De_Stella_Nova&oldid=1229396984 " Categories : Works by Johannes Kepler 1606 books 1606 in the Holy Roman Empire 17th-century books in Latin Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 June 2024, at 15:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents De Stella Nova 6 languages Add topic

