Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life Toggle Early life subsection 1.1 Patriarch of Alexandria 2 Controversies Toggle Controversies subsection 2.1 Dispute with the Prefect 2.2 Murder of Hypatia 2.3 Cyril's involvement 2.4 Conflict with Nestorius 3 Theology Toggle Theology subsection 3.1 Mariology 4 Works Toggle Works subsection 4.1 Translations 5 See also 6 Citations Toggle Citations subsection 6.1 Sources 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Cyril of Alexandria 59 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Boarisch Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Patriarch of Alexandria from 412 to 444 For other people with the same name, see Pope Cyril of Alexandria (disambiguation) .

Saint Cyril of Alexandria Patriarch of Alexandria Fresco in the Chora , 14th century Archdiocese Alexandria See Alexandria Predecessor Theophilus of Alexandria Successor Pope Dioscorus I of Alexandria Personal details Born c.

376 Didouseya , Province of Egypt , Byzantine Empire Died 444 (aged 67–68) Alexandria , Province of Egypt, Byzantine Empire Sainthood Feast day 18 January and 9 June ( Eastern Orthodox Church ) 27 June ( Coptic Church , Catholic Church , Lutheranism ) 9 February (formerly: Catholic Church, 1882–1969) 27 June (Church of England in Common Worship) 28 January (Western Rite Orthodoxy) Venerated in Catholic Church Eastern Orthodox Church Oriental Orthodoxy Anglicanism Lutheranism Title as Saint The Pillar of Faith; Seal of all the Fathers; Bishop, Confessor, Bishop of Alexandria, Teacher of the Faith and also (in the Catholic Church) Doctor of the Church Attributes Vested as a bishop with phelonion and omophorion , and usually with his head covered in the manner of Egyptian monastics (sometimes the head covering has a polystavrion pattern), he usually is depicted holding a Gospel Book or a scroll , with his right hand raised in blessing.

Patronage Alexandria Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Part of a series on the Eastern Orthodox Church Mosaic of Christ Pantocrator , Hagia Sophia Overview Structure Theology ( History of theology ) Liturgy Church history Holy Mysteries View of Salvation View of Mary View of icons Background Crucifixion / Resurrection / Ascension of Jesus Christianity Christian Church Apostolic succession Four Marks of the Church Orthodoxy Organization Autonomy Autocephaly Patriarchate Ecumenical Patriarch Episcopal polity Canon law Clergy Bishops Priests Deacons Monasticism Degrees Bratstvo Autocephalous jurisdictions Autocephalous Churches who are officially part of the communion: Constantinople Alexandria Antioch Jerusalem Russia Serbia Romania Bulgaria Georgia Cyprus Greece Poland Albania Czech Lands and Slovakia Autocephaly recognized by some autocephalous Churches de jure : America North Macedonia Autocephaly and canonicity recognized by Constantinople and 3 other autocephalous Churches: Ukraine (OCU) Spiritual independence recognized by Georgian Orthodox Church: Ukraine (UOC) Autonomous jurisdictions Sinai (JP) Finland (EP) Estonia (EP) Japan (MP) China (MP) Americas (RP) Bessarabia (RP) Moldova (MP) Semi-Autonomous: Crete (EP) Estonia (MP) ROCOR (MP) Episcopal assemblies Australia, New Zealand, and Oceania Austria Belgium, Holland, and Luxembourg Canada France Germany Great Britain and Ireland Italy and Malta Latin America Scandinavia Spain and Portugal Switzerland and Liechtenstein United States of America Noncanonical jurisdictions Old Believers Spiritual Christianity True Orthodoxy Catacomb Church Old Calendarists American Orthodox Catholic Church American World Patriarchs National churches: Abkhazia Belarus Italy Latvia Montenegro Turkey UOC–KP Evangelical Orthodox Ecumenical councils First Seven Ecumenical Councils : Nicaea I Constantinople I Ephesus Chalcedon Constantinople II Constantinople III Nicaea II Other possible ecumenical councils: Constantinople IV Constantinople V Other important councils: Quinisext Council Jassy Moscow Jerusalem Constantinople (1872) History Church Fathers Pentarchy Byzantine Empire Christianization of Georgia Christianization of Bulgaria Christianization of Kievan Rus' Great Schism Russia Ottoman Empire North America Moscow–Constantinople schism 15th–16th c.

1996 2018 Theology History of Eastern Orthodox theology ( 20th century (Neo-Palamism) ) Apophaticism Chrismation Contemplative prayer Essence vs. Energies Hesychasm Holy Trinity Hypostatic union Icons Metousiosis Mystical theology Nicene Creed Nepsis Oikonomia vs Akribeia Ousia Palamism Philokalia Phronema Sin Theosis Theotokos Differences from the Catholic Church Opposition to the Filioque Opposition to papal supremacy Liturgy and worship Divine Liturgy Divine Services Akathist Apolytikion Artos Ectenia Euchologion Holy Water Iconostasis Jesus Prayer Aprakos Kontakion Liturgical entrances Liturgical fans Lity Memorial service Memory Eternal Omophorion Eastern Orthodox bowing Eastern Orthodox marriage Praxis Paraklesis Paschal greeting Paschal Homily Paschal troparion Prayer rope Prosphora Russian bell ringing Semantron Sign of the cross Sticheron Troparion Vestments Use of incense Liturgical calendar Paschal cycle 12 Great Feasts Other feasts: Feast of Orthodoxy Intercession of the Theotokos The four fasting periods: Nativity Fast Great Lent Apostles' Fast Dormition Fast Major figures Saints ( Russian (until 15th century) , Russian (post-15th century) , Serbian , American ) Justin Martyr Athanasius of Alexandria Ephraim the Syrian Basil of Caesarea Cyril of Jerusalem Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa John Chrysostom Cyril of Alexandria John Climacus Maximus the Confessor John of Damascus Theodore the Studite Kassia Cyril and Methodius Photius I of Constantinople Vladimir the Great Sava I of Serbia Gregory Palamas Innocent of Alaska Other topics Architecture Folk Encyclical of the Eastern Patriarchs Cross Saint titles Statistics by country v t e Part of a series on Oriental Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodox churches Coptic Syriac Armenian Indian Cilicia Orthodox Tewahedo Ethiopian Eritrean Independent churches Coptic : British Orthodox Tewahedo : Tigrayan Syriac : Malabar Independent Autonomous churches Coptic : French Coptic Orthodox Church Armenian : Constantinople , Jerusalem Syriac : Jacobite Syrian Christian Church History and theology History of Oriental Orthodoxy : Coptic history Tewahedo history Syriac history Saint Thomas Christians Ecumenical Councils: Nicaea I Constantinople I Ephesus I Ephesus II Ephesus III Dvin I Dvin II Dvin III Dvin IV Manzikert Capharthutha Shirakavan Hromkla Theology: Miaphysitism Oriental Orthodox theology Non-Chalcedonian Christianity Liturgy and practices Anaphora & Rites: Alexandrian Rite Anaphora of Saint Gregory Armenian Rite West Syriac Rite Liturgy of Saint James Liturgy of Saint Basil Liturgy of Saint Cyril Malankara Rite Holy Qurobo Calendars: Armenian Coptic Ethiopian Julian Gregorian Bible: Peshitta Coptic Bible Armenian Bible Orthodox Tewahedo Bible Cross: Coptic cross Armenian Cross St. Thomas Cross Ethiopian cross Major figures Cyril of Alexandria Mor Addai Abgar V Gregory the Illuminator Nine Saints of Ethiopia Tiridates III Mar Awgin Athanasius of Alexandria Ephrem the Syrian Ezana of Axum Frumentius Shenoute Mesrop Mashtots Dioscorus of Alexandria Severus of Antioch Abraham of Farshut Yared Simon the Tanner Gregory of Narek Nerses IV Michael the Syrian Bar Hebraeus Tekle Haymanot Giyorgis of Segla Mar Thoma I Gregorios Abdal Jaleel Geevarghese Gregorios Related topics Abuna Catholicos Catholicos of India Patriarch of Antioch Maphrian Ethiopian titles Apostolic Church-Ordinance Coptic monasticism Coptic saints Debtera Coonan Cross Oath Ethiopian chant Fast of Nineveh Coptic fasting Tewahedo fasting Timkat Links and resources Category Media Templates WikiProject Christianity portal v t e Cyril of Alexandria ( Ancient Greek : Κύριλλος Ἀλεξανδρείας ; Coptic : Ⲡⲁⲡⲁ Ⲕⲩⲣⲓⲗⲗⲟⲩ ⲁ̅ or Coptic : Ⲡⲓⲁⲅⲓⲟⲥ Ⲁⲃⲃⲁ Ⲕⲩⲣⲓⲗⲗⲟⲥ ⲡⲓⲥⲧⲩⲗⲗⲟⲥ ⲛ̀ⲧⲉ ⲡⲓⲛⲁϩϯ or ⲡⲓ̀ⲁⲅⲓⲟⲥ Ⲕⲓⲣⲓⲗⲗⲟⲥ; c.

376–444) was the Patriarch of Alexandria from 412 to 444.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] He was enthroned when the city was at the height of its influence and power within the Roman Empire . Cyril wrote extensively and was a major player in the Christological controversies of the late-4th and 5th centuries. He was a central figure in the Council of Ephesus in 431, which led to the deposition of Nestorius as Patriarch of Constantinople .
Cyril is counted among the Church Fathers and also as a Doctor of the Church , and his reputation within the Christian world has resulted in his titles Pillar of Faith and Seal of all the Fathers . The Nestorian bishops at their synod at the Council of Ephesus declared him a heretic, labelling him as a "monster, born and educated for the destruction of the church".

[ 3 ] Cyril is well known for his dispute with Nestorius and his supporter, Patriarch John of Antioch , whom Cyril excluded from the Council of Ephesus for arriving late. He is also known for his expulsion of Novatians and Jews from Alexandria and for inflaming tensions that led to the murder of the Hellenistic philosopher Hypatia by a Christian mob. Historians disagree over the extent of his responsibility in this.

Cyril tried to oblige the pious Christian emperor Theodosius II (AD 408–450) to himself by dedicating his Paschal table to him.

[ 4 ] Cyril's Paschal table was provided with a Metonic basic structure in the form of a 19-year lunar cycle adopted by him around AD 425, which was very different from the first Metonic 19-year lunar cycle invented around AD 260 by Anatolius , but exactly equal to the lunar cycle which had been introduced around AD 412 by Annianus ; the Julian equivalent of this Alexandrian cycle adopted by Cyril and nowadays referred to as the "classical (Alexandrian) 19-year lunar cycle" would emerge a century later in Rome as the basic structure of Dionysius Exiguus ’ Paschal table (AD 525).

[ 5 ] The Catholic Church did not commemorate Saint Cyril in the Tridentine calendar : it added his feast only in 1882, assigning to it the date of 9 February. Yet the 1969 Catholic Calendar revision moved it to 27 June, considered to be the day of the saint's death, as celebrated by the Coptic Orthodox Church .

[ 6 ] The same date has been chosen for the Lutheran calendar. The Eastern Orthodox and Byzantine Catholic Churches celebrate his feast day on 9 June and also, together with Pope Athanasius I of Alexandria , on 18 January. Cyril is remembered in the Church of England with a commemoration on 27 June.

[ 7 ] Western Rite Orthodox Christians within the Antiochian Western Rite Vicariate, which is under the auspices of the Antiochian Orthodox Christian Archdiocese of North America, celebrate the Feast of Saint Cyril of Alexandria on 28 January, which is when his Feast Day occurs in the Roman Martyrology.

Early life [ edit ] Little is known for certain of Cyril's early life. He was born circa 376, in the town of Didouseya, Egypt, modern-day El-Mahalla El-Kubra .

[ 8 ] A few years after his birth, his maternal uncle Theophilus rose to the powerful position of Patriarch of Alexandria .

[ 9 ] His mother remained close to her brother and under his guidance, Cyril was well educated. His writings show his knowledge of Christian writers of his day, including Eusebius , Origen , Didymus the Blind , and writers of the Church of Alexandria . He received the formal Christian education standard for his day: he studied grammar from age twelve to fourteen (390–392), [ 10 ] rhetoric and humanities from fifteen to twenty (393–397) and finally theology and biblical studies (398–402).

[ 10 ] In 403, he accompanied his uncle to attend the " Synod of the Oak " in Constantinople, [ 11 ] which deposed John Chrysostom as Archbishop of Constantinople.

[ 12 ] The prior year, Theophilus had been summoned by the emperor to Constantinople to apologize before a synod , over which Chrysostom would preside, on account of several charges which were brought against him by certain Egyptian monks. Theophilus had them persecuted as Origenists .

[ 13 ] Placing himself at the head of soldiers and armed servants, Theophilus had marched against the monks, burned their dwellings, and ill-treated those whom he captured.

[ 14 ] Theophilus arrived at Constantinople with twenty-nine of his suffragan bishops, and conferring with those opposed to the Archbishop, drafted a long list of largely unfounded accusations against Chrysostom, [ 15 ] who refused to recognize the legality of a synod in which his open enemies were judges. Chrysostom was subsequently deposed.

Patriarch of Alexandria [ edit ] Theophilus died on 15 October 412, and Cyril was made Pope or Patriarch of Alexandria on 18 October 412, but only after a riot between his supporters and those of his rival Archdeacon Timotheus. According to Socrates Scholasticus , the Alexandrians were always rioting.

[ 1 ] Thus, Cyril followed his uncle in a position that had become powerful and influential, rivalling that of the prefect in a time of turmoil and frequently violent conflict between the cosmopolitan city's pagan , Jewish , and Christian inhabitants.

[ 16 ] He began to exert his authority by causing the churches of the Novatianists to be closed and their sacred vessels to be seized.

Controversies [ edit ] Dispute with the Prefect [ edit ] Orestes , Praefectus augustalis of the Diocese of Egypt , steadfastly resisted Cyril's ecclesiastical encroachment upon secular prerogatives.

[ 17 ] Tension between the parties increased when in 415, Orestes published an edict that outlined new regulations regarding mime shows and dancing exhibitions in the city, which attracted large crowds and were commonly prone to civil disorder of varying degrees. Crowds gathered to read the edict shortly after it was posted in the city's theater. Cyril sent the grammaticus Hierax to discover the content of the edict. The edict angered Christians as well as Jews. At one such gathering, Hierax read the edict and applauded the new regulations, prompting a disturbance. Many people felt that Hierax was attempting to incite the crowd—particularly the Jews—into sedition.

[ 18 ] Orestes had Hierax tortured in public in a theatre. This order had two aims: one to quell the riot, the other to mark Orestes' authority over Cyril.

[ 19 ] [ 17 ] Socrates Scholasticus recounts that upon hearing of Hierax's severe and public punishment, Cyril threatened to retaliate against the Jews of Alexandria with "the utmost severities" if the harassment of Christians did not cease immediately. In response to Cyril's threat, the Jews of Alexandria grew even more furious, eventually resorting to violence against the Christians. They plotted to flush the Christians out at night by running through the streets claiming that the Church of Alexander was on fire. When Christians responded to what they were led to believe was the burning down of their church, "the Jews immediately fell upon and slew them" by using rings to recognize one another in the dark and killing everyone else in sight. When the morning came, Cyril, along with many of his followers, took to the city's synagogues in search of the perpetrators of the massacre.

[ 20 ] According to Socrates, after Cyril rounded up all the Jews in Alexandria he ordered them to be stripped of all possessions, banished them from Alexandria, and allowed their goods to be pillaged by the remaining citizens of Alexandria. Scholasticus alleges that all the Jews of Alexandria were banished, while John of Nikiû says it was only those involved in the ambush and massacre. Susan Wessel says that, while it is not clear whether Scholasticus was a Novationist (whose churches Cyril had closed), he was apparently sympathetic towards them, and repeatedly accuses Cyril of abusing his episcopal power by infringing on the rights and duties of the secular authorities. Wessel says, however, "...Socrates probably does not provide accurate and unambiguous information about Cyril's relationship to imperial authority".

[ 21 ] Nonetheless, with Cyril's banishment of the Jews, however many, "Orestes [...] was filled with great indignation at these transactions, and was excessively grieved that a city of such magnitude should have been suddenly bereft of so large a portion of its population." [ 20 ] Because of this, the feud between Cyril and Orestes intensified, and both men wrote to the emperor regarding the situation. Eventually, Cyril attempted to reach out to Orestes through several peace overtures, including attempted mediation and, when that failed, showed him the Gospels, which he interpreted to indicate that the religious authority of Cyril would require Orestes' acquiescence in the bishop's policy.

[ 22 ] Nevertheless, Orestes remained unmoved by such gestures.

This refusal almost cost Orestes his life.

Nitrian monks came from the desert and instigated a riot against Orestes among the population of Alexandria. These monks had resorted to violence 15 years before, during a controversy between Theophilus (Cyril's uncle) and the " Tall Brothers "; the monks assaulted Orestes and accused him of being a pagan. Orestes rejected the accusations, showing that he had been baptised by the Archbishop of Constantinople. A monk named Ammonius threw a stone hitting Orestes in the head. The prefect had Ammonius tortured to death, whereupon the Patriarch allegedly honored him as a martyr. However, at least according to Scholasticus, the Christian community displayed a general lack of enthusiasm for Ammonius's case for martyrdom. The prefect then wrote to the emperor Theodosius II , as did Cyril.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Murder of Hypatia [ edit ] Main article: Hypatia The Prefect Orestes enjoyed the political backing of Hypatia , an astronomer, philosopher and mathematician who had considerable moral authority in the city of Alexandria, and who had extensive influence. Indeed, many students from wealthy and influential families came to Alexandria purposely to study privately with Hypatia , and many of these later attained high posts in government and the Church. Several Christians thought that Hypatia's influence had caused Orestes to reject all conciliatory offerings by Cyril. Modern historians think that Orestes had cultivated his relationship with Hypatia to strengthen a bond with the pagan community of Alexandria, as he had done with the Jewish one, in order to better manage the tumultuous political life of the Egyptian capital.

[ 25 ] According to Socrates Scholasticus during the Christian season of Lent in March 415, a mob of Christians under the leadership of a lector named Peter, raided Hypatia's carriage as she was travelling home.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] They dragged her into a building known as the Kaisarion , a former pagan temple and center of the Roman imperial cult in Alexandria that had been converted into a Christian church.

[ 29 ] [ 26 ] [ 28 ] There, the mob stripped Hypatia naked and murdered her using ostraka , [ 26 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] which can either be translated as " roof tiles " or " oyster shells ".

[ 26 ] [ 33 ] Later historian John of Nikiû also tells a similar story.

[ 34 ] Even later historian Byzantinist Fr.

Adrian Fortescue , says that the mob of Christian Parabalanies and Peter, cruelly tore her to pieces on the steps of a church. Damascius adds that they also cut out her eyeballs.

[ 35 ] They tore her body into pieces and dragged her limbs through the town to a place called Cinarion, where they set them on fire.

[ 26 ] [ 35 ] [ 32 ] According to Watts, this was in line with the traditional manner in which Alexandrians carried the bodies of the "vilest criminals" outside the city limits to cremate them as a way of symbolically purifying the city.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Cyril's involvement [ edit ] Although Socrates Scholasticus never explicitly identifies Hypatia's murderers, they are commonly assumed to have been members of the parabalani .

[ 37 ] Christopher Haas disputes this identification, arguing that the murderers were more likely "a crowd of Alexandrian laymen".

[ 38 ] Socrates Scholasticus unequivocally condemns the actions of the mob, declaring, "Surely nothing can be farther from the spirit of Christianity than the allowance of massacres, fights, and transactions of that sort." [ 26 ] [ 36 ] [ 39 ] Icon of Saint Cyril by Emmanuel Tzanes - 1654.

Neoplatonist historian Damascius ( c.

458 – c.

538) was "anxious to exploit the scandal of Hypatia's death", and attributed responsibility for her murder to Bishop Cyril and his Christian followers.

[ 40 ] Damascius's account of the Christian murder of Hypatia is the sole historical source naming Bishop Cyril.

[ 41 ] Some modern studies, as well as the 2009 Hypatia biopic Agora represent Hypatia as falling casualty to a conflict between two Christian factions, one peaceful and moderate and led by Orestes, with the support of Hypatia, and fundamentalist faction enforced by Parabalani and led by Patriarch Cyril.

[ 42 ] According to lexicographer William Smith , "She was accused of too much familiarity with Orestes, prefect of Alexandria, and the charge spread among the clergy, who took up the notion that she interrupted the friendship of Orestes with their archbishop, Cyril." [ 43 ] Scholasticus, alleges that Hypatia fell "victim to the political jealousy which at the time prevailed" and that news of Hypatia's murder, "brought no small disgrace", not only to Patriarch Cyril but to the whole Christian Church in Alexandria, "for murder and slaughter and all such things are altogether opposed to the Christian religion." [ 44 ] After the murder, a deputation of citizens went to Constantinople to petition the Emperor for an investigation so as to prevent such horrors in the future and to put down the disorderly Parabalani, however they urged for the Patriarch to be allowed to remain in the city (Orestes wanted him banished). One could deduce from this that there were some who didn't think Cyril responsible for this or that even his own followers thought he went too far. However, according to Damascius , Cyril himself allegedly only managed to escape even more serious punishment by bribing one of Theodosius's officials.

[ 39 ] Indeed, the investigation resulted in the emperors Honorius and Theodosius II issuing an edict in autumn of 416, which attempted to remove the parabalani from Cyril's power and instead place them under the authority of Orestes.

[ 45 ] [ 39 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] The edict restricted the parabalani from attending "any public spectacle whatever" or entering "the meeting place of a municipal council or a courtroom." [ 48 ] It also severely restricted their recruitment by limiting the total number of parabalani to no more than five hundred.

[ 47 ] Conflict with Nestorius [ edit ] Another major conflict was between the Alexandrian and Antiochian schools of ecclesiastical reflection, piety, and discourse. This long running conflict widened with the third canon of the First Council of Constantinople which granted the see of Constantinople primacy over the older sees of Alexandria and Antioch. Thus, the struggle between the sees of Alexandria and Antioch now included Constantinople. The conflict came to a head in 428 after Nestorius , who originated in Antioch, was made Archbishop of Constantinople.

[ 49 ] Cyril gained an opportunity to restore Alexandria's pre-eminence over both Antioch and Constantinople when an Antiochine priest who was in Constantinople at Nestorius' behest began to preach against calling Mary the "Mother of God" ( Theotokos ). As the term "Mother of God" had long been attached to Mary, the laity in Constantinople complained against the priest. Rather than repudiating the priest, Nestorius intervened on his behalf. Nestorius argued that Mary was neither a "Mother of Man" nor " Mother of God " as these referred to Christ's two natures ; rather, Mary was the "Mother of Christ" (Greek: Christotokos ). Christ, according to Nestorius, was the conjunction of the Godhead with his "temple" (which Nestorius was fond of calling his human nature). The controversy seemed to be centered on the issue of the suffering of Christ. Cyril maintained that the Son of God or the divine Word, truly suffered "in the flesh." [ 50 ] However, Nestorius claimed that the Son of God was altogether incapable of suffering, even within his union with the flesh.

[ 51 ] Eusebius of Dorylaeum went so far as to accuse Nestorius of adoptionism . By this time, news of the controversy in the capital had reached Alexandria. At Easter 429 A.D., Cyril wrote a letter to the Egyptian monks warning them of Nestorius's views. A copy of this letter reached Constantinople where Nestorius preached a sermon against it. This began a series of letters between Cyril and Nestorius which gradually became more strident in tone. Finally, Emperor Theodosius II convoked the Council of Ephesus (in 431) to solve the dispute. Cyril selected Ephesus [ 10 ] as the venue since it supported the veneration of Mary. The council was convoked before Nestorius's supporters from Antioch and Syria had arrived and thus Nestorius refused to attend when summoned. Predictably, the Council ordered the deposition and exile of Nestorius for heresy.

However, when John of Antioch and the other pro-Nestorius bishops finally reached Ephesus, they assembled their own Council, condemned Cyril for heresy, deposed him from his see, and labelled him as a "monster, born and educated for the destruction of the church".

[ 52 ] Theodosius, by now old enough to hold power by himself, annulled the verdict of the Council and arrested Cyril, but Cyril eventually escaped. Having fled to Egypt, Cyril bribed Theodosius's courtiers, and sent a mob led by Dalmatius , a hermit , to besiege Theodosius's palace, and shout abuse; the emperor eventually gave in, sending Nestorius into minor exile (Upper Egypt).

[ 52 ] Cyril died about 444, but the controversies were to continue for decades, from the "Robber Synod" of Ephesus (449) to the Council of Chalcedon (451) and beyond.

Theology [ edit ] Icon of St. Cyril of Alexandria Cyril regarded the embodiment of God in the person of Jesus Christ to be so mystically powerful that it spread out from the body of the God-man into the rest of the race, to reconstitute human nature into a graced and deified condition of the saints, one that promised immortality and transfiguration to believers.

Nestorius , on the other hand, saw the incarnation as primarily a moral and ethical example to the faithful, to follow in the footsteps of Jesus. Cyril's constant stress was on the simple idea that it was God who walked the streets of Nazareth (hence Mary was Theotokos , meaning "God bearer", which became in Latin "Mater Dei" or "Dei Genitrix", or Mother of God), and God who had appeared in a transfigured humanity. Nestorius spoke of the distinct "Jesus the man" and "the divine Logos " in ways that Cyril thought were too dichotomous , widening the ontological gap between man and God in a way that some of his contemporaries believed would annihilate the person of Christ.

The main issue that prompted this dispute between Cyril and Nestorius was the question which arose at the Council of Constantinople: What exactly was the being to which Mary gave birth? Cyril affirmed that the Holy Trinity consists of a singular divine nature, essence, and being ( ousia ) in three distinct aspects, instantiations, or subsistencies of being ( hypostases ). These distinct hypostases are the Father, the Son or Word ( Logos ), and the Holy Spirit. His christology is a topic of debate. He taught of "μία φύσις τοῦ θεοῦ λόγου σεσαρκωμένη", meaning "one physis of the Word of God made flesh". This resulted in the miaphysite slogan "One Nature united out of two" being used to encapsulate the theological position of this Alexandrian bishop.

According to Cyril's theology, there were two states for the Son of God: the state that existed prior to the Son (or Word/Logos) becoming enfleshed in the person of Jesus and the state that actually became enfleshed. The Logos Incarnate suffered and died on the Cross, and therefore the Son was able to suffer without suffering. Cyril passionately argued for the continuity of a single subject, God the Word, from the pre-Incarnate state to the Incarnate state. The divine Logos was really present in the flesh and in the world—not merely bestowed upon, semantically affixed to, or morally associated with the man Jesus, as the adoptionists and, he believed, Nestorius had taught.

Mariology [ edit ] Cyril of Alexandria became noted in Church history because of his spirited fight for the title " Theotokos [ 53 ] " during the First Council of Ephesus (431), establishing the ecclesiastically settled basis for all subsequent mariological developments.

[ 54 ] Prior to the controversy over the theology of Nestorius , Cyril rarely if ever used the Mariological title, but theo-political circumstances compelled him as Archbishop of one of the Empire's chief sees, to become involved and develop his theology." [ 55 ] Icon of Saint Cyril (1545).

Beginning in 429 Cyril wrote a series of letters to various ecclesiastical authorities in which he espoused the orthodoxy of "Theotokos". The propriety of the term was justified through appeals to earlier theologians who had used it, like Athanasius , the Cappadocians , and Atticus .

[ 56 ] Following an epistolary exchange with the increasingly unpopular archbishop of Constantinople, in 430 Cyril wrote his famous 12 Anathemas in which anyone who refused to call Mary Theotokos was condemned. The following year over 100 bishops met in council at Ephesus to rule on the disputes. In between sessions at the Council Cyril delivered a number of sermons; some of those attributed to his hand are of disputed authorship, but 6 are recognised as genuine. Homily IV delivered upon the late arrival of western delegates is a particularly striking example of Cyril's developed Mariology.

[ 57 ] It is the foremost expression of Cyril's devotion to Mary, and is one of the first historical attestations of the salutation Χαῖρε ("Hail") being used to invoke the Virgin, a practice later standardised in Byzantine homiletics and hymnography such as the sermons of Chrysippus and Basil of Selecucia , and the Akathist hymn . Mary, who is credited with calling the council fathers together, embodies for Cyril the paradoxes of orthodox Christology, "container of the uncontained" and "the place for the infinite", among other lauded descriptions.

[ 58 ] Cyril's notions of the identity of Christ, therefore, have direct bearing on the identity of Mary. Wessell explains how "Cyril's spatial metaphors construed Mary as a sacred place" and how he "applied metaphors depicting royalty and exaltation to Mary: she was the treasure of the world, the crown of virginity, and the sceptre of orthodoxy." [ 59 ] Subsequently, such praise would become normative in Marian theology.

In several of his works, Cyril focuses on the love of Jesus for his mother. On the Cross , he overcomes his pain and thinks of his mother. At the wedding in Cana , he bows to her wishes. The conflict with Nestorius was mainly over this issue, and some have argued that it has often been misunderstood. "[T]he debate was not so much about Mary as about Jesus. The question was not what honors were due to Mary, but how one was to speak of the birth of Jesus." [ 54 ] Wessell notes that in Homily V delivered at the council, Cyril argued that Nestorius' refusal to acknowledge God's incarnate birth from Mary was a blasphemy against Christ.

[ 60 ] At the same time, the close relationship between Christological and Mariological formulations going back to the Cappadocian Fathers created a climate wherein intellectual argumentation over disputed theology overlapped with blossoming lay piety. When the Council of Ephesus convened under Cyril's presidency it did so in the newly constructed Church of Mary , [ 61 ] a venue that contributed to the devotional matrix of the debates. Whereas in the past scholars have often argued that Marian piety and theology only developed in the wake of the conciliar decrees, Shoemaker considers this to be refuted by the picture emerging from liturgical and archaeological evidence.

[ 62 ] The substance of Cyril's arumentation was Christological in orientation. His mature Mariology was chiefly in service to this, and to the end of discrediting Nestorius.

[ 63 ] Yet Wessel, quoting Homily IV, notes that the enthusiastic praises go beyond the strictly Christological. "She was not only valuable as a vessel storing something sacred but was herself precious and venerated: ‘Is it even possible for people to speak of the celebrated Mary? The virginal womb; O thing of wonder! The marvel strikes me with awe!’" Such sentiments served to further distinguish what Cyril believed to be orthodox theology from that which Nestorius taught, characterising the latter as subversive to both church and empire. As "scepter of orthodoxy", Mary became the standard of Christological fidelity in Cyril's theology; Nestorius's denial of "Theotokos" became the identifiable sign of his impugning of the divinity of Jesus.

[ 64 ] St. Cyril received an important recognition of his preachings by the Second Council of Constantinople (553 d.C.) which declared; "St. Cyril who announced the right faith of Christians" (Anathematism XIV, Denzinger et Schoenmetzer 437).

Works [ edit ] Cyril was a scholarly archbishop and a prolific writer. In the early years of his active life in the Church he wrote several exegetical documents. Among these were: Commentaries on the Old Testament , [ 65 ] Thesaurus , Discourse Against Arians , Commentary on St. John's Gospel , [ 66 ] and Dialogues on the Trinity . In 429 as the Christological controversies increased, the output of his writings was so extensive that his opponents could not match it. His writings and his theology have remained central to the tradition of the Fathers and to all Orthodox to this day.

Becoming Temples of God (Ναοὶ θεοῦ χρηματιοῦμεν) (in Greek original and English) Second Epistle of Cyril to Nestorius Commentary on the Letter to Hebrews Third Epistle of Cyril to Nestorius (containing the twelve anathemas) Formula of Reunion: In Brief (A summation of the reunion between Cyril and John of Antioch) The "Formula of Reunion", between Cyril and John of Antioch Five tomes against Nestorius (Adversus Nestorii blasphemias) That Christ is One (Quod unus sit Christus) Scholia on the incarnation of the Only-Begotten (Scholia de incarnatione Unigeniti) Against Diodore of Tarsus and Theodore of Mopsuestia (fragments) Against the synousiasts (fragments) Commentary on the Gospel of Luke Commentary on the Gospel of John Against Julian the Apostate Cyrilli Alexandrini liber Thesaurus adversus hereticos a Georgio Trapesuntio traductus (in Latin and Greek) Translations [ edit ] Cyril of Alexandria: Select Letters , edited and translated by Lionel R. Wickham (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983).

Letters 1-50 , translated by John I. McEnerney (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1987).

Letters 51-110 , translated by John I. McEnerney (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1987).

St. Cyril of Alexandria: The Christological Controversy , translated by John A. McGuckin (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1994).

On the Unity of Christ , translated by John A. McGuckin (New York: St Vladimir's Seminary Press, 1997).

Cyril of Alexandria , by Norman Russell (London: Routledge, 2000) - contains translations of selections from the Commentary on Isaiah , Commentary on John , Against Nestorius , An Explanation of the Twelve Chapters , and Against Julian .

Against Those who are Unwilling to Confess that the Holy Virgin is Theotokos , edited and translated by Protopresbyter George Dion. Dragas (New Hampshire: Orthodox Research Institute, 2004) Commentary on the Twelve Prophets: Volume 1 , translated by Robert C. Hill (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2007).

Commentary on the Twelve Prophets: Volume 2 , translated by Robert C. Hill (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2008).

Commentary on Isaiah , translated by Robert C. Hill (Massachusetts: Holy Cross Orthodox Press, 2008).

Festal Letters: 1-12 , edited with introduction and notes by John J. O'Keefe and translated by Philip R. Amidon, S.J. (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2009).

Commentary on the Twelve Prophets: Volume 3 , translated by Robert C. Hill (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2012).

Festal Letters: 13-30 , edited with introduction and notes by John J. O'Keefe and translated by Philip R. Amidon, S.J. (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2013).

Commentary on John: Volume 1 , edited by Joel C. Elowsky and translated with introduction and notes by David R. Maxwell (Illinois: IVP Academic, 2013).

Three Christological Treatises , translated by Daniel King (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2014).

Commentary on John: Volume 2 , edited by Joel C. Elowsky and translated with introduction and notes by David R. Maxwell (Illinois: IVP Academic, 2015).

Glaphyra on the Pentateuch, Volume 1: Genesis , translated by Nicholas P. Lunn with introduction by Gregory K. Hillis (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2018).

Glaphyra on the Pentateuch, Volume 2: Exodus through Deuteronomy , translated by Nicholas P. Lunn (Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2019).

Christological Dialogue on the Incarnation of the Only-Begotten , edited by Ramez Mikhail, translated with introduction by Emmanuel Gergis, and foreword by Fr. Michel Najim (Burke, Virginia: Agora University Press, 2020).

Commentary on the Letter to the Hebrews , translated by Khachik Grigoryan (Yerevan: Ankyunacar Publishing, 2021).

Commentaries on Romans, 1-2 Corinthians, and Hebrews , edited by Joel C. Elowsky and translated with introduction and notes by David R. Maxwell (Illinois: IVP Academic, 2022).

See also [ edit ] Coptic Orthodox Church Council of Ephesus Nestorius of Constantinople Dyophysitism Miaphysitism Monophysitism Saint Cyril of Alexandria, patron saint archive Citations [ edit ] ^ a b Henry Palmer Chapman (1908). " St. Cyril of Alexandria ". In Catholic Encyclopedia .

4.

New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Chisholm, Hugh, ed. (1911). " Cyril (bishop of Alexandria) ".

Encyclopædia Britannica .

7.

(11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 706.

^ Gibbon, E., Milman, H. Hart. (1871).

The history of the decline and fall of the Roman empire . A new ed., Phila.: J. B. Lippincott & co. Volume 4, p. 509.

^ Mosshammer (2008) , pp. 193–194.

^ Zuidhoek (2019) , pp. 67–74.

^ Calendarium Romanum (Libreria Editrice, 1969), pp. 95 and 116.

^ "The Calendar" .

The Church of England . Retrieved 27 March 2021 .

^ Norman Russell (2002).

Cyril of Alexandria: The Early Church Fathers . Routledge. p. 204.

ISBN 9781134673377 .

^ Farmer, David Hugh (1997).

The Oxford dictionary of saints (4. ed.). Oxford [u.a.]: Oxford Univ. Press. p. 125.

ISBN 978-0-19-280058-9 .

^ a b c "| | St-Takla.org" .

^ Schaff, Philip. "Cyril of Alexandria" , The New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge , Vol. III.

^ " "Saint Cyril of Alexandria", Franciscan Media" . Archived from the original on 29 September 2020 . Retrieved 1 August 2018 .

^ Palladius , Dialogus , xvi; Socrates Scholasticus , Ecclesiastical History , VI, 7; Sozomen , Ecclesiastical History , VIII, 12.

^ Chrysostom Baur (1912), "Theophilus , The Catholic Encyclopedia , Vol. XIV (New York: Robert Appleton Company) ^ Photius , Bibliotheca , 59, in Migne , Patrologia Graecae , CIII, 105-113 ^ Preston Chesser, "The Burning of the Library of Alexandria" . Archived from the original on 28 March 2014 . Retrieved 23 August 2007 .

, eHistory.com ^ a b Wessel (2004) , p. 34.

^ John of Nikiu, 84.92.

^ Socrates Scholasticus, vii.13.6-9 ^ a b Socrates Scholasticus, Ecclesiastical History , born after 380 AD, died after 439 AD.

^ Wessel (2004) , p. 22.

^ Wessel (2004) , p. 35.

^ Socrates Scholasticus, vii.14.

^ Wessel (2004) , pp. 35–36.

^ Christopher Haas, Alexandria in Late Antiquity: Topography and Social Conflict , JHU Press, 2006, ISBN 0-8018-8541-8 , p. 312.

^ a b c d e f Novak 2010 , p. 240.

^ Watts 2017 , pp. 114–115.

^ a b Haas 1997 , p. 313.

^ Watts 2008 , p. 198.

^ Dzielska 1995 , p. 93.

^ Watts 2017 , pp. 115–116.

^ a b Watts 2008 , pp. 198–199.

^ Socrate Scolastico, vii.15.

^ Giovanni di Nikiu, 84.88-100.

^ a b c Watts 2017 , p. 116.

^ a b Watts 2008 , p. 199.

^ Haas 1997 , pp. 235–236, 314.

^ Haas 1997 , p. 314.

^ a b c Watts 2017 , p. 117.

^ "Whitfield, Bryan J., "The Beauty of Reasoning: A Reexamination of Hypatia and Alexandria", The Mathematics Educator , vol. 6, issue 1, p. 14, University of Georgia, Summer 1995" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 September 2006 . Retrieved 14 June 2016 .

^ Dzielska (1995) , p. 18.

^ Dzielska (1995) , pp. xi, 157.

^ "Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology, page 537 (V. 2)" . Archived from the original on 11 September 2011 . Retrieved 8 February 2010 .

^ Fortescue (2007) , p. 165.

^ Watts 2008 , p. 200.

^ Dzielska 1995 , pp. 95–96.

^ a b Haas 1997 , p. 436.

^ Haas 1997 , pp. 67, 436.

^ Leo Donald Davis, The First Seven Ecumenical Councils (325-787): Their History and Theology , Collegeville (Min.): The Liturgical Press, 1983, pp. 136–148.

ISBN 0-8146-5616-1 ^ Thomas Gerard Weinandy, Daniel A. Keating, The theology of St. Cyril of Alexandria: a critical appreciation ; New York: T&T Clark Ltd, 2003, p. 49.

^ Nestorius, Second Epistle to Cyril "Monachos.net – Nestorius of Constantinople, Second epistle to Cyril of Alexandria" . Archived from the original on 7 June 2011 . Retrieved 24 June 2010 .

^ a b Edward Gibbon, Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire , 47.

^ Artemi, Eirini (January 2012).

"The rejection of the term Theotokos by Nestorius Constantinople" .

Γρηγόριος Παλαμάς 845 (2012) 153-177 .

^ a b Gonzalez, Justo L. (1984).

The Story of Christianity, Volume 1: The Early Church to the Dawn of the Reformation . New York: HarperOne. p.

254 .

ISBN 9780060633158 .

^ O'Carroll (2000) , pp. 111–114.

^ Constas (2003) , p. 35.

^ Wessel (2004) , p. 191.

^ Wessel (2004) , pp. 224–225.

^ Wessel (2004) , p. 230.

^ Wessel (2004) , pp. 217–218.

^ O'Carroll (2000) , p. 111.

^ Shoemaker, Stephen J. (2018).

The First Christian Hymnal: The Songs of the Ancient Jerusalem Church . Provo, Utah: Brigham Young University Press. pp. xi, xxxix– xxx.

ISBN 9781944394684 .

^ Wessel (2004) , p. 224.

^ Wessel (2004) , pp. 230–232.

^ Cyril of Alexandria, Commentary on Luke (1859) , Preface, pp.i-xx.

^ "Cyril of Alexandria, Commentary on John, LFC 43, 48 (1874/1885). Preface to the online edition" .

Sources [ edit ] "Cyril I (412–444)" . Official web site of the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Alexandria and All Africa . Retrieved 8 February 2011 .

Constas, Nicholas (2003).

Proclus of Constantinople and the cult of the Virgin in late antiquity : homilies 1-5, texts and translations . Brill.

ISBN 90-04-12612-0 .

OCLC 801325432 .

Dzielska, Maria (1995).

Hypatia of Alexandria . Revealing Antiquity, 8. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 0-674-43775-6 .

OCLC 31295206 .

Fortescue, Adrian (2007).

The Greek Fathers: Their Lives and Writings .

Ignatius Press .

Haas, Christopher (1997), Alexandria in Late Antiquity: Topography and Social Conflict , Baltimore, Mississippi and London: The Johns Hopkins University Press, ISBN 978-0-8018-5377-7 Mosshammer, Alden A. (2008).

The Easter Computus and the Origins of the Christian Era . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199543120 .

Novak, Ralph Martin Jr. (2010), Christianity and the Roman Empire: Background Texts , Harrisburg, Pennsylvania: Bloomsbury Publishing, pp.

239– 240, ISBN 978-1-56338-347-2 O'Carroll, Michael (2000).

Theotokos : a theological encyclopedia of the Blessed Virgin Mary . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 1-57910-454-1 .

OCLC 47771920 .

Watts, Edward J.

(2008) [2006], City and School in Late Antique Athens and Alexandria , Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, ISBN 978-0520258167 Watts, Edward J. (2017), Hypatia: The Life and Legend of an Ancient Philosopher , Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0190659141 Wessel, Susan (2004).

Cyril of Alexandria and the Nestorian Controversy: The Making of a Saint and of a Heretic . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199268467 .

Zuidhoek, Jan (2019).

Reconstructing Metonic 19-year Lunar Cycles (on the basis of NASA's Six Millennium Catalog of Phases of the Moon) . Zwolle.

ISBN 9789090324678 .

Further reading [ edit ] Artemi, Eirini, « The mystery of the incarnation into dialogues "de incarnatione Unigenitii" and "Quod unus sit Christus" of St. Cyril of Alexandria », Ecclesiastic Faros of Alexandria, ΟΕ (2004), 145-277.

Artemi, Eirini, «St Cyril of Alexandria and his relations with the ruler Orestes and the philosopher Hypatia » , Ecclesiastic Faros of Alexandria, τ. ΟΗ (2007), 7-15.

Artemi, Eirini, « The one entity of the Word Incarnate. α. Apollinarius' explanation, β. Cyril's explanation » , Ecclesiastic Faros of Alexandria, τ. ΟΔ (2003), 293–304.

Artemi, Eirini, The historical inaccurancies of the film Agora about the murder of Hypatia , Orthodox Press, τεύχ. 1819 (2010), 7.

Artemi, Eirini, The use of the ancient Greek texts in Cyril's works, Poreia martyrias , 2010, 114-125.

Artemi, Eirini, The rejection of the term Theotokos by Nestorius Constantinople more and his refutation by Cyril of Alexandria Artemi, Eirini, Свт. Кирилл Александрийский и его отношения с епархом Орестом и философом Ипатией by EIRINI ARTEMI (6 January 2014) Kindle Purchase.

ASIN: B00ENJIJ20 Kalantzis, George (2008).

"Is There Room for Two? Cyril's Single Subjectivity and the Prosopic Union" .

St. Vladimir's Theological Quarterly .

52 (1): 95– 110.

Kalantzis, George (2010).

"Single Subjectivity and the Prosopic Union in Cyril of Alexandria and Theodore of Mopsuestia" .

Studia Patristica .

47 : 59– 64.

ISBN 9789042923744 .

Loon, Hans van (2009).

The Dyophysite Christology of Cyril of Alexandria . Leiden-Boston: Basil BRILL.

ISBN 978-9004173224 .

McGuckin, John A.

(1994).

St. Cyril of Alexandria: The Christological Controversy: Its History, Theology, and Texts . Leiden: Brill.

ISBN 9789004312906 .

Meyendorff, John (1989).

Imperial unity and Christian divisions: The Church 450-680 A.D.

Crestwood, New York: St. Vladimir's Seminary Press.

ISBN 9780881410563 .

Konrad F. Zawadzki, Der Kommentar Cyrills von Alexandrien zum 1. Korintherbrief. Einleitung, kritischer Text, Übersetzung, Einzelanalyse, Traditio Exegetica Graeca 16, Leuven-Paris-Bristol, Connecticut, 2015 Konrad F. Zawadzki, Syrische Fragmente des Kommentars Cyrills von Alexandrien zum 1. Korintherbrief, Zeitschrift für Antikes Christentum 21 (2017), 304-360 Konrad F. Zawadzki, "Keiner soll die Lektüre der Schrift durcheinanderbringen!" Ein neues griechisches Fragment aus dem Johanneskommentar des Cyrill von Alexandrien, Biblica 99 (2018), 393–413 Konrad F. Zawadzki, Der Kommentar Cyrills von Alexandrien zum 2. Korintherbrief. Einleitung, kritischer Text, Übersetzung, Einzelanalyse, Traditio Exegetica Graeca 18, Leuven-Paris-Bristol 2019 External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of a 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article about Cyril of Alexandria .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Cyril of Alexandria .

Early Church Fathers Includes text written by Cyril of Alexandria Multilanguage Opera Omnia (Greek Edition by Migne Patrologia Graeca) St Cyril the Archbishop of Alexandria Eastern Orthodox icon and synaxarion Early Church Fathers: Cyril of Alexandria The Monophysism of St Cyril of Alexandria paper by Giovanni Costa on academia.edu Works by or about Cyril of Alexandria at the Internet Archive Works by Cyril of Alexandria at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Five Metonic 19-year lunar cycles Dionysius Exiguus' Paschal table Titles of the Great Christian Church Preceded by Theophilus Pope and Patriarch of Alexandria 412–444 Succeeded by Dioscorus I v t e Patriarchs of Alexandria Patriarchs prior to the Chalcedonian schism (43–451) Mark I the Evangelist (founder) Anianus Avilius Kedronos Primus Justus Eumenius Markianos * Celadion Agrippinus Julian Demetrius I Heraclas Dionysius Maximus Theonas Peter I Achillas Alexander I Athanasius I Peter II Timothy I Theophilus I Cyril I Dioscorus I Coptic Orthodox Popes and Patriarchs (451–present) Timothy II Peter III Athanasius II John I John II Dioscorus II Timothy III Theodosius I Peter IV Damian Anastasius Andronicus Benjamin I Agathon John III Isaac Simeon I Alexander II Cosmas I Theodore I Michael I Mina I John IV Mark II James Simeon II Joseph I Michael II Cosmas II Shenouda I Michael III Gabriel I Cosmas III Macarius I Theophilus II Mina II Abraham Philotheos Zacharias Shenouda II Christodoulos Cyril II Michael IV Macarius II Gabriel II Michael V John V Mark III John VI Cyril III Athanasius III John VII Gabriel III John VII Theodosius III John VIII John IX Benjamin II Peter V Mark IV John X Gabriel IV Matthew I Gabriel V John XI Matthew II Gabriel VI Michael VI John XII John XIII Gabriel VII John XIV Gabriel VIII Mark V John XV Matthew III Mark VI Matthew IV John XVI Peter VI John XVII Mark VII John XVIII Mark VIII Peter VII Cyril IV Demetrius II Cyril V John XIX Macarius III Joseph II Cyril VI Shenouda III Tawadros II (current) Greek Orthodox Popes and Patriarchs (451–present) Proterius Timothy II Timothy III John I Peter III Athanasius II John II John III Dioscorus II Timothy IV Theodosius I Gaianus Paul Zoilus Apollinarius John IV Eulogius Theodore I John V George I Cyrus Peter IV Peter V Peter VI Cosmas I Politianus Eustatius Christopher I Sophronius I Michael I Michael II Christodoulos Eutychius Sophronius II Isaac Job Elias I Arsenius Theophilus II George II Leontius Alexander II John VI Cyril II Sabbas Sophronius III Elias II Eleutherius Mark III * Nicholas I Gregory I Nicholas II Athanasius III Gregory II Gregory III Niphon Mark IV Nicholas III Gregory IV Nicholas IV Athanasius IV Mark V Philotheus Mark VI Gregory V Joachim I Silvester Meletius I Pegas Cyril III Gerasimus I Metrophanes Nicephorus Joannicius Paisius Parthenius I Gerasimus II Samuel Cosmas II Cosmas III Matthew Cyprian Gerasimus III Parthenius II Theophilus III Hierotheus I Artemius Hierotheus II Callinicus Jacob Nicanor Nilus Sophronius IV Photius Meletius II Nicholas V Christopher II Nicholas VI Parthenius III Peter VII Theodore II (current) Latin Catholic (1276–1954) Atanasio (Athanasius) Egidio da Ferrara (Giles) ?

Humbert II, Dauphin of Vienne Juan (John) Guillaume de Chanac Arnaud Bernard du Pouget ( Arnaldo Bernardi ) uncanonical Jean de Cardaillac Pietro Amely di Brunac ?

Johannes Walteri von Sinten uncanonical Simon of Cramaud Pietro Amely di Brunac Leonardo Dolfin Ugo Roberti Pietro Amaury di Lordat Lancelotus de Navarra Giovanni Contarini Pietro Vitalis di Mauléon Giovanni Vitelleschi Marco Condulmer Jean d'Harcourt Arnaldo Rogerii de Palas Pedro de Urrea Pedro González de Mendoza Diego Hurtado de Mendoza Alonso de Fonseca y Acevedo Bernardino Carafa Cesare Riario Guido Ascanio Sforza di Santa Fiora Ottaviano Maria Sforza Julius Gonzaga Cristoforo Guidalotti Ciocchi del Monte Jacques Cortès Tommaso Alessandro Riario Enrico Caetani Giovanni Battista Albani Camillo Caetani Séraphin Olivier-Razali Alessandro di Sangro Honoratus Caetani Federico Borromeo Allesandro Crescenzi Aloysius Bevilacqua Petrus Draghi Bartoli Gregorio Giuseppe Gaetani de Aragonia Carlo Ambrosio Mezzabarba Filippo Carlo Spada Girolamo Crispi Giuseppe Antonio Davanzati Lodovico Agnello Anastasi Francisco Mattei Augustus Foscolo Paolo Angelo Ballerini Domenico Marinangeli Paolo de Huyn Luca Ermenegildo Pasetto Melkite Catholic (1724–present) Cyril VI Tanas Athanasius IV Jawhar Maximos II Hakim Theodosius V Dahan Athanasius IV Jawhar Cyril VII Siaj Agapius II Matar Ignatius IV Sarrouf Athanasius V Matar Macarius IV Tawil Ignatius V Qattan Maximos III Mazloum Clement Bahouth Gregory II Youssef-Sayur Peter IV Geraigiry Cyril VIII Geha Demetrius I Qadi Cyril IX Moghabghab Maximos IV Sayegh Maximos V Hakim Gregory III Laham Youssef I Absi Coptic Catholic (1824–present) Maximos Jouwed Kyrillos Makarios Stéphanos I Sidarouss Stéphanos II Ghattas Antonios I Naguib Ibrahim Isaac Sidrak *Markianos is considered Mark II on the Greek side of the subsequent schism, hence this numbering of Mark III.

Category Commons v t e Saints in the Coptic Church Patriarchs Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Prophets Moses Job Samuel David Hosea Amos Micah Joel Obadiah Jonah Nahum Noah Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi Isaiah Jeremiah Baruch Ezekiel Daniel John the Baptist Theotokos Mary, Our Lady of Assiut Warraq Zeitoun Seven Archangels Michael Gabriel Raphael Suriel Zedekiel Sarathiel Ananiel Apostles Andrew Bartholomew James, son of Alphaeus James, son of Zebedee John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Disciples Apollos Barnabas Mary Magdalene Phoebe the Deaconess Philemon Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Martyrs 21 Martyrs of Libya Abāmūn Abāmūn Abanoub Abaskhiron Alexandrian Martyrs Arianus Apollonia Barbara Bashnouna Basilides and Potamiana Catherine Chrysanthus and Daria Chiaffredo Colluthus Cosmas and Damian Cyprian and Justina Cyrus and John Dasya Demiana Dismas the Good Thief Dorothea Elias and Companions Epimachus Faustus, Abibus and Dionysius Felix and Regula Gabriel Abdel El-Metgaly Gallicanus George George Bishop of Assiut George El Mozahem Gereon Hor, Besoy, and Daydara Holy Innocents Imbaba Martyrs Isaac of Dafra John of Senhout Kosheh Martyrs Malati Marina the Martyr Maspero Martyrs Maurice Memnon Menas Mohrael Moura Nag Hammadi Otimus Philomena Philotheos Rais Sarah Sidhom Bishay Theban Legion Thecla Theoclia Theodora and Didymus Theodore Stratelates Varus Veronica Wadamoun Wanas Church Fathers Clement of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Papias of Hierapolis Justin Martyr Irenaeus Clement of Alexandria Athanasius of Alexandria Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nyssa Gregory of Nazianzus John Chrysostom Cyprian Hilary of Poitiers Ambrose Jerome Augustine of Hippo Aphrahat Ephrem the Syrian Isaac of Antioch Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Pachomius the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Syncletica of Alexandria John Cassian Alexander of Jerusalem Porphyrius of Gaza Alexander I of Alexandria Dionysius of Alexandria Epiphanius of Salamis Nichola of Myra Popes Mark I Anianus Avilius Kedron Justus Eumenes Markianos Celadion Agrippinus Julian Demetrius I Heraclas Dionysius Theonas Felix of Rome Peter I Alexander I Athanasius I Peter II Timothy I Theophilus I Cyril I Dioscorus I Timothy II Peter III Dioscorus II Timothy III Theodosius I Peter IV Damian Anastasius Andronicus Benjamin I Agathon Simeon I Alexander II Theodore I Michael I John IV Mark II James Simeon II Joseph I Michael II Cosmas II Michael III Gabriel I Cosmas III Abraham Zacharias Cyril II Macarius II Matthew I Gabriel VII John XIV Cyril V Macarius III Cyril VI Patriarchs and Bishops Abadiu of Antinoe Abraam of Faiyum Alexander of Jerusalem Amun of Scetis Basil of Caesarea Bar Hebraeus Cyril of Jerusalem Epiphanius of Cyprus Eusebius of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Gregory of Neocaesarea Ignatius of Antioch Jacob of Nisibis James of Jerusalem John of Nikiû John of Jerusalem Karas of California Mikhaeil of Asyut Narcissus of Jerusalem Nicholas of Myra Paphnutius of Scetis Paphnutius of Thebes Polycarp of Smyrna Porphyrius of Gaza Psote of Ebsay Serapion of Thmuis Severus of Antioch Severian of Gabala Yousab el-Abah of Girga Monks and nuns Abdel Messih El-Makari Abib and Apollo Abraham of Farshut Abraham of Scetis Amun Anthony the Great Awgin Bashnouna Hilarion Horsiesius Hospitius Mother Irini Isaac of Nineveh Isidore of Pelusium John Climacus John the Dwarf Macarius of Alexandria Macarius of Egypt Marina the Monk Moses the Black Nilus of Sinai Pachomius the Great Pambo Parsoma Patapios Paul of Thebes Paul of Tammah Paul the Simple Petronius Pishoy Poemen Samuel the Confessor Sisoes the Great Tekle Haymanot Theodorus of Tabennese Theodora of Alexandria Anchorites Karas Mary Misael Onuphrius Paphnutius Paul Pijimi Shenouda Thomas Zosimas Missionaries Gregory the Illuminator Maurice Nino Frumentius Nine Saints Other saints Ambrose Clement of Alexandria Didymus the Blind Euphrosyne Habib Girgis Candidus Simon the Tanner Three Holy Children Maximus and Domatius Verena Christianity portal Saints portal v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii 2 People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cyril_of_Alexandria&oldid=1303618122 " Categories : 376 births 444 deaths 5th-century Byzantine writers 5th-century Christian saints 5th-century Christian theologians 5th-century popes and patriarchs of Alexandria Ancient Christian anti-Judaism Anglican saints Catholic Mariology Christologists Church Fathers Doctors of the Church Egyptian Roman Catholic writers Hypatia Opponents of Nestorianism Participant in the Council of Ephesus People from El Mahalla El Kubra Saints from Roman Egypt Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2020 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Coptic-language text Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 01:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cyril of Alexandria 59 languages Add topic

