Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 1.1 Tropical solar calendars 1.2 Sidereal solar calendars 2 Non-solar calendars 3 Lunisolar calendars 4 List of solar calendars 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Solar calendar 63 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Jawa کٲشُر Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî ລາວ Latina Lietuvių Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Calendar based on the seasons or apparent sun position This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Solar calendar" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may be too technical for most readers to understand .

Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts , without removing the technical details.

( January 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A solar calendar is a calendar whose dates indicates the season or almost equivalently the apparent position of the Sun relative to the stars. The Gregorian calendar , widely accepted as a standard in the world, is an example of a solar calendar.
The main other types of calendar are lunar calendar and lunisolar calendar , whose months correspond to cycles of Moon phases . The months of the Gregorian calendar do not correspond to cycles of the Moon phase.

The Egyptians appear to have been the first to develop a solar calendar, using as a fixed point the annual sunrise reappearance of the Dog Star— Sirius , or Sothis—in the eastern sky, which coincided with the annual flooding of the Nile River. They constructed a calendar of 365 days, consisting of 12 months of 30 days each, with 5 days added at the year’s end. The Egyptians’ failure to account for the extra fraction of a day, however, caused their calendar to drift gradually into error.

Examples [ edit ] The oldest solar calendars include the Julian calendar and the Coptic calendar . 
They both have a year of 365 days, which is extended to 366 once every four years, without exception, so have a mean year of 365.25 days.
As solar calendars became more accurate, they evolved into two types.

Tropical solar calendars [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( January 2017 ) If the position of the Earth in its orbit around the Sun is reckoned with respect to the Equinox , the point at which the orbit crosses the celestial equator, then its dates accurately indicate the seasons , that is, they are synchronized with the declination of the Sun. Such a calendar is called a tropical solar calendar [ citation needed ] ..

The duration of the mean calendar year of such a calendar approximates some form of the tropical year , usually either the mean tropical year or the vernal equinox year .

The following are tropical solar calendars: Ancient Armenian calendar Bengali calendar (National and official calendar in Bangladesh) Gregorian calendar Iranian calendar (Jalāli calendar) Tabarian calendar (Tabarian calendar) Indian national calendar (Saka calendar) French Republican calendar Every one of these calendars has a year of 365 days, which is occasionally extended by adding an extra day to form a leap year , a method called " intercalation ", the inserted day being "intercalary".

The Baháʼí calendar , another example of a solar calendar, always begins the year on the vernal equinox and sets its intercalary days so that the following year also begins on the vernal equinox. The moment of the vernal equinox in the northern hemisphere is determined using the location of Tehran "by means of astronomical computations from reliable sources".

[ 1 ] Sidereal solar calendars [ edit ] Further information: Sidereal time This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( January 2017 ) If the position of the Earth (see above) is reckoned with respect to the fixed stars, then the dates indicate the zodiacal constellation near which the Sun can be found. A calendar of this type is called a sidereal solar calendar .

[ 2 ] The mean calendar year of such a calendar approximates the sidereal year .

Leaping from one lunation to another, but one Sidereal year is the period between two occurrences of the sun, as measured by the stars' solar calendar, which is derived from the Earth's orbit around the sun every 28 years.

[ 3 ] Indian calendars like the Hindu calendar , Tamil calendar , Bengali calendar (revised) and Malayalam calendar are sidereal solar calendars. The Thai solar calendar when based on the Hindu solar calendar was also a sidereal calendar. They are calculated on the basis of the apparent motion of the Sun through the twelve zodiacal signs rather than the tropical movement of the Earth.

Non-solar calendars [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( January 2017 ) The Islamic calendar is a purely lunar calendar and has a year, whose start drifts through the seasons and so is not a solar calendar.
The Maya Tzolkin calendar, which follows a 260-day cycle, has no year, therefore it is not a solar calendar.
Also, any calendar synchronized only to the synodic period of Venus would not be solar.

Lunisolar calendars [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( January 2017 ) Lunisolar calendars may be regarded as solar calendars, although their dates additionally indicate the moon phase. Typical lunisolar calendars have years marked with a whole number of lunar months, so they can not indicate the position of Earth relative to the Sun with the same accuracy as a purely solar calendar.

List of solar calendars [ edit ] The following is a list of current, historical, and proposed solar calendars: Assamese calendar Assyrian calendar Badí‘ calendar Basotho calendar Bengali calendar Berber calendar Bulgar calendar Byzantine calendar Caesar's Calendar [ 4 ] Coptic calendar Discordian calendar EartHeaven calendar [ 5 ] Era Fascista Ethiopian calendar Florentine calendar French Republican Calendar Gregorian calendar Hanke-Henry Permanent Calendar Holocene calendar Indian national calendar International Fixed Calendar Invariable Calendar Jalali calendar Juche calendar Julian calendar Maithili calendar Malayalam calendar Minguo calendar Nanakshahi calendar Odia calendar Old Icelandic calendar Pancronometer Pataphysical calendar Pax Calendar Pentecontad calendar Pisan calendar Positivist calendar Revised Julian calendar Roman calendar [ citation needed ] Runic calendar Shaka Samvat Solar Hijri calendar Soviet calendar Swedish calendar Symmetry454 Tamil calendar Thai solar calendar Tulu calendar World Calendar World Season Calendar Yoruba calendar Zoroastrian calendar See also [ edit ] List of calendars Analemma calendar Astronomical clock Daytime (astronomy) References [ edit ] ^ The Universal House of Justice (2014-07-10).

"To the Bahá'ís of the World" . Retrieved 2014-07-10 .

^ Helen R. Jacobus. (2014). Zodiac Calendars in the Dead Sea Scrolls and Their Reception : Ancient Astronomy and Astrology in Early Judaism. Brill ^ Leofranc Holford-Strevens. (2005). The History of Time: A Very Short Introduction. OUP Oxford ^ Denis Feeney. (2007). Caesar's Calendar : Ancient Time and the Beginnings of History. University of California Press ^ Steve Howland. (2024). The EartHeaven Calendar : A white paper presenting a fixed calendar solution for the next 2100 years of this Aquarian Age. Ampers& Studio, Publisher.

https://ehc.world External links [ edit ] Media related to Solar calendars at Wikimedia Commons Correspondence between Hebrew and Islamic calendars, months and holidays (pdf) v t e Calendars Systems Lunar Lunisolar Solar In wide use Astronomical Buddhist Chinese Ethiopian Gregorian Hindu Lunar Hijri Solar Hijri ISO Unix time In more limited use Akan Armenian Assamese (Bhāshkarābda) Assyrian Baháʼí Badí‘ Bali Pawukon Saka Bengali Bangladeshi Berber Borana Burmese Chinese Earthly Branches Heavenly Stems Minguo Solar term Germanic heathen Georgian Hebrew Hindu Vikram Samvat Saka Hmong Igbo Iranian Jalali medieval Zoroastrian Irish Gaelic Islamic Fasli Tabular Jain Japanese Javanese Korean Juche Kurdish Lithuanian Maithili Malayalam Mandaean Manipuri (Meitei) Melanau Mizo (Lushai) Mongolian Nepal Nepal Sambat Vikram Samvat Yele Sambat Nanakshahi Nisg̱a'a Odia Punjabi Romanian Shona Somali Sesotho Slavic Slavic Native Faith Macedonian Tamil Thai lunar solar Tibetan Tripuri Tulu Vietnamese Wicca Xhosa Yoruba Zulu Types Runic Mesoamerican Long Count Calendar round Christian variants Coptic Ethiopian and Eritrean Julian Revised Liturgical year Eastern Orthodox Saints Historical Arabian Attic Aztec Tōnalpōhualli Xiuhpōhualli Babylonian Bulgar Byzantine Cappadocian Celtic Cham Culāsakaraj Coligny Egyptian Enoch Florentine French Republican Germanic Greek Hindu Inca Macedonian Maya Haabʼ Tzolkʼin Muisca Pentecontad Pisan Qumran Rapa Nui Roman Rumi Sexagenary Soviet Swedish Turkmen By specialty Holocene anthropological Proleptic Gregorian / Proleptic Julian historiographical Darian Martian Dreamspell New Age Discordian 'Pataphysical Reform proposals Hanke–Henry Permanent International Fixed Pax Positivist Sexagesimal Symmetry454 World Displays and applications Electronic Perpetual Wall Year naming and numbering Terminology Era Epoch Leap year New Year Regnal name Regnal year Year zero Systems Ab urbe condita Anka year Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Lucis Anno Martyrum Anno Mundi Assyrian Before Present Chinese Imperial Chinese Minguo English and British regnal year Hijri year Human (Holocene) Japanese Korean Nirayana system Seleucid Spanish Yugas Satya Treta Dvapara Kali Vietnamese Fictional Discworld ( Discworld ) Greyhawk ( Dungeons & Dragons ) Middle-earth ( The Lord of the Rings ) Stardate ( Star Trek ) List of calendars Category v t e Time measurement and standards Chronometry Orders of magnitude Metrology International standards Coordinated Universal Time offset UT ΔT DUT1 International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service ISO 31-1 ISO 8601 International Atomic Time 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Barycentric Coordinate Time Barycentric Dynamical Time Civil time Daylight saving time Geocentric Coordinate Time International Date Line IERS Reference Meridian Leap second Solar time Terrestrial Time Time zone 180th meridian Obsolete standards Ephemeris time Greenwich Mean Time Prime meridian Time in physics Absolute space and time Spacetime Chronon Continuous signal Coordinate time Cosmological decade Discrete time and continuous time Proper time Theory of relativity Time dilation Gravitational time dilation Time domain Time-translation symmetry T-symmetry Horology Clock Astrarium Atomic clock Complication History of timekeeping devices Hourglass Marine chronometer Marine sandglass Radio clock Watch stopwatch Water clock Sundial Dialing scales Equation of time History of sundials Sundial markup schema Calendar Gregorian Hebrew Hindu Holocene Islamic (lunar Hijri) Julian Solar Hijri Astronomical Dominical letter Epact Equinox Intercalation Julian day Leap year Lunar Lunisolar Solar Solstice Tropical year Weekday determination Weekday names Archaeology and geology Chronological dating Geologic time scale International Commission on Stratigraphy Astronomical chronology Galactic year Nuclear timescale Precession Sidereal time Other units of time Instant Flick Shake Jiffy Second Minute Moment Hour Day Week Fortnight Month Year Olympiad Lustrum Decade Century Saeculum Millennium Related topics Chronology Duration music Mental chronometry Decimal time Metric time System time Time metrology Time value of money Timekeeper v t e Chronology Key topics Archaeology Astronomy Geology History Big History Paleontology Time Periods Eras Epochs Calendar eras Human Era Ab urbe condita Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Mundi Bosporan era Bostran era Byzantine era Seleucid era Era of Caesar (Iberia) Before Present Hijri Egyptian Sothic cycle Hindu units of time ( Yuga ) Mesoamerican Long Count Short Count Tzolkʼin Haabʼ Regnal year Anka year Canon of Kings English and British regnal year Lists of kings Limmu Era names Chinese Japanese Korean Vietnamese Calendars Pre-Julian / Julian Pre-Julian Roman Original Julian Proleptic Julian Revised Julian Gregorian Gregorian Proleptic Gregorian Old Style and New Style dates Adoption of the Gregorian calendar Dual dating Astronomical Lunisolar ( Hebrew , Hindu ) Solar Lunar ( Islamic ) Astronomical year numbering Others Chinese sexagenary cycle Geologic Calendar Iranian ISO week date Mesoamerican Maya Aztec Winter count New Earth Time Astronomic time Cosmic Calendar Ephemeris Galactic year Metonic cycle Milankovitch cycles Geologic time Concepts Deep time Geological history of Earth Geological time units Standards Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA) Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) Methods Chronostratigraphy Geochronology Isotope geochemistry Law of superposition Luminescence dating Samarium–neodymium dating Chronological dating Absolute dating Amino acid racemisation Archaeomagnetic dating Dendrochronology Ice core Incremental dating Lichenometry Paleomagnetism Radiometric dating Lead–lead Potassium–argon Radiocarbon Uranium–lead Tephrochronology Luminescence dating Thermoluminescence dating Relative dating Fluorine absorption Nitrogen dating Obsidian hydration Seriation Stratigraphy Genetic methods Molecular clock Linguistic methods Glottochronology Related topics Chronicle New Chronology Synchronoptic view Timeline Year zero Floruit Terminus post quem ASPRO chronology NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐759fc646c5‐gn6hx
Cached time: 20250812135612
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.434 seconds
Real time usage: 0.585 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2080/1000000
Revision size: 7975/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 148137/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11102/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 46700/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.239/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6127196/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  453.817      1 -total
 25.37%  115.132      8 Template:Navbox
 20.24%   91.866      1 Template:Calendars
 18.60%   84.394      1 Template:Reflist
 17.22%   78.164      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 16.26%   73.805      1 Template:Cite_web
 14.14%   64.183      1 Template:Short_description
 13.57%   61.569      6 Template:Ambox
 11.68%   53.025      1 Template:Refimprove
  8.04%   36.486      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:99211:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812135612 and revision id 1290642076. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Solar_calendar&oldid=1290642076 " Category : Solar calendars Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2017 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles that are too technical from January 2017 All articles that are too technical Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles to be expanded from January 2017 All articles to be expanded All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 May 2025, at 02:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Solar calendar 63 languages Add topic

