Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Palawan and Sulu 2 Boundaries Toggle Boundaries subsection 2.1 Regional geology 2.2 Collision zones 3 Luzon 4 Collage of 17 principal blocks Toggle Collage of 17 principal blocks subsection 4.1 Well-known micro-continental blocks 5 Magmatic arcs Toggle Magmatic arcs subsection 5.1 Ancient arcs 5.2 Active arcs 6 Sedimentary basins 7 Stratigraphic groupings 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Philippine Mobile Belt 7 languages فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Polski Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Tectonic boundary This article may be in need of reorganization to comply with Wikipedia's layout guidelines .

Please help by editing the article to make improvements to the overall structure.

( October 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Major physiographic elements of the Philippine Mobile Belt Puerto Princesa Subterranean River National Park marker describing the geologic history of the Philippines In the geology of the Philippines, the Philippine Mobile Belt is a complex portion of the tectonic boundary between the Eurasian plate and the Philippine Sea plate , comprising most of the country of the Philippines . It includes two subduction zones, the Manila Trench to the west and the Philippine Trench to the east, as well as the Philippine fault system . Within the Belt, a number of crustal blocks or microplates which have been shorn off the adjoining major plates are undergoing massive deformation.

[ 1 ] Most segments of the Philippines , including northern Luzon , are part of the Philippine Mobile Belt, which is bounded by the Philippine Sea plate to the east, the Molucca Sea Collision Zone to the south, Sunda plate to the southwest, and the South China Sea Basin to the west and north-west.

[ 2 ] To the north it ends in eastern Taiwan , the zone of active collision between the North Luzon Trough portion of the Luzon Volcanic Arc and South China.

[ 3 ] The Philippine Mobile Belt has also been called the Philippine Microplate [ 4 ] and the Taiwan–Luzon–Mindoro Belt .

[ 5 ] Palawan and Sulu [ edit ] Palawan with the Calamian Islands and the Sulu Archipelago with the Zamboanga Peninsula of western Mindanao are the tops of two protruding north-eastern arms of the Sunda plate . They are not part of the Philippine Mobile Belt but are in collision with it. The Sulu Trench marks the boundary of the Sulu micro-block with the Sulu Sea basin and the Palawan micro-block. The inactive Palawan Trench marks the subduction boundary between the Palawan microblock and the Spratly Islands plateau of the South China Sea basin.

[ 6 ] The Palawan/Calamian arm was also known in 1981 as the Palawan block and Palawan microcontinent, [ 7 ] and in 1989 as the Palawan Micro-Block.

[ 8 ] Boundaries [ edit ] The Philippine Mobile Belt is bounded on the west by the Manila Trench and its associates the Negros Trench and the Cotabato Trench , which subducts the Sunda plate under the Philippine Mobile Belt. To the east is the Philippine Trench and its northern associate, the East Luzon Trench which subducts Philippine Sea plate the Philippine Mobile Belt.

[ 9 ] The continuity of the Philippine-East Luzon Trench is interrupted and displaced by Benham Plateau on the Philippine Sea plate, [ 10 ] which collided and is still colliding with the Sierra Madre of eastern Luzon.

[ 11 ] To the north the Philippine Mobile Belt ends in Taiwan, where accreted portions of the Luzon Arc and Luzon forearc form the eastern Coastal Range and the inland Longitudinal Valley of Taiwan, respectively.

[ 12 ] To the south the Philippine Mobile Belt terminates in the Molucca Sea Collision Zone , which is itself part of the elongated zone of convergence extending north through the Philippines into Taiwan. Within the Molucca Sea Collision Zone, the Molucca Sea plate has been totally subsumed by the arc-arc collision of the Halmahera Arc and the Sangihe Arc of eastern Indonesia.

[ 13 ] Regional geology [ edit ] The belt's basement rock complex consists of oceanic crust from the Philippine Sea plate , including ophiolites in North Luzon, or continental crust from the Sunda plate . On top of which are Cretaceous to Quaternary magmatic arcs.  These magmatic arcs are exposed in the western Central Cordillera , and the northern Sierra Madre .  The Cagayan River Basin is an intra-arc rift .  Subduction of Late Oligocene to Early Miocene South China sea oceanic crust occurs at the Manila Trench.  Subduction of Eocene Philippine Sea oceanic crust occurs at the East Luzon Trough – Philippine Trench system.  The strike-slip , left lateral fault , Philippine fault system is associated with the northward movement of the belt.

[ 14 ] Collision zones [ edit ] Taiwan: Continent-Arc Collision – 400 km-long island dominated by mountain ranges. Represents an active orogenic belt resulting from the collision of the western edge of the Philippine Sea plate where the Luzon arc has developed, with the continental margin of Eurasia. Start of collision is associated with the kinematic reorganization of the Philippine Sea plate 4 Ma ( Pliocene ) involving a change in the direction of its movement from a northerly to a northwesterly motion.

Mindoro-Panay: Arc-Continent Collision – Southern termination of the Manila Trench. North Palawan Block enters into collision with the central portion of the Philippine Mobile Belt within Miocene times after cessation of the accretion of South China Sea oceanic crust between 32 and 17 Ma ( Oligocene – Miocene).

Moluccas Sea: Arc-Arc Collision – South of Mindanao Island in the Moluccas Sea. Subducting into 2 directions: to the East and to the West. This double-vergent subduction causes consequently the convergence/collision of the 2 corresponding active volcanic arcs. Start of collision in Upper Miocene. Corresponding arcs, the Sangihe and Halmahera, are presently separated by at least 100 km.

Luzon [ edit ] The island of Luzon is bisected by the braided N–S trending Philippine fault system .

[ 15 ] Luzon is not bisected E-W, and illustrations showing anything similar are erroneous. Northern Luzon is integral with southern Luzon. Any suggestion that Northern Luzon is not part of the Philippine Mobile Belt is not borne out by the detailed fault mapping of Pinet and Stephan (1989), [ 16 ] and others.  A common tectonic plate illustration for the Philippines [ 17 ] is incorrect in this regard.

Collage of 17 principal blocks [ edit ] The composition of the Philippine Mobile Belt is generally interpreted as a collage of a large variety of blocks or terrane of diverse origin amalgamated before collision with the Eurasian margin.

[ 18 ] Seven principal blocks have been identified in Luzon: the Sierra Madre Oriental, Angat, Zambales , Central Cordillera of Luzon, Bicol and Catanduanes Island blocks. In the Central Philippines four principal blocks have been identified: Panay, Mindoro, Cebu and Bohol. In Mindanao six principal blocks have been identified: Pacific Cordillera, Surigao, Pujada peninsular, Central Cordillera of Mindanao, Daguma range and Zamboanga.

[ 19 ] Well-known micro-continental blocks [ edit ] North Palawan Block Mindoro Block Magmatic arcs [ edit ] Ancient arcs [ edit ] In Luzon, the Middle Oligocene to Late Miocene age of the arc is well constrained stratigraphically as well as radiometrically. Most of the intrusive rocks are dioritic in composition, although alkali rocks also occur. In the Central Cordillera of Luzon, intrusive rocks include Paleogene rocks related to an ancient arc and Neogene intrusive and volcanic rocks related to eastward subduction from the Manila Trench.

In Visayas, oldest known magmatic rocks in the Philippines are found in Cebu Island, where dioritic rocks have been dated at Lower Cretaceous (Walther and others, 1981), similar rocks have been recognized in neighboring Bohol Island.

In Mindanao, interpretation of the age of these rocks is further complicated by their petrographic diversity. Sajona and others (1993) analyzed Pliocene-Pleistocene adakitic rocks in Zamboanga Peninsula and mention a possible association with activity along the Philippine Fault in Surigao and northern Davao .

Active arcs [ edit ] The distribution of Philippine Pliocene-Quaternary volcanoes generally reflects the activity along subduction zones presently bounding the archipelago.

Five distinct volcanic belts can be defined, namely: Luzon Volcanic Arc corresponding to the Manila Trench East-Philippine Volcanic Arc associated with the Philippine Trench Negros-Panay Arc linked to the Negros Trench Sulu-Zamboanga Arc formed by the Sulu Trench Cotabato Arc related to the Cotabato Trench Sedimentary basins [ edit ] The archipelago has 16 sedimentary basins formed by tectonic processes. Here are the following sedimentary basins: [ 20 ] Luzon Bicol Shelf Cagayan Valley Basin Central Luzon Basin Ilocos Trough Mindoro–Cuyo Basin East Palawan Basin Northwest Palawan Basin Reed Bank Basin Southeast Luzon Basin Southwest Palawan Basin West Luzon Basin Visayas Visayan Basin (or in Luzon) West Masbate–Iloilo Basin Mindanao Agusan–Davao Basin Cotabato Basin Sulu Sea Basin Stratigraphic groupings [ edit ] Main article: List of stratigraphic formations in the Philippines See also [ edit ] Subduction tectonics of the Philippines Back-arc basin References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Geology of the Philippines .

^ Galgana, G.A.; Hamburger, M.W.; McCaffrey, R.; Bacolcol, T.C.; Aurelio, M.A. (December 1, 2007). "Modeling the Philippine Mobile Belt: Tectonic blocks in a deforming plate boundary zone".

AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts .

2007 : G21C–0670.

Bibcode : 2007AGUFM.G21C0670G .

^ Rangin and Pubellier (1990) in Tectonics of Circum-Pacific Continental Margins ISBN 90-6764-132-4 p140 ff ^ Clift, Schouten and Draut (2003) in Intra-Oceanic Subduction Systems: Tectonic and Magmatic Processes , ISBN 1-86239-147-5 p84-86 ^ Hashimoto, M, ed., (1981) Accretion Tectonics in the Circum-Pacific Regions , ISBN 90-277-1561-0 p302 ^ Nicolas Pinet and Jean Francois Stephan (1989) in Tectonics of Circum-Pacific Continental Margins ISBN 90-6764-132-4 p165 ^ Rangin and Pubellier (1990) in Tectonics of Circum-Pacific Continental Margins ISBN 90-6764-132-4 p148 ^ Hashimoto, M, ed., (1981) Accretion Tectonics in the Circum-Pacific Regions , ISBN 90-277-1561-0 p303 ^ Nicolas Pinet and Jean Francois Stephan (1989) in Tectonics of Circum-Pacific Continental Margins ISBN 90-6764-132-4 p167 Fig 1, p175, p177 ^ Hashimoto, M, ed., (1981) Accretion Tectonics in the Circum-Pacific Regions , ISBN 90-277-1561-0 p299 ^ Deschamps and Lallemand (2003) in Intra-Oceanic Subduction Systems: Tectonic and Magmatic Processes ISBN 1-86239-147-5 p165 ^ Rangin and Pubellier (1990) in Tectonics of Circum-Pacific Continental Margins ISBN 90-6764-132-4 , p149 ^ Clift, Schouten and Draut (2003) in Intra-Oceanic Subduction Systems: Tectonic and Magmatic Processes , ISBN 1-86239-147-5 p86 ^ Macpherson, Forde, Hall and Thirlwall (2003) in Intra-Oceanic Subduction Systems: Tectonic and Magmatic Processes , ISBN 1-86239-147-5 p208 ^ Polve, Mireille; Maury, Rene; Jego, Sebastien; Bellon, Jerve; Margoum, Ahmed; Yumul, Graciano; Payot, Betchaida; Tamayo, Rodolfo; Cotten, Joseph (2007).

"Temporal Geochemical Evolution of Neogene Magmatism in the Baguio Gold-Copper Mining District (Northern Luzon, Philippines)" .

Resource Geology .

57 (2): 197– 218.

doi : 10.1111/j.1751-3928.2007.00017.x .

S2CID 140540795 .

^ Nicolas Pinet and Jean Francois Stephan (1989) in Tectonics of Circum-Pacific Continental Margins ISBN 90-6764-132-4 p170 ^ Nicolas Pinet and Jean Francois Stephan (1989) in Tectonics of Circum-Pacific Continental Margins ISBN 90-6764-132-4 p167 Fig 1 ^ File:Philippine Sea plate.JPG ^ Rangin and Pubellier (1990) in Tectonics of Circum-Pacific Continental Margins ISBN 90-6764-132-4 p149 ^ Rangin and Pubellier (1990) in Tectonics of Circum-Pacific Continental Margins ISBN 90-6764-132-4 p148 fig 4 ^ "::.......CCOP EPF..." ccop.or.th . Retrieved April 20, 2018 .

v t e Geography of the Philippines Geology Benham Rise Benham Bank Manila Trench Marikina Valley fault system Philippine fault system Philippine Mobile Belt Philippine Sea plate Landforms Archipelagos Extreme points Headlands Hills Island groups islands Mountains ranges passes Ultras Peninsulas Plains Valleys Volcanoes active potentially active inactive Water Baselines Bays Gulfs Lakes Rivers Straits Waterfalls Wetlands Seas Bohol Camotes Celebes Philippine Samar Sibuyan Sulu South China Visayan Administrative divisions Regions Autonomous Provinces Cities Municipalities Barangays Purok Sitio Environment Climate Ecoregions Forests Landmarks National parks Protected areas Biosphere reserves World Heritage Sites Wildlife Fauna Flora v t e Tectonic plates Major plates African Antarctic Eurasian Indo-Australian Australian Indian North American Pacific South American Minor plates Amurian Arabian Burma Caribbean Caroline Cocos Indian Nazca New Hebrides Okhotsk Philippine Scotia Somali Sunda Yangtze Microplates Adriatic Aegean Sea Anatolian Balmoral Reef Banda Sea Bird's Head Capricorn Coiba Conway Reef Explorer Futuna Galápagos Gonâve Gorda Greenland Halmahera Iberian Iranian Juan de Fuca Juan Fernández Kerguelen Kermadec Lwandle Madagascar Malpelo Manus Maoke Mariana Molucca Sea Niuafo’ou North Andes North Bismarck North Galápagos Okinawa Panama Pelso Philippine Mobile Belt Rivera Rovuma Sangihe Seychelles Shetland Solomon Sea South Bismarck South Sandwich Timor Tisza Tonga Trobriand Victoria Woodlark Ancient plates Baltic Bellingshausen Charcot Cimmeria Farallon Insular Intermontane Izanagi Kula Lhasa Malvinas Moa Phoenix Kshiroda Oceanic ridges Aden Ridge Carlsberg Ridge Central Indian Ridge Chile Ridge Cocos Ridge East Pacific Rise Explorer Ridge Gakkel Ridge Galápagos Spreading Center Gorda Ridge Juan de Fuca Ridge Mid-Atlantic Ridge Knipovich Ridge Kolbeinsey Ridge Mohns Ridge Reykjanes Ridge Pacific–Antarctic Ridge South American–Antarctic Ridge Southeast Indian Ridge Southwest Indian Ridge Ancient oceanic ridges Aegir Ridge Alpha Ridge Antarctic–Phoenix Ridge Kula–Farallon Ridge Mid-Labrador Ridge Pacific–Farallon Ridge Pacific–Kula Ridge Geology portal List Category Commons v t e Tectonic plates of East and North Asia ( Eurasian plate - Pacific plate Convergence Zone) Large Eurasian plate North American plate Philippine Sea plate Faults and rift zones Aomori Bay West Coast Fault Zone Baikal Rift Zone Haiyuan Fault Fukozu Fault Futagawa-Hinagu fault zone Idosawa Fault Itoigawa-Shizuoka Tectonic Line Izu–Bonin–Mariana Arc Japan Median Tectonic Line Longmenshan Fault Neodani Fault Nojima Fault Northeastern Japan Arc Philippine Fault System Senya Fault Tanna Fault Ulakhan Fault Urasoko fault Trenches and troughs Kuril Trench Mariana Trench Japan Eastern margin of the Sea of Japan Izu–Ogasawara Trench Japan Trench Nankai Trough Okinawa Trough Ryukyu Trench Sagami Trough Suruga Trough Philippines Manila Trench Philippine Trench Others Boso triple junction v t e Tectonic plates of Southeast Asia – New Guinea ( Australian plate – Pacific plate convergence zone) Large Caroline plate Philippine Sea plate Sunda plate Small West Burma plate Philippines Philippine Mobile Belt Indonesia Banda Sea plate Bird's Head plate Halmahera plate Molucca Sea Collision Zone Molucca Sea plate Sangihe plate Timor plate New Guinea Maoke plate North Bismarck plate Manus plate Solomon Sea plate South Bismarck plate Trobriand plate Woodlark plate Faults Flores back-arc thrust fault Great Sumatran Fault Marikina Valley fault system New Britain subduction zone Palu-Koro Fault Philippine fault system Ramu-Markham Fault Sorong Fault Trenches and troughs Java Trench (Sunda) with Mentawai Trough Sunda Trough Timor Trough Philippines Cotabato Trench Manila Trench North Luzon Trough Negros Trench Palawan Trench Philippine Trench East Luzon Trench Sulu Trench Sulawesi and Moluccas Aru Trough Banda Trench Ceram Trough Salajar Trough Sangihe Trough Talaud Trough Ternate Trough Timor Aur Trough Tanimbar Trough New Guinea Ayu Trough Kilinailau Trench Manokwari Trough Lyra Trough Mussau Trough New Guinea Trench Pocklington Trough New Britain Trench (Bougainville) West Caroline Trough West Melanesian Trench Subsea plateaus and basins Arafura Basin Aru-Tanimbar Basin Bengkulu Basin Benham Plateau Bula Basin East Natuna Basin Geelvinck (Cendrawasih) Basin Manus Basin Minahasa Basin North Australian Basin North Biak Basin North Flores Basin Northern East Java Basin Northern Makassar Basin Ontong Java Plateau Sawu Basin Southern Makassar Basin Talaud Basin Weber Deep West Halmahera Basin West Natuna Basin Woodlark Basin Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philippine_Mobile_Belt&oldid=1256483641 " Categories : Philippine tectonics Tectonic plates Geology of the Pacific Ocean Volcanic belts Geology of the Philippines Geology of Taiwan Cordilleras Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing reorganization from October 2020 Use mdy dates from May 2020 Use Philippine English from January 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in Philippine English Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 10 November 2024, at 03:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philippine Mobile Belt 7 languages Add topic

