Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and usage Toggle Etymology and usage subsection 1.1 Derivation 1.2 History of the concept 1.2.1 As a grammatical category 1.2.2 As distinct from sex 2 Biological factors and views Toggle Biological factors and views subsection 2.1 Non-human animals 3 Feminist theory 4 Gender studies Toggle Gender studies subsection 4.1 Gender identity and gender roles 4.1.1 Social assignment and gender fluidity 4.1.2 Societal categories 4.1.2.1 Non-binary and third genders 4.1.3 Measurement of gender identity 4.2 Social construction of sex hypotheses 5 Psychology and sociology 6 Gender as biopsychosocial 7 Gender and society Toggle Gender and society subsection 7.1 Languages 7.2 Legal status 7.2.1 Transgender people 7.2.2 Intersex people 7.2.3 Non-binary and third genders 7.3 Science 7.4 Religion 7.5 Poverty 7.6 General strain theory 7.7 Economic development 7.8 Climate change 7.9 Social media 8 See also 9 References 10 Bibliography 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Gender 99 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Cebuano Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gaelg Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingála Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Papiamentu پښتو Patois Polski Português Română Русский ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Sardu Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Meta-Wiki Wikiquote Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sociological constructs related to sex For the grammatical concept, see Grammatical gender . For other uses, see Gender (disambiguation) .

Gender symbols intertwined: the red Venus symbol (female) and the blue Mars symbol (male) Gender is the range of social, psychological, cultural, and behavioral aspects of being a man (or boy ), woman (or girl ), or third gender .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Although gender often corresponds to sex , a transgender person may identify with a gender other than their sex assigned at birth . Most cultures use a gender binary , in which gender is divided into two categories, and people are considered part of one or the other; [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] those who are outside these groups may fall under the umbrella term non-binary . Some societies have third genders (and fourth genders , etc.) such as the hijras of South Asia and two-spirit persons native to North America . Most scholars agree that gender is a central characteristic for social organization ; [ 6 ] this may include social constructs (i.e.

gender roles ) as well as gender expression .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] The word has been used as a synonym for sex, and the balance between these usages has shifted over time.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] In the mid-20th century, a terminological distinction in modern English (known as the sex and gender distinction ) between biological sex and gender began to develop in the academic areas of psychology , sociology , sexology , and feminism .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Before the mid-20th century, it was uncommon to use the word gender to refer to anything but grammatical categories .

[ 7 ] [ 1 ] In the West, in the 1970s, feminist theory embraced the concept of a distinction between biological sex and the social construct of gender . The distinction between gender and sex is made by most contemporary social scientists in Western countries, [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] behavioral scientists and biologists, [ 18 ] many legal systems and government bodies, [ 19 ] and intergovernmental agencies such as the WHO .

[ 20 ] The experiences of intersex people also testify to the complexity of sex and gender; female,  male, and other gender identities are experienced across the many divergences of sexual difference.

[ 21 ] The social sciences have a branch devoted to gender studies . Other sciences, such as psychology , sociology , sexology , and neuroscience , are interested in the subject. The social sciences sometimes approach gender as a social construct , and gender studies particularly does, while research in the natural sciences investigates whether biological differences in females and males influence the development of gender in humans; both inform the debate about how far biological differences influence the formation of gender identity and gendered behavior.

Biopsychosocial approaches to gender include biological, psychological, and social/cultural aspects.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Etymology and usage Derivation The modern English word gender comes from the Middle English gender , gendre , a loanword from Anglo-Norman and Middle French gendre . This, in turn, came from Latin genus . Both words mean "kind", "type", or "sort". They derive ultimately from a Proto-Indo-European (PIE) root * ǵénh₁- 'to beget', [ 24 ] which is also the source of kin , kind , king , and many other English words, with cognates widely attested in many Indo-European languages .

[ 25 ] It appears in Modern French in the word genre (type, kind, also genre sexuel ) and is related to the Greek root gen- (to produce), appearing in gene , genesis , and oxygen . The Oxford Etymological Dictionary of the English Language of 1882 defined gender as kind, breed, sex , derived from the Latin ablative case of genus , like genere natus , which refers to birth.

[ 26 ] The first edition of the Oxford English Dictionary (OED1, Volume 4, 1900) notes the original meaning of gender as "kind" had already become obsolete.

History of the concept The concept of gender, in the modern social science sense, is a recent invention in human history.

[ 27 ] The ancient world had no basis of understanding gender as it has been understood in the humanities and social sciences for the past few decades.

[ 27 ] The term gender had been associated with grammar for most of history and only started to move towards it being a malleable cultural construct in the 1950s and 1960s.

[ 28 ] Before the terminological distinction between biological sex and gender as a role developed, it was uncommon to use the word gender to refer to anything but grammatical categories .

[ 7 ] [ 1 ] For example, in a bibliography of 12,000 references on marriage and family from 1900 to 1964, the term gender does not even emerge once.

[ 7 ] Analysis of more than 30 million academic article titles from 1945 to 2001 showed that the uses of the term "gender" , were much rarer than uses of "sex" , was often used as a grammatical category early in this period. By the end of this period, uses of "gender" outnumbered uses of "sex" in the social sciences, arts, and humanities.

[ 1 ] It was in the 1970s that feminist scholars adopted the term gender as way of distinguishing "socially constructed" aspects of male–female differences (gender) from "biologically determined" aspects (sex).

[ 1 ] As of 2024, many dictionaries list "synonym for 'sex ' " as one of gender ' s meanings, alongside its sociocultural meaning.

[ 12 ] [ 11 ] According to the Oxford English Dictionary, gender came into use as a synonym for sex during the twentieth century, initially as a euphemism, as sex was undergoing its own usage shift toward referring to sexual intercourse rather than male/female categories.

[ 10 ] During the last two decades of the 20th century, gender was often used as a synonym for sex in its non-copulatory senses, especially outside the social sciences.

David Haig , writing in 2003, said "the sex/gender distinction is now only fitfully observed." [ 1 ] Within the social sciences, however, use of gender in academia increased greatly, outnumbering uses of sex during that same period. In the natural sciences, gender was more often used as a synonym for sex . This can be attributed to the influence of feminism. Haig stated, "Among the reasons that working [natural] scientists have given me for choosing gender rather than sex in biological contexts are desires to signal sympathy with feminist goals, to use a more academic term, or to avoid the connotation of copulation." Haig also notes that "gender" became the preferred term when discussing phenomena for which the social versus biological cause was unknown, disputed, or actually an interaction between the two.

[ 1 ] In 1993, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) started to use gender instead of sex to avoid confusion with sexual intercourse .

[ 29 ] Later, in 2011, the FDA reversed its position and began using sex as the biological classification and gender as "a person's self-representation as male or female, or how that person is responded to by social institutions based on the individual's gender presentation." [ 30 ] In legal cases alleging discrimination , a 2006 law review article by Meredith Render notes "as notions of gender and sexuality have evolved over the last few decades, legal theories concerning what it means to discriminate "because of sex" under Title VII have experienced a similar evolution".

[ 31 ] : 135 In a 1999 law review article proposing a legal definition of sex that "emphasizes gender self-identification," Julie Greenberg writes, "Most legislation utilizes the word 'sex,' yet courts, legislators, and administrative agencies often substitute the word 'gender' for 'sex' when they interpret these statutes." [ 32 ] : 270, 274 In J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B.

, a 1994 United States Supreme Court case addressing "whether the Equal Protection Clause forbids intentional discrimination on the basis of gender", the majority opinion noted that with regard to gender, "It is necessary only to acknowledge that 'our Nation has had a long and unfortunate history of sex discrimination,' id.

, at 684, 93 S.Ct., at 1769, a history which warrants the heightened scrutiny we afford all gender-based classifications today", and stated "When state actors exercise peremptory challenges in reliance on gender stereotypes, they ratify and reinforce prejudicial views of the relative abilities of men and women." [ 33 ] As a grammatical category The word was still widely used, however, in the specific sense of grammatical gender (the assignment of nouns to categories such as masculine , feminine and neuter ). According to Aristotle , this concept was introduced by the Greek philosopher Protagoras .

[ 34 ] In 1926, Henry Watson Fowler stated that the definition of the word pertained to this grammar-related meaning: "Gender...is a grammatical term only. To talk of persons...of the masculine or feminine g[ender], meaning of the male or female sex, is either a jocularity (permissible or not according to context) or a blunder." [ 35 ] As distinct from sex In 1945, Madison Bentley defined gender as the "socialized obverse of sex".

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Simone de Beauvoir 's 1949 book The Second Sex has been interpreted as the beginning of the distinction between sex and gender in feminist theory , [ 38 ] [ 39 ] although this interpretation is contested by many feminist theorists, including Sara Heinämaa.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] Controversial sexologist John Money coined the term gender role , [ 42 ] [ 43 ] and was the first to use it in print in a scientific trade journal in 1955.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] In the seminal 1955 paper, he defined it as "all those things that a person says or does to disclose himself or herself as having the status of boy or man, girl or woman." [ 46 ] The modern academic sense of the word, in the context of social roles of men and women, dates at least back to 1945, [ 47 ] and was popularized and developed by the feminist movement from the 1970s onwards (see feminist theory and gender studies below), which theorizes that human nature is essentially epicene and social distinctions based on sex are arbitrarily constructed. In this context, matters pertaining to this theoretical process of social construction were labelled matters of gender .

The popular use of gender simply as an alternative to sex (as a biological category) is also widespread, although attempts are still made to preserve the distinction. The American Heritage Dictionary (2000) uses the following two sentences to illustrate the difference, noting that the distinction "is useful in principle, but it is by no means widely observed, and considerable variation in usage occurs at all levels." [ 48 ] The effectiveness of the medication appears to depend on the sex (not gender) of the patient.

In peasant societies, gender (not sex) roles are likely to be more clearly defined.

Biological factors and views See also: Sexual differentiation and Sexual differentiation in humans Some gendered behavior is influenced by prenatal and early life androgen exposure. This includes, for example, gender normative play, self-identification with a gender, and tendency to engage in aggressive behavior.

[ 49 ] Males of most mammals, including humans, exhibit more rough and tumble play behavior, which is influenced by maternal testosterone levels. These levels may also influence sexuality, with non-heterosexual persons exhibiting sex atypical behavior in childhood.

[ 50 ] Some research pertaining to the biological causes of gender incongruence has been done. Transgender and cisgender gender identity is influenced by genetic factors [ 51 ] [ 52 ] and it has been hypothesised that it may be influenced by the prenatal hormonal environment or sexual dimorphism in the brain .

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] There are studies concerning women who have a condition called congenital adrenal hyperplasia , which leads to the overproduction of the masculine sex hormone , androgen . These women usually have ordinary female appearances (though nearly all girls with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) have corrective surgery performed on their genitals). However, despite taking hormone-balancing medication given to them at birth, these females are statistically more likely to be interested in activities traditionally linked to males than female activities. Psychology professor and CAH researcher Dr. Sheri Berenbaum attributes these differences to an exposure of higher levels of male sex hormones in utero.

[ 55 ] Non-human animals In non-human animal research, gender is commonly used to refer to the biological sex of the animals.

[ 1 ] According to biologist Michael J. Ryan , gender identity is a concept exclusively applied to humans.

[ 56 ] Also, in a letter Ellen Ketterson writes, "[w]hen asked, my colleagues in the Department of Gender Studies agreed that the term gender could be properly applied only to humans, because it involves one's self-concept as man or woman. Sex is a biological concept; gender is a human social and cultural concept." [ 57 ] However, Poiani (2010) notes that the question of whether behavioural similarities across species can be associated with gender identity or not is "an issue of no easy resolution", [ 58 ] and suggests that mental states, such as gender identity, are more accessible in humans than other species due to their capacity for language.

[ 59 ] Poiani suggests that the potential number of species with members possessing a gender identity must be limited due to the requirement for self-consciousness .

[ 60 ] Jacques Balthazart suggests that "there is no animal model for studying sexual identity. It is impossible to ask an animal, whatever its species, to what sex it belongs." [ 61 ] He notes that "this would imply that the animal is aware of its own body and sex, which is far from proved", despite recent research demonstrating sophisticated cognitive skills among non-human primates and other species.

[ 62 ] Hird (2006) has also stated that whether or not non-human animals consider themselves to be feminine or masculine is a "difficult, if not impossible, question to answer", as this would require "judgements about what constitutes femininity or masculinity in any given species". Nonetheless, she asserts that "non-human animals do experience femininity and masculinity to the extent that any given species' behaviour is gender segregated." [ 63 ] Despite this, Poiani and Dixson emphasise the applicability of the concept of gender role to non-human animals [ 58 ] such as rodents [ 64 ] throughout their book.

[ 65 ] The concept of gender role has also been applied to non-human primates such as rhesus monkeys .

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] In 2023, an investigation by Neves et al showed small but important details in communication, such as grammatical genders, in the construction of stereotypes and inherent emotions associated with four non-human animals ( Giant panda ; giraffe ; polar bear ; cheetah ).

[ 68 ] Feminist theory Part of a series on Feminist philosophy Major works A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792) The Subjection of Women (1869) The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State (1884) The Second Sex (1949) The Feminine Mystique (1963) Sexual Politics (1969) The Dialectic of Sex (1970) Speculum of the Other Woman (1974) This Sex Which is Not One (1977) Gyn/Ecology (1978) Throwing Like a Girl (1980) In a Different Voice (1982) The Politics of Reality (1983) Women, Race, and Class (1983) Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center (1984) The Creation of Patriarchy (1986) Toward a Feminist Theory of the State (1989) Gender Trouble (1990) Sexual Personae (1990) Black Feminist Thought (1990) Feminism and the Mastery of Nature (1993) Whipping Girl (2007) The Promise of Happiness (2010) Major thinkers Bartky Baier de Beauvoir Bebel Boggs Butler Cixous Cleyre De la Cruz Cobain Collins Daly Davis Démar Dworkin Faust Federici Firestone Fourier Friedan Frye Gamond Goldman Grosz Hanna Haslanger hooks Irigaray Jaggar Kristeva Lerner Lorde Lugones Luxemburg MacKinnon Mama Michel Mill Taylor Mill Millett Nussbaum Paglia Pankhurst Pateman Plumwood Rubin Saadawi Showalter Solanas Spivak Voilquin Whedon Wittig Wollstonecraft Young Zetkin Ideas Feminism analytical epistemology ethics existentialism metaphysics science Gender equality Gender performativity Social construction of gender Care ethics Intersectionality Standpoint theory Journals Feminist Philosophy Quarterly Hypatia philoSOPHIA Radical Philosophy Signs Category Feminist philosophy v t e Biologist and feminist academic Anne Fausto-Sterling rejects the discourse of biological versus social determinism and advocates a deeper analysis of how interactions between the biological being and the social environment influence individuals' capacities.

[ 69 ] The philosopher and feminist Simone de Beauvoir applied existentialism to women's experience of life: "One is not born a woman, one becomes one." [ 70 ] In context, this is a philosophical statement. However, it may be analyzed in terms of biology—a girl must pass puberty to become a woman—and sociology, as a great deal of mature relating in social contexts is learned rather than instinctive.

[ 71 ] Within feminist theory , terminology for gender issues developed over the 1970s. In the 1974 edition of Masculine/Feminine or Human , the author uses "innate gender" and "learned sex roles", [ 72 ] but in the 1978 edition, the use of sex and gender is reversed.

[ 73 ] By 1980, most feminist writings had agreed on using gender only for socioculturally adapted traits .

Andrea Dworkin stated her "commitment to destroying male dominance and gender itself" while stating her belief in radical feminism .

[ 74 ] Political scientist Mary Hawkesworth addresses gender and feminist theory, stating that since the 1970s the concept of gender has transformed and been used in significantly different ways within feminist scholarship. She notes that a transition occurred when several feminist scholars, such as Sandra Harding and Joan Scott , began to conceive of gender "as an analytic category within which humans think about and organize their social activity". Feminist scholars in Political Science began employing gender as an analytical category, which highlighted "social and political relations neglected by mainstream accounts". However, Hawkesworth states "feminist political science has not become a dominant paradigm within the discipline".

[ 75 ] Gender studies Gender studies is a field of interdisciplinary study and academic field devoted to gender, gender identity and gendered representation as central categories of analysis. This field includes Women's studies (concerning women , feminity , their gender roles and politics, and feminism ), Men's studies (concerning men , masculinity , their gender roles , and politics), and LGBT studies .

[ 76 ] Sometimes Gender studies is offered together with Study of Sexuality .
These disciplines study gender and sexuality in the fields of literature and language, history , political science , sociology , anthropology , cinema and media studies , human development, law, and medicine.

[ 77 ] It also analyses race , ethnicity , location , nationality , and disability .

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] In gender studies, the term gender refers to proposed social and cultural constructions of masculinities and femininities. In this context, gender explicitly excludes reference to biological differences, to focus on cultural differences.

[ 80 ] This emerged from a number of different areas: in sociology during the 1950s; from the theories of the psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan ; and in the work of French psychoanalysts like Julia Kristeva , Luce Irigaray , and American feminists such as Judith Butler . Those who followed Butler came to regard gender roles as a practice, sometimes referred to as " performative ".

[ 81 ] Charles E. Hurst states that some people think sex will, "...automatically determine one's gender demeanor and role (social) as well as one's sexual orientation " (sexual attractions and behavior).

[ 82 ] Gender sociologists believe that people have cultural origins and habits for dealing with gender. For example, Michael Schwalbe believes that humans must be taught how to act appropriately in their designated gender to fill the role properly, and that the way people behave as masculine or feminine interacts with social expectations. Schwalbe comments that humans "are the results of many people embracing and acting on similar ideas".

[ 83 ] People do this through everything from clothing and hairstyle to relationship and employment choices. Schwalbe believes that these distinctions are important, because society wants to identify and categorize people as soon as we see them. They need to place people into distinct categories to know how we should feel about them.

Hurst comments that in a society where we present our genders so distinctly, there can often be severe consequences for breaking these cultural norms. Many of these consequences are rooted in discrimination based on sexual orientation. Gays and lesbians are often discriminated against in our legal system because of societal prejudices.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] [ 86 ] Hurst describes how this discrimination works against people for breaking gender norms, no matter what their sexual orientation is. He says that "courts often confuse sex, gender, and sexual orientation, and confuse them in a way that results in denying the rights not only of gays and lesbians, but also of those who do not present themselves or act in a manner traditionally expected of their sex".

[ 82 ] This prejudice plays out in our legal system when a person is judged differently because they do not present themselves as the "correct" gender.

American political scientist Karen Beckwith addresses the concept of gender within political science arguing that a "common language of gender" exists and that it must be explicitly articulated in order to build upon it within the political science discipline. Beckwith describes two ways in which the political scientist may employ 'gender' when conducting empirical research: "gender as a category and as a process." Employing gender as a category allows for political scientists "to delineate specific contexts where behaviours, actions, attitudes and preferences considered masculine or feminine result in particular political outcomes". It may also demonstrate how gender differences, not necessarily corresponding precisely with sex, may "constrain or facilitate political" actors. Gender as a process has two central manifestations in political science research, firstly in determining "the differential effects of structures and policies upon men and women," and secondly, the ways in which masculine and feminine political actors "actively work to produce favorable gendered outcomes".

[ 87 ] With regard to gender studies, Jacquetta Newman states that although sex is determined biologically, the ways in which people express gender is not. Gendering is a socially constructed process based on culture, though often cultural expectations around women and men have a direct relationship to their biology. Because of this, Newman argues, many privilege sex as being a cause of oppression and ignore other issues like race, ability, poverty, etc. Current gender studies classes seek to move away from that and examine the intersectionality of these factors in determining people's lives. She also points out that other non-Western cultures do not necessarily have the same views of gender and gender roles.

[ 88 ] Newman also debates the meaning of equality, which is often considered the goal of feminism; she believes that equality is a problematic term because it can mean many different things, such as people being treated identically, differently, or fairly based on their gender. Newman believes this is problematic because there is no unified definition as to what equality means or looks like, and that this can be significantly important in areas like public policy.

[ 89 ] Gender identity and gender roles Main articles: Gender identity and Gender role Part of a series on Transgender topics Outline History Timeline Gender identities Androgyne Bissu, Calabai, Calalai Burrnesha Cisgender Gender bender Hijra Non-binary or genderqueer Gender fluidity Kathoey Koekchuch Third gender Bakla Faʻafafine Femminiello Khanith Māhū Mudoko dako Mukhannath Muxe Travesti Two-spirit Winkte X-gender Trans man Trans woman Fakaleitī Mak nyah Rae-rae Transgender Youth Akava'ine Trans* Transsexual Health care practices Gender clinic Gender dysphoria in children causes Sex assignment Hormone therapy feminizing masculinizing DIY Puberty-suppressing hormone therapy Gender-affirming surgery masculinizing feminizing Facial feminization surgery Facial masculinization surgery Hair removal Pregnancy Assisted reproductive technology Voice therapy WPATH Standards of Care Transgender health care misinformation Rights and legal status Gender self-identification Legal gender Non-binary gender Personal identity Rights movement Organizations Political office-holders United States Asylum Healthcare Military service South Korea United States Prisons Toilets Bathroom bills Unisex Anti-gender movement Anti-transgender movement in the United Kingdom Discrimination Non-binary Parental rights movement Transgender men Transmisogyny Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary radical feminism Genocide Inequality Violence Murders Trans panic defense Yogyakarta Principles Society and culture Events and awareness Awareness Week Beauty pageants Day of Remembrance Day of Visibility Flag March more Culture Anatomical terminology Fictional characters Film Literature Transgender culture of New York City Media portrayals People non-binary Publications Religion Sports Television Theory and concepts Androphilia and gynephilia Blanchard's typology Childhood gender nonconformity Cisgender / cissexual Cisnormativity Cross-dressing Deadnaming Gender binary Gender detransitioning Gender expression Gender transitioning Gender identity Gender modality Gender nonconformity Gender-sexuality questioning Postgenderism Rapid-onset dysphoria Studies Transfeminism views Transmedicalism Transmisogyny By country Rights Argentina 2012 law 2021 law Australia Austria Brazil Canada 2016 bill China Finland France [ fr ] Germany 1980 law 2018 law 2024 law India 2014 bill 2019 act Tamil Nadu Iran Ireland Pakistan 2017 bill 2018 act New Zealand Norway 2016 act Singapore South Africa 2003 act South Korea Spain 2022 law United Kingdom Anti-trans movement 2004 act 2022 bill United States Disenfranchisement Title IX Transphobia History Argentina [ es ] Australia Re Kevin Brazil China Finland Nazi Germany Singapore United Kingdom United States Legality elected officials Cafeteria riot Stonewall See also 2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States Androgyny Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric Gender Gender diversity Gender studies Healthcare and the LGBTQ community Intersex Legal recognition of intersex people Queer heterosexuality LGBTQ Mental health of LGBTQ people Sex Sex–gender distinction Sexual orientation Social construction of gender Suicide among LGBTQ people LGBTQ portal Category v t e Gender depicted as an ambiguous phenomenon, by a young Swedish actor Gender identity refers to a personal identification with a particular gender and gender role in society. The term woman has historically been used interchangeably with reference to the female body, though more recently this usage has been viewed as controversial by some feminists .

[ 90 ] There are qualitative analyses that explore and present the representations of gender; however, feminists challenge these dominant ideologies concerning gender roles and biological sex. One's biological sex is oftentimes tied to specific social roles and expectations.

Judith Butler considers the concept of being a woman to have more challenges, owing not only to society's viewing women as a social category but also as a felt sense of self, a culturally conditioned or constructed subjective identity.

[ 91 ] Social identity refers to the common identification with a collectivity or social category that creates a common culture among participants concerned.

[ 92 ] According to social identity theory , [ 93 ] an important component of the self-concept is derived from memberships in social groups and categories; this is demonstrated by group processes and how inter-group relationships impact significantly on individuals' self perception and behaviors. The groups people belong to therefore provide members with the definition of who they are and how they should behave within their social sphere.

[ 94 ] A protester holding a flyer with the words "Gender is like that old jumper from my cousin. It was given to me and it doesn't fit" at a rally for transgender equality in Washington D.C. in 2013 Categorizing males and females into social roles creates a problem for some individuals who feel they have to be at one end of a linear spectrum and must identify themselves as man or woman, rather than being allowed to choose a section in between.

[ 95 ] Globally, communities interpret biological differences between men and women to create a set of social expectations that define the behaviors that are "appropriate" for men and women and determine their different access to rights, resources, power in society and health behaviors.

[ 96 ] Although the specific nature and degree of these differences vary from one society to the next, they still tend to typically favor men, creating an imbalance in power and gender inequalities within most societies.

[ 97 ] Many cultures have different systems of norms and beliefs based on gender, but there is no universal standard to a masculine or feminine role across all cultures.

[ 98 ] Social roles of men and women in relation to each other is based on the cultural norms of that society, which lead to the creation of gender systems . The gender system is the basis of social patterns in many societies, which include the separation of sexes, and the primacy of masculine norms.

[ 97 ] Philosopher Michel Foucault said that as sexual subjects, humans are the object of power, which is not an institution or structure, rather it is a signifier or name attributed to "complex strategical situation".

[ 99 ] Because of this, "power" is what determines individual attributes, behaviors, etc. and people are a part of an ontologically and epistemologically constructed set of names and labels . For example, being female characterizes one as a woman, and being a woman signifies one as weak, emotional, and irrational, and incapable of actions attributed to a "man". Butler said that gender and sex are more like verbs than nouns. She reasoned that her actions are limited because she is female. "I am not permitted to construct my gender and sex willy-nilly," she said.

[ 91 ] "[This] is so because gender is politically and therefore socially controlled. Rather than 'woman' being something one is, it is something one does." [ 91 ] More recent criticisms of Judith Butler's theories critique her writing for reinforcing the very conventional dichotomies of gender.

[ 100 ] Social assignment and gender fluidity See also: Sex assignment and Gender fluidity According to gender theorist Kate Bornstein , gender can have ambiguity and fluidity .

[ 101 ] There are two [ 102 ] [ 103 ] contrasting ideas regarding the definition of gender, and the intersection of both of them is definable as below: The World Health Organization defines gender as "the characteristics of women, men, girls and boys that are socially constructed".

[ 104 ] The beliefs, values and attitude taken up and exhibited by them is as per the agreed upon norms of the society and the personal opinion of the person is not taken into the primary consideration of assignment of gender and imposition of gender roles as per the assigned gender.

[ 2 ] The assignment of gender involves taking into account the physiological and biological attributes assigned by nature followed by the imposition of the socially constructed conduct.

Gender is a term used to exemplify the attributes that a society or culture constitutes as "masculine" or "feminine". Although a person's sex as male or female stands as a biological fact that is identical in any culture, what that specific sex means in reference to a person's gender role as a man or a woman in society varies cross-culturally according to what things are considered to be masculine or feminine.

[ 105 ] These roles are learned from various, intersecting sources such as parental influences, the socialization a child receives in school, and what is portrayed in the local media. Learning gender roles starts from birth and includes seemingly simple things like what color outfits a baby is clothed in or what toys they are given to play with. However, a person's gender does not always align with what has been assigned at birth. Factors other than learned behaviors play a role in the development of gender.

[ 106 ] The article Adolescent Gender-Role Identity and Mental Health: Gender Intensification Revisited focuses on the work of Heather A. Priess, Sara M. Lindberg, and Janet Shibley Hyde on whether or not girls and boys diverge in their gender identities during adolescent years. The researchers based their work on ideas previously mentioned by Hill and Lynch in their gender intensification hypothesis in that signals and messages from parents determine and affect their children's gender role identities. This hypothesis argues that parents affect their children's gender role identities and that different interactions spent with either parents will affect gender intensification. Priess and among other's study did not support the hypothesis of Hill and Lynch which stated "that as adolescents experience these and other socializing influences, they will become more stereotypical in their gender-role identities and gendered attitudes and behaviors." [ 107 ] However, the researchers did state that perhaps the hypothesis Hill and Lynch proposed was true in the past but is not true now due to changes in the population of teens in respect to their gender-role identities.

Authors of "Unpacking the Gender System: A Theoretical Perspective on Gender Beliefs and Social Relations", Cecilia Ridgeway and Shelley Correll , argue that gender is more than an identity or role but is something that is institutionalized through "social relational contexts." Ridgeway and Correll define "social relational contexts" as "any situation in which individuals define themselves in relation to others in order to act." [ 108 ] They also point out that in addition to social relational contexts, cultural beliefs plays a role in the gender system. The coauthors argue that daily people are forced to acknowledge and interact with others in ways that are related to gender. Every day, individuals are interacting with each other and comply with society's set standard of hegemonic beliefs, which includes gender roles. They state that society's hegemonic cultural beliefs sets the rules which in turn create the setting for which social relational contexts are to take place. Ridgeway and Correll then shift their topic towards sex categorization. The authors define sex categorization as "the sociocognitive process by which we label another as male or female." [ 108 ] The failure of an attempt to raise David Reimer from infancy through adolescence as a girl after his genitals were accidentally mutilated is cited as disproving the theory that gender identity is determined solely by parenting.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] Reimer's case is used by organizations such as the Intersex Society of North America to caution against needlessly modifying the genitals of unconsenting minors.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] Between the 1960s and 2000, many other male newborns and infants were surgically and socially reassigned as females if they were born with malformed penises, or if they lost their penises in accidents. At the time, surgical reconstruction of the vagina was more advanced than reconstruction of the penis , leading many doctors and psychologists, including John Money who oversaw Reimer's case, to recommend sex reassignment based on the idea that these patients would be happiest living as women with functioning genitalia.

[ 113 ] Available evidence indicates that in such instances, parents were deeply committed to raising these children as girls and in as gender-typical a manner as possible.

[ 113 ] : 72–73 A 2005 review of these cases found that about half of natal males reassigned female lived as women in adulthood, including those who knew their medical history, suggesting that gender assignment and related social factors has a major, though not determinative, influence on eventual gender identity.

[ 112 ] In 2015, the American Academy of Pediatrics released a webinar series on gender, gender identity, gender expression, transgender, etc.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] In the first lecture Sherer explains that parents' influence (through punishment and reward of behavior) can influence gender expression but not gender identity .

[ 116 ] Sherer argued that kids will modify their gender expression to seek reward from their parents and society, but this will not affect their gender identity (their internal sense of self).

Societal categories Gender symbols Mary Frith ("Moll Cutpurse") scandalized 17th century society by wearing male clothing, smoking in public, and otherwise defying gender roles.

Sexologist John Money coined the term gender role in 1955. The term gender role is defined as the actions or responses that may reveal their status as boy, man, girl or woman, respectively.

[ 45 ] Elements surrounding gender roles include clothing, speech patterns, movement, occupations, and other factors not limited to biological sex. In contrast to taxonomic approaches, some feminist philosophers have argued that gender "is a vast orchestration of subtle mediations between oneself and others", rather than a "private cause behind manifest behaviours".

[ 117 ] Non-binary and third genders Main articles: Genderqueer and Third gender Historically, most societies have recognized only two distinct, broad classes of gender roles, a binary of masculine and feminine, largely corresponding to the biological sexes of male and female.

[ 5 ] [ 118 ] [ 119 ] When a baby is born, society allocates the child to one gender or the other, on the basis of what their genitals resemble.

[ 105 ] However, some societies have historically acknowledged and even honored people who fulfill a gender role that exists more in the middle of the continuum between the feminine and masculine polarity. For example, the Hawaiian māhū , who occupy "a place in the middle" between male and female, [ 120 ] [ 121 ] or the Ojibwe ikwekaazo , "men who choose to function as women", [ 122 ] or ininiikaazo , "women who function as men".

[ 122 ] In the language of the sociology of gender , some of these people may be considered third gender , especially by those in gender studies or anthropology. Contemporary Native American and FNIM people who fulfill these traditional roles in their communities may also participate in the modern, two-spirit community, [ 123 ] however, these umbrella terms, neologisms, and ways of viewing gender are not necessarily the type of cultural constructs that more traditional members of these communities agree with.

[ 124 ] The hijras of India and Pakistan are often cited as third gender .

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] Another example may be the muxe (pronounced [ˈmuʃe] ), found in the state of Oaxaca, in southern Mexico.

[ 127 ] The Bugis people of Sulawesi , Indonesia have a tradition that incorporates all the features above.

[ 128 ] In addition to these traditionally recognized third genders, many cultures now recognize, to differing degrees, various non-binary gender identities . People who are non-binary (or genderqueer) have gender identities that are not exclusively masculine or feminine. They may identify as having an overlap of gender identities, having two or more genders, having no gender, having a fluctuating gender identity, or being third gender or other-gendered. Recognition of non-binary genders is still somewhat new to mainstream Western culture, [ 129 ] and non-binary people may face increased risk of assault, harassment, and discrimination.

[ 130 ] Measurement of gender identity Two instruments incorporating the multidimensional nature of masculinity and femininity have dominated gender identity research: The Bem Sex Role Inventory (BSRI) and the Personal Attributes Questionnaire (PAQ).

[ 131 ] Both instruments categorize individuals as either being sex typed (males report themselves as identifying primarily with masculine traits, females report themselves as identifying primarily with feminine traits), cross sex-typed (males report themselves as identifying primarily with feminine traits, females report themselves as identifying primarily with masculine traits), androgynous (either males or females who report themselves as high on both masculine and feminine traits) or undifferentiated (either males or females who report themselves as low on both masculine and feminine traits).

[ 132 ] Twenge (1997) noted that men are generally more masculine than women and women generally more feminine than men, but the association between biological sex and masculinity/femininity is waning.

[ 133 ] Social construction of sex hypotheses " Rosie the Riveter " was an iconic symbol of the American homefront in WWII and a departure from restrictive, "feminine", gender roles due to wartime necessity .

Main article: Social construction of sex The World Health Organization states "As a social construct, gender varies from society to society and can change over time." [ 134 ] Sociologists generally regard gender as a social construct. For instance, Ann Oakley , a professor of sociology and social policy, says "the constancy of sex must be admitted, but so also must the variability of gender." [ 135 ] Lynda Birke, a feminist biologist, maintains "'biology' is not seen as something which might change." [ 136 ] However, there are scholars who argue that sex is also socially constructed. For example, gender studies writer Judith Butler states that "perhaps this construct called 'sex' is as culturally constructed as gender; indeed, perhaps it was always already gender, with the consequence that the distinction between sex and gender turns out to be no distinction at all." [ 137 ] They continue: It would make no sense, then, to define gender as the cultural interpretation of sex, if sex is itself a gender-centered category. Gender should not be conceived merely as the cultural inscription of meaning based on a given sex (a juridical conception); gender must also designate the very apparatus of production whereby the sexes themselves are established. [...] This production of sex as the pre-discursive should be understood as the effect of the apparatus of cultural construction designated by gender.

[ 138 ] Butler argues that "bodies only appear, only endure, only live within the productive constraints of certain highly gendered regulatory schemas," [ 139 ] and sex is "no longer as a bodily given on which the construct of gender is artificially imposed, but as a cultural norm which governs the materialization of bodies." [ 140 ] With regard to history, Linda Nicholson, a professor of history and women's studies , argues that the understanding of human bodies as sexually dimorphic was historically not recognised. She states that male and female genitals were considered inherently the same in Western society until the 18th century. At that time, female genitals were regarded as incomplete male genitals, and the difference between the two was conceived as a matter of degree. In other words, there was a belief in a gradation of physical forms, or a spectrum.

[ 141 ] Scholars such as Helen King , Joan Cadden , and Michael Stolberg have criticized this interpretation of history.

[ 142 ] Cadden notes that the "one-sex" model was disputed even in ancient and medieval medicine, [ 143 ] and Stolberg points out that already in the sixteenth century, medicine had begun to move towards a two-sex model.

[ 144 ] In addition, drawing from the empirical research of intersex children, Anne Fausto-Sterling , a professor of biology and gender studies , describes how the doctors address the issues of intersexuality. She starts her argument with an example of the birth of an intersexual individual and maintains "our conceptions of the nature of gender difference shape, even as they reflect, the ways we structure our social system and polity; they also shape and reflect our understanding of our physical bodies." [ 145 ] Then she adds how gender assumptions affects the scientific study of sex by presenting the research of intersexuals by John Money et al., and she concludes that "they never questioned the fundamental assumption that there are only two sexes, because their goal in studying intersexuals was to find out more about 'normal' development." [ 146 ] She also mentions the language the doctors use when they talk with the parents of the intersexuals. After describing how the doctors inform parents about the intersexuality, she asserts that because the doctors believe that the intersexuals are actually male or female, they tell the parents of the intersexuals that it will take a little bit more time for the doctors to determine whether the infant is a boy or a girl. That is to say, the doctors' behavior is formulated by the cultural gender assumption that there are only two sexes. Lastly, she maintains that the differences in the ways in which the medical professionals in different regions treat intersexual people also give us a good example of how sex is socially constructed.

[ 147 ] In her Sexing the Body : gender politics and the construction of sexuality , she introduces the following example: A group of physicians from Saudi Arabia recently reported on several cases of XX intersex children with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), a genetically inherited malfunction of the enzymes that aid in making steroid hormones . [...] In the United States and Europe, such children, because they have the potential to bear children later in life, are usually raised as girls. Saudi doctors trained in this European tradition recommended such a course of action to the Saudi parents of CAH XX children. A number of parents, however, refused to accept the recommendation that their child, initially identified as a son, be raised instead as a daughter. Nor would they accept feminizing surgery for their child. [...] This was essentially an expression of local community attitudes with [...] the preference for male offspring.

[ 148 ] Thus it is evident that culture can play a part in assigning gender, particularly in relation to intersex children.

[ 147 ] Psychology and sociology See also: Sex and psychology Many of the more complicated human behaviors are influenced by both innate factors and by environmental ones, which include everything from genes, gene expression, and body chemistry, through diet and social pressures. A large area of research in behavioral psychology collates evidence in an effort to discover correlations between behavior and various possible antecedents such as genetics, gene regulation, access to food and vitamins, culture, gender, hormones, physical and social development, and physical and social environments.

[ 149 ] A core research area within sociology is the way human behavior operates on itself , in other words, how the behavior of one group or individual influences the behavior of other groups or individuals. Starting in the late 20th century, the feminist movement has contributed extensive study of gender and theories about it, notably within sociology but not restricted to it.

[ 150 ] The Defence of Saragossa by David Wilkie , 1828. Spain's desperate situation when invaded by Napoleon enabled Agustina de Aragón to break into a closely guarded male preserve and become the only female professional officer in the Spanish Army of her time (and long afterwards).

Social theorists have sought to determine the specific nature of gender in relation to biological sex and sexuality, [ 151 ] [ 152 ] with the result being that culturally established gender and sex have become interchangeable identifications that signify the allocation of a specific 'biological' sex within a categorical gender.

[ 152 ] The second wave feminist view that gender is socially constructed and hegemonic in all societies, remains current in some literary theoretical circles, Kira Hall and Mary Bucholtz publishing new perspectives as recently as 2008.

[ 153 ] As the child grows, "...society provides a string of prescriptions, templates, or models of behaviors appropriate to the one sex or the other," [ 154 ] which socialises the child into belonging to a culturally specific gender.

[ 155 ] There is huge incentive for a child to concede to their socialisation with gender shaping the individual's opportunities for education, work, family, sexuality, reproduction, authority, [ 156 ] and to make an impact on the production of culture and knowledge.

[ 157 ] Adults who do not perform these ascribed roles are perceived from this perspective as deviant and improperly socialized.

[ 158 ] Some believe society is constructed in a way that splits gender into a dichotomy via social organisations that constantly invent and reproduce cultural images of gender.

Joan Acker believed gendering occurs in at least five different interacting social processes: [ 159 ] The construction of divisions along the lines of gender, such as those produced by labor, power, family, the state, even allowed behaviors and locations in physical space The construction of symbols and images such as language, ideology, dress and the media, that explain, express and reinforce, or sometimes oppose, those divisions Interactions between men and women, women and women and men and men that involve any form of dominance and submission. Conversational theorists, for example, have studied the way that interruptions, turn taking and the setting of topics re-create gender inequality in the flow of ordinary talk The way that the preceding three processes help to produce gendered components of individual identity, i.e., the way they create and maintain an image of a gendered self Gender is implicated in the fundamental, ongoing processes of creating and conceptualising social structures.

Looking at gender through a Foucauldian lens, gender is transfigured into a vehicle for the social division of power. Gender difference is merely a construct of society used to enforce the distinctions made between what is assumed to be female and male, and allow for the domination of masculinity over femininity through the attribution of specific gender-related characteristics.

[ 160 ] "The idea that men and women are more different from one another than either is from anything else, must come from something other than nature... far from being an expression of natural differences, exclusive gender identity is the suppression of natural similarities." [ 161 ] Gender conventions play a large role in attributing masculine and feminine characteristics to a fundamental biological sex.

[ 162 ] Socio-cultural codes and conventions, the rules by which society functions, and which are both a creation of society as well as a constituting element of it, determine the allocation of these specific traits to the sexes. These traits provide the foundations for the creation of hegemonic gender difference. It follows then, that gender can be assumed as the acquisition and internalisation of social norms. Individuals are therefore socialized through their receipt of society's expectations of 'acceptable' gender attributes that are flaunted within institutions such as the family, the state and the media. Such a notion of 'gender' then becomes naturalized into a person's sense of self or identity, effectively imposing a gendered social category upon a sexed body.

[ 161 ] The conception that people are gendered rather than sexed also coincides with Judith Butler's theories of gender performativity . Butler argues that gender is not an expression of what one is, but rather something that one does.

[ 163 ] It follows then, that if gender is acted out in a repetitive manner it is in fact re-creating and effectively embedding itself within the social consciousness. Contemporary sociological reference to male and female gender roles typically uses masculinities and femininities in the plural rather than singular, suggesting diversity both within cultures as well as across them.

The difference between the sociological and popular definitions of gender involve a different dichotomy and focus. For example, the sociological approach to "gender" (social roles: female versus male) focuses on the difference in (economic/power) position between a male CEO (disregarding the fact that he is heterosexual or homosexual ) to female workers in his employ (disregarding whether they are straight or gay). However the popular sexual self-conception approach (self-conception: gay versus straight) focuses on the different self-conceptions and social conceptions of those who are gay/straight, in comparison with those who are straight (disregarding what might be vastly differing economic and power positions between female and male groups in each category). There is then, in relation to definition of and approaches to "gender", a tension between historic feminist sociology and contemporary homosexual sociology.

[ 164 ] Gender as biopsychosocial According to Alex Iantaffi , Meg-John Barker , and others, gender is biopsychosocial. This is because it is derived from biological, psychological, and social factors, [ 165 ] [ 22 ] with all three factors feeding back into each other to form a person's gender.

[ 22 ] Biological factors such as sex chromosomes, hormones, and anatomy play a significant role in the development of gender. Hormones such as testosterone and estrogen also play a crucial role in shaping gender identity and expression. Anatomy, including genitalia and reproductive organs, can also influence one's gender identity and expression.

[ 166 ] Psychological factors such as cognition, personality, and self-concept also contribute to gender development. Gender identity emerges around the age of two to three years. Gender expression, which refers to the outward manifestation of gender, is influenced by cultural norms, personal preferences, and individual differences in personality.

[ 167 ] Social factors such as culture, socialization, and institutional practices shape gender identity and expression.

In some English literature, there is also a trichotomy between biological sex, psychological gender, and social gender role. This framework first appeared in a feminist paper on transsexualism in 1978.

[ 1 ] [ 168 ] Gender and society Languages Grammatical gender is a property of some languages in which every noun is assigned a gender, often with no direct relation to its meaning. For example, the word for "girl" is muchacha (grammatically feminine) in Spanish , [ 169 ] Mädchen (grammatically neuter) or the older Maid (grammatically feminine) [ 170 ] in German , and cailín (grammatically masculine) in Irish .

[ 169 ] The term " grammatical gender " is often applied to more complex noun class systems. This is especially true when a noun class system includes masculine and feminine as well as some other non-gender features like animate, edible, manufactured, and so forth. An example of the latter is found in the Dyirbal language . Other gender systems exist with no distinction between masculine and feminine; examples include a distinction between animate and inanimate things, which is common to, amongst others, Ojibwe , [ 171 ] Basque and Hittite ; and systems distinguishing between people (whether human or divine) and everything else, which are found in the Dravidian languages and Sumerian .

A sample of the World Atlas of Language Structures by Greville G Corbett found that fewer than half of the 258 languages sampled have any system of grammatical gender .

[ 172 ] Of the remaining languages that feature grammatical gender, over half have more than the minimum requirement of two genders.

[ 172 ] Grammatical gender may be based on biological sex (which is the most common basis for grammatical gender), animacy , or other features, and may be based on a combination of these classes.

[ 173 ] One of the four genders of the Dyirbal language consists mainly of fruit and vegetables.

[ 174 ] Languages of the Niger-Congo language family can have as many as twenty genders, including plants, places, and shapes.

[ 175 ] Many languages include terms that are used asymmetrically in reference to men and women. Concern that current language may be biased in favor of men has led some authors in recent times to argue for the use of a more gender-neutral vocabulary in English and other languages.

[ 176 ] Several languages attest the use of different vocabulary by men and women, to differing degrees. See, for instance, Gender differences in Japanese . The oldest documented language, Sumerian , records a distinctive sub-language, Emesal , only used by female speakers.

[ 177 ] Conversely, many Indigenous Australian languages have distinctive registers with a limited lexicon used by men in the presence of their mothers-in-law (see Avoidance speech ).

[ 178 ] As well, quite a few sign languages have a gendered distinction due to boarding schools segregated by gender, such as Irish Sign Language .

[ 179 ] Several languages such as Persian [ 169 ] or Hungarian are gender-neutral. In Persian the same word is used in reference to men and women. Verbs, adjectives and nouns are not gendered. (See Gender-neutrality in genderless languages ).

Several languages employ different ways to refer to people where there are three or more genders, such as Navajo [ 180 ] Legal status A person's gender can have legal significance. In some countries and jurisdictions there are same-sex marriage laws.

[ 8 ] Transgender people Main article: Legal status of transgender people The legal status of transgender people varies greatly around the world. Some countries have enacted laws protecting the rights of transgender individuals, but others have criminalized their gender identity or expression .

[ 9 ] Many countries now legally recognize sex reassignments by permitting a change of legal gender on an individual's birth certificate .

[ 3 ] Intersex people Main article: Legal recognition of intersex people For intersex people, who according to the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights , "do not fit typical binary notions of male or female bodies", [ 181 ] access to any form of identification document with a gender marker may be an issue.

[ 182 ] For other intersex people, there may be issues in securing the same rights as other individuals assigned male or female; other intersex people may seek non-binary gender recognition.

[ 183 ] Non-binary and third genders Main article: Legal recognition of non-binary gender Some countries now legally recognize non-binary or third genders, including Canada , Germany , [ 184 ] Australia , New Zealand , India and Pakistan . In the United States , Oregon was the first state to legally recognize non-binary gender in 2017, [ 4 ] and was followed by California and the District of Columbia .

[ 6 ] [ 13 ] Science Historically, science has been portrayed as a masculine pursuit in which women have faced significant barriers to participate.

[ 185 ] Even after universities began admitting women in the 19th century, women were still largely relegated to certain scientific fields, such as home science , nursing , and child psychology .

[ 186 ] Women were also typically given tedious, low-paying jobs and denied opportunities for career advancement.

[ 186 ] This was often justified by the stereotype that women were naturally more suited to jobs that required concentration, patience, and dexterity, rather than creativity, leadership, or intellect.

[ 186 ] Although these stereotypes have been dispelled in modern times, women are still underrepresented in prestigious " hard science " fields such as physics , and are less likely to hold high-ranking positions, [ 187 ] a situation global initiatives such as the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 5 are trying to rectify.

[ 188 ] See also: Women in science Religion Further information: Gender and religion This topic includes internal and external religious issues such as gender of God and deities creation myths about human gender, roles and rights (for instance, leadership roles especially ordination of women , sex segregation , gender equality , marriage, abortion, homosexuality ).

Yin and yang In Taoism , yin and yang are considered feminine and masculine, respectively. The Taijitu and concept of the Zhou period reach into family and gender relations. Yin is female and yang is male. They fit together as two parts of a whole. The male principle was equated with the sun: active, bright, and shining; the female principle corresponds to the moon: passive, shaded, and reflective. Thus "male toughness was balanced by female gentleness, male action and initiative by female endurance and need for completion, and male leadership by female supportiveness." [ 189 ] In Judaism , God is traditionally described in the masculine, but in the mystical tradition of the Kabbalah , the Shekhinah represents the feminine aspect of God's essence.

[ 190 ] However, Judaism traditionally holds that God is completely non-corporeal, and thus neither male nor female. Conceptions of the gender of God notwithstanding, traditional Judaism places a strong emphasis on individuals following Judaism's traditional gender roles, though many modern denominations of Judaism strive for greater egalitarianism. Moreover, traditional Jewish culture recognizes at least six genders .

[ 191 ] [ 192 ] In Christianity , God is traditionally described in masculine terms and the Church has historically been described in feminine terms. On the other hand, Christian theology in many churches distinguishes between the masculine images used of God (Father, King, God the Son) and the reality they signify, which transcends gender, embodies all the virtues of both men and women perfectly, which may be seen through the doctrine of Imago Dei . In the New Testament , Jesus at several times mentions the Holy Spirit with the masculine pronoun i.e. John 15:26 among other verses. Hence, the Father , the Son and the Holy Spirit (i.e.

Trinity ) are all mentioned with the masculine pronoun; though the exact meaning of the masculinity of the Christian triune God is contested.

[ 193 ] In Hinduism , one of the several forms of the Hindu god Shiva is Ardhanarishvara (literally half-female god). In this composite form, the left half of the body represents shakti (energy, power) in the form of the goddess Parvati (otherwise his consort) while the right half represents Shiva. Whereas Parvati is regarded to be the cause of arousal of kama (desire), Shiva is the destroyer of the concept. Symbolically, Shiva is pervaded by the power of Parvati and Parvati is pervaded by the power of Shiva.

[ 194 ] This myth projects an inherent view in ancient Hinduism, that each human carries within himself both female and male components, which are forces rather than sexes, and it is the harmony between the creative and the annihilative, the strong and the soft, the proactive and the passive, that makes a true person. Evidence of homosexuality, bisexuality, androgyny, multiple sex partners , and open representation of sexual pleasures are found in artworks like the Khajuraho temples, believed to have been accepted within prevalent social frameworks.

[ 195 ] Poverty Main article: Feminization of poverty Gender inequality is most common in women dealing with poverty. Many women must shoulder all the responsibility of the household because they must take care of the family. Oftentimes this may include tasks such as tilling land, grinding grain, carrying water and cooking.

[ 196 ] Also, women are more likely to earn low incomes because of gender discrimination, as men are more likely to receive higher pay, have more opportunities, and have overall more political and social capital then women.

[ 197 ] Approximately 75% of world's women are unable to obtain bank loans because they have unstable jobs.

[ 196 ] It shows that there are many women in the world's population but only a few represent world's wealth. In many countries, the financial sector largely neglects women even though they play an important role in the economy, as Nena Stoiljkovic pointed out in D+C Development and Cooperation .

[ 198 ] In 1978 Diana M. Pearce coined the term feminization of poverty to describe the problem of women having higher rates of poverty.

[ 199 ] Women are more vulnerable to chronic poverty because of gender inequalities in the distribution of income, property ownership, credit, and control over earned income.

[ 200 ] Resource allocation is typically gender-biased within households, and continue on a higher level regarding state institutions.

[ 200 ] A bar graph comparing poverty differences based on age and gender in 2012.

Gender and Development (GAD) is a holistic approach to give aid to countries where gender inequality has a great effect of not improving the social and economic development. It is a program focused on the gender development of women to empower them and decrease the level of inequality between men and women.

[ 201 ] The largest discrimination study of the transgender community, conducted in 2013, found that the transgender community is four times more likely to live in extreme poverty (income of less than $10,000 a year) than people who are cisgender .

[ 202 ] [ 203 ] General strain theory According to general strain theory , studies suggest that gender differences between individuals can lead to externalized anger that may result in violent outbursts.

[ 204 ] These violent actions related to gender inequality can be measured by comparing violent neighborhoods to non-violent neighborhoods.

[ 204 ] By noticing the independent variables (neighborhood violence) and the dependent variable (individual violence), it is possible to analyze gender roles.

[ 205 ] The strain in the general strain theory is the removal of a positive stimulus and or the introduction of a negative stimulus, which would create a negative effect (strain) within individual, which is either inner-directed (depression/guilt) or outer-directed (anger/frustration), which depends on whether the individual blames themselves or their environment.

[ 206 ] Studies reveal that even though males and females are equally likely to react to a strain with anger, the origin of the anger and their means of coping with it can vary drastically.

[ 206 ] Males are likely to put the blame on others for adversity and therefore externalize feelings of anger.

[ 204 ] Females typically internalize their angers and tend to blame themselves instead.

[ 204 ] Female internalized anger is accompanied by feelings of guilt, fear, anxiety and depression.

[ 205 ] Women view anger as a sign that they've somehow lost control, and thus worry that this anger may lead them to harm others and/or damage relationships. On the other end of the spectrum, men are less concerned with damaging relationships and more focused on using anger as a means of affirming their masculinity.

[ 205 ] According to the general strain theory, men would more likely engage in aggressive behavior directed towards others due to externalized anger whereas women would direct their anger towards themselves rather than others.

[ 206 ] Economic development Gender, and particularly the role of women is widely recognized as vitally important to international development issues.

[ 207 ] This often means a focus on gender-equality, ensuring participation , but includes an understanding of the different roles and expectation of the genders within the community.

[ 208 ] Climate change Main article: Climate change and gender Gender is a topic of increasing concern within climate change policy and science.

[ 209 ] Generally, gender approaches to climate change address gender-differentiated consequences of climate change , as well as unequal adaptation capacities and gendered contribution to climate change. Furthermore, the intersection of climate change and gender raises questions regarding the complex and intersecting power relations arising from it. These differences, however, are mostly not due to biological or physical differences, but are formed by the social, institutional and legal context. Subsequently, vulnerability is less an intrinsic feature of women and girls but rather a product of their marginalization.

[ 210 ] Roehr [ 211 ] notes that, while the United Nations officially committed to gender mainstreaming , in practice gender equality is not reached in the context of climate change policies. This is reflected in the fact that discourses of and negotiations over climate change are mostly dominated by men.

[ 212 ] [ 213 ] [ 214 ] Some feminist scholars hold that the debate on climate change is not only dominated by men but also primarily shaped in 'masculine' principles, which limits discussions about climate change to a perspective that focuses on technical solutions.

[ 213 ] This perception of climate change hides subjectivity and power relations that actually condition climate-change policy and science, leading to a phenomenon that Tuana [ 213 ] terms 'epistemic injustice'.
Similarly, MacGregor [ 212 ] attests that by framing climate change as an issue of 'hard' natural scientific conduct and natural security, it is kept within the traditional domains of hegemonic masculinity.

[ 212 ] [ 214 ] Social media Forbes published an article in 2010 that reported 57% of Facebook users are women, which was attributed to the fact that women are more active on social media. On average, women have 8% more friends and account for 62% of posts that are shared via Facebook.

[ 215 ] Another study in 2010 found that in most Western cultures, women spend more time sending text messages compared to men as well as spending more time on social networking sites as a way to communicate with friends and family.

[ 216 ] Research conducted in 2013 found that over 57% of pictures posted on social networking sites were sexual and were created to gain attention.

[ 217 ] Moreover, 58% of women and 45% of men do not look into the camera, which creates an illusion of withdrawal.

[ 217 ] Other factors to be considered are the poses in pictures such as women lying down in subordinate positions or even touching themselves in childlike ways.

[ 217 ] Adolescent girls generally use social networking sites as a tool to communicate with peers and reinforce existing relationships; boys on the other hand tend to use social networking sites as a tool to meet new friends and acquaintances.

[ 218 ] Furthermore, social networking sites have allowed individuals to truly express themselves, as they are able to create an identity and socialize with other individuals that can relate.

[ 219 ] Social networking sites have also given individuals access to create a space where they feel more comfortable about their sexuality.

[ 219 ] Recent research has indicated that social media is becoming a stronger part of younger individuals' media culture, as more intimate stories are being told via social media and are being intertwined with gender, sexuality, and relationships.

[ 219 ] Research has found that almost all U.S. teens (95%) aged 12 through 17 are online, compared to only 78% of adults. Of these teens, 80% have profiles on social media sites, as compared to only 64% of the online population aged 30 and older. According to a study conducted by the Kaiser Family Foundation, 11-to-18-year-olds spend on average over one and a half hours a day using a computer and 27 minutes per day visiting social network sites, i.e. the latter accounts for about one fourth of their daily computer use.

[ 220 ] Studies have shown that female users tend to post more "cute" pictures, while male participants were more likely to post pictures of themselves in activities. Women in the U.S. also tend to post more pictures of friends, while men tend to post more about sports and humorous links. The study also found that males would post more alcohol and sexual references.

[ 220 ] The roles were reversed however, when looking at a teenage dating site: women made sexual references significantly more often than males. Boys share more personal information, while girls are more conservative about the personal information they post. Boys, meanwhile, are more likely to orient towards technology, sports, and humor in the information they post to their profile.

[ 221 ] Research in the 1990s suggested that different genders display certain traits, such as being active, attractive, dependent, dominant, independent, sentimental, sexy, and submissive, in online interaction.

[ 222 ] Even though these traits continue to be displayed through gender stereotypes, recent studies show that this is not necessarily the case any more.

[ 223 ] See also Androcentrism Anti-gender movement Biological determinism Coloniality of gender Feminist metaphysics Gender and politics Gender bender Gender paradox Gynocentrism Postgenderism Sex–gender distinction Sexism Sex ratio References ^ a b c d e f g h i Haig, David (April 2004).

"The Inexorable Rise of Gender and the Decline of Sex: Social Change in Academic Titles, 1945–2001" (PDF) .

Archives of Sexual Behavior .

33 (2): 87– 96.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.359.9143 .

doi : 10.1023/B:ASEB.0000014323.56281.0d .

PMID 15146141 .

S2CID 7005542 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 June 2012.

^ a b "What do we mean by "sex" and "gender"?" .

World Health Organization . Archived from the original on 30 January 2017 . Retrieved 26 November 2015 .

^ a b Sigelman, Carol K.; Rider, Elizabeth A. (2017).

Life-Span Human Development . Cengage Learning. p. 385.

ISBN 978-1-337-51606-8 .

Archived from the original on 4 August 2021 . Retrieved 4 August 2021 .

^ a b Maddux, James E.; Winstead, Barbara A. (2019).

Psychopathology: Foundations for a Contemporary Understanding . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-429-64787-1 .

Archived from the original on 4 August 2021 . Retrieved 4 August 2021 .

^ a b Kevin L. Nadal, The Sage Encyclopedia of Psychology and Gender (2017, ISBN 1483384276 ), p. 401: "Most cultures currently construct their societies based on the understanding of gender binary—the two gender categorizations (male and female). Such societies divide their population based on biological sex assigned to individuals at birth to begin the process of gender socialization." ^ a b Heinemann, Isabel (2012).

Inventing the Modern American Family: Family Values and Social Change in 20th Century United States . Campus Verlag. p. 36.

ISBN 978-3-593-39640-8 .

Archived from the original on 27 August 2021 . Retrieved 28 July 2021 .

^ a b c d Udry, J. Richard (November 1994).

"The Nature of Gender" (PDF) .

Demography .

31 (4): 561– 573.

doi : 10.2307/2061790 .

JSTOR 2061790 .

PMID 7890091 .

S2CID 38476067 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 June 2021.

^ a b Lindqvist, Anna; Sendén, Marie Gustafsson; Renström, Emma A. (2 October 2021).

"What is gender, anyway: a review of the options for operationalising gender" .

Psychology & Sexuality .

12 (4): 332– 344.

doi : 10.1080/19419899.2020.1729844 .

S2CID 213397968 .

^ a b Bates, Nancy; Chin, Marshall; Becker, Tara, eds. (2022).

Measuring Sex, Gender Identity, and Sexual Orientation . Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.

doi : 10.17226/26424 .

ISBN 978-0-309-27510-1 .

PMID 35286054 .

S2CID 247432505 .

Archived from the original on 24 May 2023.

^ a b "Gender" .

Oxford English Dictionary . Retrieved 11 August 2024 .

^ a b "gender" .

Cambridge English Dictionary . Retrieved 9 August 2024 .

^ a b "gender" .

American Heritage Dictionary . Retrieved 9 August 2024 .

^ a b Hausman, Bernice (1995).

Changing Sex: Transsexualism, Technology, and the Idea of Gender . United Kingdom: Duke University Press. p. 95.

ISBN 0822316927 .

^ Germon, J. (2009).

"Money and the Production of Gender" .

Gender . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

23– 62.

doi : 10.1057/9780230101814_2 .

ISBN 978-1-349-37508-0 .

^ Kimmel, Michael S. (2017).

The gendered society (Sixth ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. p. 3.

ISBN 978-0-19-026031-6 .

OCLC 949553050 .

^ "GENDER" . Social Science Dictionary. Archived from the original on 2 February 2011 . Retrieved 20 March 2015 .

^ Lindsey, Linda L. (2010).

"Ch. 1. The Sociology of gender" (PDF) .

Gender Roles: A Sociological Perspective . Pearson.

ISBN 978-0-13-244830-7 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 April 2015.

^ Paludi, Michele Antoinette (2008).

The Psychology of Women at Work: Challenges and Solutions for Our Female Workforce . ABC-CLIO. p. 153.

ISBN 978-0-275-99677-2 .

Archived from the original on 20 October 2021 . Retrieved 30 August 2021 .

^ O'Halloran, Kerry (2020).

Sexual orientation, gender identity and international human rights law: common law perspectives . London: Routledge. pp.

22– 28, 328– 329.

ISBN 978-0-429-44265-0 .

OCLC 1110674742 .

^ "Gender: definitions" .

www.euro.who.int .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2021 . Retrieved 22 August 2021 .

^ Schweizer, Katinka; Brunner, Franziska; Handford, Christina; Richter-Appelt, Hertha (2 January 2014). "Gender experience and satisfaction with gender allocation in adults with diverse intersex conditions (divergences of sex development, DSD)".

Psychology & Sexuality .

5 (1): 56– 82.

doi : 10.1080/19419899.2013.831216 .

^ a b c Iantaffi, Alex (2017).

How to Understand Your Gender: A Practical Guide for Exploring Who You Are . Jessica Kingsley Publishers.

ISBN 978-1785927461 .

^ Knudson-Martin, Carmen; Mahoney, Anne Rankin (March 2009).

"Introduction to the Special Section-Gendered Power in Cultural Contexts: Capturing the Lived Experience of Couples" .

Family Process .

48 (1): 5– 8.

doi : 10.1111/j.1545-5300.2009.01263.x .

PMID 19378641 .

^ Ringe, Don (2006).

From Proto-Indo-European to Proto-Germanic (PDF) . A Linguistic History of English (1st ed.). New York City: Oxford University Press . p. 61.

ISBN 978-0-19-928413-9 .

OCLC 64554645 .

OL 7405151M .

Wikidata Q131605459 . Retrieved 16 October 2021 .

^ 'Gen' Archived 19 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine . Your Dictionary.com ^ Skeat, Walter William (1882).

An Etymological Dictionary of the English Language . Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 230.

^ a b Holmes, Brooke (2012). "Introduction".

Gender: Antiquity and its Legacy . Oxford University Press. pp.

1– 2.

ISBN 978-0195380828 .

For as it turns out, what we call gender is a fairly recent concept. It's not that people in Ancient Greece and Rome didn't talk and think and argue about the categories of male and female, masculine and feminine and the nature and extent of sexual difference. They did in [ways] both similar to and very different from our own. The problem is that they didn't have the concept of gender that has grown so influential in the humanities and the social sciences over the past four decades.

^ Holmes, Brooke (2012). "Introduction".

Gender: Antiquity and its Legacy . Oxford University Press. pp.

3– 4.

ISBN 978-0195380828 .

The concept of gender, as I've just said, is recent. So what is it and where does it come from? Simone de Beauvoir famously wrote: 'one is not born, but rather becomes, woman'...But the term 'gender', which had long been associated with grammar, only started to move towards what she was describing in the later 1950s and 1960s.

^ "Guideline for the Study and Evaluation of Gender Differences in the Clinical Evaluation of Drugs" (PDF) .

Food and Drug Administration . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 April 2015 . Retrieved 3 August 2014 .

^ "Evaluation of Sex-Specific Data in Medical Device Clinical Studies – Guidance for Industry and Food and Drug Administration Staff" .

U.S. Food and Drug Administration . 22 August 2014. Archived from the original on 9 August 2014 . Retrieved 26 February 2019 .

^ Render, Meredith (December 2006).

"Misogyny, Androgyny and Sexual Harassment: Sex Discrimination in a Gender-Deconstructed World" .

Harvard Journal of Law & Gender .

29 : 99– 150 . Retrieved 24 December 2022 .

^ Greenberg, Julie A (1999).

"Defining Male and Female: Intersexuality and the Collision Between Law and Biology" .

Arizona Law Review .

41 : 265– 328.

SSRN 896307 .

^ "J.E.B., Petitioner v. ALABAMA ex rel. T.B." Legal Information Institute .

Cornell Law School . Retrieved 24 December 2022 .

^ Aristotle (1954), Rhetoric , translated by Roberts, William Rhys, Mineola, NY: Dover , p. 127, ISBN 978-0-486-43793-4 , OCLC 55616891 , A fourth rule is to observe Protagoras' classification of nouns into male, female and inanimate.

{{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Fowler's Modern English Usage , 1926: p. 211.

^ Bentley, Madison (April 1945).

"Sanity and Hazard in Childhood" .

The American Journal of Psychology .

58 (2): 212– 246.

doi : 10.2307/1417846 .

ISSN 0002-9556 .

JSTOR 1417846 . Retrieved 17 August 2021 .

^ Horley, James; Clarke, Jan (2016).

Experience, Meaning, and Identity in Sexuality: A Psychosocial Theory of Sexual Stability and Change . Springer. p. 24.

ISBN 978-1-137-40096-3 .

Archived from the original on 17 August 2021 . Retrieved 17 August 2021 .

^ Witt, Charlotte E. (2011).

Feminist metaphysics: explorations in the ontology of sex, gender and identity . Springer. p. 48.

ISBN 978-90-481-3782-4 .

OCLC 780208834 .

^ Butler, Judith , "Sex and Gender in Simone de Beauvoir's Second Sex" in Yale French Studies , No. 72 (1986), pp. 35–49.

^ Heinämaa, Sara (1997).

"What Is a Woman? Butler and Beauvoir on the Foundations of the Sexual Difference" .

Hypatia .

12 (1): 20– 39.

doi : 10.1111/j.1527-2001.1997.tb00169.x .

S2CID 143621442 . Retrieved 8 February 2023 .

^ Viveros Vigoya, Mara (2016). Disch, Lisa; Hawkesworth, Mary (eds.).

"Sex/Gender" .

academic.oup.com . pp.

852– 873.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199328581.013.42 .

ISBN 978-0-19-932858-1 . Retrieved 24 December 2023 .

^ Brewington, Kelly (2006).

"Hopkins pioneer in gender identity" .

Baltimore Sun .

Archived from the original on 13 April 2010 . Retrieved 7 April 2023 .

^ Goldie, Professor Department of English Terry; Goldie, Terry (2014).

The Man Who Invented Gender: Engaging the Ideas of John Money . UBC Press.

ISBN 978-0-7748-2794-2 .

^ Money, J. (1994). "The concept of gender identity disorder in childhood and adolescence after 39 years".

Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy .

20 (3): 163– 177.

doi : 10.1080/00926239408403428 .

ISSN 0092-623X .

PMID 7996589 .

^ a b Drescher, Jack (31 March 2010).

"Transsexualism, Gender Identity Disorder and the DSM" .

Journal of Gay & Lesbian Mental Health .

14 (2): 109– 122.

doi : 10.1080/19359701003589637 .

ISSN 1935-9705 .

^ Money, John ; Hampson, Joan G; Hampson, John (October 1955). "An Examination of Some Basic Sexual Concepts: The Evidence of Human Hermaphroditism".

Bull. Johns Hopkins Hosp .

97 (4): 301– 19.

PMID 13260820 .

By the term, gender role, we mean all those things that a person says or does to disclose himself or herself as having the status of boy or man, girl or woman, respectively. It includes, but is not restricted to sexuality in the sense of eroticism. Gender role is appraised in relation to the following: general mannerisms, deportment and demeanor, play preferences and recreational interests; spontaneous topics of talk in unprompted conversation and casual comment; content of dreams, daydreams, and fantasies; replies to oblique inquiries and projective tests; evidence of erotic practices and, finally, the person's own replies to direct inquiry.

^ " gender , n." Oxford English Dictionary Online . Oxford English Dictionary. p. Sense 3(b).

Archived from the original on 21 July 2017 . Retrieved 5 January 2017 .

^ Usage note: Gender , Archived 21 March 2006 at the Wayback Machine The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language , Fourth Edition, (2000).

^ Hines, Melissa; Constantinescu, Mihaela; Spencer, Debra (26 February 2015).

"Early androgen exposure and human gender development" .

Biology of Sex Differences .

6 3.

doi : 10.1186/s13293-015-0022-1 .

ISSN 2042-6410 .

PMC 4350266 .

PMID 25745554 .

^ Hines, Melissa (6 February 2017).

"Prenatal endocrine influences on sexual orientation and on sexually differentiated childhood behavior" .

Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology .

32 (2): 170– 182.

doi : 10.1016/j.yfrne.2011.02.006 .

ISSN 0091-3022 .

PMC 3296090 .

PMID 21333673 .

^ Polderman, Tinca J. C.; Kreukels, Baudewijntje P. C.; Irwig, Michael S.; Beach, Lauren; Chan, Yee-Ming; Derks, Eske M.; Esteva, Isabel; Ehrenfeld, Jesse; Heijer, Martin Den; Posthuma, Danielle; Raynor, Lewis; Tishelman, Amy; Davis, Lea K. (March 2018). "The Biological Contributions to Gender Identity and Gender Diversity: Bringing Data to the Table".

Behavior Genetics .

48 (2): 95– 108.

doi : 10.1007/s10519-018-9889-z .

hdl : 1871.1/acbbef10-1339-495d-8cc6-0d3f02742596 .

ISSN 1573-3297 .

PMID 29460079 .

^ Ristori, Jiska; Cocchetti, Carlotta; Romani, Alessia; Mazzoli, Francesca; Vignozzi, Linda; Maggi, Mario; Fisher, Alessandra Daphne (January 2020).

"Brain Sex Differences Related to Gender Identity Development: Genes or Hormones?" .

International Journal of Molecular Sciences .

21 (6): 2123.

doi : 10.3390/ijms21062123 .

ISSN 1422-0067 .

PMC 7139786 .

PMID 32204531 .

^ Ettner, Randi (2020). "Etiology of Gender Dysphoria".

Gender Confirmation Surgery . Springer International Publishing. pp.

21– 28.

ISBN 978-3-030-29092-4 . Retrieved 9 December 2024 .

^ Fisher, Alessandra D.; Ristori, Jiska; Morelli, Girolamo; Maggi, Mario (15 May 2018). "The molecular mechanisms of sexual orientation and gender identity".

Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology .

467 : 3– 13.

doi : 10.1016/j.mce.2017.08.008 .

PMID 28847741 .

^ Beattie-Moss, Melissa (8 June 2005).

"Are gender differences predetermined?" .

Penn State University . Archived from the original on 13 January 2006 . Retrieved 30 August 2010 .

^ Ryan, Michael J. (2019).

A Taste for the Beautiful: The Evolution of Attraction . Princeton University Press. p. 9.

ISBN 978-0-691-19139-3 .

Archived from the original on 17 February 2022 . Retrieved 28 July 2021 .

^ Ketterson, Ellen D.

(2005).

"Evolution's Rainbow: Diversity, Gender, and Sexuality in Nature and People" .

BioScience .

55 (2): 178.

doi : 10.1641/0006-3568(2005)055[0178:dahg]2.0.co;2 .

ISSN 0006-3568 .

^ a b Poiani 2010 , p. 2.

^ Poiani, Aldo (2010).

Animal homosexuality: a biosocial perspective . A. F. Dixson. New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 2.

ISBN 978-0-511-78958-8 .

OCLC 665835558 .

^ Poiani 2010 , p. 36.

^ Balthazart, Jacques (2012).

The Biology of Homosexuality . Oxford University Press, US. p. 5.

ISBN 978-0-19-983882-0 .

Archived from the original on 17 February 2022 . Retrieved 18 October 2021 .

^ Balthazart 2012 .

^ Hird, Myra J. (2006).

"Animal Transex" .

Australian Feminist Studies .

21 (49): 35– 50.

doi : 10.1080/08164640500470636 .

ISSN 0816-4649 .

S2CID 214614711 .

Archived from the original on 8 September 2021 . Retrieved 8 September 2021 .

^ Poiani 2010 , p. 141,164.

^ Poiani 2010 , p. 20,105,110.

^ Einstein, Gillian, ed. (2007).

Sex and the brain . Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. p. 34.

ISBN 978-0-262-27224-7 .

OCLC 181029707 .

While the exact forms of play that characterize prepubertal male humans and prepubertal male rhesus may not be identical, both of these primates show a clear division of preadolescent activities into gender roles.

^ Goy, Robert W.; Uno, Hideo; Sholl, Samuel A. (14 April 2020), "Psychological and Anatomical Consequences of Prenatal Exposure to Androgens in Female Rhesus*" , Toxicity of Hormones in Perinatal Life , CRC Press, pp.

127– 142, doi : 10.1201/9780429283116-9 , ISBN 978-0429283116 , S2CID 81167171 , archived from the original on 17 February 2022 , retrieved 8 September 2021 ^ Neves, J.; Costa, I.; Oliveira, J.; Silva, B.; Maia, J. (25 May 2025).

"Can Gender Nouns Influence the Stereotypes of Animals?" .

Animals .

13 (16): 2604.

doi : 10.3390/ani13162604 .

PMC 10451744 .

PMID 37627395 .

^ Anne Fausto-Sterling (1992) Myths of Gender: Biological Theories about Men and Women . New York: Basic Books. p. 8 ISBN 0-465-04792-0 .

^ de Beauvoir, Simone (1949) The Second Sex .

^ Fausto-Sterling (2000) Chapter 3 "Of Gender and Genitals", pp. 44–77 ^ Chafetz, J.S. (1974).

Masculine/Feminine or Human? An Overview of the Sociology of Sex Roles . Itasca, Illinois: F.E. Peacock.

^ Chafetz, J.S. (1978).

Masculine/Feminine or Human? An Overview of the Sociology of Sex Roles . Itasca, Illinois: F.E. Peacock.

ISBN 978-0-87581-231-1 .

OCLC 4348310 .

^ Dworkin, Andrea (1995). "My Life as a Writer", pp. 33–34 in Dworkin, Andrea Life and Death: Unapologetic Writings on the Continuing War Against Women . New York: Free Press.

ISBN 0-7432-3626-2 ^ Hawkesworth, Mary (2005). "Engendering political science: An immodest proposal".

Politics & Gender .

1 (1): 141– 156.

doi : 10.1017/s1743923x0523101x .

S2CID 146467636 .

^ "Gender Studies" . Whitman College. Archived from the original on 12 December 2012 . Retrieved 2 May 2012 .

^ "About – Center for the Study of Gender and Sexuality (CSGS)" .

The University of Chicago .

Archived from the original on 14 August 2019 . Retrieved 2 May 2012 .

^ "Department of Gender Studies" .

Indiana University (IU Bloomington).

Archived from the original on 10 September 2017 . Retrieved 2 May 2012 .

^ Healey, J.F. (2003).

Race, Ethnicity, Gender and Class: the Sociology of Group Conflict and Change , Pine Forge Press ISBN 1-4129-1521-X ^ Garrett, Stephanie (1992).

Gender Archived 11 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine , Routledge, p. vii ISBN 0-422-60570-0 .

^ Butler (1990) p. 9.

^ a b Hurst, C. (2007) Social Inequality: Forms, Causes, and Consequences . 6th ed. pp. 131, 139–142 ^ Schwalbe, M. (2005). The Sociologically Examined Life: Pieces of the Conversation Third Edition. pp. 22–23 ISBN 0-07-282579-0 ^ Smith, N. and Stanley, E. (2011). Captive Genders. 1st ed. Edinburgh: AK Press.

^ Center for American Progress, (2016). Unjust: How The Broken Criminal Justice System Fails LGBT People. Washington.

^ Lydon et al., "Coming Out of Concrete Closets: A Report on Black & Pink's National LGBTQ Prisoner Survey." ^ Karen, Beckwith (2005). "A Common Language of Gender?".

Politics & Gender .

1 (1): 132.

doi : 10.1017/s1743923x05211017 .

S2CID 146644541 .

^ White, Linda (1964).

Women, Politics, and Public Policy: The Political Struggles of Canadian Women, 2nd ed . Oxford Press. pp.

6– 7.

^ White, Linda (1964).

Women, Politics, and Public Policy: The Political Struggles of Canadian Women, 2nd ed . Oxford Press. pp.

11– 12.

^ Mikkola, Mari (12 May 2008).

"Feminist Perspectives on Sex and Gender." Archived 25 January 2020 at the Wayback Machine Stanford University.

^ a b c Butler (1990) ^ Snow, D.A. and Oliver, P.E. (1995). "Social Movements and Collective Behavior: Social Psychological Dimensions and Considerations", pp. 571–600 in Karen Cook, Gary A. Fine, and James S.House (eds.) Sociological Perspectives on Social Psychology . Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

^ Taifel, H. & Turner, J.C. (1986). "The social identity of intergroup relations", pp. 7–24 in S. Worchel & W.G. Austin (eds.) The psychology of intergroup relations . Chicago: Nelson-Hall.

ISBN 0-8185-0278-9 .

^ Terry, D.J.; Hogg, M.A. (1996). "Group norms and the attitude-behavior relationship: A role for group identification".

Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin .

22 (8): 776– 793.

doi : 10.1177/0146167296228002 .

S2CID 145426706 .

^ Pathak, Sunita, and Pathak, Surendra "Gender and the MDGs with Reference to Women as Human" Archived 25 January 2020 at the Wayback Machine . Academia.edu.

^ Galdas, P. M.; Johnson, J. L.; Percy, M.E.; Ratner, P.A. (2010).

"Help seeking for cardiac symptoms: Beyond the masculine–feminine binary" .

Social Science & Medicine .

71 (1): 18– 24.

doi : 10.1016/j.socscimed.2010.03.006 .

PMC 5142841 .

PMID 20398989 .

^ a b Warnecke, T. (2013). "Entrepreneurship and Gender: An Institutional Perspective".

Journal of Economic Issues .

47 (2): 455– 464.

doi : 10.2753/JEI0021-3624470219 .

S2CID 153502466 .

^ Spade, J., Valentine, C. (2011).

The kaleidoscope of gender: prisms, patterns, and possibilities . Pine Forge Press. 3rd edition ^ Tong, Rosemarie (2009).

Feminist thought: a more comprehensive introduction / Rosemarie Tong. Boulder, Colo.: Westview Press ISBN 0-8133-4375-5 .

^ Vigo, Julian.

'The Body in Gender Discourse: The Fragmentary Space of the Feminine.' La femme et l'écriture . Meknès, Maroc, 1996.

^ Bornstein, Kate (1995).

Gender Outlaw – On Men, Women and the rest of us , Vintage, ISBN 0-679-75701-5 pp. 51–52 ^ "What Is Fluid?" .

WebMD . 28 June 2021 . Retrieved 23 June 2022 .

Reviewed by Dan Brennan ^ Zheng, Lily (20 November 2020).

"Transgender, Gender-Fluid, Nonbinary, and Gender-Nonconforming Employees Deserve Better Policies" .

Harvard Business Review .

ISSN 0017-8012 . Retrieved 23 June 2022 .

^ "Gender" .

World Health Organization . Retrieved 8 February 2023 .

^ a b Birke, Lynda (2001). "Chapter 24, In Pursuit of Difference." The Gender and Science Reader . New York: Routledge, pp. 309–322.

^ Ehrensaft, Diane (25 May 2017).

"Gender nonconforming youth: current perspectives" .

Adolescent Health, Medicine and Therapeutics .

8 : 57– 67.

doi : 10.2147/ahmt.s110859 .

ISSN 1179-318X .

PMC 5448699 .

PMID 28579848 .

^ Priess, Heather A.; Lindberg, Sara M.; Hyde, Janet Shibley (2009).

"Adolescent Gender-Role Identity and Mental Health: Gender Intensification Revisited" .

Child Development .

80 (5): 1531– 1544.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8624.2009.01349.x .

JSTOR 25592088 .

PMC 4244905 .

PMID 19765016 .

^ a b Ridgeway, Cecilia L.

; Correll, Shelley J.

(2004). "Unpacking the Gender System: A Theoretical Perspective on Gender Beliefs and Social Relations".

Gender .

18 (4): 510– 531.

doi : 10.1177/0891243204265269 .

JSTOR 4149448 .

S2CID 8797797 .

^ "David Reimer, subject of 'sex reassignment,' dead at 38" . Archived from the original on 7 August 2018 . Retrieved 11 November 2020 .

^ Colapinto J (2001).

As Nature Made Him: The Boy Who Was Raised as a Girl .

Harper Perennial .

ISBN 0-06-092959-6 .

Revised in 2006 [ page needed ] ^ Intersex Society of North America | A world free of shame, secrecy, and unwanted genital surgery ^ a b Meyer-Bahlburg, Heino F. L. (1 August 2005).

"Gender Identity Outcome in Female-Raised 46,XY Persons with Penile Agenesis, Cloacal Exstrophy of the Bladder, or Penile Ablation" .

Archives of Sexual Behavior .

34 (4): 423– 438.

doi : 10.1007/s10508-005-4342-9 .

ISSN 1573-2800 .

PMID 16010465 .

S2CID 34971769 .

^ a b Bailey JM, Vasey PL, Diamond LM, Breedlove SM, Vilain E, Epprecht M (September 2016).

"Sexual Orientation, Controversy, and Science" .

Psychological Science in the Public Interest .

17 (2): 45– 101.

doi : 10.1177/1529100616637616 .

PMID 27113562 .

S2CID 42281410 .

^ "American Academy of Pediatrics, Education, LGBT Health and Wellness" .

www.aap.org . Archived from the original on 4 August 2017.

^ "American Academy of Pediatrics Webinar Series – What is Gender?" (PDF) .

American Academy of Pediatrics . 11 September 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 August 2018 . Retrieved 17 February 2022 .

^ Dr. Sherer (15 September 2015).

"SOLGBTHW Webinar – What is Gender Terminology and Definitions" .

American Academy of Pediatrics . Archived from the original on 6 December 2019.

^ Laurie, Timothy (2014).

"The Ethics of Nobody I Know: Gender and the Politics of Description" .

Qualitative Research Journal .

14 (1): 64– 78.

doi : 10.1108/qrj-03-2014-0011 .

hdl : 10453/44221 .

Archived from the original on 2 November 2021 . Retrieved 20 June 2015 .

^ Maria Llorente, Culture, Heritage, and Diversity in Older Adult Mental Health Care (2018, ISBN 1615372059 ), p. 184: "Historically, in many, if not most, cultures, gender traditionally has been conceived as binary, but the modern and preferred understanding is that gender actually occurs on a spectrum." ^ Marie L. Miville, Angela D. Ferguson, Handbook of Race-Ethnicity and Gender in Psychology (2014, ISBN 1461488605 ), p. 47: "In Western societies, as in many regions of the world, gender has been historically conceptualized and constructed as a binary (being either "male" or "female") largely determined by both biological (genetic and hormonal) and social cognitive (social, cultural reinforcement, and modeling of gendered behaviour)." ^ "Hinaleimoana Wong-Kalu – TedxMaui" . 27 May 2014.

Archived from the original on 4 May 2020 . Retrieved 17 February 2022 .

^ "Intersections: Transgender, Queens, Mahu, Whatever': An Oral History from Hawai'i" .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2020 . Retrieved 17 February 2022 .

^ a b Treuer, Anton (2011).

"Women and Gender" .

The Assassination of Hole in the Day . Borealis Books.

ISBN 978-0873518017 .

Archived from the original on 27 February 2021 . Retrieved 17 October 2016 .

^ Gilbert Herdt, ed. (1996).

Third Sex Third Gender: Beyond Sexual Dimorphism in Culture and History . Zone Books.

ISBN 978-0-942299-82-3 .

OCLC 35293440 .

^ Kehoe, Alice B.

(2002).

"Appropriate Terms" .

SAA Bulletin . Society for American Archaeology 16(2), UC-Santa Barbara .

ISSN 0741-5672 .

Archived from the original on 5 November 2004 . Retrieved 1 May 2019 .

At the conferences that produced the book, Two-Spirited People , I heard several First Nations people describe themselves as very much unitary, neither "male" nor "female," much less a pair in one body. Nor did they report an assumption of duality within one body as a common concept within reservation communities; rather, people confided dismay at the Western proclivity for dichotomies. Outside Indo-European-speaking societies, "gender" would not be relevant to the social personae glosses "men" and "women," and "third gender" likely would be meaningless. The unsavory word " berdache " certainly ought to be ditched (Jacobs et al. 1997:3–5), but the urban American neologism "two-spirit" can be misleading.

^ Nanda, Serena (1998).

Neither Man Nor Woman: The Hijras of India . Wadsworth Publishing.

ISBN 0-534-50903-7 ^ Reddy, Gayatri (2005).

With Respect to Sex: Negotiating Hijra Identity in South India.

(Worlds of Desire: The Chicago Series on Sexuality, Gender, and Culture), University of Chicago Press (2005).

ISBN 0-226-70756-3 ^ "A lifestyle distinct: the Muxe of Mexico," Archived 24 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine New York Times , 6 December 2008.

^ Graham, Sharyn (April–June 2001) Sulawesi's Fifth Gender Archived 18 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine .

Inside Indonesia .

^ McGee, R. Jon and Richard L. Warms (2011). Anthropological Theory: An Introductory History. New York, McGraw Hill.

^ Jack Harrison; Jaime Grant; Jody L. Herman (2011–2012).

"A Gender Not Listed Here: Genderqueers, Gender Rebels, and Otherwise in the National Transgender Discrimination Survey" (PDF) .

LGBTQ Policy Journal .

2 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 July 2012 . Retrieved 20 December 2017 .

^ Stets, Jan E.; Kushida, Melanie; Fares, Phoenicia; Whitham, Monica M. (26 August 2023).

"Exploring Current Gender Meanings: Creating a New Gender Identity Scale" .

Advancing Identity Theory, Measurement, and Research . Frontiers in Sociology and Social Research. Vol. 10.

Springer Publishing . pp.

79– 107.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-32986-9_5 .

ISBN 978-3-031-32985-2 .

^ Palan, K. (2001).

"Gender Identity in Consumer Research: A Literature Review and Research Agenda" (PDF) .

Academy of Marketing Science Review .

10 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 September 2012.

^ Twenge, Jean M. (1997). "Changes in masculine and feminine traits over time: A meta-analysis".

Sex Roles .

36 ( 5– 6): 305– 325.

doi : 10.1007/BF02766650 .

S2CID 144858334 .

^ "Gender and health" .

World Health Organization . Retrieved 7 April 2023 .

^ Oakley, Ann (1972).

Sex, Gender and Society . London: Temple Smith. p. 16 ISBN 0-85117-020-X .

^ Birke, Lynda (2001). "In Pursuit of Difference: Scientific Studies of Women and Men," Muriel Lederman and Ingrid Bartsch eds., The Gender and Science Reader , New York: Routledge. p. 320.

^ Butler (1990) p. 7.

^ Butler (1990) p. 10.

^ Butler (1993) p. xi.

^ Butler (1993) pp. 2–3.

^ Nicholson, Linda (1994). " "Interpreting Gender". Signs".

Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

20 (1): 79– 105.

doi : 10.1086/494955 .

JSTOR 3174928 .

S2CID 225085688 .

^ Helen King. 2013.

The One-Sex Body on Trial: The Classical and Early Modern Evidence.

Farnham: Ashgate. 978-1-4094-6335-1 ^ Joan Cadden. 1993.

Meanings of Sex Difference in the Middle Ages: Medicine, Science, and Culture.

Cambridge University Press.

^ Michael Stolberg. 2003. "A Woman Down to her Bones. The Anatomy of Sexual Difference in the Sixteenth and Early Seventeenth Centuries." Isis, 94: 274-299.

^ Fausto-Sterling (2000) p. 45.

^ Fausto-Sterling (2000) p. 46.

^ a b Fausto-Sterling (2000) ^ Fausto-Sterling (2000) pp. 58–59.

^ Landecker, Hannah; Panofsky, Aaron (30 July 2013).

"From Social Structure to Gene Regulation, and Back: A Critical Introduction to Environmental Epigenetics for Sociology" .

Annual Review of Sociology .

39 (1): 333– 357.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-soc-071312-145707 .

ISSN 0360-0572 .

^ England, Paula (May 1998).

"The Impact of Feminist Thought on Sociology" (PDF) .

Contemporary Sociology .

28 (3): 263– 268.

doi : 10.2307/2654137 .

JSTOR 2654137 .

Archived from the original on 17 February 2022 . Retrieved 14 February 2021 .

^ Little, William (6 November 2014). "Chapter 12. Gender, Sex, and Sexuality".

Introduction to Sociology .

^ a b Mayer, Lawrence S.; McHugh, Paul R.

(2016).

"Sexuality and Gender: Findings from the Biological, Psychological, and Social Sciences" .

The New Atlantis (50): 10– 143.

ISSN 1543-1215 .

JSTOR 43893424 .

^ Gender Articulated . Routledge. 1995.

ISBN 978-0-415-91399-7 .

Archived from the original on 11 April 2021 . Retrieved 21 September 2008 .

^ Connell, R. (1987) Gender & Power . Polity Press, Cambridge.

ISBN 0-8047-1430-4 .

^ Ogli, Burxonov Baxodirjon Botirali (2020).

"Gender Can Vary Across Related Languages" .

JournalNX (in Ukrainian).

6 (11): 416– 418.

^ Satz, Debra (2004).

"Feminist Perspectives on Reproduction and the Family" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 21 July 2020 . Retrieved 6 February 2015 .

^ Lorber, J & Farrell, S (eds.) (1990) The Social Construction of Gender . Sage, Newbury Park.

ISBN 0-8039-3956-6 ^ Wearing, B (1996).

Gender: The Pain and Pleasure of Difference . Longman, Melbourne ISBN 0-582-86903-X .

^ Acker, J. (1990).

"Hierarchies, Jobs, Bodies: A Theory of Gendered Organizations" (PDF) .

Gender & Society .

4 (2): 139– 158.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.693.1964 .

doi : 10.1177/089124390004002002 .

JSTOR 189609 .

S2CID 40897237 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 February 2020 . Retrieved 28 August 2015 .

^ Deji, Olanike F. (2012) Gender Concepts and Theories . Gender and Rural Development. Berlin: Lit. N.

^ a b Glover, D and Kaplan, C (2000) Genders Archived 17 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine , Routledge, New York ISBN 0-415-44243-5 , p. xxi.

^ Mikkola, Mari (12 May 2008).

"Feminist Perspectives on Sex and Gender" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2016 ed.). Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 25 January 2020 . Retrieved 21 November 2016 .

^ Lloyd, M. (1999). "Performativity, Parody, Politics".

Theory, Culture & Society .

16 (2): 195– 213.

doi : 10.1177/02632769922050476 .

S2CID 145251297 .

^ Ingraham, Chrys (1994). "The Heterosexual Imaginary: Feminist Sociology and Theories of Gender".

Sociological Theory .

12 (2): 203– 219.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.470.737 .

doi : 10.2307/201865 .

JSTOR 201865 .

^ Christian, Lisa M.; Cole, Steve W.; McDade, Thomas; Pachankis, John E.; Morgan, Ethan; Strahm, Anna M.; Kamp Dush, Claire M. (1 October 2021).

"A biopsychosocial framework for understanding sexual and gender minority health: A call for action" .

Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews .

129 : 107– 116.

doi : 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.06.004 .

ISSN 0149-7634 .

PMC 8429206 .

PMID 34097981 .

^ Ma. del Pilar Sánchez López; Rosa M. Limiñana-Gras, eds. (2017).

The psychology of gender and health: conceptual and applied global concerns . London: Academic Press is an imprint of Elsevier.

ISBN 978-0-12-803866-6 .

OCLC 967324413 .

^ Iantaffi, Alex (2021).

Gender trauma: healing cultural, social, and historical gendered trauma . Meg-John Barker. London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-78775-107-1 .

OCLC 1202930548 .

^ Yudkin, M. (1978). "Transsexualism and women: A critical perspective".

Feminist Studies .

4 (3): 97– 106.

doi : 10.2307/3177542 .

hdl : 2027/spo.0499697.0004.310 .

JSTOR 3177542 .

^ a b c Berger, Miriam (15 December 2019).

"A Guide to How Gender-Neutral Language is Developing Around the World" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 8 January 2020 . Retrieved 25 April 2021 .

^ "Maid" .

wiktionary.org . Retrieved 14 December 2023 .

^ Valentine, J. Randolph, 2001, p. 114.

^ a b Corbett, Greville G., ed. (2014).

The expression of gender . Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton. p. 124.

ISBN 978-3-11-030733-7 .

OCLC 913049820 .

Archived from the original on 17 February 2022 . Retrieved 2 September 2021 .

^ Corbett, Greville G., ed. (2014).

The expression of gender . Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton. p. 110.

ISBN 978-3-11-030733-7 .

OCLC 913049820 .

Archived from the original on 17 February 2022 . Retrieved 2 September 2021 .

^ Corbett, Greville G., ed. (2014).

The expression of gender . Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton. p. 115.

ISBN 978-3-11-030733-7 .

OCLC 913049820 .

Archived from the original on 17 February 2022 . Retrieved 2 September 2021 .

^ Corbett, Greville G., ed. (2014).

The expression of gender . Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton.

ISBN 978-3-11-030733-7 .

OCLC 913049820 .

^ Lindqvist, Anna; Renström, Emma Aurora; Sendén, Marie Gustafsson (18 October 2019).

"Reducing a Male Bias in Language? Establishing the Efficiency of Three Different Gender-Fair Language Strategies" .

Sex Roles .

81 ( 1– 2): 109– 117.

doi : 10.1007/s11199-018-0974-9 .

S2CID 255011887 .

^ Guichard, Michaël (31 May 2023).

"Emesal: The Language of Women and Lamenters in Cuneiform Literature in the Early Second Millennium BC in Mesopotamia" .

hypotheses.org . Retrieved 4 November 2023 .

^ Dixon, R. M. W. (1980). "Speech and song styles: Avoidance styles".

The languages of Australia . Vol. Section 3.3. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

58– 59.

^ "Irish Sign Language" .

www.irishdeafsociety.ie . Retrieved 28 July 2020 .

^ Nimmo, Cayla (14 July 2023).

"Navajo Nation's LGBTQ Pride Event Celebrates A Return To The Culture's History" .

NPR . Retrieved 3 November 2023 .

^ "Free & Equal Campaign Fact Sheet: Intersex" (PDF) . United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights . 2015.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 28 March 2016 .

^ Migiro, Katy (5 December 2014).

"Kenya takes step toward recognizing intersex people in landmark ruling" .

Reuters . Archived from the original on 6 December 2014 . Retrieved 25 April 2021 .

^ Promoting and Protecting Human Rights in relation to Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity and Sex Characteristics .

Asia Pacific Forum of National Human Rights Institutions . 2016.

ISBN 978-0-9942513-7-4 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2017 . Retrieved 12 November 2016 .

^ Berger, Miriam (15 December 2019).

"A Guide to How Gender-Neutral Language is Developing Around the World" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 8 January 2020 . Retrieved 25 April 2021 .

^ Schiebinger, Londa (2001). "Has Feminism Changed Science?".

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

25 (4) (2nd ed.). Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press: 1171– 5.

doi : 10.1086/495540 .

ISBN 978-0-674-00544-0 .

PMID 17089478 .

S2CID 225088475 .

^ a b c Sheffield, Suzanne Le-May (2006).

Women and Science: Social Impact and Interaction . New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. pp.

129– 134.

ISBN 978-0-8135-3737-5 .

^ Eisenhart, Margaret A.; Finkel, Elizabeth (1998).

"Women's Science: Learning and Succeeding from the Margins" .

Science Education .

84 (6). Chicago: University of Chicago Press: 34–36 .

Bibcode : 2000SciEd..84..793A .

doi : 10.1002/1098-237X(200011)84:6<793::AID-SCE6>3.0.CO;2-K .

ISBN 978-0-226-19544-5 .

^ "Sustainable Development Goal 5: Gender equality" .

UN Women .

Archived from the original on 26 November 2020 . Retrieved 23 September 2020 .

^ "New Civilizations in the Eastern and Western Hemispheres, 2000-250 BCE" (PDF) . 11. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 December 2023 . Retrieved 23 December 2023 .

^ Tuchman, Lauren (18 January 2012).

"The Shekhinah or The Divine Presence or Divine Feminine in Judaism" .

State of Formation .

Archived from the original on 28 April 2021 . Retrieved 25 April 2021 .

^ "Gender Diversity in Jewish Tradition | Reform Judaism" .

reformjudaism.org . Retrieved 23 December 2023 .

^ "The Eight Genders in the Talmud" .

My Jewish Learning . Retrieved 23 December 2023 .

^ Tompkins, Stephan (2 June 2015).

"Why is God not female?" .

BBC . Retrieved 4 November 2023 .

^ "Arhanarishvara: Hindu deity" .

Britannica . Archived from the original on 15 August 2018 . Retrieved 25 April 2021 .

^ Vohra, Ashok (8 March 2005), "The Male-Female Hologram," Times of India , p. 9.

^ a b Gender and Poverty Reduction Archived 29 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine . UNPD.org. 29 October 2014 ^ Peterson, Janice (1987). "The Feminization of Poverty".

Journal of Economic Issues .

21 (1): 329– 337.

doi : 10.1080/00213624.1987.11504613 .

JSTOR 4225831 .

^ Stoiljkovic, Nena.

Smart finance Archived 17 February 2022 at the Wayback Machine . D+C Development and Cooperation ^ Christopher, Karen, et al.

The Gender Gap in Poverty in Modern Nations: Single Motherhood, The Market, and the State . University of California Press.

^ a b Cagatay, Nilufer . "Trade, Gender and Poverty." pp. 4–8. United Nations.

^ Chant, Sylvia (2008). "The 'Feminisation of Poverty' and the 'Feminisation' of Anti-Poverty Programmes: Room for Revision?".

Journal of Development Studies .

44 (2): 165– 197.

doi : 10.1080/00220380701789810 .

S2CID 154939529 .

^ Grant, Jaime M.; Mottet, Lisa A.; Tanis, Justin; Harrison, Jack; Herman, Jody L.; Keisling, Mara (2011).

"Injustice at Every Turn: A Report of the National Transgender Discrimination Survey" . National Center for Transgender Equality and National Gay and Lesbian Task Force. Archived from the original on 20 November 2018 . Retrieved 20 November 2018 .

^ "Transgender FAQ" .

GLAAD . 8 November 2013.

Archived from the original on 8 May 2019 . Retrieved 12 June 2015 .

^ a b c d Agnew, R. (2012).

"Reflection on "A Revised Strain Theory of Delinquency" " .

Social Forces .

91 : 33– 38.

doi : 10.1093/sf/sos117 .

S2CID 145274165 .

^ a b c Grothoff, G. E.; Kempf-Leonard, K.; Mullins, C. (2014). "Gender and Juvenile Drug Abuse: A General Strain Theory Perspective".

Women & Criminal Justice .

24 : 22– 43.

doi : 10.1080/08974454.2013.842519 .

S2CID 144473355 .

^ a b c Moon, B.; Blurton, D.; McCluskey, J.D. (2007). "General Strain Theory and Delinquency: Focusing on the Influences of Key Strain Characteristics on Delinquency".

Crime & Delinquency .

54 (4): 582– 613.

doi : 10.1177/0011128707301627 .

S2CID 145118032 .

^ Adema, W., Ali, N., Frey, V., Kim, H., Lunati, M., Piacentini, M. and Queisser, M. (2014). Enhancing Women's Economic Empowerment Through Entrepreneurship and Business leadership in OECD Countries. OECD.

^ [1] Archived 2 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine OECD, ILO, IMF and WBG, (2014). Achieving stronger growth by promoting a more genderbalanced economy. Report prepared for the G20 Labour and Employment Ministerial Meeting. Melbourne, Australia: G20 Labour and Employment Ministerial Meeting.

^ Olsson, Lennart et al.

(2014) "Livelihoods and Poverty" Archived 28 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine , pp. 793–832 in Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.

Ed. C.B. Field et al. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.

^ Birkmann, Joern et al. (2014) "Emergent Risks and Key Vulnerabilities" Archived 23 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine , pp. 1039–1099 in Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.

Ed. C.B. Field et al. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.

^ Roehr, Ulrike (2007).

"Gender, Climate Change and Adaptation. Introduction to the Gender Dimensions" Archived 17 May 2015 at the Library of Congress Web Archives. unep.org ^ a b c MacGregor, S. (2010). "A stranger silence still: The need for feminist social research on climate change".

The Sociological Review .

57 (2_suppl): 124– 140.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-954X.2010.01889.x .

S2CID 141663550 .

^ a b c Tuana, N. (2013). "Gendering Climate Knowledge for Justice: Catalyzing a New Research Agenda".

Research, Action and Policy: Addressing the Gendered Impacts of Climate Change . pp.

17– 31.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-007-5518-5_2 .

ISBN 978-94-007-5517-8 .

^ a b Boyd, Emily (2009).

"The Noel Kempff Project in Bolivia: Gender, Power, and Decision-Making in Climate Mitigation" , pp. 101–110 in Climate Change and Gender Justice . Geraldine Terry and Caroline Sweetman (eds.). Warwickshire: Practical Action Publishing, Oxfam GB.

^ Gourdreau, Jenna (26 April 2010).

"What men and women are doing on Facebook" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on 8 April 2016 . Retrieved 12 April 2016 .

^ Tufekci, Zeynep (31 July 2008).

"Gender, social capital and social network(ing) sites: Women bonding, men searching" . American Sociological Association.

Archived from the original on 3 March 2020 . Retrieved 14 April 2016 .

^ a b c Tortajada-Giménez, Iolanda; Araüna-Baró, Núria; Martínez-Martínez, Inmaculada José (1 June 2013).

"Advertising Stereotypes and Gender Representation in Social Networking Sites" .

Comunicar .

21 (41): 177– 186.

doi : 10.3916/C41-2013-17 .

hdl : 10272/7056 .

^ Barker, V (2009). "Older adolescents' motivations for social network site use: The influence of gender, group identity, and collective self-esteem".

Cyberpsychology & Behavior .

12 (2) (2 ed.): 209– 213.

doi : 10.1089/cpb.2008.0228 .

PMID 19250021 .

S2CID 5446136 .

^ a b c de Ridder, Sander; van Bauwel, Sofie (1 January 2015).

"Youth and intimate media cultures: Gender, sexuality, relationships, and desire as storytelling practices in social networking sites" (PDF) .

Communications .

40 (3).

doi : 10.1515/commun-2015-0012 .

hdl : 1854/LU-5889652 .

S2CID 199487985 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 April 2018 . Retrieved 20 April 2018 .

^ a b Herring, Susan ; Kapidzic, Sanja (2015).

Teens, Gender, and Self-Presentation in Social Media (2 ed.). International encyclopedia of social and behavioral sciences.

^ Malin, Sveningsson Elm (1 January 2007).

"Doing and undoing gender in a Swedish Internet community" . Cambridge.

Archived from the original on 17 February 2022 . Retrieved 14 April 2016 .

^ Gauntlett, D (2008).

Media, Gender and Identity: An Introduction . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-134-15502-6 .

Archived from the original on 11 April 2021 . Retrieved 14 April 2016 .

^ Herring, Susan C.

; Kapidzic, Sanja.

"Teens, Gender, and Self-Presentation in Social Media. Sciences" (PDF) . Oxford.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 February 2016 . Retrieved 14 April 2016 .

Bibliography Butler, Judith (1990).

Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. Thinking Gender' . New York & London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-38955-6 .

Butler, Judith (1993).

Bodies That Matter: On the Discursive Limits of "Sex" . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-61015-5 .

Fausto-Sterling, Anne (2000).

Sexing the body: gender politics and the construction of sexuality . New York: Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0-465-07714-4 .

External links Gender at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Resources from Wikiversity GenPORT: Your gateway to gender and science resources Gender in Agriculture Sourcebook v t e Gender and sexual identities Gender identities Genders Man Woman Male Female Androgyne Boi Cisgender Cross-dresser Femboy Gender bender Gender fluidity Gender neutrality Gender variance Masculine of center Non-binary / genderqueer Transgender Akava'ine Trans man Trans woman Fakaleitī Mak nyah Rae-rae Transsexual Third genders and sexes Androgynos Apwint Bakla Binabinaaine Bugis genders Bissu Calabai Calalai Chibados Enaree Eunuch Galli Fa'afafine Fakafifine Femminiello Güevedoce Hijra Kathoey Köçek Koekchuch Lhamana Māhū Mudoko dako Mukhannath Muxe Nádleehi Nullo Palopa Sipiniq Sworn virgin Travesti Tumtum Two-spirit Vakasalewalewa Winkte X-gender Sexual orientation identities Sexual orientations Asexual Bisexual Heterosexual Homosexual Alternative labels Banjee Bi-curious Ex-gay Ex-ex-gay Down-low Fictosexual Gay Gay men Gray asexual Demisexual Aegosexual Heteroflexible Khanith Lesbian women Non-heterosexual Pansexual Polysexual Queer Questioning Same gender loving Takatāpui Social aspects Sociosexuality Antisexuality Asociality Homosociality Heterosociality Other Achillean Allosexuality Analloeroticism Androphilia and gynephilia Aromanticism Attraction to transgender people Kinsey scale Monosexuality Plurisexuality Postgenderism Romantic orientation Sapphism See also Aphobia Acephobia Arophobia Anti-gender movement Discrimination against non-binary people Discrimination against transgender men Discrimination against transgender women Gender assignment Gender modality Gender roles Gender self-identification Healthcare and the LGBTQ community Intersex Legal recognition of non-binary gender Legal status of transgender people Mental health of LGBTQ people Queer heterosexuality Right to personal identity Sex as a biological variable Sex–gender distinction Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures Social construction of gender Split attraction model Suicide among LGBTQ people Transgender archaeology Transgender inequality Transmisogyny Transphobia v t e Gender studies Overview Gender studies Anti-gender movement Postgenderism Identity Gender Cisgender Transgender Non-binary gender (or Genderqueer) Gender variance Gender identity Gender binary Gender expression Gender role Breadwinner model Gender neutrality List of gender identities Gender in language Binnen-I Feminist language reform Feminization of language Gender neutrality in English Genderless languages Language Languages with gendered third-person pronouns Languages with grammatical gender Pronouns Gender paradox Grammatical gender Gender-specific and gender-neutral pronouns Genderless language Gender marking in job titles Language and gender Lavender linguistics Male as norm Preferred gender pronoun Gender inequality General Gender apartheid Feminist In Islam Gender-related violence Gender bias Sexism In conscription Gender bias on Wikipedia Gender bias in medical diagnosis Gender-equality paradox Financial General Gender pay gap Development Gender and development Gender Empowerment Measure Gender Development Index International Center for Research on Women (ICRW) Academia Academics Gender studies academics The NeuroGenderings Network Journals Gender studies journals Women's studies journals Religion Gender and religion Gender in Bible translation God and gender in Hinduism Discrimination Feminism Gender and sexual identities Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Poland Israel Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hjq4t
Cached time: 20250817095941
Cache expiry: 21600
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.386 seconds
Real time usage: 2.684 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14307/1000000
Revision size: 149461/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 514333/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7061/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 29/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 749379/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.544/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21937645/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 3/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2315.405      1 -total
 58.92% 1364.150      1 Template:Reflist
 20.34%  470.944     56 Template:Cite_journal
 14.10%  326.519     47 Template:Cite_book
 11.74%  271.923      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.65%  223.332     38 Template:Cite_web
  6.96%  161.254      1 Template:Transgender_sidebar
  4.97%  115.092      1 Template:Feminist_philosophy_sidebar
  4.31%   99.835      2 Template:Harvcoltxt
  4.15%   96.203      1 Template:Lang Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:38076:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817095941 and revision id 1305848776. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gender&oldid=1305848776 " Categories : Gender Social concepts Social constructionism Sociological theories Feminism LGBTQ Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2017 CS1 Ukrainian-language sources (uk) CS1: long volume value Webarchive template other archives Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use dmy dates from August 2020 Articles containing Neapolitan-language text Articles using infobox templates with no data rows Pages with Zapotec IPA Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 12:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gender 99 languages Add topic

