Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General criticism 2 Historical materialism 3 Historical determinism 4 Suppression of individual rights 5 Economic Toggle Economic subsection 5.1 Labor theory of value 5.2 Distorted or absent price signals 5.3 Reduced incentives 5.4 Inconsistency 5.5 Relevance 6 Social 7 Democracy 8 Epistemological 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Criticism of Marxism 17 languages العربية Български Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 پښتو Português Svenska Tiếng Việt 文言 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about criticism of Marxism, a branch of socialism. For criticism of socialism in general, see Criticism of socialism . For criticism of the actions of communist states, which are sovereign states governed by communist parties, usually Marxist–Leninist or some national variation thereof, see Criticism of communist party rule .

Karl Marx and the Close of His System is a book published in 1896 by the Austrian economist Eugen von Bohm-Bawerk , which represented one of the earliest detailed critiques of Marxism.

Criticism of Marxism has come from various political ideologies , campaigns and academic disciplines . This includes general intellectual criticism about dogmatism , a lack of internal consistency , criticism related to materialism (both philosophical and historical ), arguments that Marxism is a type of historical determinism or that it necessitates a suppression of individual rights , issues with the implementation of communism and economic issues such as the distortion or absence of price signals and reduced incentives .

In addition, critics have raised empirical and epistemological concerns, arguing that Marxism relies on vague or unfalsifiable theories, resists refutation through dialectical reinterpretation , and has failed key predictions about capitalist collapse and socialist revolution.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] General criticism [ edit ] Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e See also: Reformism Some democratic socialists and social democrats reject the idea that societies can achieve socialism only through class conflict and a proletarian revolution . Many anarchists reject the need for a transitory state phase . Some thinkers have rejected the fundamentals of Marxist theory, such as historical materialism and the labor theory of value and have gone on to criticize capitalism and advocate socialism using other arguments.

Some contemporary supporters of Marxism see many aspects of Marxist thought as viable, but contend that the corpus is incomplete or outdated in regard to certain aspects of economic, political or social theory. They may therefore combine Marxist concepts with the ideas of other theorists such as Max Weber —the Frankfurt School provides one example of this approach.

Conservative historian Paul Johnson in his 1988 book Intellectuals wrote that Marx "developed traits characteristic of a certain type of scholar, especially Talmudic ones: a tendency to accumulate immense masses of half-assimilated materials and to plan encyclopaedic works which were never completed; a withering contempt for all non-scholars; and extreme assertiveness and irascibility in dealing with other scholars. Virtually all his work, indeed, has the hallmark of Talmudic study: it is essentially a commentary on, a critique of the work of others in his field." He continues: "The truth is, even the most superficial inquiry into Marx's use of evidence forces one to treat with skepticism everything he wrote which relies on factual data". For example, Johnson stated: "The whole of the key Chapter Eight of Capital is a deliberate and systematic falsification to prove a thesis which an objective examination of the facts showed was untenable".

[ 5 ] [ page needed ] Paul Johnson's criticism of Marx has itself been subject to criticism by Marxian economist Richard D. Wolff . In his 1991 academic paper Wolff comments on the book Intellectuals and Johnson's passage describing Marx as type of scholar that is not in reality productive, drawing similarities to Talmudic studies (Jewish studies of the Talmud). Arguably a racist statement.

[ 6 ] Here Wolff describes Johnson's book:  "Criticism as malicious gossip [...] a right-wing tirade of rage is vented against left-wing social critics, intellectuals in general, Jews, women, and most of the others who compose the usual targets of such mentalities." [ 6 ] Historical materialism [ edit ] Historical materialism remains one of the bases of Marxism .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] It proposes that technological advances in modes of production inevitably lead to changes in the social relations of production.

[ 9 ] This economic " base " of society supports, is reflected by and influences the ideological " superstructure " which encompasses culture, religion, politics, and all other aspects of humanity's social consciousness.

[ 10 ] It thus looks for the causes of developments and changes in human history in economic, technological and, more broadly, material factors as well as the clashes of material interests among tribes, social classes, and nations. Law, politics, the arts, literature, morality and religion are understood by Marx to make up the superstructure as reflections of the economic base of society. Many critics have argued that this is an oversimplification of the nature of society and claim that the influence of ideas, culture and other aspects of what Marx called the superstructure are just as important as the economic base to the course of society, if not more so. However, Marxism does not claim that the economic base of society is the only determining element in society as demonstrated by the following letter written by Friedrich Engels , Marx's long-time contributor: According to the materialist conception of history, the ultimately determining element in history is the production and reproduction of real life. More than this neither Marx nor I ever asserted. Hence if somebody twists this into saying that the economic element is the only determining one he transforms that proposition into a meaningless, abstract, senseless phrase.

[ 11 ] According to critics, this also creates another problem for Marxism. If the superstructure also influences the base then there is no need for Marx's constant assertions that the history of society is one of economic class conflict. This then becomes a classic chicken or the egg argument as to whether the base or the superstructure comes first.

Peter Singer proposes that the way to solve this problem is to understand that Marx saw the economic base as ultimately real. Marx believed that humanity's defining characteristic was its means of production and thus the only way for man to free himself from oppression was for him to take control of the means of production. According to Marx, this is the goal of history and the elements of the superstructure act as tools of history.

[ 12 ] Marx held that the relationship between material base and ideological superstructure was a determination relation and not a causal relation.

[ 13 ] However, some critics of Marx have insisted that Marx claimed the superstructure was an effect caused by the base. For instance, Anarcho-capitalist Murray Rothbard criticized historical materialism by arguing that Marx claimed the "base" of society (its technology and social relations) determined its "consciousness" in the superstructure.

[ 14 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Historical determinism [ edit ] Marx's theory of history has been considered a variant of historical determinism [ 15 ] linked to his reliance on dialectical materialism as an endogenous mechanism for social change.

[ 16 ] Marx wrote: At a certain stage of development, the material productive forces of society come into conflict with the existing relations of production or – this merely expresses the same thing in legal terms – with the property relations within the framework of which they have operated hitherto. From forms of development of the productive forces these relations turn into their fetters. Then begins an era of social revolution. The changes in the economic foundation lead sooner or later to the transformation of the whole immense superstructure.

[ 17 ] The concept of the dialectic first emerged from the dialogues of the ancient Greek philosophers , but it was revived by Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel in the early 19th century as a conceptual framework for describing the often-opposing forces of historical evolution. Historical determinism has also been associated with scholars like Arnold Toynbee and Oswald Spengler , but in recent times this conceptual approach has fallen into disuse.

[ 18 ] Terry Eagleton writes that Marx's writings "should not be taken to mean that everything that has ever happened is a matter of class struggle. It means, rather, that class struggle is most fundamental to human history".

[ 19 ] Academic Peter Stillman believes Marx's status as a determinist is a "myth".

[ 20 ] Friedrich Engels Friedrich Engels himself cautioned against interpreting Marxism as strictly deterministic, emphasizing that while economic factors are foundational, they are not the sole forces shaping history.

[ 21 ] On another occasion, Engels remarked that "younger people sometimes lay more stress on the economic side than is due to it".

[ 22 ] In an effort to reassert this approach to an understanding of the forces of history, Prabhat Ranjan Sarkar criticised what he considered the narrow conceptual basis of Marx's ideas on historical evolution.

[ 23 ] In the 1978 book The Downfall of Capitalism and Communism , Ravi Batra pointed out crucial differences in the historical determinist approaches of Sarkar and Marx: Sarkar's main concern with the human element is what imparts universality to his thesis. Thus while social evolution according to Marx is governed chiefly by economic conditions, to Sarkar this dynamic is propelled by forces varying with time and space: sometimes physical prowess and high-spiritedness, sometimes intellect applied to dogmas and sometimes intellect applied to the accumulation of capital (p. 38). [...] The main line of defence of the Sarkarian hypothesis is that unlike the dogmas now in disrepute, it does not emphasise one particular point to the exclusion of all others: it is based on the sum total of human experience – the totality of human nature. Whenever a single factor, however important and fundamental, is called upon to illuminate the entire past and by implication the future, it simply invites disbelief, and after closer inspection, rejection. Marx committed that folly, and to some extent so did Toynbee. They both offered an easy prey to the critics, and the result is that today historical determinism is regarded by most scholars as an idea so bankrupt that it can never be solvent again.

[ 24 ] Suppression of individual rights [ edit ] Various thinkers have argued that a communist state would by its very nature erode the rights of its citizens due to the postulated violent revolution and dictatorship of proletariat , its collectivist nature, reliance on "the masses" rather than individuals, historical materialism and centrally planned economy .

[ citation needed ] These points have also been debated by various thinkers, who argue that we currently exist in a Dictatorship of the Bourgeoisie [ 25 ] and that Marxism is not deterministic.

[ 26 ] The American neoclassical economist Milton Friedman argued that the absence of a free market economy under socialism would inevitably lead to an authoritarian political regime. Friedman's view was shared by Friedrich Hayek , who also believed that capitalism is a precondition for freedom to flourish in a nation state.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] David Harvey has responded to such claims by suggesting that socialism enables individual freedom, stating that "the achievement of individual liberties and freedoms is, I argued, a central aim of such emancipatory projects. But that achievement requires collectively building a society where each one of us has adequate life chances and life possibilities to realize each one of our own potentialities." [ 29 ] In contrast, Jonathan Chait writes that "Marxist governments trample on individual rights because Marxist theory does not care about individual rights. Marxism is a theory of class justice... Unlike liberalism, which sees rights as a positive-sum good that can expand or contract for society as a whole, Marxists (and other left-wing critics of liberalism) think of political rights as a zero-sum conflict. Either they are exercised on behalf of oppression or against it." [ 30 ] Anarchists have also argued that centralized communism would inevitably create coercion and state domination.

Mikhail Bakunin believed Marxist regimes would lead to the "despotic control of the populace by a new and not at all numerous aristocracy".

[ 31 ] Even if this new aristocracy were to have originated from among the ranks of the proletariat , Bakunin argued that their new-found power would fundamentally change their view of society and thus lead them to "look down at the plain working masses".

[ 31 ] Economic [ edit ] Marxian economics have been criticized for a number of reasons. Some critics point to the Marxian analysis of capitalism while others argue that the economic system proposed by Marxism is unworkable.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] There are also doubts that the rate of profit in capitalism would tend to fall as Marx predicted. In 1961, Marxian economist Nobuo Okishio devised a theorem ( Okishio's theorem ) showing that if capitalists pursue cost-cutting techniques and if the real wage does not rise, the rate of profit must rise.

[ 36 ] Labor theory of value [ edit ] Main article: Labor theory of value The labor theory of value is one of the most commonly criticized core tenets of Marxism.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] The Austrian School argues that this fundamental theory of classical economics is false and prefers the subsequent and modern subjective theory of value put forward by Carl Menger in his book Principles of Economics . The Austrian School was not alone in criticizing the Marxian and classical belief in the labor theory of value. British economist Alfred Marshall attacked Marx, saying: "It is not true that the spinning of yarn in a factory [...] is the product of the labour of the operatives. It is the product of their labour, together with that of the employer and subordinate managers, and of the capital employed".

[ 42 ] Marshall points to the capitalist as sacrificing the money he could be using now for investment in business, which ultimately produces work.

[ 42 ] By this logic, the capitalist contributes to the work and productivity of the factory because he delays his gratification through investment.

[ 42 ] Through the law of supply and demand , Marshall attacked Marxian theory of value. According to Marshall, price or value is determined not just by supply, but by the demand of the consumer.

[ 42 ] Labor does contribute to cost, but so do the wants and needs of consumers. The shift from labor being the source of all value to subjective individual evaluations creating all value undermines Marx's economic conclusions and some of his social theories.

[ 43 ] Shimshon Bichler and Jonathan Nitzan argue that most studies purporting to show empirical evidence of the labor theory of value often make methodological errors by comparing the total labor value to total price of multiple economic sectors, which results in a strong overall correlation but this is a statistical exaggeration; the authors argue that the correlations between labor value and price in each sector are often very small if not insignificant. Bichler and Nitzan also argue that because it is difficult to quantify a way to measure abstract labor, researchers are forced to make assumptions.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] However, Bichler and Nitzan argue these assumptions involve circular reasoning : The most important of these assumptions are that the value of labour power is proportionate to the actual wage rate, that the ratio of variable capital to surplus value is given by the price ratio of wages to profit, and occasionally also that the value of the depreciated constant capital is equal to a fraction of the capital's money price. In other words, the researcher assumes precisely what the labour theory of value is supposed to demonstrate .

[ 46 ] Distorted or absent price signals [ edit ] The economic calculation problem is a criticism of socialist economics or, more precisely, of centralized socialist planned economies . It was first proposed by Austrian School economist Ludwig von Mises in 1920 and later expounded by Friedrich Hayek .

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] The problem referred to is that of how to distribute resources rationally in an economy. The free market solution is the price mechanism , wherein people individually have the ability to decide how a good should be distributed based on their willingness to give money for it. The price conveys embedded information about the abundance of resources as well as their desirability which in turn allows on the basis of individual consensual decisions corrections that prevent shortages and surpluses . Mises and Hayek argued that this is the only possible solution and, without the information provided by market prices, socialism lacks a method to rationally allocate resources. The debate raged in the 1920s and 1930s and that specific period of the debate has come to be known by economic historians as the socialist calculation debate .

[ 49 ] In practice, socialist states like the Soviet Union used mathematical techniques to determine and set prices with mixed results.

[ 50 ] Reduced incentives [ edit ] Some critics of socialism argue that income sharing reduces individual incentives to work and therefore incomes should be individualised as much as possible.

[ 51 ] Critics of socialism have argued that in any society where everyone holds equal wealth there can be no material incentive to work because one does not receive rewards for work well done. They further argue that incentives increase productivity for all people and that the loss of those effects would lead to stagnation. In Principles of Political Economy (1848), John Stuart Mill said: It is the common error of Socialists to overlook the natural indolence of mankind; their tendency to be passive, to be the slaves of habit, to persist indefinitely in a course once chosen. Let them once attain any state of existence which they consider tolerable, and the danger to be apprehended is that they will thenceforth stagnate; will not exert themselves to improve, and by letting their faculties rust, will lose even the energy required to preserve them from deterioration. Competition may not be the best conceivable stimulus, but it is at present a necessary one, and no one can foresee the time when it will not be indispensable to progress.

[ 52 ] However, he later altered his views and became more sympathetic to socialism, particularly Fourierism , adding chapters to his Principles of Political Economy in defence of a socialist outlook and defending some socialist causes.

[ 53 ] Within this revised work, he also made the radical proposal that the whole wage system be abolished in favour of a co-operative wage system. Nonetheless, some of his views on the idea of flat taxation remained, albeit in a slightly toned-down form.

[ 54 ] The economist John Kenneth Galbraith has criticised communal forms of socialism that promote egalitarianism in terms of wages or compensation as unrealistic in its assumptions about human motivation: This hope [that egalitarian reward would lead to a higher level of motivation], one that spread far beyond Marx, has been shown by both history and human experience to be irrelevant. For better or worse, human beings do not rise to such heights. Generations of socialists and socially oriented leaders have learned this to their disappointment and more often to their sorrow. The basic fact is clear: the good society must accept men and women as they are.

[ 55 ] Edgar Hardcastle responds to this by saying: "They want to work and need no more inducement than is given by the knowledge that work must be done to keep society going, and that they are playing their part in it along with their fellow men and women." He continues by criticising what he sees are the double standards of anti-socialists: "Notice how they object to the unemployed receiving a miserly dole without having to work, but never object to the millionaires (most of them in that position through inheritance) being able to live in luxurious idleness." [ 56 ] Authors like Arnold Petersen argue that arguments such as these are inaccurate as hunter-gatherers practiced primitive communism without problems such as these.

[ 57 ] Inconsistency [ edit ] Vladimir Karpovich Dmitriev writing in 1898, [ 58 ] Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz writing in 1906–1907 [ 59 ] and subsequent critics have alleged that Karl Marx 's value theory and law of the tendency of the rate of profit to fall are internally inconsistent. In other words, the critics allege that Marx drew conclusions that actually do not follow from his theoretical premises. Once those errors are corrected, Marx's conclusion that aggregate price and profit are determined by—and equal to—aggregate value and surplus value no longer holds true. This result calls into question his theory that the exploitation of workers is the sole source of profit.

[ 60 ] The inconsistency allegations have been a prominent feature of Marxian economics and the debate surrounding it since the 1970s.

[ 1 ] Andrew Kliman argues that since internally inconsistent theories cannot possibly be right, this undermines Marx's critique of political economy and current-day research based upon it as well as the correction of Marx's alleged inconsistencies.

[ 61 ] Critics who have alleged that Marx has been proved internally inconsistent include former and current Marxian and/or Sraffian economists, such as Paul Sweezy , [ 62 ] Nobuo Okishio , [ 63 ] Ian Steedman , [ 64 ] John Roemer , [ 65 ] Gary Mongiovi [ 66 ] and David Laibman , [ 67 ] who propose that the field be grounded in their correct versions of Marxian economics instead of in Marx's critique of political economy in the original form in which he presented and developed it in Capital .

[ 68 ] Proponents of the temporal single system interpretation (TSSI) of Marx's value theory, like Kliman, claim that the supposed inconsistencies are actually the result of misinterpretation and argue that when Marx's theory is understood as "temporal" and "single-system", the alleged internal inconsistencies disappear. In a recent survey of the debate, Kliman concludes that "the proofs of inconsistency are no longer defended; the entire case against Marx has been reduced to the interpretive issue".

[ 69 ] Relevance [ edit ] Marxism has been criticized as irrelevant, with many economists rejecting its core tenets and assumptions.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] John Maynard Keynes referred to Capital as "an obsolete textbook which I know to be not only scientifically erroneous but without interest or application for the modern world".

[ 3 ] Keynes also wrote "I believe that the future will learn more from the spirit of Gesell than from that of Marx ".

[ 73 ] According to George Stigler , "Economists working in the Marxian-Sraffian tradition represent a small minority of modern economists, and that their writings have virtually no impact upon the professional work of most economists in major English-language universities".

[ 74 ] In a review of the first edition of The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , Robert Solow criticized it for overemphasizing the importance of Marxism in modern economics: Marx was an important and influential thinker, and Marxism has been a doctrine with intellectual and practical influence. The fact is, however, that most serious English-speaking economists regard Marxist economics as an irrelevant dead end.

[ 75 ] A 2006 nationally representative survey of American professors found 3% of them identify as Marxists. The share rises to 5% in the humanities and is about 18% among social scientists.

[ 76 ] Social [ edit ] Social criticism is based on the assertion that the Marxian conception of society is fundamentally flawed.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] The Marxist stages of history, class analysis and theory of social evolution have been criticised.

Jean-Paul Sartre concluded that "class" was not a homogeneous entity and could never mount a revolution, but continued to advocate Marxist beliefs.

[ 79 ] According to the book Reflections on a Ravaged Century by the British historian Robert Conquest , Marx was unable to put the Asian society in the development stages of slave, feudal, capitalist, socialist, and as a result, Asian society where much of the world's population lived for thousand of years was "out of the balance".

[ 80 ] Democracy [ edit ] While Karl Marx advocated for an increased democratic agency of citizens, [ 81 ] some Marxist branches have been criticized for limiting democracy.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] Democratic centralism as internal organization structure of some Marxist parties has been criticized for prioritizing centralization over democracy.

[ 86 ] Epistemological [ edit ] Arguments against Marxism are often based on epistemological reasoning.

[ 87 ] Specifically, various critics have contended that Marx or his adherents have a flawed approach to epistemology ( i.e.

the philosophy or theory of knowledge).

According to Leszek Kołakowski , the laws of dialectics at the very base of Marxism are fundamentally flawed: some are "truisms with no specific Marxist content", others "philosophical dogmas that cannot be proved by scientific means", yet others just "nonsense". Some Marxist "laws" are vague and can be interpreted differently, but these interpretations generally fall into one of the aforementioned categories of flaws as well.

[ 88 ] However, Marxist sociologist Ralph Miliband argued Kolakowski had a flawed understanding of Marxism and its relation to Leninism and Stalinism.

[ 89 ] Kołakowski noted all of Marx's key predictions or forecasts were disproved in Marx's own lifetime or soon after.

[ 90 ] Specifically, Kołakowski identified five of Marx's core predictions that were falsified: First, that middle classes would quickly disappear under capitalism, when the middle class actually grew substantially.

Second, Marx's prediction of "not only the relative but also the absolute impoverishment of the working class" was invalidated when working class living standards increased.

Third, "and most importantly, Marx’s theory predicted the inevitability of the proletarian revolution. Such a revolution has never occurred anywhere." Fourth, "Marx’s prediction concerning the inevitable fall of the profit rate, a process that was supposed to lead ultimately to the collapse of the capitalist economy", when profits actually rose.

Fifth, "the prediction that the market will hamper technical progress. The exact opposite has quite obviously proved to be the case." Economist Thomas Sowell wrote in 1985: What Marx accomplished was to produce such a comprehensive, dramatic, and fascinating vision that it could withstand innumerable empirical contradictions, logical refutations, and moral revulsions at its effects. The Marxian vision took the overwhelming complexity of the real world and made the parts fall into place, in a way that was intellectually exhilarating and conferred such a sense of moral superiority that opponents could be simply labelled and dismissed as moral lepers or blind reactionaries. Marxism was – and remains – a mighty instrument for the acquisition and maintenance of political power.

[ 91 ] Many notable academics such as Karl Popper , David Prychitko , Robert C. Allen , and Francis Fukuyama argue that many of Marx's predictions have failed.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] [ 94 ] Marx predicted that wages would tend to depreciate and that capitalist economies would suffer worsening economic crises leading to the ultimate overthrow of the capitalist system. The socialist revolution would be spontaneous uprisings from working class population, and would occur first in the most advanced capitalist nations and once collective ownership had been established then all sources of class conflict would disappear. Instead of Marx's predictions, communist revolutions were not spontaneous uprisings of the working class but led by revolutionaries and activists, took place in undeveloped regions in Latin America and Asia instead of industrialized countries like the United States or the United Kingdom.

Popper has argued that both the concept of Marx's historical method as well as its application are unfalsifiable and thus it is a pseudoscience [ 95 ] that cannot be proven true or false: The Marxist theory of history, in spite of the serious efforts of some of its founders and followers, ultimately adopted this soothsaying practice. In some of its earlier formulations (for example in Marx's analysis of the character of the 'coming social revolution') their predictions were testable, and in fact falsified. Yet instead of accepting the refutations the followers of Marx re-interpreted both the theory and the evidence in order to make them agree. In this way they rescued the theory from refutation; but they did so at the price of adopting a device which made it irrefutable. They thus gave a 'conventionalist twist' to the theory; and by this stratagem they destroyed its much advertised claim to scientific status.

[ 2 ] Popper believed that Marxism had been initially scientific, in that Marx had postulated a theory which was genuinely predictive. When Marx's predictions were not in fact borne out, Popper argues that the theory was saved from falsification by the addition of ad hoc hypotheses which attempted to make it compatible with the facts. By this means, a theory which was initially genuinely scientific degenerated into pseudoscientific dogma .

[ 92 ] Popper agreed on the general non-falsifiability of the social sciences, but instead used it as an argument against central planning and all-encompassing historiographical ideologies.

[ 92 ] Popper devoted much attention to dissecting the practice of using the dialectic in defence of Marxist thought, which was the very strategy employed by V.A. Lektorsky in his defence of Marxism against Popper's criticisms. Among Popper's conclusions was that Marxists used dialectic as a method of side-stepping and evading criticisms, rather than actually answering or addressing them: [ 96 ] Hegel thought that philosophy develops; yet his own system was to remain the last and highest stage of this development and could not be superseded. The Marxists adopted the same attitude towards the Marxian system. Hence, Marx's anti-dogmatic attitude exists only in the theory and not in the practice of orthodox Marxism, and dialectic is used by Marxists, following the example of Engels' Anti-Dühring, mainly for the purposes of apologetics – to defend the Marxist system against criticism. As a rule critics are denounced for their failure to understand the dialectic, or proletarian science, or for being traitors. Thanks to dialectic the anti-dogmatic attitude has disappeared, and Marxism has established itself as a dogmatism which is elastic enough, by using its dialectic method, to evade any further attack. It has thus become what I have called reinforced dogmatism.

[ 96 ] Bertrand Russell has criticized as unscientific Marx's belief in progress as a universal law. Russell stated: "Marx professed himself an atheist, but retained a cosmic optimism which only theism could justify".

[ 97 ] Marxists like Thomas Riggins have claimed that Russell misrepresented Marx's ideas.

[ 98 ] Murray Rothbard has criticized Marxism as resorting to quasi-religious epistemology in reaction to the failure of Marx's predictions.

[ 99 ] See also [ edit ] Politics portal Anarchism and Marxism Criticism of communist party rule Criticism of socialism Transformation problem References [ edit ] ^ a b See M. C. Howard and J.E. King, 1992, A History of Marxian Economics: Volume II, 1929–1990 . Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.

^ a b Popper, Karl (2002).

Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge . Routledge. p. 49.

ISBN 978-0415285940 .

^ a b John Maynard Keynes.

Essays in Persuasion . W.W. Norton & Co. 1991. p. 300 ISBN 978-0393001907 .

^ Domhoff, G. William (April 2005).

"Who Rules America: A Critique of Marxism" .

WhoRulesAmerica.net . Retrieved 30 November 2018 .

^ Johnson, Paul (2007) [1988].

Intellectuals From Marx and Tolstoy to Sartre and Chomsky by Paul Johnson (revised ed.). Perennial.

ISBN 978-0061253171 .

^ a b Wolff, Richard D.; Johnson, Paul; Jacoby, Russell; Walzer, Michael; Watkins, Evan (Summer 1991).

"Review Essay. Criticizing Social Criticism" .

Boundary 2 .

18 (2): 207.

doi : 10.2307/303286 .

JSTOR 303286 .

^ "Historical materialism" .

Dictionary.com . Retrieved 8 May 2018 .

^ Erich Fromm (1961).

"Marx's Concept of Man" .

Marxists Internet Archive . Retrieved 8 May 2018 .

^ Marx, Karl .

"The Poverty of Philosophy" . Marxists Internet Archive . Retrieved 23 May 2008 .

The hand-mill gives you society with the feudal lord; the steam-mill society with the industrial capitalist.

^ Marx, Karl (2001).

Preface to a Critique of Political Economy . London: The Electric Book Company. pp.

7– 8.

^ Marx, Karl and Friedrich Engels.

Selected Correspondence . p. 498 ^ Singer, Peter (1980).

Marx: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p.

50 .

ISBN 978-0192854056 .

^ Marx, Karl (1977).

A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy . Moscow: Progress Publishers: Notes by R. Rojas.

^ Murray Rothbard (1995), An Austrian Perspective on the History of Economic Thought , Vol. 2, Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd, Chapter 12, pp. 372–74, ISBN 094546648X ^ J.I. (Hans) Bakker (2007). Ritzer, George (ed.).

Economic Determinism . Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology.

doi : 10.1002/9781405165518 .

ISBN 978-1405124331 . Archived from the original on 29 September 2020 . Retrieved 28 December 2011 .

^ Sean Sayers.

"Marxism and the Dialectical Method – A critique of G.A. Cohen" (PDF) . Radical Philosophy 36 (Spring, 1984). pp.

4– 13. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 July 2013 . Retrieved 28 December 2011 .

^ Karl Marx.

"A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy" .

Progress Publishers , Moscow, 1977 . Retrieved 28 December 2011 .

^ Gary R. Habermas (1996).

The historical Jesus: ancient evidence for the life of Christ .

Thomas Nelson Inc.

ISBN 978-0899007328 . Retrieved 28 December 2011 .

^ Why Marx is Right? page 34 ^ Marx:Myths and Legends ^ Engels, Friedrich (1972).

Letters: Marx–Engels Correspondence 1890. Engels to J. Bloch. In Königsberg . Moscow: Progressive Publishers – via Marxists Internet Archive.

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ Aboulafia, Mitchell (1 December 2019).

"Eight Marxist Claims That May Surprise You" .

Jacobin . Retrieved 19 August 2020 .

^ Sohail Inayatullah (19 February 2002).

"Rethinking Science and Culture: P.R. Sarkar's Reconstruction of Science and Society" .

KurzweilAI . Retrieved 28 December 2011 .

^ Ravi Batra (2011-09-15).

"Sarkar, Toynbee and Marx" . PROUT Globe. p. 267 . Retrieved 28 December 2011 .

^ Duncan, Graeme (March 1989).

Democracy and the Capitalist State . Cambridge University Press. p. 85.

ISBN 978-0521280624 .

^ Woods, Alan (2016). "What Is Historical Materialism?". In Defence of Marxism. International Marxist Tendency . Retrieved 28 November 2017.

^ Friedrich Hayek (1944).

The Road to Serfdom . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0226320618 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Bellamy, Richard (2003).

The Cambridge History of Twentieth-Century Political Thought . Cambridge University Press. p. 60.

ISBN 978-0521563543 .

^ "David Harvey: Socialists Must Be the Champions of Freedom" .

jacobinmag.com . Retrieved 2020-11-14 .

^ Chait, Jonathan (23 March 2016).

"Reminder: Liberalism Is Working, and Marxism Has Always Failed" .

Intelligencer . Retrieved 7 August 2022 .

^ a b Bakunin, Mikhail .

"Statism and Anarchy" . Marxists Internet Archive . Retrieved 6 August 2008 .

^ Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny.

Pervasive shortages under socialism . No. w3791. National Bureau of Economic Research, 1991.

^ Stringham, Edward Peter. "Kaldor-Hicks efficiency and the problem of central planning." (2001).

^ "Millennials open to socialism are not living in the real world" .

Washington Examiner . 2017-12-11 . Retrieved 2018-05-08 .

^ Acemoglu, Daron; Robinson, James A. (December 2014).

"The Rise and Decline of General Laws of Capitalism" (PDF) .

NBER Working Paper Series . Retrieved 6 September 2018 – via NBER.

^ M.C. Howard and J.E. King. (1992) A History of Marxian Economics: Volume II, 1929–1990, chapter 7, sects. II–IV. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.

^ "What is the biggest flaw in the labor theory of value? – Marginal Revolution" .

Marginal REVOLUTION . 2010-03-30 . Retrieved 2018-05-08 .

^ Becker, Gary S. (1965). "A Theory of the Allocation of Time".

The Economic Journal .

75 (299): 493– 517.

doi : 10.2307/2228949 .

ISSN 1468-0297 .

JSTOR 2228949 .

^ Investopedia Staff (2010-06-24).

"Labor Theory Of Value" .

Investopedia . Retrieved 2018-05-08 .

^ Wolff, Jonathan (2017).

"Karl Marx" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 28 July 2018 .

^ DeLong, Brad (2005).

"Lire le Capital: Mail Call" .

Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality . Retrieved 2019-12-02 .

^ a b c d Bucholz, Todd.

New Ideas from Dead Economists . New York: A Plume Book. 1998. pp. 166–67.

^ Ludwig Von Mises . " Socialism: An Economic and Sociological Analysis " 2nd Ed. Trans. J. Kahane. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1951. pp. 111–222.

^ Cockshott, Paul, Shimshon Bichler, and Jonathan Nitzan.

"Testing the labour theory of value: An exchange." (2010): 1–15.

^ Nitzan, Jonathan, and Shimshon Bichler.

Capital as power: A study of order and creorder . Routledge, 2009, pp. 93–97, 138–44 ^ Nitzan, Jonathan, and Shimshon Bichler.

Capital as power: A study of order and creorder . Routledge, 2009, pp.96 ^ Von Mises, Ludwig (1990).

Economic calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth (PDF) .

Ludwig von Mises Institute . Retrieved 8 September 2008 .

^ F.A. Hayek, (1935), "The Nature and History of the Problem" and "The Present State of the Debate," om in F.A. Hayek, ed.

Collectivist Economic Planning , pp. 1–40, 201–43.

^ Fonseca, Gonçalo L. (2000s).

"The socialist calculation debate" .

History of Economic Thought . Archived from the original on 18 February 2009 . Retrieved 3 April 2007 .

^ Nove, A., & Nuti, D.M. (1972). eds., Socialist Economics. Selected Readings .

^ Zoltan J. Acs & Bernard Young.

Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises in the Global Economy . University of Michigan Press, p. 47, 1999.

^ Mill, John Stuart.

The Principles of Political Economy , Book IV, Chapter 7.

^ Mill, John Stuart; Bentham, Jeremy (2004). Ryan, Alan (ed.).

Utilitarianism and Other Essays . London: Penguin Books. p.

11 .

ISBN 978-0140432725 .

^ Wilson, Fred (2007).

"John Stuart Mill: Political Economy" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Stanford University . Retrieved 4 May 2009 .

^ John Kenneth Galbraith, The Good Society: The Humane Agenda (Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1996), pp. 59–60.

^ "Incentive Under Socialism" .

^ Petersen, Arnold (November 2005).

"Socialism and Human Nature" . Socialist Labor Party of America. Retrieved 19 August 2020.

^ V.K. Dmitriev, 1974 (1898), Economic Essays on Value, Competition and Utility . Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press ^ Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz, 1952 (1906–1907), "Value and Price in the Marxian System", International Economic Papers 2, 5–60; Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz, 1984 (1907), "On the Correction of Marx's Fundamental Theoretical Construction in the Third Volume of Capital ". In Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk 1984 (1896), Karl Marx and the Close of his System , Philadelphia: Orion Editions.

^ M.C. Howard and J.E. King. (1992) A History of Marxian Economics: Volume II, 1929–1990, chapter 12, sect. III. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.

^ Kliman states that "Marx's value theory would be necessarily wrong if it were internally inconsistent. Internally inconsistent theories may be appealing, intuitively plausible and even obvious, and consistent with all available empirical evidence – but they cannot be right. It is necessary to reject them or correct them. Thus the alleged proofs of inconsistency trump all other considerations, disqualifying Marx's theory at the starting gate. By doing so, they provide the principal justification for the suppression of this theory as well as the suppression of, and the denial of resources needed to carry out, present-day research based upon it. This greatly inhibits its further development. So does the very charge of inconsistency. What person of intellectual integrity would want to join a research program founded on (what he believes to be) a theory that is internally inconsistent and therefore false?" (Andrew Kliman, Reclaiming Marx's "Capital": A Refutation of the Myth of Inconsistency, Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2007, p. 3, emphasis in original). The connection between the inconsistency allegations and the lack of study of Marx's theories was argued further by John Cassidy ("The Return of Karl Marx," The New Yorker , 20–27 October 1997, p. 252): "His mathematical model of the economy, which depended on the idea that labor is the source of all value, was riven with internal inconsistencies and is rarely studied these days." ^ "Only one conclusion is possible, namely, that the Marxian method of transformation [of commodity values into prices of production] is logically unsatisfactory." Paul M. Sweezy, 1970 (1942), The Theory of Capitalist Development , p. 15. New York: Modern Reader Paperbacks.

^ Nobuo Okishio, 1961, "Technical Changes and the Rate of Profit," Kobe University Economic Review 7, pp. 85–99.

^ "[P]hysical quantities ... suffice to determine the rate of profit (and the associated prices of production) .... [I]t follows that value magnitudes are, at best, redundant in the determination of the rate of profit (and prices of production)." "Marx's value reasoning – hardly a peripheral aspect of his work – must therefore be abandoned, in the interest of developing a coherent materialist theory of capitalism." Ian Steedman, 1977, Marx after Sraffa , pp. 202, 207. London: New Left Books ^ "[The falling-rate-of-profit] position is rebutted in Chapter 5 by a theorem which states that ... competitive innovations result in a rising rate of profit. There seems to be no hope for a theory of the falling rate of profit within the strict confines of the environment that Marx suggested as relevant." John Roemer, Analytical Foundations of Marxian Economic Theory , p. 12. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1981.

^ Vulgar Economy in Marxian Garb: A Critique of Temporal Single System Marxism , Gary Mongiovi, 2002, Review of Radical Political Economics 34:4, p. 393. "Marx did make a number of errors in elaborating his theory of value and the profit rate .... [H]is would-be Temporal Single System defenders ... camouflage Marx's errors." "Marx's value analysis does indeed contain errors." (abstract) ^ "An Error II is an inconsistency, whose removal through development of the theory leaves the foundations of the theory intact. Now I believe that Marx left us with a few Errors II." David Laibman , "Rhetoric and Substance in Value Theory" in Alan Freeman, Andrew Kliman and Julian Wells (eds.), The New Value Controversy and the Foundations of Economics , Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2004, p. 17 ^ See Andrew Kliman , Reclaiming Marx's "Capital": A Refutation of the Myth of Inconsistency, esp. pp. 210–11.

^ Andrew Kliman, Reclaiming Marx's "Capital" , Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, p. 208, emphases in original.

^ Sowell, Thomas (1985).

Marxism: Philosophy and Economics . William Morrow. p. 220.

ISBN 978-0688029630 .

Despite the massive intellectual feat that Marx's Capital represents, the Marxian contribution to economics can be readily summarized as virtually zero. Professional economics as it exists today reflects no indication that Karl Marx ever existed. This neither denies nor denigrates Capital as an intellectual achievement, and perhaps in its way the culmination of classical economics. But the development of modern economics had simply ignored Marx. Even economists who are Marxists typically utilize a set of analytical tools to which Marx contributed nothing, and have recourse to Marx only for ideological, political, or historical purposes. In professional economics, Capital was a detour into a blind alley, however historic it may be as the centerpiece of a worldwide political movement. What is said and done in its name is said and done largely by people who have never read through it, much less followed its labyrinthine reasoning from its arbitrary postulates to its empirically false conclusions. Instead, the massive volumes of Capital have become a quasi-magic touchstone – a source of assurance that somewhere and somehow a genius "proved" capitalism to be wrong and doomed, even if the specifics of this proof are unknown to those who take their certitude from it.

^ Leiter, B. (2002). Marxism and the continuing irrelevance of Normative Theory.

^ Judis, John B. (6 May 2014).

"Thomas Piketty Is Pulling Your Leg" .

The New Republic . Retrieved 2018-05-06 .

Marx, Piketty writes, "devoted little thought to the question of how a society in which private capital had been totally abolished would be organized politically and economically—a complex issue if ever there was one, as shown by the tragic totalitarian experiments undertaken in states where private capital was abolished." On a deeper level, Piketty's approach to economic history more closely resembles that of Adam Smith or David Ricardo than Marx.

^ John Maynard Keynes : "The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money". VI.23.vi. Reproduced in marxists.org ^ Stigler, George J.

(December 1988). "Palgrave's Dictionary of Economics".

Journal of Economic Literature .

26 (4): 1729– 36.

JSTOR 2726859 .

^ Solow, Robert M. (1988).

"The Wide, Wide World of Wealth" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2018-05-06 .

^ Gross, Neil, and Solon Simmons. "The social and political views of American professors." Working Paper presented at a Harvard University Symposium on Professors and Their Politics . 2007.

^ "Dead end" .

The Economist . 2 July 2009 . Retrieved 2018-05-08 .

^ Mirowsky, John. "Wage slavery or creative work?." Society and mental health 1.2 (2011): 73–88.

^ "Essays in Self-Criticism" .

www.faculty.umb.edu . Retrieved 2018-05-08 .

^ Conquest, Robert (2000).

Reflections on a ravaged century . New York: Norton. pp.

47– 51.

ISBN 978-0393048186 .

OCLC 41412004 .

^ Niemi, William L. (2011).

"Karl Marx's sociological theory of democracy: Civil society and political rights" .

The Social Science Journal .

48 (1): 39– 51.

doi : 10.1016/j.soscij.2010.07.002 .

^ Miliband, Ralph. Marxism and politics. Aakar Books, 2011.

^ Springborg, Patricia (1984).

"Karl Marx on Democracy, Participation, Voting, and Equality" .

Political Theory .

12 (4): 537– 556.

doi : 10.1177/0090591784012004005 .

JSTOR 191498 .

^ Meister, Robert (1991).

Political identity: thinking through Marx . Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-0631177463 .

^ Wolff, Richard (2000).

"Marxism and democracy" .

Rethinking Marxism .

12 (1): 112– 122.

doi : 10.1080/08935690009358994 .

^ Alam, Javeed (2009).

"Can Democratic Centralism be conducive to Democracy?" .

Economic and Political Weekly .

44 (38): 37– 42.

JSTOR 25663569 .

^ "Marx after communism" .

The Economist . 2002-12-19 . Retrieved 2018-05-08 .

^ Kołakowski, Leszek (2005).

Main Currents of Marxism . New York: W.W. Norton and Co. p. 909.

ISBN 978-0393329438 .

^ Miliband, Ralph (2016). "Kolakowski's Anti-Marx".

Political Studies .

29 (1): 115– 22.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9248.1981.tb01280.x .

S2CID 145789723 .

^ Leszek Kolakowski.

What Is Left of Socialism?

. FirstThings.com, October 1, 2002. Accessed July 24, 2025 ^ Sowell, Thomas Marxism Philosophy and Economics (William Morrow 1985) p. 218.

^ a b c Thornton, Stephen (2006). "Karl Popper". In Zolta, Edward N. (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Stanford: Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ "The End of History?" Francis Fukuyama.

^ Allen, R.C. (2017).

The industrial revolution: a very short introduction (Vol. 509). Oxford University Press p. 80.

^ "Science as Falsification" .

stephenjaygould.org . Archived from the original on 2 May 2018 . Retrieved 22 November 2015 .

^ a b Popper, Karl (2002).

Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge . Routledge. p. 449.

ISBN 978-0415285940 .

^ Russell, Bertrand History of Western Philosophy Simon and Schuster pp. 788–89.

^ Riggins, Thomas (28 May 2014).

"V.J. McGill on Russell's Critique of Marxism" .

Political Affairs . Retrieved 29 April 2015 .

^ Rothbard, Murray N. (1990). "Karl Marx: Communist as Religious Eschatologist".

The Review of Austrian Economics . Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands. pp.

123– 179.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-017-3454-7_5 .

ISBN 978-94-017-3456-1 .

External links [ edit ] Marx and totalitarianism Main Currents of Marxism. Volume I: The Founders, Volume II: The Golden Age, Volume III: The Breakdown critique by Leszek Kołakowski The Open Society and Its Enemies. Volume II: The High Tide of Prophecy (Hegel, Marx and the Aftermath) critique by Karl Popper Science and Pseudoscience (transcript) Archived 2010-05-10 at the Wayback Machine includes a critique by Imre Lakatos Marxism As Pseudo-science by Ernest Van Den Haag Upholding Spirituality against the theory of Materialism propounded by Marx NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐lwtfr
Cached time: 20250812004918
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.711 seconds
Real time usage: 0.841 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4385/1000000
Revision size: 59676/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 165587/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2660/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 243853/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.429/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8403923/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  671.661      1 -total
 54.61%  366.825      1 Template:Reflist
 21.40%  143.706     17 Template:Cite_book
 17.32%  116.360      1 Template:Marxism
 16.86%  113.209      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.65%   78.237     18 Template:Cite_web
  9.39%   63.064      1 Template:Sidebar
  9.18%   61.630      1 Template:Short_description
  6.78%   45.538      9 Template:Cite_journal
  6.41%   43.027      8 Template:Cite_news Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5721669:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812004918 and revision id 1303792057. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Criticism_of_Marxism&oldid=1303792057 " Categories : Anti-communism Anti-Marxism Communism Criticisms of political philosophy Marxism Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2020 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from August 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 02:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Criticism of Marxism 17 languages Add topic

