Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Philosophy of space and time Toggle Philosophy of space and time subsection 1.1 Time 1.2 Space 2 Philosophy of quantum mechanics Toggle Philosophy of quantum mechanics subsection 2.1 Uncertainty principle 2.2 "Locality" and hidden variables 2.3 Interpretations of quantum mechanics 3 Philosophy of thermal and statistical physics 4 History Toggle History subsection 4.1 Aristotelian physics 4.2 Newtonian physics 4.3 Leibniz 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Philosophy of physics 30 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Чӑвашла Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский سنڌي Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Taclḥit Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Truths and principles of the study of matter, space, time and energy This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( September 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In philosophy , the philosophy of physics deals with conceptual and interpretational issues in physics , many of which overlap with research done by certain kinds of theoretical physicists . Historically, philosophers of physics have engaged with questions such as the nature of space, time, matter and the laws that govern their interactions, as well as the epistemological and ontological basis of the theories used by practicing physicists. The discipline draws upon insights from various areas of philosophy, including metaphysics , epistemology , and philosophy of science , while also engaging with the latest developments in theoretical and experimental physics.

Contemporary work focuses on issues at the foundations of the three pillars of modern physics : Quantum mechanics : Interpretations of quantum theory , including the nature of quantum states, the measurement problem , and the role of observers . Implications of entanglement , nonlocality , and the quantum-classical relationship are also explored.

Relativity : Conceptual foundations of special and general relativity , including the nature of spacetime, simultaneity, causality, and determinism. Compatibility with quantum mechanics, gravitational singularities, and philosophical implications of cosmology are also investigated.

Statistical mechanics : Relationship between microscopic and macroscopic descriptions, interpretation of probability, origin of irreversibility and the arrow of time . Foundations of thermodynamics, role of information theory in understanding entropy , and implications for explanation and reduction in physics.

Other areas of focus include the nature of physical laws , symmetries , and conservation principles ; the role of mathematics; and philosophical implications of emerging fields like quantum gravity , quantum information , and complex systems . Philosophers of physics have argued that conceptual analysis clarifies foundations, interprets implications, and guides theory development in physics.

Philosophy of space and time [ edit ] Main article: Philosophy of space and time The existence and nature of space and time (or space-time) are central topics in the philosophy of physics.

[ 1 ] Issues include (1) whether space and time are fundamental or emergent, and (2) how space and time are operationally different from one another.

Time [ edit ] Main article: Time in physics Time, in many philosophies, is seen as change.

In classical mechanics, time is taken to be a fundamental quantity (that is, a quantity which cannot be defined in terms of other quantities). However, certain theories such as loop quantum gravity claim that spacetime is emergent. As Carlo Rovelli , one of the founders of loop quantum gravity, has said: "No more fields on spacetime: just fields on fields".

[ 2 ] Time is defined via measurement—by its standard time interval. Currently, the standard time interval (called "conventional second ", or simply "second") is defined as 9,192,631,770 oscillations of a hyperfine transition in the 133 caesium atom . ( ISO 31-1 ). What time is and how it works follows from the above definition. Time then can be combined mathematically with the fundamental quantities of space and mass to define concepts such as velocity , momentum , energy , and fields .

Both Isaac Newton and Galileo Galilei , [ 3 ] as well as most people up until the 20th century, thought that time was the same for everyone everywhere.

[ 4 ] The modern conception of time is based on Albert Einstein 's theory of relativity and Hermann Minkowski 's spacetime , in which rates of time run differently in different inertial frames of reference, and space and time are merged into spacetime . Einstein's general relativity as well as the redshift of the light from receding distant galaxies indicate that the entire Universe and possibly space-time itself began about 13.8 billion years ago in the Big Bang . Einstein's theory of special relativity mostly (though not universally) made theories of time where there is something metaphysically special about the present seem much less plausible, as the reference-frame-dependence of time seems to not allow the idea of a privileged present moment.

Space [ edit ] Main article: Space Space is one of the few fundamental quantities in physics, meaning that it cannot be defined via other quantities because there is nothing more fundamental known at present. Thus, similar to the definition of other fundamental quantities (like time and mass ), space is defined via measurement. Currently, the standard space interval, called a standard metre or simply metre, is defined as the distance traveled by light in a vacuum during a time interval of 1/299792458 of a second (exact).

In classical physics , space is a three-dimensional Euclidean space where any position can be described using three coordinates and parameterised by time.  Special and general relativity use four-dimensional spacetime rather than three-dimensional space; and currently there are many speculative theories which use more than three spatial dimensions.

Philosophy of quantum mechanics [ edit ] Main article: Quantum foundations Quantum mechanics is a large focus of contemporary philosophy of physics, specifically concerning the correct interpretation of quantum mechanics. Very broadly, much of the philosophical work that is done in quantum theory is trying to make sense of superposition states: [ 5 ] the property that particles seem to not just be in one determinate position at one time, but are somewhere 'here', and also 'there' at the same time. Such a radical view turns many common sense metaphysical ideas on their head. Much of contemporary philosophy of quantum mechanics aims to make sense of what the very empirically successful formalism of quantum mechanics tells us about the physical world.

Uncertainty principle [ edit ] Main article: Uncertainty principle The uncertainty principle is a mathematical relation asserting an upper limit to the accuracy of the simultaneous measurement of any pair of conjugate variables , e.g. position and momentum. In the formalism of operator notation , this limit is the evaluation of the commutator of the variables' corresponding operators.

The uncertainty principle arose as an answer to the question: How does one measure the location of an electron around a nucleus if an electron is a wave?  When quantum mechanics was developed, it was seen to be a relation between the classical and quantum descriptions of a system using wave mechanics.

"Locality" and hidden variables [ edit ] Main articles: EPR paradox and Bell's theorem Bell's theorem is a term encompassing a number of closely related results in physics, all of which determine that quantum mechanics is incompatible with local hidden-variable theories given some basic assumptions about the nature of measurement. "Local" here refers to the principle of locality , the idea that a particle can only be influenced by its immediate surroundings, and that interactions mediated by physical fields cannot propagate faster than the speed of light . " Hidden variables " are putative properties of quantum particles that are not included in the theory but nevertheless affect the outcome of experiments. In the words of physicist John Stewart Bell , for whom this family of results is named, "If [a hidden-variable theory] is local it will not agree with quantum mechanics, and if it agrees with quantum mechanics it will not be local." [ 6 ] The term is broadly applied to a number of different derivations, the first of which was introduced by Bell in a 1964 paper titled "On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen Paradox ". Bell's paper was a response to a 1935 thought experiment that Albert Einstein , Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen proposed, arguing that quantum physics is an "incomplete" theory.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] By 1935, it was already recognized that the predictions of quantum physics are probabilistic . Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen presented a scenario that involves preparing a pair of particles such that the quantum state of the pair is entangled , and then separating the particles to an arbitrarily large distance. The experimenter has a choice of possible measurements that can be performed on one of the particles. When they choose a measurement and obtain a result, the quantum state of the other particle apparently collapses instantaneously into a new state depending upon that result, no matter how far away the other particle is.  This suggests that either the measurement of the first particle somehow also influenced the second particle faster than the speed of light, or that the entangled particles had some unmeasured property which pre-determined their final quantum states before they were separated.  Therefore, assuming locality, quantum mechanics must be incomplete, as it cannot give a complete description of the particle's true physical characteristics. In other words, quantum particles, like electrons and photons , must carry some property or attributes not included in quantum theory, and the uncertainties in quantum theory's predictions would then be due to ignorance or unknowability of these properties, later termed "hidden variables".

Bell carried the analysis of quantum entanglement much further. He deduced that if measurements are performed independently on the two separated particles of an entangled pair, then the assumption that the outcomes depend upon hidden variables within each half implies a mathematical constraint on how the outcomes on the two measurements are correlated. This constraint would later be named the Bell inequality . Bell then showed that quantum physics predicts correlations that violate this inequality. Consequently, the only way that hidden variables could explain the predictions of quantum physics is if they are "nonlocal", which is to say that somehow the two particles can carry non-classical correlations no matter how widely they ever become separated.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Multiple variations on Bell's theorem were put forward in the following years, introducing other closely related conditions generally known as Bell (or "Bell-type") inequalities. The first rudimentary experiment designed to test Bell's theorem was performed in 1972 by John Clauser and Stuart Freedman .

[ 11 ] More advanced experiments, known collectively as Bell tests , have been performed many times since. To date, Bell tests have consistently found that physical systems obey quantum mechanics and violate Bell inequalities; which is to say that the results of these experiments are incompatible with any local hidden variable theory.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] The exact nature of the assumptions required to prove a Bell-type constraint on correlations has been debated by physicists and by philosophers. While the significance of Bell's theorem is not in doubt, its full implications for the interpretation of quantum mechanics remain unresolved.

Interpretations of quantum mechanics [ edit ] Main article: Interpretation of quantum mechanics In March 1927, working in Niels Bohr 's institute, Werner Heisenberg formulated the principle of uncertainty thereby laying the foundation of what became known as the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics. Heisenberg had been studying the papers of Paul Dirac and Pascual Jordan .  He discovered a problem with measurement of basic variables in the equations. His analysis showed that uncertainties, or imprecisions, always turned up if one tried to measure the position and the momentum of a particle at the same time. Heisenberg concluded that these uncertainties or imprecisions in the measurements were not the fault of the experimenter, but fundamental in nature and are inherent mathematical properties of operators in quantum mechanics arising from definitions of these operators.

[ 14 ] The Copenhagen interpretation is somewhat loosely defined, as many physicists and philosophers of physics have advanced similar but not identical views of quantum mechanics. It is principally associated with Heisenberg and Bohr, despite their philosophical differences.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Features common to Copenhagen-type interpretations include the idea that quantum mechanics is intrinsically indeterministic, with probabilities calculated using the Born rule , and the principle of complementarity , which states that objects have certain pairs of complementary properties that cannot all be observed or measured simultaneously.

[ 17 ] Moreover, the act of "observing" or "measuring" an object is irreversible, and no truth can be attributed to an object, except according to the results of its measurement . Copenhagen-type interpretations hold that quantum descriptions are objective, in that they are independent of any arbitrary factors in the physicist's mind.

[ 18 ] : 85–90 The many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics by Hugh Everett III claims that the wave-function of a quantum system is telling us claims about the reality of that physical system. It denies wavefunction collapse, and claims that superposition states should be interpreted literally as describing the reality of many-worlds where objects are located, and not simply indicating the indeterminacy of those variables. This is sometimes argued as a corollary of scientific realism , [ 19 ] which states that scientific theories aim to give us literally true descriptions of the world.

One issue for the Everett interpretation is the role that probability plays on this account. The Everettian account is completely deterministic, whereas probability seems to play an ineliminable role in quantum mechanics.

[ 20 ] Contemporary Everettians have argued that one can get an account of probability that follows the Born rule through certain decision-theoretic proofs, [ 21 ] but there is as yet no consensus about whether any of these proofs are successful.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] Physicist Roland Omnès noted that it is impossible to experimentally differentiate between Everett's view, which says that as the wave-function decoheres into distinct worlds, each of which exists equally, and the more traditional view that says that a decoherent wave-function leaves only one unique real result. Hence, the dispute between the two views represents a great "chasm". "Every characteristic of reality has reappeared in its reconstruction by our theoretical model; every feature except one: the uniqueness of facts." [ 25 ] Philosophy of thermal and statistical physics [ edit ] The philosophy of thermal and statistical physics is concerned with the foundational issues and conceptual implications of thermodynamics and statistical mechanics . These branches of physics deal with the macroscopic behavior of systems comprising a large number of microscopic entities, such as particles, and the nature of laws that emerge from these systems like irreversibility and entropy . Interest of philosophers in statistical mechanics first arose from the observation of an apparent conflict between the time-reversal symmetry of fundamental physical laws and the irreversibility observed in thermodynamic processes, known as the arrow of time problem. Philosophers have sought to understand how the asymmetric behavior of macroscopic systems, such as the tendency of heat to flow from hot to cold bodies, can be reconciled with the time-symmetric laws governing the motion of individual particles.

Another key issue is the interpretation of probability in statistical mechanics , which is primarily concerned with the question of whether probabilities in statistical mechanics are epistemic , reflecting our lack of knowledge about the precise microstate of a system, or ontic , representing an objective feature of the physical world. The epistemic interpretation, also known as the subjective or Bayesian view, holds that probabilities in statistical mechanics are a measure of our ignorance about the exact state of a system. According to this view, we resort to probabilistic descriptions only due to the practical impossibility of knowing the precise properties of all its micro-constituents, like the positions and momenta of particles. As such, the probabilities are not objective features of the world but rather arise from our ignorance. In contrast, the ontic interpretation, also called the objective or frequentist view, asserts that probabilities in statistical mechanics are real, physical properties of the system itself. Proponents of this view argue that the probabilistic nature of statistical mechanics is not merely a reflection of our ignorance but an intrinsic feature of the physical world, and that even if we had complete knowledge of the microstate of a system, the macroscopic behavior would still be best described by probabilistic laws.

History [ edit ] Aristotelian physics [ edit ] This section's factual accuracy is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help to ensure that disputed statements are reliably sourced .

( September 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Aristotelian physics viewed the universe as a sphere with a center. Matter, composed of the classical elements : earth, water, air, and fire; sought to go down towards the center of the universe, the center of the Earth, or up, away from it. Things in the aether such as the Moon, the Sun, planets, or stars circled the center of the universe.

[ 26 ] Movement is defined as change in place, [ 26 ] i.e. space.

[ 27 ] Newtonian physics [ edit ] The implicit axioms of Aristotelian physics with respect to movement of matter in space were superseded in Newtonian physics by Newton's first law of motion .

[ 28 ] Every body perseveres in its state either of rest or of uniform motion in a straight line, except insofar as it is compelled to change its state by impressed forces.

"Every body" includes the Moon, and an apple; and includes all types of matter, air as well as water, stones, or even a flame. Nothing has a natural or inherent motion.

[ 29 ] Absolute space being three-dimensional Euclidean space , infinite and without a center.

[ 29 ] Being "at rest" means being at the same place in absolute space over time.

[ 30 ] The topology and affine structure of space must permit movement in a straight line at a uniform velocity; thus both space and time must have definite, stable dimensions .

[ 31 ] Leibniz [ edit ] Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz , 1646–1716, was a contemporary of Newton. He contributed a fair amount to the statics and dynamics emerging around him, often disagreeing with Descartes and Newton . He devised a new theory of motion ( dynamics ) based on kinetic energy and potential energy , which posited space as relative, whereas Newton was thoroughly convinced that space was absolute. An important example of Leibniz's mature physical thinking is his Specimen Dynamicum of 1695.

[ 32 ] Until the discovery of subatomic particles and the quantum mechanics governing them, many of Leibniz's speculative ideas about aspects of nature not reducible to statics and dynamics made little sense.

He anticipated Albert Einstein by arguing, against Newton, that space , time and motion are relative, not absolute: [ 33 ] "As for my own opinion, I have said more than once, that I hold space to be something merely relative, as time is, that I hold it to be an order of coexistences, as time is an order of successions." [ 34 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Physics portal Anthropic principle Arrow of time Causality (physics) Causal closure Determinism Digital physics Mind-body dualism Functional decomposition Holism Instrumentalism Laws of thermodynamics Modal realism Monism Physical ontology Naturalism : Metaphysical Methodological Operationalism Phenomenology (particle physics) Philosophy of : Classical physics Space and time Thermodynamics and statistical mechanics Motion Physical Bodies Law System Physicalism Physics Aristotle Physics envy Quantum theory : Bohr-Einstein debates Einstein's thought experiments EPR paradox Interpretations of Metaphysics Mysticism Reductionism Relativity : General Special Space Absolute theory Container space Free space Relational space Relational theory Spacetime Supervenience Symmetry in physics Theophysics Time in physics References [ edit ] ^ Maudlin, Tim (2012).

Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time . Princeton University Press. p. xi.

ISBN 978-0691143095 . Retrieved 3 October 2017 .

...the existence and nature of space and time (or space-time) is a central topic.

^ Rovelli, C. (2004). Quantum Gravity. Cambridge Monographs on Mathematical Physics. p. 71.

^ Roger Penrose , 2004.

The Road to Reality : A Complete Guide to the Laws of the Universe . London: Jonathan Cape.

ISBN 0-224-04447-8 (hardcover), 0-09-944068-7 (paperback).

^ Rynasiewicz, Robert (2022), "Newton's Views on Space, Time, and Motion" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2022 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 28 July 2024 ^ BristolPhilosophy (19 February 2013).

"Eleanor Knox (KCL) – The Curious Case of the Vanishing Spacetime" .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2021 . Retrieved 7 April 2018 – via YouTube.

^ Bell, John S.

(1987).

Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics . Cambridge University Press. p. 65.

ISBN 9780521368698 .

OCLC 15053677 .

^ Einstein, A.

; Podolsky, B.

; Rosen, N.

(15 May 1935).

"Can Quantum-Mechanical Description of Physical Reality be Considered Complete?" .

Physical Review .

47 (10): 777– 780.

Bibcode : 1935PhRv...47..777E .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRev.47.777 .

^ Bell, J. S.

(1964).

"On the Einstein Podolsky Rosen Paradox" (PDF) .

Physics Physique Физика .

1 (3): 195– 200.

doi : 10.1103/PhysicsPhysiqueFizika.1.195 .

^ Parker, Sybil B. (1994).

McGraw-Hill Encyclopaedia of Physics (2nd ed.). McGraw-Hill. p.

542 .

ISBN 978-0-07-051400-3 .

^ Mermin, N. David (July 1993).

"Hidden Variables and the Two Theorems of John Bell" (PDF) .

Reviews of Modern Physics .

65 (3): 803– 15.

arXiv : 1802.10119 .

Bibcode : 1993RvMP...65..803M .

doi : 10.1103/RevModPhys.65.803 .

S2CID 119546199 .

^ "The Nobel Prize in Physics 2022" .

Nobel Prize (Press release).

The Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences . 4 October 2022 . Retrieved 6 October 2022 .

^ The BIG Bell Test Collaboration (9 May 2018). "Challenging local realism with human choices".

Nature .

557 (7704): 212– 216.

arXiv : 1805.04431 .

Bibcode : 2018Natur.557..212B .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-018-0085-3 .

PMID 29743691 .

S2CID 13665914 .

^ Wolchover, Natalie (7 February 2017).

"Experiment Reaffirms Quantum Weirdness" .

Quanta Magazine . Retrieved 8 February 2020 .

^ Niels Bohr, Atomic Physics and Human Knowledge , p. 38 ^ Faye, Jan (2019).

"Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Camilleri, K.; Schlosshauer, M. (2015). "Niels Bohr as Philosopher of Experiment: Does Decoherence Theory Challenge Bohr's Doctrine of Classical Concepts?".

Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics .

49 : 73– 83.

arXiv : 1502.06547 .

Bibcode : 2015SHPMP..49...73C .

doi : 10.1016/j.shpsb.2015.01.005 .

S2CID 27697360 .

^ Omnès, Roland (1999). "The Copenhagen Interpretation".

Understanding Quantum Mechanics . Princeton University Press. pp.

41– 54.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv173f2pm.9 .

S2CID 203390914 .

Bohr, Heisenberg, and Pauli recognized its main difficulties and proposed a first essential answer. They often met in Copenhagen ... 'Copenhagen interpretation has not always meant the same thing to different authors. I will reserve it for the doctrine held with minor differences by Bohr, Heisenberg, and Pauli.

^ Omnès, R.

(1994).

The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-03669-4 .

OCLC 439453957 .

^ David Wallace, 'The Emergent Multiverse', pp. 1–10 ^ David Wallace, 'The Emergent Multiverse', pp. 113–117 ^ David Wallace, 'The Emergent Multiverse', pg. 157–189 ^ Kent, Adrian (2010). "One world versus many: The inadequacy of Everettian accounts of evolution, probability, and scientific confirmation". In S. Saunders; J. Barrett; A. Kent; D. Wallace (eds.).

Many Worlds? Everett, Quantum Theory and Reality . Oxford University Press.

arXiv : 0905.0624 .

Bibcode : 2009arXiv0905.0624K .

^ Kent, Adrian (1990). "Against Many-Worlds Interpretations".

International Journal of Modern Physics A .

5 (9): 1745– 1762.

arXiv : gr-qc/9703089 .

Bibcode : 1990IJMPA...5.1745K .

doi : 10.1142/S0217751X90000805 .

S2CID 14523184 .

^ Price, Huw (2010). "Decisions, Decisions, Decisions: Can Savage Salvage Everettian Probability?". In S. Saunders; J. Barrett; A. Kent; D. Wallace (eds.).

Many Worlds? Everett, Quantum Theory and Reality . Oxford University Press.

arXiv : 0802.1390 .

^ Omnès, Roland (2002). "11".

Quantum philosophy : understanding and interpreting contemporary science (in French). Arturo Spangalli (transl.) (1st paperback ed.). Princeton: Princeton University Press. p. 213.

ISBN 978-1400822867 .

^ a b Tim Maudlin (2012-07-22).

Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time: Space and Time (Princeton Foundations of Contemporary Philosophy) (p. 3). Princeton University Press. Kindle Edition. "Because it is a sphere, Aristotle's universe contains a geometrically privileged center, and Aristotle makes reference to that center in characterizing the natural motions of different sorts of matter. 'Upward', 'downward', and 'uniform circular motion' all are defined in terms of the center of the universe." ^ Tim Maudlin (2012-07-22).

Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time: Space and Time (Princeton Foundations of Contemporary Philosophy) (p. 4). Princeton University Press. Kindle Edition.  "Aristotle adopts the concept of space, and the correlative concept of motion, that we all intuitively employ." ^ Tim Maudlin (2012-07-22).

Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time: Space and Time (Princeton Foundations of Contemporary Philosophy) (pp. 4–5). Princeton University Press. Kindle Edition. "Newtonian physics is implicit in his First Law of Motion: Law I : Every body perseveres in its state either of rest or of uniform motion in a straight line, except insofar as it is compelled to change its state by impressed forces. 1 This single law smashes the Aristotelian universe to smithereens." ^ a b Tim Maudlin (2012-07-22).

Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time: Space and Time (Princeton Foundations of Contemporary Philosophy) (pp. 5). Princeton University Press. Kindle Edition.

^ Tim Maudlin (2012-07-22).

Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time: Space and Time (Princeton Foundations of Contemporary Philosophy) (pp. 9–10). Princeton University Press. Kindle Edition. "Newton believed in the existence of a spatial arena with the geometrical structure of E 3 . He believed that this infinite three-dimensional space exists at every moment of time. And he also believed something much more subtle and controversial, namely, that identically the same points of space persist through time." ^ Tim Maudlin (2012-07-22).

Philosophy of Physics: Space and Time: Space and Time (Princeton Foundations of Contemporary Philosophy) (p. 12). Princeton University Press. Kindle Edition. "...space must have a topology, an affine structure, and a metric; time must be one-dimensional with a topology and a metric; and, most importantly, the individual parts of space must persist through time.

^ Ariew and Garber 117, Loemker §46, W II.5. On Leibniz and physics, see the chapter by Garber in Jolley (1995) and Wilson (1989).

^ Rafael Ferraro (2007).

Einstein's Space-Time: An Introduction to Special and General Relativity . Springer. p. 1.

ISBN 978-0-387-69946-2 .

^ See H. G. Alexander, ed., The Leibniz-Clarke Correspondence , Manchester: Manchester University Press, pp. 25–26.

Further reading [ edit ] David Albert , 1994.

Quantum Mechanics and Experience . Harvard Univ. Press.

John D. Barrow and Frank J. Tipler , 1986.

The Cosmological Anthropic Principle . Oxford Univ. Press.

Beisbart, C. and S. Hartmann, eds., 2011. "Probabilities in Physics". Oxford Univ. Press.

John S. Bell , 2004 (1987), Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics . Cambridge Univ. Press.

David Bohm , 1980.

Wholeness and the Implicate Order . Routledge.

Nick Bostrom , 2002.

Anthropic Bias: Observation Selection Effects in Science and Philosophy . Routledge.

Thomas Brody, 1993, Ed. by Luis de la Peña and Peter E. Hodgson The Philosophy Behind Physics Springer ISBN 3-540-55914-0 Harvey Brown , 2005.

Physical Relativity. Space-time structure from a dynamical perspective . Oxford Univ. Press.

Butterfield, J., and John Earman , eds., 2007.

Philosophy of Physics, Parts A and B . Elsevier.

Craig Callender and Nick Huggett, 2001.

Physics Meets Philosophy at the Planck Scale . Cambridge Univ. Press.

David Deutsch , 1997.

The Fabric of Reality . London: The Penguin Press.

Bernard d'Espagnat , 1989.

Reality and the Physicist . Cambridge Univ. Press. Trans. of Une incertaine réalité; le monde quantique, la connaissance et la durée .

--------, 1995.

Veiled Reality . Addison-Wesley.

--------, 2006.

On Physics and Philosophy . Princeton Univ. Press.

Roland Omnès , 1994.

The Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics . Princeton Univ. Press.

--------, 1999.

Quantum Philosophy . Princeton Univ. Press.

Huw Price, 1996.

Time's Arrow and Archimedes's Point . Oxford Univ. Press.

Lawrence Sklar, 1992.

Philosophy of Physics . Westview Press.

ISBN 0-8133-0625-6 , ISBN 978-0-8133-0625-4 Victor Stenger , 2000.

Timeless Reality . Prometheus Books.

Carl Friedrich von Weizsäcker , 1980.

The Unity of Nature . Farrar Straus & Giroux.

Werner Heisenberg , 1971.

Physics and Beyond: Encounters and Conversations . Harper & Row ( World Perspectives series), 1971.

William Berkson , 1974.

Fields of Force . Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.

ISBN 0-7100-7626-6 Encyclopædia Britannica, Philosophy of Physics, David Z. Albert External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Philosophy of physics .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy : " Absolute and Relational Theories of Space and Motion "—Nick Huggett and Carl Hoefer " Being and Becoming in Modern Physics "—Steven Savitt " Boltzmann's Work in Statistical Physics "—Jos Uffink " Conventionality of Simultaneity "—Allen Janis " Early Philosophical Interpretations of General Relativity "—Thomas A. Ryckman " Everett's Relative-State Formulation of Quantum Mechanics "—Jeffrey A. Barrett " Experiments in Physics "—Allan Franklin " Holism and Nonseparability in Physics "—Richard Healey " Intertheory Relations in Physics "—Robert Batterman " Naturalism "—David Papineau " Philosophy of Statistical Mechanics "—Lawrence Sklar " Physicalism "—Daniel Sojkal " Quantum Mechanics "—Jenann Ismael " Reichenbach's Common Cause Principle "—Frank Artzenius " Structural Realism "—James Ladyman " Structuralism in Physics "—Heinz-Juergen Schmidt " Supertasks "—JB Manchak and Bryan Roberts " Symmetry and Symmetry Breaking "— Katherine Brading and Elena Castellani " Thermodynamic Asymmetry in Time "—Craig Callender " Time "—by Ned Markosian " Time Machines " —John Earman, Chris Wüthrich, and JB Manchak " Uncertainty principle "—Jan Hilgevoord and Jos Uffink " The Unity of Science "—Jordi Cat v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Philosophy of time Concepts in time Time A priori and a posteriori A series and B series Action Duration Eternal return Eternity Event Aevum Imaginary time Multiple time dimensions Temporal parts Temporality Theories of time A-theory of time B-theory of time Endurantism Eternalism Four-dimensionalism Fatalism Finitism Growing block universe Perdurantism Presentism Related articles Etiology Metaphysics Post hoc ergo propter hoc Teleology " The Unreality of Time " The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time An Experiment with Time v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e Fundamental interactions of physics Physical forces Strong interaction fundamental residual Electroweak interaction weak interaction electromagnetism Gravitation Hypothetical forces Fifth force Quintessence Glossary of physics Particle physics Philosophy of physics Universe v t e Major branches of physics Divisions Pure Applied Engineering Approaches Experimental Theoretical Computational Classical Classical mechanics Newtonian Analytical Celestial Continuum Acoustics Classical electromagnetism Classical optics Ray Wave Thermodynamics Statistical Non-equilibrium Modern Relativistic mechanics Special General Nuclear physics Particle physics Quantum mechanics Atomic, molecular, and optical physics Atomic Molecular Modern optics Condensed matter physics Solid-state physics Crystallography Interdisciplinary Astrophysics Atmospheric physics Biophysics Chemical physics Geophysics Materials science Mathematical physics Medical physics Ocean physics Quantum information science Related History of physics Nobel Prize in Physics Philosophy of physics Physics education research Timeline of physics discoveries Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐rhtnh
Cached time: 20250816101231
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.634 seconds
Real time usage: 0.803 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3527/1000000
Revision size: 38638/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 233738/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2501/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 152667/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.353/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8103792/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  612.186      1 -total
 31.99%  195.844      1 Template:Reflist
 18.47%  113.051      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
 18.11%  110.884      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 17.90%  109.572     10 Template:Cite_book
  8.94%   54.712      1 Template:Short_description
  8.24%   50.427     13 Template:Navbox
  8.02%   49.077      1 Template:Commons_category
  7.76%   47.488      1 Template:Sister_project
  7.52%   46.019      1 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:123450:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816101231 and revision id 1295584561. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philosophy_of_physics&oldid=1295584561 " Categories : Philosophy of physics Philosophy of science Applied and interdisciplinary physics Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2017 Articles that may contain original research from September 2017 All articles that may contain original research Accuracy disputes from September 2022 All accuracy disputes Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 17:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philosophy of physics 30 languages Add topic

