Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Precursors 2 Freudian developments 3 Two principles Toggle Two principles subsection 3.1 The beyond 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Pleasure principle (psychology) 18 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά فارسی Français Italiano עברית 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Instinctual seeking of pleasure This article is about the psychoanalytical term. For other uses, see Pleasure principle .

Part of a series on Psychology Outline History Subfields Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Psychology portal v t e In Freudian psychoanalysis , the pleasure principle ( German : Lustprinzip ) [ 1 ] is the instinctive seeking of pleasure and avoiding of pain to satisfy biological and psychological needs .

[ 2 ] Specifically, the pleasure principle is the animating force behind the id .

[ 3 ] Precursors [ edit ] Epicurus in the ancient world, and later Jeremy Bentham , laid stress upon the role of pleasure in directing human life, the latter stating: "Nature has placed mankind under the governance of two sovereign masters, pain and pleasure ".

[ 4 ] Freud's most immediate predecessor and guide however was Gustav Theodor Fechner and his psychophysics .

[ 5 ] Some contemporary interpretations of the pleasure principle suggest that future advances in biotechnology and neuroscience may enable direct modulation of the biological substrates of pleasure and pain. According to this view, developments in nanomedicine , affective neuroscience , and post-genomic medicine could allow for precise control over emotional states, potentially minimizing suffering and enhancing well-being. This perspective envisions the pleasure-pain axis as not only a psychological drive but also a target for ethical and technical intervention.

[ 6 ] Freudian developments [ edit ] Freud used the idea that the mind seeks pleasure and avoids pain in his Project for a Scientific Psychology of 1895, [ 7 ] as well as in the theoretical portion of The Interpretation of Dreams of 1900, where he termed it the 'unpleasure principle'.

[ 8 ] In the Two Principles of Mental Functioning of 1911, contrasting it with the reality principle , Freud spoke for the first time of "the pleasure-unpleasure principle, or more shortly the pleasure principle".

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In 1923, linking the pleasure principle to the libido he described it as the watchman over life; and in Civilization and Its Discontents of 1930 he still considered that "what decides the purpose of life is simply the programme of the pleasure principle".

[ 10 ] While on occasion Freud wrote of the near omnipotence of the pleasure principle in mental life, [ 11 ] elsewhere he referred more cautiously to the mind's strong (but not always fulfilled) tendency towards the pleasure principle.

[ 12 ] Two principles [ edit ] Freud contrasted the pleasure principle with the counterpart concept of the reality principle , which describes the capacity to defer gratification of a desire when circumstantial reality disallows its immediate gratification. In infant and early childhood, the id rules behavior by obeying only the pleasure principle. People at that age only seek immediate gratification, aiming to satisfy cravings such as hunger and thirst, and at later ages the id seeks out sex.

[ 13 ] Maturity is learning to endure the pain of deferred gratification. Freud argued that "an ego thus educated has become 'reasonable'; it no longer lets itself be governed by the pleasure principle, but obeys the reality principle, which also, at bottom, seeks to obtain pleasure, but pleasure which is assured through taking account of reality, even though it is pleasure postponed and diminished".

[ 13 ] The beyond [ edit ] In his book Beyond the Pleasure Principle , published in 1921, Freud considered the possibility of "the operation of tendencies beyond the pleasure principle, that is, of tendencies more primitive than it and independent of it".

[ 14 ] By examining the role of repetition compulsion in potentially over-riding the pleasure principle, [ 15 ] Freud ultimately developed his opposition between Libido , the life instinct, and the death drive .

See also [ edit ] Hedonism Id, ego and super-ego Ignacio Matte Blanco Jouissance Pierre Janet Reality principle Self-control Utilitarianism References [ edit ] ^ Laplanche, Jean ; Pontalis, Jean-Bertrand (2018) [1973].

"Pleasure Principle" .

The Language of Psychoanalysis .

Abingdon-on-Thames : Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-429-92124-7 .

^ Snyder, C. R.

; Lopez, Shane J. (2007).

Positive Psychology . Sage Publications, Inc.

ISBN 978-0-7619-2633-7 .

^ Carlson, Neil R.; Heth, C. Donald (2007).

Psychology - the science of behaviour . Pearson Education Canada. pp.

700 .

ISBN 978-0-205-64524-4 .

^ R. Gregory ed., The Oxford Companion to the Mind (1987) p. 308.

^ Sigmund Freud, On Metapsychology (PFL 11), pp. 276-7.

^ Can Biotechnology Abolish Suffering?

. Kindle Edition. 2017. p. 219.

^ Peter Gay, Freud (1989), p. 80.

^ a b On Metapsychology , p. 36.

^ Nagera, Humberto, ed. (2014) [1970].

"The Pleasure Principle (pp. 60—61)" .

Basic Psychoanalytic Concepts on Metapsychology, Conflicts, Anxiety and Other Subjects . Abingdon-on-Thames: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-31767042-1 .

^ Sigmund Freud, Civilization, Society and Religion (PFL 12), p. 263.

^ Sigmund Freud, On Psychopathology (PFL 10), p. 243.

^ On Metapsychology , p. 278.

^ a b Sigmund Freud, Introductory Lectures 16.357.

^ On Metapsychology , p. 287.

^ On Metapsychology , p. 293.

External links [ edit ] Look up pleasure principle in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Pleasure/unpleasure principle Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pleasure_principle_(psychology)&oldid=1300137898 " Categories : Psychoanalytic terminology Motivation Positive psychology Pleasure Energy and instincts Freudian psychology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2024 Articles with excerpts Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 13:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pleasure principle (psychology) 18 languages Add topic

