Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Research facilities 3 Gallery of Research 4 Publications 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Austrian Academy of Sciences 30 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Magyar مصرى Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenščina Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 48°12′32.0″N 16°22′37.4″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.208889°N 16.377056°E ﻿ / 48.208889; 16.377056 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Science academy in Austria "ÖAW" redirects here. For other uses, see OAW (disambiguation) .

Austrian Academy of Sciences Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften Austrian Academy of Sciences Agency overview Formed 1847 ; 178 years ago ( 1847 ) Type National academy Jurisdiction Austria Headquarters Vienna, Austria 48°12′32.0″N 16°22′37.4″E ﻿ / ﻿ 48.208889°N 16.377056°E ﻿ / 48.208889; 16.377056 Agency executives Heinz Faßmann , President Ulrike Diebold , Vice President Website www.oeaw.ac.at Map The Austrian Academy of Sciences (German: Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften ; ÖAW ) is a legal entity under the special protection of the Republic of Austria. According to the statutes of the Academy its mission is to promote the sciences and humanities in every respect and in every field, particularly in fundamental research.

History [ edit ] In 1713, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz suggested to establish an Academy, inspired by the Royal Society and the French Academy of Sciences . The "Kaiserliche Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien" was finally established by Imperial Patent on 14 May 1847. The academy soon began extensive research. In the humanities the academy started with researching and publishing important historical sources of Austria. Research in natural science also covered a wide variety of topics.

The 1921 federal law guaranteed the legal basis of the academy in the newly founded First Austrian Republic . From the mid-1960s onwards it became the country's leading institution in the field of non-university basic research.

[ citation needed ] The academy is also a learned society , and its past members have included Theodor Billroth , Ludwig Boltzmann , Christian Doppler , Anton Eiselsberg , Otto Hittmair , Paul Kretschmer , Hans Horst Meyer , Albert Anton von Muchar , Julius von Schlosser , Roland Scholl , Eduard Suess and the Nobel Prize winners Julius Wagner-Jauregg , Victor Francis Hess , Erwin Schrödinger and Konrad Lorenz .

[ 1 ] Anton Zeilinger , predecessor of the academy's incumbent president, is Nobel Prize laureate in physics 2022.

[ 2 ] Research facilities [ edit ] The academy operates 25 research institutes. In 2012, a reorganization prompted the outsourcing of various institutes to universities as well as mergers. The academy's institutes are split into two major divisions, one for mathematics and natural sciences ( mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche Klasse ) and one for humanities and social sciences ( philosophisch-historische Klasse ).

In the field of humanities , there are the Institute for the Study of Ancient Culture , which is well known for the analysis of excavation results in Carnuntum and Ephesos , the Institute for Interdisciplinary Mountain Research , focusing on montology , the Institute of Culture Studies and Theatre History , and the Vienna Institute of Demography , among others.

The academy conducts socio-cultural research in Tibetan-speaking Himalayas, Tibet, and central Asia.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Facilities that focus on natural sciences include the Institute of Molecular Biotechnology (which is operated in cooperation with Boehringer Ingelheim ), the Gregor Mendel Institute , the Aithyra Institute for biomedical Artificial Intelligence, the Johann Radon Institute for Computational and Applied Mathematics (RICAM), Linz , the Research Center for Molecular Medicine , the Erich Schmid Institute of Materials Science , the Institute for Quantum Optics and Quantum Information , the Acoustics Research Institute , the Space Research Institute and the Institute for High Energy Physics (HEPHY), Wien .

Gallery of Research [ edit ] During his term as president of the academy (1991–2003), Werner Welzig initiated the establishment of the Galerie der Forschung (English: Gallery of Research).

[ 6 ] In 2005 the Gallery organised its pilot event "Mapping controversies: the case of the genetically modified food", [ 7 ] which was staged in the Alte Aula in Vienna.

Publications [ edit ] Via its Austrian Academy of Sciences Press imprint, the academy publishes Medieval Worlds: Comparative & Interdisciplinary Studies , a biannual peer-reviewed open access academic journal covering Medieval studies . Other publications are the Corpus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Latinorum and eco.mont – Journal on Protected Mountain Areas Research and Management . Also Memoranda of the Academy of Knowledge. Mathematical and natural science class (Denkschriften der Akademie der Wissenschaften), which was founded in 1850.

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ Basic information from official website Archived 2 October 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Anton Zeilinger: Nobel Prize Winner in Physics" .

Austrian Academy of Sciences . Retrieved 3 January 2023 .

^ Interaction in the Himalayas and Central Asia: Process of Transfer, Translation and Transformation in Art, Archaeology, Religion and Polity . ÖAW. 2017.

^ "ISA Regional Group Tibet, Mongolia, Central Asia and Tibetan-speaking Himalaya Regions" .

www.oeaw.ac.at . Retrieved 17 August 2023 .

^ "Book on Cultural Flows in Western Himalaya" .

asia-europe.uni-heidelberg.de . 3 March 2015.

^ "Press release of the Austrian Academy of Sciences" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 May 2011 . Retrieved 24 February 2009 .

^ "Announcement of the event on the website of the European Commission" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 March 2007 . Retrieved 24 February 2009 .

^ "Zobodat – Literatur Serien" .

www.zobodat.at . Retrieved 9 August 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Austrian Academy of Sciences .

Official website v t e International Science Council (ISC) National members Albania Angola Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Benin Bolivia Bosnia & Herzegovina Republika Srpska Botswana Brazil ANPOCS Bulgaria Burkina Faso Cameroon Canada SSHRC Chile China CASS Colombia Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Cuba Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Egypt El Salvador Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Finland France Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Guatemala Honduras Hungary India ICSSR Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya North Korea South Korea KSSRC KAST Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Mauritius Mexico COMECSO Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Namibia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nigeria North Macedonia Norway UB Oman Pakistan PAS PCSIR Panama Peru Philippines PSSC Poland Portugal Romania Russia Rwanda Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Singapore Slovak Republic Slovenia South Africa HSRC Spain Sri Lanka Sudan SNAS Sweden Switzerland Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Togo Tunisia Turkey Science Academy TÜBİTAK Uganda Ukraine United Kingdom British Academy ESRC United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Zambia Zimbabwe RCZ Transnational members ACSS AASSREC CASS CLACSO CODESRIA FLACSO UAI OSSREA USP Unions and associations 4S IALS IASSA IAU ICA IEA IFSM IGU IMU INQUA IPRA IPSA ISA ISEE ISPRS IUBMB IUBS IUCr IUFoST IUFRO IUGG IUGS IUHPST IUIS IUMRS IUMS IUNS IUPAB IUPAC IUPAP IUPESM IUPHAR IUPS IUPsyS IUSS IUSSP IUTAM IUTOX URSI WAPOR WAU Affiliated members AAS AASSA ACSS ASTC CIE EADI ECPR FIG GYA IAAP IAHR IASC ICA ICIAM ICLAS ICO ICSTI IFDO IFIP IFLA IFS IIASA ISA ISDE IUVSTA IWA PSA SSRC TNI TWAS UIS Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic 2 Norway 2 Croatia Greece Poland Vatican Israel Geographic MusicBrainz place Academics CiNii Artists ULAN Other IdRef 2 Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Austrian_Academy_of_Sciences&oldid=1252412053 " Categories : Austrian Academy of Sciences Organisations based in Vienna 1921 establishments in Austria Scientific organizations established in 1921 Members of the International Council for Science Members of the International Science Council Himalayan studies Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2021 Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 21 October 2024, at 06:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Austrian Academy of Sciences 30 languages Add topic

