Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 2.1 By Nietzsche 2.2 By Marxists and socialists 3 See also 4 Notes 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Art for art's sake 39 languages Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Slogan for art without any didactic, moral or utilitarian function This article is about the English expression. For other uses, see Art for Art's Sake (disambiguation) .

Art for art's sake —the usual English rendering of l'art pour l'art ( pronounced [laʁ puʁ laʁ] ), a French slogan from the latter half of the 19th century—is a phrase that expresses the philosophy that 'true' art is utterly independent of all social values and utilitarian functions, be they didactic , moral , or political . Such works are sometimes described as autotelic (from Greek: autoteles , 'complete in itself'), a concept also applied to "inner-directed" or "self-motivated" persons.

The phrase is sometimes used commercially. A Latin version of this phrase, ars gratia artis ( Classical Latin : [ˈars ˈɡraːtiaː ˈartɪs] ), is used as a motto by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer film studio, appearing in the film scroll around the roaring head of Leo the Lion in its logo.

History [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( September 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The phrase " l'art pour l'art " had been used by Parisian intellectuals since the beginning of the 19th century, but it was Théophile Gautier (1811–1872) who first fully articulated its current metaphysical meaning in the prefaces of his 1832 poetry volume Albertus and 1835 novel Mademoiselle de Maupin .

[ 1 ] The phrase also appeared in the lectures and writings of Victor Cousin [ 2 ] and Benjamin Constant . In his essay " The Poetic Principle " (1850) Edgar Allan Poe argues: We have taken it into our heads that to write a poem simply for the poem's sake ... and to acknowledge such to have been our design, would be to confess ourselves radically wanting in the true poetic dignity and force:– but the simple fact is that would we but permit ourselves to look into our own souls we should immediately there discover that under the sun there neither exists nor can exist any work more thoroughly dignified, more supremely noble, than this very poem, this poem per se, this poem which is a poem and nothing more, this poem written solely for the poem's sake.

[ 3 ] "Art for the sake of art" became a bohemian creed in the 19th century; a slogan raised in defiance of those—from John Ruskin to the later Communist advocates of socialist realism —who thought that the value of art was to serve some moral or didactic purpose. It was a rejection of the Marxist aim of politicising art . "Art for the sake of art" affirmed that art was valuable in itself; that artistic pursuits did not need moral justification, and indeed, could legitimately be morally neutral or subversive .

[ citation needed ] James McNeill Whistler wrote the following, deprecating the accustomed role of art in the service of the state or official religion, as had been common practice since the Counter-Reformation of the 16th century: "Art should be independent of all claptrap – should stand alone...and appeal to the artistic sense of eye or ear, without confounding this with emotions entirely foreign to it, as devotion, pity, love, patriotism and the like." [ 4 ] In this brusque dismissal, the artist also rejected sentimentalism . All that remains of Romanticism in this statement is the reliance on the artist's own eye and sensibility as the arbiter.

In English art and letters, the slogan is associated with Walter Pater and his Aesthetic Movement , which self-consciously rebelled against Victorian moralism . It first appeared in print in English in two works of 1868: Pater's review of William Morris 's poetry in the Westminster Review , and Algernon Charles Swinburne 's study William Blake . However, William Makepeace Thackeray had used the term privately in an 1839 letter to his mother in which he recommended Thomas Carlyle 's Miscellanies , writing that Carlyle had done more than any other to give "art for art's sake ... its independence." [ 5 ] A modified form of Pater's review appeared in his Studies in the History of the Renaissance (1873), one of the most influential texts of the Aesthetic Movement.

[ 6 ] Arnold Bennett made the facetious riposte: "Am I to sit still and see other fellows pocketing two guineas apiece for stories which I can do better myself? Not me. If anyone imagines my sole aim is art for art's sake, they are cruelly deceived." [ 7 ] In Germany, the poet Stefan George was one of the first artists to translate the phrase ( Kunst für die Kunst ) and adopt it for his own literary programme, presented in the first volume of his literary magazine Blätter für die Kunst (1892). He was inspired mainly by Charles Baudelaire and the French Symbolists whom he had met in Paris, where he was friends with Albert Saint-Paul and consorted with the circle around Stéphane Mallarmé .

[ citation needed ] Criticism [ edit ] By Nietzsche [ edit ] Friedrich Nietzsche argued that there is 'no art for art's sake', the arts always express human values and communicate core beliefs: When the purpose of moral preaching and of improving man has been excluded from art, it still does not follow by any means that art is altogether purposeless, aimless, senseless—in short, l'art pour l'art , a worm chewing its own tail. "Rather no purpose at all than a moral purpose!"—that is the talk of mere passion. A psychologist, on the other hand, asks: what does all art do? does it not praise? glorify? choose? prefer? With all this it strengthens or weakens certain valuations. Is this merely a "moreover"? an accident? something in which the artist's instinct had no share? Or is it not the very presupposition of the artist's ability? Does his basic instinct aim at art, or rather at the sense of art, at life? at a desirability of life? Art is the great stimulus to life: how could one understand it as purposeless, as aimless, as l'art pour l'art ?

[ 8 ] By Marxists and socialists [ edit ] Marxists have argued that art should be politicised for the sake of transmitting the socialist message.

[ 9 ] George Sand , who was not a Marxist but a socialist writer, [ 10 ] [ 11 ] wrote in 1872 that L'art pour l'art was an empty phrase, an idle sentence. She asserted that artists had a "duty to find an adequate expression to convey it to as many souls as possible," ensuring that their works were accessible enough to be appreciated.

[ 12 ] Senegalese president, head of the Socialist Party of Senegal , and co-founder of Negritude , Leopold Sedar Senghor , and anti-colonial Africanist writer Chinua Achebe have both criticised the slogan as being a limited and Eurocentric view on art and creation. Senghor argued that, in "black African aesthetics," art is "functional" and that in "black Africa, 'art for art's sake' does not exist." [ 13 ] Achebe is more scathing in his collection of essays and criticism entitled Morning Yet on Creation Day , in which he asserts that "art for the sake of art is just another piece of deodorised dog shit [sic]." [ 14 ] Walter Benjamin , one of the developers of Marxist hermeneutics , [ 15 ] discusses the slogan in his seminal 1936 essay " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction ". He first mentions it in regard to the reaction within the realm of traditional art to innovations in reproduction, in particular photography . He even terms the " L'art pour l'art " slogan as part of a " theology of art" in bracketing off social aspects. In the Epilogue to his essay, Benjamin discusses the links between fascism and art. His main example is that of Futurism and the thinking of its mentor Filippo Tommaso Marinetti . One of the slogans of the Futurists was " Fiat ars – pereat mundus " ('Let art be created, though the world perish'). Provocatively, Benjamin concludes that as long as fascism expects war "to supply the artistic gratification of a sense of perception that has been changed by technology," then this is the "consummation," the realization, of " L'art pour l'art ." [ 16 ] [ clarification needed ] Diego Rivera , who was a member of the Mexican Communist Party and "a supporter of the revolutionary cause," claims that the art for the sake of art theory would further divide the rich from the poor. Rivera goes on to say that since one of the characteristics of so called "pure art" was that it could only be appreciated by a few superior people, the art movement would strip art from its value as a social tool and ultimately make art into a currency-like item that would only be available to the rich.

[ 17 ] Chinese communist leader Mao Zedong said: "There is in fact no such thing as art for art's sake, art that stands above classes, art that is detached from or independent of politics.

Proletarian literature and art are part of the whole proletarian revolutionary cause; they are, as Lenin said, cogs and wheels in the whole revolutionary machine." [ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Critical theory Intrinsic motivation Parnassianism Art for art Notes [ edit ] ^ Schaffer, Aaron (1928). "Théophile Gautier and "L'art pour l'art" ".

The Sewanee Review .

36 (4): 405– 417.

^ " Art for art's sake " (revised ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . [1999] 2015.

^ Poe, Edgar Allan (1850).

"The Poetic Principle" . E. A. Poe Society of Baltimore.

Archived from the original on 18 August 2007 . Retrieved 2007-08-08 .

^ Edwards, Owen (April 2006).

"Refined Palette" .

Smithsonian Magazine : 29 . Retrieved 2007-08-08 .

^ Sanders, Charles Richard (1977).

Carlyle's Friendships and Other Studies . Durham, N.C.: Duke University Press. p. 234.

ISBN 978-0-8223-0389-3 .

^ Martin, Joseph (1985). "Conrad and the Aesthetic Movement".

Conradiana .

17 (3): 199– 213.

ISSN 0010-6356 .

JSTOR 24634525 .

^ Bennett, Arnold (1966–1986). James G. Hepburn (ed.).

Letters of Arnold Bennett; . London: Oxford U. P. p. 19.

ISBN 0-19-212185-5 .

OCLC 364280 .

^ Nietzsche, Twilight of the Idols , "Skirmishes of an Untimely Man," § 24 ^ "Marxism, Art and Utopia: Critical Theory and Political Aesthetics" . 27 January 2017.

^ Hart, Kathleen (2004).

Revolution and Women's Autobiography in Nineteenth-century France . Rodopi. p. 91.

^ Lewis, Linda M. (2003).

Germaine de Staël, George Sand, and the Victorian Woman Artist . University of Missouri Press. p. 48.

^ Letters of George Sand, Vol 3 ^ Beier, Ulli (2002). "Léopold Sédar Senghor: A Personal Memoir".

Research in African Literatures .

33 (4): 3– 11.

ISSN 0034-5210 .

JSTOR 3820493 .

^ Achebe, Chinua. 1975.

Morning Yet on Creation Day . Michigan: Heinemann Educational Books , p. 19. (Paperback reprint 1976. New York: Anchor Press/Doubleday, p. 25.) ^ Erasmus: Speculum Scientarium , 25 , p. 162: "the different versions of Marxist hermeneutics by the examples of Walter Benjamin's Origins of the German Tragedy [ sic ], ... and also by Ernst Bloch's Hope the Principle [ sic ]." ^ Benjamin, Walter. 1973. "The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction." In Illuminations . London: Fontana Press. p. 23.

ISBN 0-00-686248-9 .

^ Rivera, Diego. 1932. " The revolutionary spirit in modern art ." The Modern Quarterly (Baltimore) 6(3):51–57. p. 52. – via International Center for the Arts of the Americas . Retrieved 2020 September 19.

^ "Talks at the Yenan Forum on Literature and Art" (May 1942), Selected Works , Vol. III, p. 86. Via Quotations of Chairman Mao Zedong , accessed via the Marxists Internet Archive here .

External links [ edit ] Look up art for art's sake in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Dictionary of the History of Ideas : Art for Art's Sake Art History Resources : art for the sake of art Explained v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Théophile Gautier Novels Fortunio (1837) Avatar (1856) Captain Fracasse (1863) Short fiction " La Morte Amoureuse " (1836) " The Mummy's Foot " (1840) " One of Cleopatra's Nights " (1838) One of Cleopatra's Nights and Other Fantastic Romances (1882) Poetry Émaux et Camées (1852) Libretti Giselle (1841) La Péri (1843) Family Théophile Gautier, fils (son) Judith Gautier (daughter) Related Art for art's sake Category Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Art_for_art%27s_sake&oldid=1297394135 " Categories : 1830s neologisms Avant-garde art Concepts in aesthetics Concepts in epistemology English phrases History of art Mottos Phrases Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Théophile Gautier Slogans Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Pages with French IPA Articles containing Latin-language text Pages with Classical Latin IPA Articles needing additional references from September 2020 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2020 Articles containing German-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2024 This page was last edited on 25 June 2025, at 23:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Art for art's sake 39 languages Add topic

