Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Meiofaunal taxa 2 Collecting meiofauna Toggle Collecting meiofauna subsection 2.1 Sampling methodologies 2.2 Extraction methodologies 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Meiobenthos 7 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch Eesti فارسی Polski Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group of marine and fresh water organisms defined by their small size Part of a series related to Benthic life Benthos Benthic zone Benthopelagic coupling Seabed By size Macrobenthos Meiobenthos Microbenthos By type Zoobenthos Phytobenthos By location Endobenthos Epibenthos Hyperbenthos By habitat Shallow: Tide pool Bay mud Bivalve reef Mangrove forest Coral reef Seagrass meadow Deep Seamount Cold seep Hydrothermal vent Communities Benthic fish Benthopelagic fish Bottom feeder Deep sea Deep sea communities Demersal fish Intertidal ecology Hydrothermal vent microbial communities Related Epibenthic sled Van Veen grab sampler Bioirrigation Bioturbation Demersal zone Marine sediment Marine life portal v t e Meiobenthos , also called meiofauna , are small benthic invertebrates that live in marine or freshwater environments , or both. The term meiofauna loosely defines a group of organisms by their size—larger than microfauna but smaller than macrofauna —rather than by their taxonomy . This fauna includes both animals that turn into macrofauna later in life, and those small enough to belong to the meiobenthos their entire life. In marine environments there can be thousands of individuals in 10 cubic centimeters of sediment, and counts animals like nematodes, copepods , rotifers , tardigrades and ostracods , but protists like ciliates and foraminifers within the size range of the meiobenthos are also often included. In practice, the term usually includes organisms that can pass through a 1 mm mesh but are retained by a 45 μm mesh, though exact dimensions may vary.

[ 1 ] Whether an organism will pass through a 1 mm mesh also depends upon whether it is alive or dead at the time of sorting.

The terms meiobenthos and meiofauna were first coined and defined in 1942 by marine biologist Molly Mare , [ 2 ] with both terms being derived from the Greek “μείων” ( méio - "less"). However, organisms that fit into the modern meiofauna category have been studied since the 18th century.

Meiofaunal taxa [ edit ] Meiofaunal taxa based on the scheme of Nielsen (2001) meiofaunal taxa shown in bold Protozoa Foraminifera Ciliophora Animalia — Eumetazoa Cnidaria Triploblastica—Bilateria Protostomia Spiralia Mollusca Annelida Phoronida Brachiopoda Polyzoa Entoprocta Ectoprocta Platyhelminthes ( Turbellaria ) Nemertea Gnathifera Rotifera Gnathostomulida Chaetognatha Micrognathozoa Gastrotricha Ecdysozoa Panarthropoda Tardigrada Onychophora Arthropoda Amphipoda Cladocera Cumacea Copepoda Isopoda Ostracoda Mystacocarida Syncarida Tanaidacea Thermosbaenacea Halacaridae Pycnogonida Palpigradida Insecta Nematoda Scalidophora Priapulida Kinorhyncha Loricifera Deuterostomia Ambulacraria Echinodermata Hemichordata Pterobranchia Entropneusta Chordata Olfactores Cephalochordata Live foraminifera Ammonia tepida ( Rotaliida ) Water bear Hypsibius dujardini Gastrotrich Collecting meiofauna [ edit ] Van Veen grab Meiofauna are most commonly encountered in sedimentary environments in both marine and freshwater environments, from the littoral to the deep-sea . They can also be found on hard substrates living on algae , the phytal environment , and sessile animals ( barnacles , mussel beds, etc.).

Sampling methodologies [ edit ] Sampling the meiobenthos is dependent upon the environment and whether quantitative or qualitative samples are required. In the sedimentary environment, the methodology used also depends on the physical morphology of the sediment. For qualititative sampling within the littoral zone, for both coarse and fine sediment, a bucket and spade will work. In the sub-littoral and deep water, some form of grab (like the Van Veen grab sampler ) is required, although a fine mesh (about 0.25 mm or less) would work also.

For the quantitative sampling of sedimentary environments at all depths, a wide variety of samplers have been devised. The simplest is a plastic syringe with the end cut off to form a piston corer which can be deployed in the littoral zone, or in the sub-littoral using SCUBA gear. Generally the deeper the water, the more complicated the sampling process becomes. For sampling the meiofauna on hard substrates or phytal or epizootic environments, the only practical methodology is to cut or scrape off a known area of the substrate and place it in a plastic bag.

Extraction methodologies [ edit ] There are a wide variety of methods for extracting meiofauna from the samples of their habitat depending upon whether live or fixed specimens are required.  For extracting live meiofauna, one has to contend with the large number of species that cling or attach themselves to the substrate when disturbed.  In order to get the meiofauna to release their grip, there are three methodologies available.

The first, and simplest, is osmotic shock , which is achieved by submerging the sample in fresh water for a few seconds (this only works for marine samples). This will cause the organisms to release, after which they can be shaken free from the substrate and filtered out through a 45 μm mesh and immediately returned to fresh filtered seawater.  Many organisms will come through this process unharmed as long as the osmotic shock does not last too long.

The second methodology is the use of an anaesthetic . The preferred chemical solution for meiobenthologists is isotonic magnesium chloride (7.5g MgCl 2 ·6H 2 O per 100 mL of distilled water). The sample is immersed in the isotonic solution and left for a period of 15 min, after which the meiofauna are shaken free of the substrate and again filtered out through a 45 μm mesh and immediately returned to fresh filtered seawater.

The third methodology is Uhlig's seawater ice technique.

[ 3 ] This relies on the organisms moving ahead of a front of ice-cold seawater moving down through the sample, ultimately forcing them out of the sediment. It is most effective on samples from temperate and tropical regions.

For major studies where large numbers of samples are collected concurrently, samples are normally fixed using a 10% formalin solution, and the meiofauna are extracted at a later date. There are two main extraction methodologies. The first, decantation , works best with coarse sediments. Samples are shaken in an excess of water, the sediment is briefly allowed to settle, and then the meiofauna are filtered off. The second methodology, the flotation technique, works best with finer sediments, where the mass of the sediment particles is close to that of the meiofauna. The best solution for this technique is the colloidal silica Ludox. The sample is stirred into the Ludox solution and left to settle for 40 min, after which the meiofauna are filtered out. In fine sediments, extraction efficiency is improved with centrifugation . With both methodologies, repeated extractions should be made (at least three) with each sample to ensure that at least 95% of the meiofauna is extracted.

See also [ edit ] Mesofauna Orsten , a fossil deposit which preserves numerous meiofauna References [ edit ] ^ Sedimentary Coastal Zones from High to Low Latitudes: Similarities and Differences ^ Molly F. Mare (October 1942).

"A study of a marine benthic community with special reference to the micro-organisms" (PDF) .

Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom .

25 (3): 517– 554.

doi : 10.1017/S0025315400055132 .

ISSN 0025-3154 .

Wikidata Q56043976 .

{{ cite journal }} : Wikipedia Library link in |url= ( help ) ^ Uhlig, G.; Thiel, H.; Gray, J. S. (1973-05-01).

"The quantitative separation of meiofauna" .

Helgoländer wissenschaftliche Meeresuntersuchungen .

25 (1): 173– 195.

Bibcode : 1973HWM....25..173U .

doi : 10.1007/BF01609968 .

ISSN 1438-3888 .

S2CID 46016793 .

Giere, Olav (2009).

Meiobenthology: The microscopic motile fauna of aquatic sediments , 2nd edition, Springer.

ISBN 978-3-540-68657-6 .

Higgins, R.P. and Thiel, H. (1988).

Introduction to the study of meiofauna . Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington D.C.

ISBN 0-87474-488-1 Mare, M.F.

(1942). A study of a marine benthic community with special reference to the micro-organisms.

Journal of the Marine Biological Association of the United Kingdom , 25 :517-554.

Nielsen, C. (2001).

Animal evolution: Interrelationships of the living phyla . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-850682-1 Uhlig, G., Thiel, H. and Gray, J.S. (1973). The quantitative separation of meiofauna.

Helgoländer wissenschaftliche Meeresuntersuchungen , 11 : 178–185.

External links [ edit ] International Association of Miobenthologists v t e Aquatic ecosystems General components and freshwater ecosystems General Acoustic ecology Algal bloom Anoxic waters Aquatic adaptation Aquatic animal Insect Mammal Water bird Aquatic biomonitoring Aquatic plant Aquatic population dynamics Aquatic predation Aquatic respiration Aquatic science Aquatic toxicology Benthos Bioluminescence Biomass Cascade effect Colored dissolved organic matter Dead zone Ecohydrology Eutrophication Fisheries science Food chain Food web GIS and aquatic science Hydrobiology Hypoxia Macrobenthos Meiobenthos Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial loop Nekton Neuston Particle Pelagic zone Photic zone Phytoplankton Plankton Pleuston Productivity Ramsar Convention Sediment trap Semiaquatic Shoaling and schooling Siltation Spawn Stable isotope analysis in aquatic ecosystems Stream metabolism Substrate Thermal pollution Trophic level Underwater camouflage Water column Zooplankton Freshwater Freshwater biology Freshwater biome Freshwater environmental quality parameters Freshwater fish Hyporheic zone Limnology Lake ecosystem Lake stratification Macrophyte Pond Fish pond Rheotaxis River Ecosystem Stream bed Stream pool Trophic state index Upland and lowland Water garden Wetland Bog Brackish marsh Fen Freshwater marsh Freshwater swamp forest Ecoregions List of freshwater ecoregions (WWF) Africa and Madagascar Latin America and the Caribbean List of marine ecoregions Specific examples Everglades Maharashtra North Pacific Subtropical Gyre San Francisco Estuary Marine ecosystems ( components ) General Deep scattering layer Diel vertical migration f-ratio Iron fertilization Large marine ecosystem Marine biology Marine chemistry Marine food web Marine primary production Marine snow Ocean fertilization Oceanic physical-biological process Ocean turbidity Photophore Thorson's rule Upwelling Viral shunt Whale fall Marine life Census of Marine Life Deep-sea community Deep-water coral Marine fungi Marine invertebrates Marine larval ecology Seagrass Seashore wildlife Wild fisheries Microorganisms Marine bacteriophage Marine prokaryotes Marine protists Marine viruses Paradox of the plankton Vertebrates Marine mammal Marine reptile Saltwater fish Coastal fish Coral reef fish Deep-sea fish Demersal fish Pelagic fish Seabird Marine habitats Bay mud Marine coastal ecosystem Coastal biogeomorphology Cold seep Coral reef Davidson Seamount § Ecology Estuary Intertidal ecology Intertidal wetland Kelp forest Hydrothermal vent Lagoon Mangrove Marine biomes Mudflat Oyster reef Rocky shore Salt marsh Salt pannes and pools Seagrass meadow Sponge ground Sponge reef Tide pool Conservation Coral bleaching Ecological values of mangroves Fisheries and climate change HERMIONE Human impact on marine life Marine conservation activism Marine pollution Marine protected area Lakes portal Oceans portal Category v t e Groups of organisms in aquatic ecosystems Benthos Macrobenthos Meiobenthos Herpon Nekton Neuston Pechton / Pecton / Pekton Plankton Pleuston Plocon Seston Tripton Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Meiobenthos&oldid=1292779032 " Categories : Zoology 1940s neologisms Hidden categories: CS1 errors: URL Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 19:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Meiobenthos 7 languages Add topic

