Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Economics 2.2 Orientalism and China 2.3 On Taxation 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents François Quesnay 51 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Magyar Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska తెలుగు Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French physician, Physiocratic economist, and orientalist (1694–1774) François Quesnay Portrait, after 1743 Born ( 1694-06-04 ) 4 June 1694 Méré near Versailles , France Died 16 December 1774 (1774-12-16) (aged 80) Versailles , France Philosophical work Era Age of Enlightenment Region Western philosophy French philosophy School Physiocrats Main interests Political economy , Sinology Notable ideas Laissez-faire François Quesnay ( / k eɪ ˈ n eɪ / ; French: [fʁɑ̃swa kɛnɛ] ; 4 June 1694 – 16 December 1774) was a French economist and physician of the Physiocratic school.

[ 1 ] He is known for publishing the " Tableau économique " (Economic Table) in 1758, which provided the foundations of the ideas of the Physiocrats.

[ 2 ] This was perhaps the first work attempting to describe the workings of the economy in an analytical way, and as such can be viewed as one of the first important contributions to economic thought. His Le Despotisme de la Chine , written in 1767, describes Chinese politics and society, and his own political support for enlightened despotism .

[ 3 ] Life [ edit ] Quesnay was born at Méré near Versailles , the son of an advocate and small landed proprietor.

Apprenticed at the age of sixteen to a surgeon, he soon went to Paris, studied medicine and surgery there, and, having qualified as a master-surgeon, settled down to practice at Mantes . In 1737 he was appointed perpetual secretary of the academy of surgery founded by François Gigot de la Peyronie , and became surgeon in ordinary to King Louis XV . In 1744 he graduated as a doctor of medicine; he became the physician in ordinary to the king, and afterwards his first consulting physician, and was installed in the Palace of Versailles . His apartments were on the entresol , whence the Réunions de l'entresol [ clarification needed ] received their name. Louis XV esteemed Quesnay highly, and used to call him his thinker. When he ennobled him he gave him for arms three flowers of the pansy [ 4 ] (derived from pensée , in French meaning thought ), with the Latin motto Propter cogitationem mentis .

[ 5 ] He now devoted himself principally to economic studies , taking no part in the court intrigues which were perpetually going on around him. Around 1750 he became acquainted with Jacques C.M.V. de Gournay (1712–1759), who was also an earnest inquirer in the economic field; and round these two distinguished men was gradually formed the philosophic sect of the Économistes, or, as for distinction's sake they were afterwards called, the Physiocrates. The most remarkable men in this group of disciples were the elder Mirabeau (author of L'Ami des hommes , 1756–60, and Philosophie rurale , 1763), Nicolas Baudeau ( Introduction a la philosophie économique , 1771), Guillaume-François Le Trosne ( De l'ordre social , 1777), André Morellet (best known by his controversy with Galiani on the freedom of the grain trade during the Flour War ), Lemercier de La Rivière , and du Pont de Nemours .

Adam Smith , during his stay on the continent with the young Duke of Buccleuch in 1764–1766, spent some time in Paris, where he made the acquaintance of Quesnay and some of his followers; he paid a high tribute to their scientific services in his Wealth of Nations .

[ 6 ] [ 4 ] In 1717, Quesnay married Jeanne-Cathérine Dauphin, [ 7 ] and had a son and a daughter; his grandson by the former was a member of the first Legislative Assembly. He died on 16 December 1774, having lived long enough to see his great pupil, Anne Robert Jacques Turgot, Baron de Laune , in office as minister of finance.

[ 4 ] Works [ edit ] Tableau économique His economic writings are collected in the 2nd vol. of the Principaux économistes , published by Guillaumin, Paris, with preface and notes by Eugène Daire; also his Oeuvres économiques et philosophiques were collected with an introduction and note by August Oncken (Frankfort, 1888); a facsimile reprint of the Tableau économique , from the original MS., was published by the British Economic Association (London, 1895). His other writings were the article "Évidence" in the Encyclopédie , and Recherches sur l'évidence des vérites geometriques , with a Projet de nouveaux éléments de géometrie , 1773. Quesnay's Eloge was pronounced in the Academy of Sciences by Grandjean de Fouchy (see the Recueil of that Academy, 1774, p. 134). See also F.J. Marmontel , Mémoires ; Mémoires de Mme. du Hausset ; H. Higgs, The Physiocrats (London, 1897).

[ 4 ] Economics [ edit ] Tableau economique , 1965 In 1758 he published the Tableau économique (Economic Table), which provided the foundations of the ideas of the Physiocrats. This was perhaps the first work to attempt to describe the workings of the economy in an analytical way, and as such can be viewed as one of the first important contributions to economic thought.

[ 8 ] The publications in which Quesnay expounded his system were the following: two articles, on "Fermiers" (Farmers) and on "Grains", in the Encyclopédie of Diderot and Jean le Rond d'Alembert (1756, 1757); [ 9 ] [ 4 ] a discourse on the law of nature in the Physiocratie of Dupont de Nemours (1768); Maximes générales de gouvernement economique d'un royaume agricole (1758), and the simultaneously published Tableau économique avec son explication, ou extrait des économies royales de Sully (with the celebrated motto, Pauvres paysans, pauvre royaume; pauvre royaume, pauvre roi ); Dialogue sur le commerce et les travaux des artisans ; and other minor pieces.

[ 4 ] The Tableau économique , though on account of its dryness and abstract form it met with little general favor, may be considered the principal manifesto of the school. It was regarded by the followers of Quesnay as entitled to a place amongst the foremost products of human wisdom, and is named by the elder Mirabeau, in a passage quoted by Adam Smith , [ 6 ] as one of the three great inventions which have contributed most to the stability of political societies, the other two being those of writing and of money. Its object was to exhibit by means of certain formulas the way in which the products of agriculture, which is the only source of wealth, would in a state of perfect liberty be distributed among the several classes of the community (namely, the productive classes of the proprietors and cultivators of land, and the unproductive class composed of manufacturers and merchants), and to represent by other formulas the modes of distribution which take place under systems of Governmental restraint and regulation, with the evil results arising to the whole society from different degrees of such violations of the natural order. It follows from Quesnay's theoretic views that the one thing deserving the solicitude of the practical economist and the statesman is the increase of the net product; and he infers also what Smith afterwards affirmed, on not quite the same ground, that the interest of the landowner is strictly and indissolubly connected with the general interest of the society. A small edition de luxe of this work, with other pieces, was printed in 1758 in the Palace of Versailles under the king's immediate supervision, some of the sheets, it is said, having been pulled by the royal hand. Already in 1767 the book had disappeared from circulation, and no copy of it is now procurable; but, the substance of it has been preserved in the Ami des hommes of Mirabeau, and the Physiocratie of Dupont de Nemours.

[ 4 ] Orientalism and China [ edit ] Quesnay is known for his writings on Chinese politics and society. His book Le Despotisme de la Chine , written in 1767, describes his views of the Chinese imperial system.

[ 3 ] He was supportive of the meritocratic concept of giving scholars political power, without the cumbersome aristocracy that characterized French politics, and the importance of agriculture to the welfare of a nation. Gregory Blue writes that Quesnay "praised China as a constitutional despotism and openly advocated the adoption of Chinese institutions, including a standardized system of taxation and universal education." Blue speculates that this may have influenced the 1793 establishment of the Permanent Settlement in Bengal by the British Empire .

[ 10 ] Quesnay's interests in Orientalism has also been a source of criticism. Carol Blum, in her book Strength in Numbers on 18th century France, labels Quesnay an "apologist for Oriental despotism ." [ 11 ] Because of his admiration of Confucianism , Quesnay's followers bestowed him with the title "Confucius of Europe." [ 12 ] Quesnay's infatuation for Chinese culture, as described by Jesuits, led him to persuade the son of Louis XV to mirror the "plowing of sacred land" by the Chinese emperor to symbolize the link between government and agriculture.

[ 13 ] On Taxation [ edit ] Quesnay acknowledged three economic classes in France: the "proprietary" class consisting of only landowners, the "productive" class of agricultural workers, and the "sterile" class of merchants. Quesnay saw no benefit to the sterile class and believed the productive to be all important. Quesnay viewed France's agriculture as backward and unproductive compared to Britain during the time he was residing in the Palace of Versailles. Despite residing in the Palace, Quesnay believed agriculture was the heart of the economy and of special importance to him. Quesnay argued that taxes placed on cultivators are only harmful to society as these taxes will reduce the incentive for agricultural production. Taxing proprietors (property holders) does not destroy the means of production meaning there is no decline in output. Quesnay wanted proprietors to bear the full burden of the tax in the country as taxing cultivators is a negative consequence for everyone. Removing incentive from cultivators reduces agricultural production and the agricultural surplus Quesnay believed to be the heart of the economy. Quesnay also opposed indirect taxes in contrast to direct taxes. These "indirect taxes" are placed on the French public by proprietors whose greed demands immunity from taxation. Direct taxes on proprietors has no impact on reproduction and economic decline. Reducing indirect taxes and increasing direct taxes gives the French a surplus of agriculture and the funding the country needs. However, this opinion was not very popular among the wealthy of which Quesnay spent time regularly with. He spent some of his time fearing for his life in the Palace.

See also [ edit ] Contributions to liberal theory History of economic thought Liberalism Ronald L. Meek Circular flow of income Notes [ edit ] ^ Cleveland, Cutler J., "Biophysical economics" , Encyclopedia of Earth , Last updated: 14 September 2006.

^ See the biographical note in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 31 (International Publishers: New York, 1989) p. 605.

^ a b McCabe, Ina Baghdiantz (2008).

Orientalism in Early Modern France: Eurasian Trade, Exoticism and the Ancien Regime .

Berg Publishers . pp.

271 –72.

ISBN 978-1845203740 .

^ a b c d e f g One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Quesnay, François ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 22 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

742– 43.

^ "Nouvelles Ephemerides, Économiques, Seconde Partie, Analyses, Et Critiques Raisonnées. N° Premier. Éloge Historique De M. Quesnay, Contenant L'Analyse De Ses Ouvrages, Par M. Le Cte D'A***" . Taieb.net . Retrieved 16 August 2012 .

^ a b Smith, Adam, 1937, The Wealth of Nations , N.Y.: Random House, p. 643; first published 1776.

^ Murphy, Antoin E. (2009).

The Genesis of Macroeconomics: New Ideas from Sir William Petty to Henry Thornton . Oxford University Press. p. 120.

ISBN 978-0199543229 .

^ O'Hara, Phillip Anthony (1999).

Encyclopedia of Political Economy . Psychology Press. p. 848.

ISBN 978-0415187183 . Retrieved 21 July 2012 .

^ Kafker, Frank A.; Chouillet, Jacques (1990).

"Kafker, Frank A.: Notices sur les auteurs des 17 volumes de « discours » de l'Encyclopédie (suite et fin).

Recherches sur Diderot et sur l'Encyclopédie Année (1990) Volume 8 Numéro 8 p. 112" .

Recherches Sur Diderot et Sur l'Encyclopédie .

8 (1): 101– 21.

^ Shaffer, E.S (2000).

Comparative Criticism . Vol. 22, East and West: Comparative Perspectives.

Cambridge University Press . pp.

239– 40.

ISBN 978-0521790727 .

^ Blum, Carol (2002).

Strength in Numbers: Population, Reproduction, and Power in Eighteenth-Century France .

JHU Press . p.

16 .

ISBN 978-0801868108 .

^ Rothbard, Murray N.

(2006).

Economic Thought Before Adam Smith .

Ludwig von Mises Institute . p. 366.

ISBN 978-0945466482 .

^ Gunn, Geoffrey C. (2003).

First Globalization: The Eurasian Exchange, 1500 to 1800 .

Rowman & Littlefield . p. 148.

ISBN 978-0742526624 .

References [ edit ] Hobson, John M. (2004), The Eastern Origins of Western Civilization , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0521547245 .

Further reading [ edit ] Henderson, David R.

, ed. (2008).

"François Quesnay (1694–1774)" .

The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics .

Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.).

Liberty Fund . p. 579.

ISBN 978-0865976665 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to François Quesnay .

Works by or about François Quesnay at the Internet Archive Le Despotisme de la Chine (1767) by François Quesnay, hosted on the University of Massachusetts website François Quesnay (June 1766).

"Analyse de la formule arithmétique du tableau économiqueu de la distribution des dépenses annuelles d'une Nation agricole" .

Journal de l'Agriculture, du Commerce et des Finances .

2 (3): 11– 41.

v t e Physiocrats Anne Robert Jacques Turgot François Quesnay Jacques Claude Marie Vincent de Gournay John Law Nicolas Baudeau Pierre le Pesant Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours Richard Cantillon Victor de Riqueti v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway 2 Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=François_Quesnay&oldid=1303557752 " Categories : 1694 births 1774 deaths 18th-century French economists 18th-century French physicians 18th-century French philosophers 18th-century French writers 18th-century French male writers Members of the French Academy of Sciences Fellows of the Royal Society French orientalists French political philosophers French surgeons People from Eure Physiocrats Contributors to the Encyclopédie (1751–1772) Court physicians Natural law ethicists Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2017 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Pages with French IPA Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2010 Articles with Internet Archive links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 18:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents François Quesnay 51 languages Add topic

