Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Linguistic aspects Toggle Linguistic aspects subsection 1.1 Characters 1.2 Pronunciations and etymologies 1.3 Meanings 1.4 Toponymy 1.5 Loanwords 2 History 3 Nature 4 Modern usage Toggle Modern usage subsection 4.1 Taijitu 4.2 Tai chi 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Footnotes 7.2 Works cited 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Yin and yang 82 languages Afrikaans العربية অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Bikol Central Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Қазақша Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical concept of dualistic-monism or dynamic-monism in ancient Chinese philosophy "Yin yang" redirects here. For other uses, see Yin yang (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Yin and yang" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Yin and yang A taijitu of a particular style that is often named a "yin and yang symbol", the black area representing yin, with the opposite white side representing yang. The dots are representative of one within the other.

Chinese name Traditional Chinese 陰陽 Simplified Chinese 阴阳 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin yīnyáng Bopomofo ㄧㄣ ㄧㄤˊ Gwoyeu Romatzyh inyang Wade–Giles yin 1 -yang 2 Tongyong Pinyin yin-yáng IPA [ín.jǎŋ] Hakka Romanization yim 1 -yong 2 Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization yām yèuhng Jyutping jam1 joeng4 IPA [jɐm˥ jœŋ˩] Southern Min Hokkien POJ im-iông Tâi-lô im-iông Middle Chinese Middle Chinese 'im-yang Old Chinese Baxter (1992) *ʔrjum ljang Baxter–Sagart (2014) *q(r)um lang Vietnamese name Vietnamese alphabet âm dương Chữ Hán 陰陽 Korean name Hangul 음양 Hanja 陰陽 Transcriptions Revised Romanization eumyang McCune–Reischauer ŭmyang Mongolian name Mongolian Cyrillic арга билэг / арга билиг Mongolian script ᠡ‍ᠠ‍ᠷᠭ᠎᠎ᠠ ᠪᠢᠯᠡᠭ ᠠᠷᠭ᠎ᠠ ᠪᠢᠯᠢᠭ Japanese name Kanji 陰陽 Hiragana いんよう おんよう おんみょう Katakana インヨウ オンヨウ オンミョウ Transcriptions Revised Hepburn in'yō on'yō onmyō Kunrei-shiki in'you on'you onmyou Part of a series on Taoism Outline History Concepts Taoist philosophy Tao De Wuji Taiji Yin and yang Bagua Wuxing (five phases) Bianhua Fan (reversal) Wu wei (non-action) Wu xin (no-mind) Ziran Xian (immortal) Zhenren True form Three Treasures Jing Qi Shen Hun and po Practices Three Treasures (virtues) Five Precepts Ten Precepts Meditation Alchemy Neidan Waidan Bugang Chu Diet ( Bigu ) Sexual practices Art Fulu Priesthood Texts I Ching Tao Te Ching Zhuangzi Huainanzi Taipingjing Xiang'er Liezi Sanhuangjing Huahujing Qingjing Jing Baopuzi Daozang Theology Hongjun Laozu Three Pure Ones Yuanshi Tianzun Lingbao Tianzun Daode Tianzun Four heavenly ministers Jade Emperor Ziwei Emperor Tianhuang Emperor Houtu Queen Mother of the West King Father of the East Three Great Emperor-Officials Eight Immortals Chang'e Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors Yellow Emperor Guan Yu Li Hong Body god People Laozi Zhuang Zhou Lie Yukou Heshang Gong Wei Boyang Zhang Daoling Gan Ji Zhang Jue Zhang Lu Ge Xuan He Yan Wang Bi Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove Guo Xiang Sun Hanhua Wei Huacun Ge Hong Bao Jingyan Kou Qianzhi Lu Xiujing Tao Hongjing Cheng Xuanying Chen Tuan Zhang Boduan Sun Bu'er Wang Chongyang Qiu Chuji Zhang Guoxiang Zhang Sanfeng Zhu Quan Fangshi Schools Huang–Lao Way of the Taiping Xuanxue Shangqing School Way of the Li Family Lingbao School Chongxuan School Quanzhen School Dragon Gate Wuliupai Way of the Celestial Masters Way of the Five Pecks of Rice The Southern Celestial Masters The Northern Celestial Masters Zhengyi Dao Chinese ritual mastery traditions Yao Taoism Sacred places Grotto-heavens Sacred Mountains of China Wudang Mountains Mount Penglai Mount Kunlun Taoist temple White Cloud Temple Louguantai Cebu Taoist Temple Taoist Temple (Hanford, California) Institutions and organizations Chinese Taoist Association Celestial Masters Taoist priests Category v t e Part of a series on Chinese folk religion Concepts Tian — Shangdi Qi Shen Ling Xian ling Yinyang Hundun Mingyun Yuanfen Baoying Wu Theory Chinese theology Chinese gods and immortals Chinese mythology Chinese astrology Chinese zodiac Chinese creation myth Chinese spiritual world concepts Model humanity: Xian Zhenren Wen and wu Practices Fenxiang Jingxiang Feng shui Miaohui Wu shamanism Jitong mediumship Precious scrolls Institutions and temples Associations of good-doing Lineage associations or churches Chinese temple Ancestral shrine Chinese Folk Temples' Association Festivals Qingming Zhongyuan Zhongqiu Jiuhuangye Qixi Duanwu Nian Internal traditions Major cultural forms Chinese ancestral religion Chinese communal deity religion Chinese food therapy Chinese geomancy Chinese mother goddess worship Northeast China folk religion Traditional Chinese medicine Qigong Main philosophical traditions: Confucianism ( state rites ) Taoism Three teachings Other schools ( Mohism ) Ritual traditions: Folk ritual masters' orders Jitong mediumship Nuo folk religion Chinese shamanism Devotional traditions: Mazuism Ong Yah worship Zhenkong, "Void of Truth".

Salvation churches and sects : De teaching Jiugongdao Luo teaching Maitreya teachings Tiandi teachings Tianxian miaodao Xia teaching Xiantiandao Yiguandao Zaili teaching Confucian churches and sects: Holy Confucian Church Indonesian Confucian Church Universal Church of the Way and its Virtue Phoenix churches Xuanyuanism Taigu school Related religions and movements Benzhuism Bimoism Bon Dongbaism Han Buddhism Miao folk religion Vietnamese folk religion Qiang folk religion Yao folk religion Zhuang folk religion House church (China) Religion portal v t e Originating in Chinese philosophy , yin and yang ( English: / j ɪ n / , / j æ ŋ / ), also yinyang [ 1 ] [ 2 ] or yin-yang , [ 3 ] [ 2 ] is the concept of opposite cosmic principles or forces that interact, interconnect, and perpetuate each other. Yin and yang can be thought of as complementary and at the same time opposing forces that together form a dynamic system in which the whole is greater than the assembled parts and the parts are essential for the cohesion of the whole.

[ 4 ] In Chinese cosmology , the universe creates itself out of a primary chaos of primordial qi or material energy, organized into the cycles of yin and yang, force and motion leading to form and matter. "Yin" is retractive, passive, contractive and receptive in nature in a contrasting relationship to "yang" is repelling, active, expansive and repulsive in principle; this dichotomy in some form, is seen in all things in nature and their patterns of change, difference and transformations. For example, biological, psychological and cosmological seasonal cycles, the historical evolution of landscapes over days, weeks, years to eons. The original meaning of Yin was depicted as the northerly shaded side of a hill and Yang being the bright southerly aspect. When pertaining to human gender Yin is associated to more rounded feminine characteristics and Yang as sharp and masculine traits.

[ 5 ] Taiji is a Chinese cosmological term for the "Supreme Ultimate" state of undifferentiated absolute and infinite potential, the oneness before duality, from which yin and yang originate. It can be contrasted with the older wuji ( 無極 ; 'without pole'). In the cosmology pertaining to yin and yang, the material energy which this universe was created from is known as qi . It is believed that the organization of qi in this cosmology of yin and yang is the formation of the 10 thousand things between Heaven and Earth.

[ 6 ] Included among these forms are humans. Many natural dualities (such as light and dark , fire and water, expanding and contracting) are thought of as physical manifestations of the duality symbolized by yin and yang. This duality, as a unity of opposites , lies at the origins of many branches of classical Chinese science , technology and philosophy, as well as being a primary guideline of traditional Chinese medicine , [ 7 ] and a central principle of different forms of Chinese martial arts and exercise, such as baguazhang , tai chi , daoyin , kung fu and qigong , as well as appearing in the pages of the I Ching and the famous Taoist medical treatise called the Huangdi Neijing .

[ 8 ] In Taoist metaphysics, distinctions between good and bad, along with other dichotomous moral judgments, are perceptual, not real; so, the duality of yin and yang is an indivisible whole. In the ethics of Confucianism on the other hand, most notably in the philosophy of Dong Zhongshu ( c.

2nd century BC), a moral dimension is attached to the idea of yin and yang.

[ 9 ] The Ahom philosophy of duality of the individual self han and pu is based on the concept of the hun 魂 and po 魄 that are the yin and yang of the mind in the philosophy of Taoism.

[ 10 ] : vii The tradition was originated in Yunnan , China and followed by some Ahom , descendants of the Dai ethnic minority .

[ 10 ] : 203 Linguistic aspects [ edit ] Characters [ edit ] Yīnyáng in seal script (top), as well as traditional (middle) and simplified (bottom) character forms The Chinese characters 陰 and 陽 are both phono-semantic compounds , with semantic component 阝 'mound', 'hill' , a graphical variant of 阜 —with the phonetic components 今 ; jīn (and the added semantic component 云 ; yún ; 'cloud') and 昜 ; yáng .

[ 11 ] : 4138, 4114 In the latter, 昜 ; yáng ; 'bright' features 日 ; 'the Sun' + 示 + 彡 ; 'sunbeam'.

[ 11 ] : 4144, 1499 Pronunciations and etymologies [ edit ] The Standard Chinese pronunciation of 陰 is usually the level first tone as yīn with the meaning 'shady', 'cloudy', or sometimes with the falling fourth tone as yìn with the distinct meaning 'to shelter', 'shade'.

陽 ; 'sunny' is always pronounced with the rising second tone as yáng .

[ citation needed ] Sinologists and historical linguists have reconstructed Middle Chinese pronunciations from data in the (7th century CE) Qieyun rhyme dictionary and later rhyme tables , which was subsequently used to reconstruct Old Chinese phonology from rhymes in the (11th–7th centuries BCE) Shijing and phonological components of Chinese characters.

Reconstructions of Old Chinese have illuminated the etymology of modern Chinese words.

[ citation needed ] Compare these Middle Chinese and Old Chinese [ a ] reconstructions of 陰 ; yīn and 陽 ; yáng : ˑiəm < *ˑiəm and iang < *diang ( Bernhard Karlgren ) [ 12 ] ʔjəm and *raŋ ( Li Fang-Kuei ) [ 13 ] ʔ(r)jum and *ljang ( William H. Baxter ) [ 14 ] ʔjəm < *ʔəm and jiaŋ < *laŋ (Axel Schuessler) [ 15 ] im < *qrum and yang < *laŋ ( William H. Baxter and Laurent Sagart ) [ 16 ] Schuessler gives probable Sino-Tibetan etymologies for both Chinese words.

yin < *ʔəm compares with Burmese ʔum C 'overcast', 'cloudy', Adi muk-jum 'shade', and Lepcha so'yǔm 'shade'; it is probably cognate with Chinese àn < *ʔə̂mʔ 黯 ; 'dim', 'gloomy' and qīn < *khəm 衾 ; 'blanket'.

yang < *laŋ compares with Lepcha a-lóŋ 'reflecting light', Burmese laŋ B 'be bright' and ə-laŋ B 'light'; and is perhaps cognate with Chinese chāng < *k-hlaŋ 昌 ; 'prosperous', 'bright' (compare areal words like Tai plaŋ A1 'bright' & Proto- Viet-Muong hlaŋ B ). To this word-family, Unger also includes 炳 ; bǐng < *pl(j)aŋʔ 'bright'; [ 17 ] however Schuessler reconstructs 炳 ; bǐng 's Old Chinese pronunciation as *braŋʔ and includes it in an Austroasiatic word family, besides 亮 ; liàng < *raŋh 爽 ; shuǎng < *sraŋʔ 'twilight of dawn'; míng < *mraŋ 明 'bright', 'become light', 'enlighten'; owing to "the different OC initial consonant which seems to have no recognizable OC morphological function".

[ 18 ] Meanings [ edit ] Yin and yang are semantically complex words.

John DeFrancis 's ABC Chinese-English Comprehensive Dictionary gives the following translation equivalents.

[ 19 ] Yin 陰 or 阴 — Noun : ① [philosophy] female/passive/negative principle in nature, ② Surname; Bound morpheme : ① the moon, ② shaded orientation, ③ covert; concealed; hidden, ④ vagina, ⑤ penis, ⑥ of the netherworld, ⑦ negative, ⑧ north side of a hill, ⑨ south bank of a river, ⑩ reverse side of a stele, ⑪ in intaglio; Stative verb : ① overcast, ② sinister; treacherous Yang 陽 or 阳 — Bound morpheme : ① [Chinese philosophy] male/active/positive principle in nature, ② the sun, ③ male genitals, ④ in relief, ⑤ open; overt, ⑥ belonging to this world, ⑦ [linguistics] masculine, ⑧ south side of a hill, ⑨ north bank of a river The compound yinyang 陰陽 means "yin and yang; opposites; ancient Chinese astronomy; occult arts; astrologer; geomancer; etc." The sinologist Rolf Stein glosses Chinese yin 陰 as "shady side (of a mountain)" and yang 陽 as "sunny side (of a mountain)" with the uncommon English geographic terms ubac "shady side of a mountain" and adret "sunny side of a mountain" (which are of French origin ).

[ 20 ] Toponymy [ edit ] Many Chinese place names or toponyms contain the word yang 'sunny side', and a few contain yin 'shady side'. In China, as elsewhere in the Northern Hemisphere , sunlight comes predominantly from the south, and thus the south face of a mountain or the north bank of a river will receive more direct sunlight than the opposite side.

[ 21 ] For example, Yang refers to the "south side of a hill" in Hengyang 衡陽 , which is south of Mount Heng 衡山 in Hunan , [ 22 ] and to the "north bank of a river" in Luoyang 洛陽 , which is located north of the Luo River 洛河 in Henan .

[ 23 ] Similarly, yin refers to "north side of a hill" in Huayin 華陰 , which is north of Mount Hua 華山 in Shaanxi province.

[ 24 ] In Japan, the characters are used in western Honshu to delineate the north-side San'in region 山陰 from the south-side San'yō region 山陽 , separated by the Chūgoku Mountains 中国山地 .

Loanwords [ edit ] English yin , yang , and yin-yang are familiar loanwords of Chinese origin .

The Oxford English Dictionary defines: yin (jɪn) Also Yin , Yn . [Chinese yīn shade, feminine; the moon.] a.

In Chinese philosophy, the feminine or negative principle (characterized by dark, wetness, cold, passivity, disintegration, etc.) of the two opposing cosmic forces into which creative energy divides and whose fusion in physical matter brings the phenomenal world into being. Also attrib . or as adj ., and transf . Cf.

yang .

b.

Comb ., as yin-yang , the combination or fusion of the two cosmic forces; freq. attrib., esp. as yin-yang symbol , a circle divided by an S-shaped line into a dark and a light segment, representing respectively yin and yang , each containing a 'seed' of the other.

yang (jæŋ) Also Yang . [Chinese yáng yang, sun, positive, male genitals.] a.

In Chinese philosophy, the masculine or positive principle (characterized by light, warmth, dryness, activity, etc.) of the two opposing cosmic forces into which creative energy divides and whose fusion in physical matter brings the phenomenal world into being. Also attrib.

or as adj.

Cf.

yin .

b.

Comb.

: yang-yin = yin-yang s.v.

yin b.

For the earliest recorded "yin and yang" usages, the OED cites 1671 for yin and yang , [ 25 ] 1850 for yin-yang , [ 26 ] and 1959 for yang-yin .

[ 27 ] In English, yang-yin (like ying-yang ) occasionally occurs as a mistake or typographical error for the Chinese loanword yin-yang —yet they are not equivalents. Chinese does have some yangyin collocations , such as 洋銀 ( lit.

' foreign silver ' ) "silver coin/dollar", but not even the most comprehensive dictionaries (e.g., the Hanyu Da Cidian ) enter yangyin * 陽陰 . While yang and yin can occur together in context, [ 28 ] yangyin is not synonymous with yinyang . The linguistic term " irreversible binomial " refers to a collocation of two words A–B that cannot be idiomatically reversed as B–A, for example, English cat and mouse (not * mouse and cat ) and friend or foe (not * foe or friend ).

[ 29 ] Similarly, the usual pattern among Chinese binomial compounds is for positive A and negative B, where the A word is dominant or privileged over B. For example, tiandi 天地 "heaven and earth" and nannü 男女 "men and women".

Yinyang meaning "dark and light; female and male; moon and sun", is an exception. Scholars have proposed various explanations for why yinyang violates this pattern, including "linguistic convenience" (it is easier to say yinyang than yangyin ), the idea that "proto-Chinese society was matriarchal", or perhaps, since yinyang first became prominent during the late Warring States period, this term was "purposely directed at challenging persistent cultural assumptions".

[ 29 ] History [ edit ] Joseph Needham discusses yin and yang together with Five Elements as part of the School of Naturalists . He says that it would be proper to begin with yin and yang before Five Elements because the former: "lay, as it were, at a deeper level in Nature, and were the most ultimate principles of which the ancient Chinese could conceive. But it so happens that we know a good deal more about the historical origin of the Five-Element theory than about that of the yin and the yang, and it will therefore be more convenient to deal with it first." [ 30 ] He then discusses Zou Yan ( 鄒衍 ; 305–240 BC) who is most associated with these theories. Although yin and yang are not mentioned in any of the surviving documents of Zou Yan, his school was known as the Yin Yang Jia (Yin and Yang School). Needham concludes "There can be very little doubt that the philosophical use of the terms began about the beginning of the 4th century, and that the passages in older texts which mention this use are interpolations made later than that time." [ 30 ] Nature [ edit ] Yin and yang are a concept that originated in ancient Chinese philosophy that describes how opposite or contrary forces may create each other by their comparison and are to be seen as actually complementary, interconnected, and interdependent in the natural world, and how they may give rise to each other as they interrelate to one another.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] In Daoist philosophy, dark and light, yin and yang, arrive in the Tao Te Ching at chapter 42.

[ 33 ] It is impossible to talk about yin or yang without some reference to the opposite, traditionally it is said that Yin and Yang are known by the comparison of each other, since yin and yang are bound together as parts of a mutual whole (for example, there cannot be the bottom of the foot without the top). A way to illustrate this idea is to postulate the notion of a race with only women or only men; this race would disappear in a single generation. Yet, women and men together create new generations that allow the race they mutually create (and mutually come from) to survive. The interaction of the two gives birth to humans, as the interaction of heaven and earth establishes harmony ( he ), giving birth to things.

[ 34 ] Modern usage [ edit ] Yin is the black side, and yang is the white side. Other color arrangements have included the white of yang being replaced by red.

[ 35 ] The taijitu is sometimes accompanied by other shapes, [ 36 ] such as bagua .

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] In turn, the concepts are also applied to the human body. In traditional Chinese medicine, one's health is directly related to the balance between yin and yang qualities within them.

[ 37 ] The technology of yin and yang is the foundation of critical and deductive reasoning for effective differential diagnosis of disease and illnesses within Taoist influenced traditional Chinese medicine .

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] Taijitu [ edit ] Main article: Taijitu The taijitu The principle of yin and yang is represented by the taijitu (literally "diagram of the Supreme Ultimate "). The term is commonly used to mean the simple "divided circle" form, but may refer to any of several schematic diagrams representing these principles, such as the swastika , common to Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism. Similar symbols have also appeared in other cultures, such as in Celtic art and Roman shield markings .

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] In this symbol the two teardrops swirl to represent the conversion of yin to yang and yang to yin. This is seen when a ball is thrown into the air with a yang velocity then converts to a yin velocity to fall back to earth. The two teardrops are opposite in direction to each other to show that as one increases the other decreases. The dot of the opposite field in the tear drop shows that there is always yin within yang and always yang within yin.

[ 45 ] Tai chi [ edit ] Main article: Tai chi Tai chi, a form of martial art, is often described as the principles of yin and yang applied to the human body and an animal body.

Wu Jianquan , a famous Chinese martial arts teacher, described tai chi ( taijiquan ) as follows: Various people have offered different explanations for the name Taijiquan . Some have said: – 'In terms of self-cultivation , one must train from a state of movement towards a state of stillness.

Taiji comes about through the balance of yin and yang . In terms of the art of attack and defense then, in the context of the changes of full and empty, one is constantly internally latent, to not outwardly expressive, as if the yin and yang of Taiji have not yet divided apart.' Others say: 'Every movement of Taijiquan is based on circles, just like the shape of a Taijitu . Therefore, it is called Taijiquan .

— Wu Jianquan, The International Magazine of Tʻai Chi Chʻüan [ 46 ] See also [ edit ] China portal Ayin and Yesh Dialectic Dualistic cosmology Shatkona Enantiodromia Flag of Mongolia Flag of South Korea Flag of Tibet Fu Xi Gankyil Huangdi Neijing Ometeotl Onmyōdō Seny and Rauxa Taegeuk Tai chi Tomoe Zhuangzi Notes [ edit ] ^ With an asterisk, to denote unattested forms.

References [ edit ] Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Stefon, Matt (7 May 2021).

"yinyang" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 3 May 2023 .

^ a b Wang, Robin R.

"Yinyang (Yin-yang)" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 3 May 2023 .

^ Shan, Jun (3 February 2020).

"What Do Yin and Yang Represent?" .

ThoughtCo . Retrieved 3 May 2023 .

^ Georges Ohsawa (1976).

The Unique Principle . George Ohsawa Macrobiotic.

ISBN 978-0-918860-17-0 – via Google Books .

^ Feuchtwang, Stephan (2016).

Religions in the Modern World: Traditions and Transformations . New York: Routledge. p. 150.

ISBN 978-0-415-85881-6 .

^ Feuchtwang, Sephan. "Chinese Religions." Religions in the Modern World: Traditions and Transformations, Third ed., Routledge, 2016, pp. 150–151.

^ Porkert, Manfred (1974).

The Theoretical Foundations of Chinese Medicine . MIT Press.

ISBN 0-262-16058-7 .

^ Field, Tiffany (1 August 2011).

"Tai Chi research review" .

Complementary Therapies in Clinical Practice .

17 (3): 141– 146.

doi : 10.1016/j.ctcp.2010.10.002 .

ISSN 1744-3881 .

PMID 21742279 .

^ Taylor Latener, Rodney Leon (2005).

The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Confucianism . Vol. 2. New York: Rosen Publishing Group. p. 869.

ISBN 978-0-8239-4079-0 .

^ a b Gogoi, Shrutashwinee (2011).

Tai ahom religion a philosophical study (PhD).

hdl : 10603/116167 .

^ a b 汉语大字典 [ Hanyu Da Zidian ] (in Chinese). Chengdu: Hubei cishu chubanshe. 1986–1989.

ISBN 7-80543-001-2 .

^ Bernhard Karlgren, Grammata Serica Recensa , Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities, 1957, 173, 188.

^ Li, Fang-Kuei, "Studies on Archaic Chinese", translated by Gilbert L. Mattos, Monumenta Serica 31, 1974:219–287.

^ William H. Baxter, A Handbook of Old Chinese Phonology , Mouton de Gruyter ,1992.

^ Schuessler, Axel, ABC Etymological Dictionary of Old Chinese , University of Hawaii Press , 2007, 558, 572.

^ Baxter & Sagart (2014), pp. 326–378.

^ Ulrich Unger, Hao-ku : Sinologische Rundbriefe, 1986:34 ^ Schuessler, Axel, ABC Etymological Dictionary of Old Chinese , University of Hawaii Press , 2007. pp. 168, 180, 558.

^ John DeFrancis, ed., ABC Chinese-English Comprehensive Dictionary , University of Hawaii Press, 2003, 1147, 1108.

^ Rolf Stein (2010), Rolf Stein's Tibetica Antiqua: With Additional Materials , Brill, p. 63.

^ "CHINESE PLACE NAMES" .

www.sjsu.edu . Retrieved 8 April 2025 .

^ "Hengyang | Ancient City & Major Industrial Hub | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 8 April 2025 .

^ "Info about Luoyang-国际合作交流中心" .

sites.lynu.edu.cn . Retrieved 8 April 2025 .

^ Li, Zhuqing (2024). "Chinese Place Names". In Jiao, Liwei (ed.).

The Routledge Handbook of Chinese Language and Culture . Routledge. pp.

179– 180.

ISBN 978-1-315-16780-0 .

^ Arnoldus Montanus , Atlas Chinensis: Being a relation of remarkable passages in two embassies from the East-India Company of the United Provinces to the Vice-Roy Singlamong, General Taising Lipovi, and Konchi, Emperor, Thomas Johnson , tr. by J. Ogilby, 1671, 549: "The Chineses by these Strokes ‥ declare ‥ how much each Form or Sign receives from the two fore-mention'd Beginnings of Yn or Yang." ^ William Jones Boone , "Defense of an Essay on the proper renderings of the words Elohim and θεός into the Chinese Language," Chinese Repository XIX, 1850, 375: "... when in the Yih King (or Book of Diagrams) we read of the Great Extreme, it means that the Great Extreme is in the midst of the active-passive primordial substance (Yin-yáng); and that it is not exterior to, or separate from the Yin-yáng." ^ Carl Jung , "Aion: Researches into the Phenomenology of the Self", in The Collected Works of C. G. Jung , tr. by R. F. C. Hull, Volume 9, Part 2, p. 58" "[The vision of "Ascension of Isaiah"] might easily be a description of a genuine yang-yin relationship, a picture that comes closer to the actual truth than the privatio boni . Moreover, it does not damage monotheism in any way, since it unites the opposites just and yang and yin are united in Tao (which the Jesuits quite logically translated as "God")." ^ For instance, the Huainanzi says" "Now, the lumber is not so important as the forest; the forest is not so important as the rain; the rain is not so important as yin and yang; yin and yang are not so important as harmony; and harmony is not so important as the Way. (12, 材不及林，林不及雨，雨不及陰陽，陰陽不及和，和不及道 ; tr. Major et al. 2010, 442).

^ a b Roger T. Ames, " Yin and Yang ", in Encyclopedia of Chinese Philosophy , ed. by Antonio S. Cua, Routledge, 2002, 847.

^ a b Needham, Joseph; Science and Civilization in China Vol.2:  History of Scientific Thought; Cambridge University Press ; 1956 ^ "The hidden meanings of yin and yang – John Bellaimey" . TED-Ed. 2 August 2013. Archived from the original on 28 October 2021 . Retrieved 2 August 2013 .

^ Xu, Guang (1996).

Chinese Herbal Medicine . Vermillion. p. 41.

ISBN 978-0-09-180944-7 .

^ Muller, Charles.

"Daode Jing" . Retrieved 9 March 2018 .

^ Robin R. Wang "Yinyang (Yin-yang)" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 9 March 2018 .

^ a b The World Book Encyclopedia . Vol. 19. Chicago: Scott Fetzer Company . 2003. p. 36.

ISBN 0-7166-0103-6 .

OCLC 50204221 .

^ a b Carrasco, David ; Warmind, Morten; Hawley, John Stratton; Reynolds, Frank; Giarardot, Norman; Neusner, Jacob ; Pelikan, Jaroslav ; Campo, Juan; Penner, Hans (1999).

Wendy Doniger (ed.).

Merriam-Webster's Encyclopedia of World Religions . United States: Merriam-Webster . p. 495.

ISBN 978-0-87779-044-0 .

^ Li CL. A brief outline of Chinese medical history with particular reference to acupuncture. Perspect Biol Med. 1974 Autumn;18(1):132–143.

^ Ching, Nigel; Halpin, Jeremy (2017).

The art and practice of diagnosis in Chinese medicine . London Philadelphia: Singing Dragon.

ISBN 978-0-85701-267-8 .

^ Hu, Dongpei, ed. (2016).

Traditional Chinese medicine: theory and principles . Berlin Boston: De Gruyter.

ISBN 978-3-11-041766-1 .

^ Seem, Dr. Mark (1991).

Acupuncture Energetics A Workbook for Diagnostics and Treatment . Inner Traditions/Bear.

ISBN 978-0-89281-435-0 .

^ Acupuncture Therapeutics . Jessica Kingsley Publishers. 2011. p. 23.

ISBN 978-0-85701-018-6 .

^ Giovanni Monastra: " The "Yin–Yang" among the Insignia of the Roman Empire?

[ usurped ] ," "Sophia," Vol. 6, No. 2 (2000) ^ "Late Roman Shield Patterns – Magister Peditum" .

www.ne.jp .

^ Helmut Nickel: "The Dragon and the Pearl," Metropolitan Museum Journal, Vol. 26 (1991), p. 146, fn. 5 ^ Hughes, Kevin (2020).

Introduction to the Theory of Yin-Yang . Independent.

ISBN 979-8-6678-6786-9 .

[ page needed ] ^ Woolidge, Doug (June 1997). "The International Magazine of Tʻai Chi Chʻüan".

Tʻai Chi .

21 (3). Wayfarer Publications.

ISSN 0730-1049 .

Works cited [ edit ] Baxter, William H.; Sagart, Laurent (2014).

Old Chinese: A New Reconstruction . Oxford: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-994537-5 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Yin Yang .

Look up yin , yang , or yin-yang in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Robin R. Wang.

"Yinyang (Yin-yang)" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX v t e Chinese philosophy Schools Agriculturalism Buddhism Confucianism Han learning Neo-Confucianism New Confucianism Huang–Lao Legalism Mohism Marxism School of Diplomacy School of Names Naturalism Taoism Daoxue Xuanxue Yangism Mixed School Nine Schools of Thought Hundred Schools of Thought Philosophers Eastern Zhou Bu Shang Chunyu Kun Confucius Deng Xi Duanmu Ci Gaozi Gongsun Long Guan Zhong Han Fei Hui Shi Laozi Li Kui Li Si Lie Yukou Mencius Mozi Shang Yang Shen Buhai Shen Dao Su Qin Sun Tzu Wu Qi Ximen Bao Xu Xing Xunzi Yang Zhu Yuan Xian Zhang Yi Zhuang Zhou Zichan Zisi Zou Yan Qin Han Ban Zhao Dong Zhongshu Dongfang Shuo Dou Wu Huan Tan Jia Yi Jia Kui Jing Fang Kong Anguo Liu An Lu Jia Liu Xiang Ma Rong Wang Chong Wang Fu Xun Yue Yang Xiong Three Kingdoms Jin Northern and Southern Bao Jingyan Fan Zhen Fan Ye Ge Hong Guo Xiang Fu Xuan He Yan Huiyuan Ji Kang Sengzhao Wang Su Wang Bi Xiahou Xuan Xie Daoyun Xun Can Yan Zhitui Zhi Dun Sui Tang Fu Yi Jizang Wang Tong Zhang Zhihe Han Yu Li Ao Liu Yuxi Liu Zongyuan Linji Yixuan Five Dynasties Ten Kingdoms Song Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Fan Zhongyan Hu Hong Lu Jiuyuan Shao Yong Shen Kuo Su Song Wang Anshi Wang Chongyang Wang Chuyi Ye Shi Zhang Zai Zhou Dunyi Zhu Xi Yuan Ming Chen Jiru Huang Zongxi Hong Zicheng Jiao Hong Jiao Yu Lai Zhide Li Zhi Liu Bowen Liu Zongzhou Luo Rufang Qian Dehong Wang Ji Wang Gen Wang Yangming Wu Cheng Xu Ai Zhan Ruoshui Qing Chen Hongmou Chen Menglei Dai Zhen Fang Bao Fang Lanfen Fang Quan Feng Guifen Gong Zizhen Gu Yanwu Hong Liangji Ji Yun Ma Qixi Lin Zexu Liu Yiming Pan Pingge Tan Sitong Tang Zhen Wang Fuzhi Wei Yuan Yan Yuan Yu Yue Yu Zhengxie Zhang Xuecheng Zhuang Cunyu Zeng Guofan 20th century Cai Yuanpei Carsun Chang P. C. Chang Chen Daqi Chen Duxiu Chung-ying Cheng Ch'ien Mu Chu Anping Fang Keli Feng Youlan Gan Yang Gu Su Gu Zhun He Guanghu Hu Qiaomu Hu Shih Hua Gang Ray Huang Jiang Qing Jin Yuelin Kang Youwei Lee Shui-chuen Li Shicen Li Zehou Liang Qichao Liang Shuming Lin Yutang Liu Xiaofeng Lu Xun Mao Zedong Mou Zongsan Qiu Renzong Sun Yat-sen Tang Chun-i Tang Yijie Tsang Lap Chuen Xiong Shili Xu Fuguan Yang Changji Yin Haiguang Yu Dunkang Zhang Dongsun Zhang Shenfu Zhou Guoping Zhou Zuoren Concepts Tao De Fa Jian'ai Jing Jing zuo Li Confucianism Neo-Confucianism Ming yun Qi Qing Ren Three teachings Shen Si Ti Tian Mandate of Heaven Wu wei Filial piety Xin Human nature Self-cultivation Yi Yin and yang Yong Zhengming Ziran Topics Logic Theology Metaphysics Politics Ethics Role ethics State consequentialism Ink wash Shan shui Society Epistemology Metaphilosophy Legitimacy v t e Taoism Philosophy Metaphysics Tao (way) Taiji (ultimate) Wuji (non-polarity) Yin and yang (duality) Bagua (eight trigrams) Feng shui Wuxing (five phases) Bianhua (transformation) Fan (reversion) Ethics De (integrity) Wu wei (nonaction) Ziran (spontenaity) Pu (plainness) Zhenren Five Precepts Ten Precepts Practice Neidan (internal alchemy) Waidan (external alchemy) Yangsheng (self-cultivation) Daoyin (calisthenics) Meditation Three Treasures Jing (essence) Qi (breath) Shen (spirit) Diet Xian (immortality) Art Fulu (talismancy) Texts Tao Te Ching Zhuangzi Liezi Huainanzi Taipingjing Xiang'er Sanhuangjing Huahujing Qingjing Jing Baopuzi Daozang Deities Hongjun Laozu Three Pure Ones Yuanshi Tianzun Lingbao Tianzun Daode Tianzun Four Sovereigns Jade Emperor Ziwei Emperor Tianhuang Emperor Houtu Three Great Emperor-Officials Queen Mother of the West King Father of the East Eight Immortals Chang'e Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors Yellow Emperor Guan Shengdi Other deities People Laozi Zhuang Zhou Lie Yukou Heshang Gong Wei Boyang Zhang Daoling Gan Ji Zhang Jue Zhang Lu Ge Xuan He Yan Wang Bi Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove Guo Xiang Wei Huacun Ge Hong Bao Jingyan Kou Qianzhi Lu Xiujing Tao Hongjing Cheng Xuanying Chen Tuan Zhang Boduan Sun Bu'er Wang Chongyang Qiu Chuji Zhang Guoxiang Zhang Sanfeng Zhu Quan Fangshi Schools Huang–Lao Taiping Way of the Five Pecks of Rice Way of the Celestial Masters Northern Celestial Masters Zhengyi Xuanxue Shangqing Lingbao Jingming Chongxuan Quanzhen ( Dragon Gate ) Wuliu Yao Sacred places Grotto-heavens Sacred Mountains of China Wudang Mountains Mount Penglai Mount Kunlun Temples Cebu Hanford Louguantai Tong Jee Teung White Cloud v t e Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) Practices Acupuncture Chinese herbology Chinese medical doll Chinese massage (Tuina) Fire cupping Moxibustion Qigong Concepts Meridians Yin and yang Neidan Waidan Paozhi Daojia Neijia Waijia Taijiquan Chen-style taijiquan Three Treasures Qi Jing Shen Five Phases Earth Fire Metal Water Wood Zangfu Organs Yin organs Heart Kidney Pericardium Liver Lung Spleen Yang organs Gallbladder Large Intestine Small Intestine Stomach San Jiao / Triple Warmer Urinary Bladder Noted physicians Bian Que (d. 310 BC) Hua Tuo (141–208) Ge Hong (b. 283) Sun Simiao (581–682) Zhang Jiegu (c. 1140–1220) Zhang Zhongjing (c. 150–219) Contemporary related topics Alternative medicine Energy medicine Medicine in China Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Yin_and_yang&oldid=1302934164 " Categories : Chinese martial arts terminology Concepts in Chinese philosophy Chinese words and phrases Dichotomies Dualism in cosmology Religious symbols Tai chi Taoist cosmology Traditional Chinese medicine National symbols of Mongolia National symbols of South Korea Hidden categories: CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Articles containing Chinese-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2022 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2023 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from February 2024 Articles containing Vietnamese-language text Articles containing Korean-language text Articles containing Mongolian-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 05:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Yin and yang 82 languages Add topic

