Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Versions 2 Current models 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Linear model of innovation 4 languages العربية Español Bahasa Melayu 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Original model of three phases of the process of technological change: Invention is followed by Innovation, which is followed by Diffusion The Linear Model of Innovation was an early model designed to understand the relationship of science and technology that begins with basic research that flows into applied research, development and diffusion.

[ 1 ] It posits scientific research as the basis of innovation which eventually leads to economic growth.

[ 2 ] The model has been criticized by many scholars over decades of years. The majority of the criticisms pointed out its crudeness and limitations in capturing the sources, process, and effects of innovation.

[ 2 ] However, it has also been argued that the linear model was simply a creation by academics, debated heavily in academia, but was never believed in practice.

[ 2 ] The model is more fittingly used as a basis to understand more nuanced alternative models.

Versions [ edit ] Two versions of the linear model of innovation are often presented: "technology push" model [ 3 ] "market pull" model [ 3 ] From the 1950s to the Mid-1960s, the industrial innovation process was generally perceived as a linear progression from scientific discovery, through technological development in firms, to the marketplace.

[ 3 ] The stages of the "Technology Push" model are: Basic science→Design and engineering→Manufacturing→Marketing→Sales From the Mid 1960s to the Early 1970s, emerges the second-generation Innovation model, referred to as the "market pull" model of innovation.

[ 3 ] According to this simple sequential model, the market was the source of new ideas for directing R&D , which had a reactive role in the process. The stages of the "market pull " model are: Market need—Development—Manufacturing—Sales The linear models of innovation supported numerous criticisms concerning the linearity of the models. These models ignore the many feedbacks and loops that occur between the different "stages" of the process. Shortcomings and failures that occur at various stages may lead to a reconsideration of earlier steps and this may result in an innovation. A history of the linear model of innovation may be found in Benoît Godin 's The Linear Model of Innovation: The Historical Construction of an Analytical Framework .

[ 4 ] A critical look at the origin of the terminology and how it may have a dubious history can be found in David Edgerton 's ‘The linear model’ did not exist: Reflections on the history and historiography of science and research in industry in the twentieth century.

[ 2 ] Current models [ edit ] Current models of innovation derive from approaches such as Actor-Network Theory , Social shaping of technology and social learning , [ 5 ] provide a much richer picture of the way innovation works. Current ideas in Open Innovation and User innovation derive from these later ideas.

In the 'Phase Gate Model', the product or services concept is frozen at an early stage to minimize risk. Through enterprise, the innovation process involves a series of sequential phases arranged in a manner that the preceding phase must be cleared before moving to the next phase. Therefore, a project must pass through a gate with the permission of the gatekeeper before moving to the next succeeding phase.

Criteria for passing through each gate is defined beforehand. The gatekeeper examines whether the stated objectives for the preceding phase have been properly met or not and whether desired development has taken place during the preceding phase or not.

See also [ edit ] Innovation Technological change Science and technology studies References [ edit ] Rogers, Everett (2003).

Diffusion of Innovations , 5th edition, Free Press.

ISBN 0-7432-2209-1 ^ Godin, Benoît (2006). "The Linear Model of Innovation: The Historical Construction of an Analytical Framework".

Science, Technology, & Human Values .

31 (6): 639– 667.

doi : 10.1177/0162243906291865 .

JSTOR 29733964 .

S2CID 145458677 .

^ a b c d Edgerton, David.

" 'The Linear Model' Did Not Exist: Reflections on the History and Historiography of Science and Research in Industry in the Twentieth Century" .

The Science-industry Nexus: History, Policy, Implications: Nobel Symposium 123 – via ResearchGate.

^ a b c d Rothwell, Roy (February 1994). "Towards the Fifth-generation Innovation Process".

International Marketing Review .

11 (1): 7– 31.

doi : 10.1108/02651339410057491 .

ISSN 0265-1335 .

^ Godin, Benoit (2006).

"The Linear Model of Innovation: The Historical Construction of an Analytical Framework" (PDF) .

Science, Technology, & Human Values .

31 (6): 639– 667.

doi : 10.1177/0162243906291865 .

S2CID 145458677 .

^ Ilkka., Tuomi (2006).

Networks of innovation: change and meaning in the age of the Internet . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199256983 .

OCLC 53871734 .

v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Linear_model_of_innovation&oldid=1301527720 " Categories : Technological change Innovation Science and technology studies This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 09:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Linear model of innovation 4 languages Add topic

