Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Buildings 2 Research 3 Teaching 4 Professor of Pathology and Head of Department Chronology 5 Emeritus and notable alumni 6 References Toggle the table of contents Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge Purpose Research and teaching in Pathology Head of Department Professor Heike Laman Parent organization University of Cambridge Website www .path .cam .ac .uk The Department of Pathology is a department of the University of Cambridge that conducts research and teaching in Pathology .

[ 1 ] Founded in 1883, the Department of Pathology is one of the largest departments within the School of Biological Sciences, involved in scientific research and teaching related to pathology , the study of the causes and effects of disease to advance medicine and devise new treatments. The current head of Department is Professor Heike Laman.

[ 2 ] Buildings [ edit ] The department spans three buildings. The main departmental building, finished in 1927 (architect Edward Warren ) is situated on Tennis Court Road and the nearby Molteno Institute . Both are situated on the Downing Site in central Cambridge . The third location is part of the main hospital building at Addenbrooke's Hospital on the Cambridge Biomedical Campus .

[ 3 ] Research [ edit ] As of 2025 [update] , the department has 162 researchers, including 110 post-graduate researchers, 50 postdoctoral researchers and 49 research groups. Research spans four divisions including cellular and molecular pathology , immunology , microbiology and parasitology and virology .

[ 4 ] Teaching [ edit ] The department is heavily involved in teaching across the medical and veterinary sciences as well as the natural sciences . Over 450 undergraduate students are trained each year in the 2nd year Biology of Disease course, taught to a cohort of medical, veterinary and natural sciences students in their second year. Further third year teaching takes the form of the Part II Pathology course which again features a mixed cohort of approximately 90 students. Finally, specific clinical teaching is also provided in collaboration with the clinical school.

[ 5 ] Professor of Pathology and Head of Department Chronology [ edit ] The Professor of Pathology is an established (statutory) chair at the University of Cambridge which was established in 1883. Traditionally, the Professor of Pathology was also the formal Head of department. However, in 2023 Professor Adrian Liston was elected to the Professor of Pathology while Professor Heike Laman was elected 10th Head of department and became the first woman to take on the role since the founding of the department in 1883.

[ 6 ] 1883-1897 Charles Roy - Professor of Pathology & Head of Department 1897-1898 Alfredo Kanthack - Professor of Pathology & Head of Department 1899-1922 German Sims Woodhead - Professor of Pathology & Head of Department 1922-1961 Henry Roy Dean - Professor of Pathology & Head of Department 1962-1975 Ronald Greaves - Professor of Pathology & Head of Department 1975-1987 Peter Wildy - Professor of Pathology & Head of Department 1987-1998 Malcolm Ferguson-Smith - Professor of Pathology & Head of Department 1998-2011 Andrew Wyllie - Professor of Pathology & Head of Department 2011-2022 Geoffrey Smith - Professor of Pathology & Head of Department 2022- Heike Laman - Head of Department (re-elected in 2025) 2023- Adrian Liston - Professor of Pathology Emeritus and notable alumni [ edit ] Notable alumni of the department include: [ 7 ] Henry Roy Dean - Professor of Pathology and responsible for significant pathology teaching at Cambridge and the current building on Tennis Court Road in 1928. With Ronald Greaves, developed reliable methods for freeze-drying plasma, the process now known as lyophilisation .

Andrew Wyllie - Made important discoveries about apoptosis, including the breakdown of DNA during apoptosis and its role in tumor growth Malcolm Ferguson-Smith - Distinguished medical geneticist from Glasgow, held the chair from 1987 to 1998. He emphasised the importance of Pathology in the analysis of the genome and so positioned the department well for the 21st Century.

Geoffrey L. Smith - Virologist and medical research authority in the area of Vaccinia virus and the family of Poxviruses . Part of the UK's response to the 2022 Mpox epidemic.

Ashley Moffett - Moffett has been at the forefront of research into the immunology of trophoblast invasion and its role in placentation for over 25 years. She became a fellow of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists in 2015, and a fellow of the Academy of Medical Sciences in 2019.

References [ edit ] ^ "Department of Pathology" . Retrieved 26 February 2025 .

^ "About the Department of Pathology" . Retrieved 26 February 2025 .

^ "Department of Pathology - Find us" . Retrieved 26 February 2025 .

^ "Department of Pathology - Staff List" . 26 February 2025 . Retrieved 26 February 2025 .

^ "Teaching in the Department of Pathology" . 26 February 2025 . Retrieved 26 February 2025 .

^ "About the Department of Pathology" . 26 February 2025 . Retrieved 26 February 2025 .

^ "History of the Department of Pathology" . 26 February 2025 . Retrieved 26 February 2025 .

v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Department_of_Pathology,_University_of_Cambridge&oldid=1297923859 " Categories : Departments in the Faculty of Biology, University of Cambridge Institutions in the School of the Biological Sciences, University of Cambridge Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from February 2025 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2025 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 29 June 2025, at 11:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge Add languages Add topic

