Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and career 2 Philosophical work Toggle Philosophical work subsection 2.1 Yablo's paradox 2.2 Statement 2.3 Analysis 2.3.1 First-order logic 3 Books 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Stephen Yablo 6 languages العربية Català Eesti Français 日本語 Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Canadian-born American philosopher Stephen Yablo Yablo in 2022 Born ( 1957-09-30 ) 30 September 1957 (age 67) Toronto , Canada Spouse Sally Haslanger Education Education University of Toronto ( B.Sc.

) University of California, Berkeley ( Ph.D.

) Doctoral advisor Donald Davidson Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic Doctoral students Carolina Sartorio Main interests Philosophical logic , philosophy of language , philosophy of mathematics , philosophy of mind Notable ideas Yablo's paradox Stephen Yablo ( / ˈ j æ b l oʊ / ; [ 1 ] born 1957) is a Canadian-born American philosopher. He is the Emeritus David W. Skinner Professor of Philosophy at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and taught previously at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor .

[ 2 ] He specializes in the philosophy of logic , philosophy of mind , metaphysics , philosophy of language , and philosophy of mathematics .

Life and career [ edit ] He was born in Toronto , on 30 September 1957, to a Polish father Saul Yablo and Romanian-Canadian mother Gloria Yablo (née Herman), both Jewish .

[ 3 ] He is married to fellow MIT philosopher Sally Haslanger .

His Ph.D. is from University of California, Berkeley , where he worked with Donald Davidson and George Myro . In 2012, he was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences .

Philosophical work [ edit ] Yablo has published a number of influential papers in philosophy of mind, philosophy of language, and metaphysics, and gave the John Locke Lectures at Oxford in 2012, which formed the basis for his book Aboutness , which one reviewer described as "an important and far-reaching book that philosophers will be discussing for a long time." [ 4 ] Yablo's paradox [ edit ] In papers published in 1985 [ 5 ] and 1993, [ 6 ] Yablo showed how to create a paradox similar to the liar paradox , but without self-reference . Unlike the liar paradox, which uses a single sentence, Yablo's paradox uses an infinite list of sentences, each referring to sentences occurring later in the list. Analysis of the list shows that there is no consistent way to assign truth values to any of its members. Since everything on the list refers only to later sentences, Yablo claims that his paradox is "not in any way circular". However, Graham Priest disputes this.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Statement [ edit ] Consider the following infinite set of sentences: S 1 : For each i > 1, S i is not true.

S 2 : For each i > 2, S i is not true.

S 3 : For each i > 3, S i is not true.

...

Analysis [ edit ] For any n , the proposition S n is of universally quantified form, expressing an unending number of claims (each the negation of a statement with a larger index). As a proposition, any S n also expresses that S n + 1 is not true, for example.

For any pair of numbers n and m with n < m , the proposition S n subsumes all the claims also made by the later S m . As this holds for all such pairs of numbers, one finds that all S n imply any S m with n < m . For example, any S n implies S n + 1 .

Claims made by any of the propositions ("the next statement is not true") stand in contradiction with an implication we can also logically derive from the lot (the validity of the next statement is implied by the current one). This establishes that assuming any S n leads to a contradiction. And this just means that all S n are proven false.

But all S n being false also exactly validates the very claims made by them. So we have the paradox that each sentence in Yablo's list is both not true and true.

First-order logic [ edit ] For any P {\displaystyle P} , the negation introduction principle of propositional logic negates P ↔ ↔ ¬ ¬ P {\displaystyle P\leftrightarrow \neg P} . So no consistent theory proves that one of its propositions equivalent to itself. Metalogically, it means any axiom of the form of such an equivalence is inconsistent. This is one formal pendant of the liar paradox.

Similarly, for any unary predicate Q {\displaystyle Q} and if R {\displaystyle R} is an entire transitive relation , then by a formal analysis as above, predicate logic negates the universal closure of Q ( n ) ↔ ↔ ∀ ∀ i .

( R ( i , n ) → → ¬ ¬ Q ( i ) ) {\displaystyle Q(n)\leftrightarrow \forall i.{\big (}R(i,n)\to \neg Q(i){\big )}} On the natural numbers, for R {\displaystyle R} taken to be equality " = {\displaystyle =} ", this also follows from the analysis of the liar paradox. For R {\displaystyle R} taken to be the standard order " > {\displaystyle >} ", it is still possible to obtain a non-standard model of arithmetic for the omega-inconsistent theory defined by adjoining all the equivalences individually.

[ 9 ] Books [ edit ] Thoughts (Philosophical Papers, volume 1) (Oxford University Press, 2009) Things (Philosophical Papers, volume 2) (Oxford University Press, 2010) Aboutness (Princeton University Press, 2014).

References [ edit ] ^ Are Ontological Questions Really Only About *HOW* Things Exist?

on YouTube ^ "Yablo" (PDF) .

www.mit.edu .

^ Tremain, Shelley (August 15, 2018).

"Dialogues on Disability: Shelley Tremain Interviews Stephen Yablo" .

Discrimination and Disadvantage . Archived from the original on January 27, 2021 . Retrieved December 20, 2024 .

^ Morton, Adam (September 10, 2014).

"Aboutness" .

^ S. Yablo (1985).

"Truth and reflection" .

Journal of Philosophical Logic .

14 (2): 297– 348.

doi : 10.1007/BF00249368 .

S2CID 36735626 .

^ S. Yablo (1993).

"Paradox Without Self-Reference" (PDF) .

Analysis .

53 (4): 251– 252.

doi : 10.1093/analys/53.4.251 .

^ G. Priest (1997). "Yablo's paradox".

Analysis .

57 (4): 236– 242.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.626.8312 .

doi : 10.1093/analys/57.4.236 .

^ J. Beall (2001).

"Is Yablo's paradox non-circular?" (PDF) .

Analysis .

61 (3): 176– 187.

doi : 10.1093/analys/61.3.176 .

^ Yablo’s Paradox and ω-Inconsistency, Ketland External links [ edit ] "Liar Paradox" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"Yablo's Paradox" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"Paradox Without Self-Reference" - Analysis , vol. 53 (1993), pp. 251–52 "Mental Causation" - The Philosophical Review , vol. 101, issue 2 (1992), pp. 245–280 "Go Figure: A Path Through Fictionalism" Interview at 3:AM Magazine Interview at What is it like to be a philosopher ?

v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion v t e Paradoxes Philosophical Analysis Buridan's bridge Dream argument Epicurean Fiction Fitch's knowability Free will Goodman's Hedonism Liberal Meno's Mere addition Moore's Newcomb's Nihilism Omnipotence Preface Rule-following Sorites Theseus' ship White horse Zeno's Logical Barber Berry Bhartrhari's Burali-Forti Court Crocodile Curry's Epimenides Free choice paradox Grelling–Nelson Kleene–Rosser Liar Card No-no Pinocchio Quine's Yablo's Opposite Day Paradoxes of set theory Richard's Russell's Socratic Hilbert's Hotel Temperature paradox Barbershop Catch-22 Chicken or the egg Drinker Entailment Lottery Plato's beard Raven Ross's Unexpected hanging " What the Tortoise Said to Achilles " Heat death paradox Olbers's paradox Economic Allais Antitrust Arrow information Bertrand Braess' Competition Income and fertility Downs–Thomson Easterlin Edgeworth Ellsberg European Gibson's Giffen good Icarus Jevons Leontief Lerner Lucas Mandeville's Mayfield's Metzler Plenty Productivity Prosperity Scitovsky Service recovery St. Petersburg Thrift Toil Tullock Value Decision theory Abilene Apportionment Alabama New states Population Arrow's Buridan's ass Chainstore Condorcet's Decision-making Downs Ellsberg Fenno's Fredkin's Green Hedgehog's Inventor's Kavka's toxin puzzle Morton's fork Navigation Newcomb's Parrondo's Preparedness Prevention Prisoner's dilemma Tolerance Willpower List Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Croatia Poland Israel Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project Google Scholar PhilPeople MathSciNet Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stephen_Yablo&oldid=1290448355 " Categories : Analytic philosophers American logicians Philosophers of mathematics Philosophers of mind American philosophers of language Living people Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences University of Michigan faculty Self-referential paradoxes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from December 2024 Articles with hCards Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 14 May 2025, at 21:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stephen Yablo 6 languages Add topic

