Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Early years 1.2 North House 1.3 Major renovations of 1986, 1988, and 2002 1.4 Renaming to Pforzheimer 1.5 Dispute with Adams House on dining access (Pforzheimer–Adams War) 2 Administration 3 House Committee 4 The Belltower Suite 5 Notable residents 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Pforzheimer House Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′55″N 71°07′29″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.38195°N 71.12467°W ﻿ / 42.38195; -71.12467 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Residential House of Harvard College Pforzheimer House Residential House at Harvard University Harvard University View of Pforzheimer House's Moors Hall.

Shield Location 56 Linnaean Street Coordinates 42°22′55″N 71°07′29″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.38195°N 71.12467°W ﻿ / 42.38195; -71.12467 Motto Latin : Fortes Fortuna Adiuvat (sometimes stylized as "pFortes pFortuna Adiuvat") Established 1970 (as North House) Named for Carol K. and Carl H. Pforzheimer Jr.

Previous names North House, Radcliffe Quadrangle Colours Red, Black, White Faculty Deans Erica Chenoweth Zoe Marks Undergraduates approx. 400 Called Pfohosers, Pfohomies, Pfohoes Website pfoho .harvard .edu Pforzheimer House , nicknamed Pfoho ( FOE-hoe ) and formerly named North House , is one of twelve undergraduate residential Houses at Harvard University . It was named in 1995 for Carol K. and Carl Howard Pforzheimer Jr , major University and Radcliffe College benefactors, and their family.

Located in the Radcliffe Quadrangle , Pforzheimer House comprises Ada Louise Comstock, Daniel Henry Holmes, Mary Buckminster Moors, and Wolbach Halls, in addition to Faculty Row and the Jordan North and South buildings.

Pforzheimer House's shield features black and crimson squares on a crimson and black field; its mascot is the polar bear . The current faculty deans are Erica Chenoweth and Zoe Marks.

History [ edit ] Early years [ edit ] Radcliffe College students first took up residence on campus in 1901, and the oldest parts of Pforzheimer House date to that year.

Moors opened in time for the 1949–50 academic year, the year plans for Holmes were first drawn up. Construction of Comstock began in 1957.

Jordan North and Jordan South The Jordans, two separate buildings located at the corner of Walker and Shepard Streets, began as an experiment in cooperative living in 1961. They gradually became used as overflow housing in 1985, although one building persisted as a co-op until at least until 1997.

Wolbach, formerly an apartment building, was purchased by Radcliffe in 1964.

North House [ edit ] The name "North House" first appeared in 1961 and consisted of Comstock, Moors, and Holmes. Wolbach did not yet belong to Radcliffe at this point. The Jordans were initially assigned to the no-longer-extant East House.

In the fall of 1970, Professor Edward L. Keenan and his wife Joan became the first masters of North House. They moved into the newly constructed masters residence at 46 Linnaean Street. The townhouses of Faculty Row along Linnaean were also completed in 1970 and were affiliated with the House.

Male students were first assigned to North House in the fall of 1970, when Harvard and Radcliffe entered an agreement allowing students from the respective colleges to live in dormitories at the other institution.

House Master and Co-Master Woody and Hanna Hastings began their term in 1975.

Major renovations of 1986, 1988, and 2002 [ edit ] They attempted to cultivate house spirit by integrating and interconnecting the buildings. Woody Hastings remarked, "Any student in North House ought to be able to get from any place in the House to any other place in the House in his PJs - or less." Accordingly, when plans were drawn up for a major renovation in the mid-1980s, the Hastings rejected an early proposal that would have segmented the house into disconnected vertical "entryways", opting instead for a plan that connected "the bricks" to one another more closely and in the process allowed the construction of the Holmes junior common room, the house grille, the Comstock Library, and the centralized balconied dining hall. The duplex suites on the top floors of "the bricks" were also created during this renovation.

Until a major renovation in 2002, Wolbach Hall consisted of one and two bedroom apartments, complete with kitchens. Renovations to Wolbach were done in order to increase the number of students housed in the dorm and to provide suites on campus accessible and appropriate to disabled persons.

A breezeway connecting Wolbach to Moors, long advocated by Hastings, was constructed in 2002.

Renaming to Pforzheimer [ edit ] In 1995, North House was renamed Pforzheimer House. A Boston Globe columnist referred to this as "the Pforzheimer House flap," saying that "Harvard renamed the Radcliffe-owned house after a loyal donor without consulting [Radcliffe President Linda] Wilson & Co." [ 1 ] The Harvard Noteables wrote five song parodies lamenting the name change.

[ 2 ] North House Masters J. Woodland Hastings and Hanna Hastings said they were "thrilled!" with the new name and Hanna was quoted as saying "It's just what we've been asking for. We wanted to be more than a direction." [ 3 ] Pretty quickly, students grew used to the new name. The letters f or ph were replaced by pF in House-related words, hence Pformal , PfoHo Pfora , and Pfreshman Welcome .

In 1996, the House welcomed new masters, the McCarthys, to go with its new name. A central common room in Moors was named for the Hastings upon their retirement. That same year, the New York Times noted that, "many black and Hispanic students lived in the Radcliffe quadrangle, in the Pforzheimer House", [ 4 ] while the Boston Globe observed that "Pforzheimer, formerly North House, [had] evolved into a base for black student activism and a mecca for premeds" and observed that "the distinct cultures" of the residence halls was about to be broken up by the then-new policy of assigning students randomly to residence halls.

[ 5 ] Thirteen members of the Pforzheimer family have attended Harvard and Radcliffe over four generations. They are generally regarded as philanthropic leaders and actively involved alumni, with both Carl H. Pforzheimer, Jr.

(AB '28, MBA '30) and Carl H. Pforzheimer III (AB '58, MBA '63) serving as president of the HAA (Harvard Alumni Association), and, along with Carol Koehler Pforzheimer (AB '31) and Nancy Pforzheimer Aronson (AB '56), they worked on numerous graduate school and Radcliffe committees. In addition, the Pforzheimers were the first Harvard–Radcliffe couple to win Harvard Medals for their service to the University.

[ 6 ] Dispute with Adams House on dining access (Pforzheimer–Adams War) [ edit ] This section may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may only interest a particular audience .

Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information, and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia's inclusion policy .

( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In October 1999, Adams House began enforcing a long-standing policy of closing its dining hall to non-residents during peak hours. Since Adams House is located closest to the main class buildings at Harvard Yard, their dining hall is often crowded, and residents unable to find a seat. Residents of Adams House enacted a series of measures to keep members of other houses out. The most infamous was "The No Interhouse Gong Show," wherein Adams House members rang a gong when nonresidents came in. A running tally of the number of nonresidents attempting to eat in Adams was kept on a large chalkboard.

Pforzheimer House, furthest from the main class buildings, was particularly inconvenienced by this policy. They responded by attempting to pass in House Committee a tongue-in-cheek, non-binding measure (proposed by Rick Wedell '01) denying Adams house residents access to the Pforzheimer dining hall. However, there was no real support for the measure and it did not pass, though the attempt was reported in the Crimson . Adams House residents discovered the proposal, and retaliated by declaring war in their House Committee. The initial suggestion was raised by senior Colin Wood, and formally proposed by Jessamyn Conrad, and seconded by sophomore Kyle Gilman. That night, the Declaration and Articles of War were written, sent to the Pfohozheimer listserv, and the war had officially begun.

Adams House gained the element of surprise when students blanketed "O-Ho" with the Declaration of War overnight. Adams House declared that it was in possession of the Pforzheimer "Pf", and would henceforth be known as Pfadams House. The "Adams House" sign above C-Entry was actually changed at this time. The next day, when Pforzheimer students awoke, they discovered that every "Pf" in their dormitory had been "stolen" (covered with masking tape). A week of pranks followed, the most extensive of which occurred when Pforzheimer residents forged notices from the freshman dorms, informing all freshmen that Annenberg Hall was closed, and to go to the Adams dining hall for Sunday brunch.

[ 7 ] Students from Pforzheimer House (Andy and Aric) made a bold, daytime raid, stealing the gong and closing the gates leading to the Adams dining hall with a bike lock at lunch hour one day, creating chaos. Adams residents, including both Masters, took to reading the declaration of war over the "Orzheimer" call boxes during lunch and dinner.

To settle this war, Adams and Pforzheimer House agreed to a binding field day competition, including a football game, a tug-of-war, and a fifteen-minute musical theatre competition. A Pforzheimer win would result in a return to "Adams" from "Pfadams", the return of the gong, and would grant Pforzheimer House residents dining hall privileges at Adams House. An Adams win would result in a return of the gong, continued use of "Pfadams House" with Pforzheimer House becoming "Orzheimer House", though Adams generously offered to supply the rival library with a copy of "Hooked on Phonics." An Adams win would also grant the Pfoho "colonists" dining hall privileges at Adams House. Led by Masters McCarthy, presiding over the event in full academic regalia, Pforzheimer House secured a resounding victory (trouncing Adams in the football and tug-of-war and putting up a brave but wholly inadequate showing in the musico-theatrical segment), and Adams accordingly agreed to provide its residents with ID stickers granting them access to the Adams dining hall, an arrangement that stands to this day.

[ 8 ] For several years, a "War Memorial" stood in Adams House, commemorating the event.

Administration [ edit ] As with all houses at Harvard College , Pforzheimer House consists of two classes of members/residents: the Senior Common Room (SCR) and the Junior Common Room (JCR). The official university administration of the house consists of the resident members of the Senior Common Room, such as the House faculty deans, the Allston Burr Resident Dean, senior resident tutors, and the resident tutors. There is also a non-academic house administrator and a building manager.

Erica Chenoweth and Zoe Marks are the current faculty deans.

[ 9 ] The Allston Burr Resident Dean is Monique A. Roy.

[ 10 ] House Committee [ edit ] A Pforzheimer House T-shirt design Student life and house events are administered by the House Committee, or HoCo, whose voting members must be from the Junior Common Room , i.e. the undergraduate student body of the house. Members of the Senior Common Room may attend HoCo meetings as non-voting participants. The committee operates separately from the Harvard Undergraduate Council , to organize student events and manage funding. The HoCo, as with the other student government organizations in the Houses, are funded by the UC.

[ needs update ] The Belltower Suite [ edit ] The Belltower suite is one of several specially named suites at Harvard College, including Eliot House 's Ground Zero, Cabot House 's Library Suite, Quincy House 's Terrace (formerly known as the Balcony Suite), and Currier House 's Ten-Man Suite. It is named for its access to the Pforzheimer belltower.

The core Belltower Suite is Moors Hall #410, which connects by internal fire-escape passageways to Moors #403 and #404. The Belltower suite also connects to the belltower itself, which is not used for housing. Frequently, a single group of friends shares Moors #410 and #403 or, more rarely, all three of the suites; in this case, the entire area occupied by the friends becomes "the Belltower suite" / "the Belltower".

One of the largest housing arrangements on the Harvard campus, it can comfortably house twelve students with individual bedrooms, four bathrooms (three full and one half), and three common rooms.

The Belltower itself faces out over the Quadrangle and is accessed by a ladder and trap door. Access to the tower begins in the passageway that connects Moors Hall #410 and #403. A first ladder leads through a ceiling trapdoor to the carpeted mezzanine level (the "chill pad"). A second, longer ladder leads via a small hatch to the lantern of the tower called the " crow's nest ". Expansive windows on all four sides of the lantern allow for a majestic view of the greater Boston area. An access door located halfway between the mezzanine and the lantern provides access to an outdoor inter-level widow's walk .

Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg is rumored to have met his wife, Priscilla Chan , at a party in Pforzheimer's Bell Tower Suite while they were both undergraduates at Harvard College .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Notable residents [ edit ] From the Pforzheimer House website: [ 14 ] Sheryl Sandberg , tech executive Mo Rocca , comedian and journalist Eden Riegel , actress Jillian Dempsey , ice hockey player Mark Takano , U.S. Congressman from California's 41st district Cameron Winklevoss Tyler Winklevoss Kyle Juszczyk , NFL player Jeffrey Clark , Justice Department lawyer [ 15 ] References [ edit ] ^ Beam, Alex (1997), "The Last Days of Radcliffe?", The Boston Globe, September 19, 1997, Living, p. E1.

^ "The Harvard Noteables: Parodies, Volume I" . Digitas. Archived from the original on March 5, 2002.

^ Jonathan N. Axelrod (December 6, 1994).

"North House to Be Named For Pforzheimer Family; Change Designed to Honor Longtime Contribution" . The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved October 12, 2006 .

^ Rimer, Sara (2003), "Blacks' Guide to Harvard Covers History and Tips," The New York Times, February 1, 2003, p. A15 ^ Dembner, Alice (1996), "Harvard Puts End to Selective Living," The Boston Globe," June 6, 1996, Metro section, p. 1 ^ "Reading Room Named in Honor of Carol K. Pforzheimer '31" . Archived from the original on May 20, 2011.

^ Resnick, Scott A (October 19, 1999).

"First-Years Casualties in Pfoho-Adams War" . The Harvard Crimson" . Retrieved June 15, 2007 .

^ Resnick, Scott A (October 18, 1999).

"Spirit Unleashed As House War Ends" . The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved May 16, 2021 .

^ New masters for Pforzheimer House | Harvard Gazette . News.harvard.edu. Retrieved on 2014-04-12.

^ "Monique A. Roy" .

Pforzheimer House . Harvard University . Retrieved April 13, 2020 .

^ "Housing Market 2020: Pforzheimer | Flyby | the Harvard Crimson" .

^ "Priscilla Chan is running one of the most ambitious philanthropies in the world" . July 10, 2017.

^ "Pfamous Alumni" .

^ "Pfamous Alumni" . Retrieved May 7, 2016 .

^ Benner, Katie (January 23, 2021).

"Trump and Justice Dept. Lawyer Said to Have Plotted to Oust Acting Attorney General" .

The New York Times .

See also: (Dec. 10, 1949). "Moors Will Speak At Hall Inaugural".

The Harvard Crimson .

Available online.

(Mar. 8, 1950). "Future Annex Dormitory To Be Called Holmes Hall".

The Harvard Crimson .

Available online.

Miller, Martha E. (Apr. 12, 1957). "'Cliffe to Break Ground For Ninth Dorm April 29".

The Harvard Crimson .

Available online.

Gale, Mary Ellen (Jun. 14, 1962). "Mrs. Bunting's Radcliffe".

The Harvard Crimson .

Available online.

Cliff, Mary F. (Feb. 9, 1984). "Hanging Out Up There".

The Harvard Crimson .

Available online.

Masters, Brooke A. (Sep. 28, 1987). "Quadlings Celebrate Renovations".

The Harvard Crimson .

Available online.

Resnick, Scott A. (Oct. 18, 1999). "Spirit Unleashed As House War Ends".

The Harvard Crimson .

Available online.

Fong, J. G. (Mar. 16, 2000). "Fifteen Minutes: Harvard Band on the Rise, Again".

The Harvard Crimson .

Available online.

Studlien, Kirsten G. (Jun. 8, 2000). "Dilemma on Walker Street".

The Harvard Crimson .

Available online.

Kofol, Anne K. (Sep. 9, 2002). "Quad Updated With Renovations".

The Harvard Crimson .

Available online.

Dolan, Meghan M. and Cornelia L. Griggs (Oct. 23, 2003). "Room With A Crew".

Fifteen Minutes .

Available online .

Bell, Richard, et al., ed. (Oct. 2002). "2002-03 Pforzheimer House Pfacebook." Doroshow, D. B. (Nov. 1, 2001). "Pfoho's Photogenic Polar".

The Harvard Crimson .

Available online.

[Pf-OPEN] mailing list archives, Sep.-Dec. 2001, inclusive.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pforzheimer House .

Official Pforzheimer House website Harvard-Radcliffe Television Street map at the Library of Congress Web Archives (archived 2009-04-03) Official history of the House History of the shield, with images at the Wayback Machine (archived 2005-02-19) The Noteables: Parodies, vol. I at archive.today (archived 2002-03-05). Search the text for the words "The following five" - it's about two-thirds of the way down.

v t e Residential houses of Harvard Adams House Cabot House Currier House Dudley House Dunster House Eliot House Kirkland House Leverett House Lowell House Mather House Pforzheimer House Quincy House Winthrop House v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pforzheimer_House&oldid=1306061479 " Categories : Harvard Houses Radcliffe College and Institute 1970 establishments in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from October 2021 Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles that are excessively detailed from September 2024 All articles that are excessively detailed Wikipedia articles with style issues from September 2024 All articles with style issues Wikipedia articles in need of updating from September 2024 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template other archives Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template archiveis links This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 18:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pforzheimer House Add languages Add topic

