Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The tripartite soul 2 In the Republic Toggle In the Republic subsection 2.1 Reason (λογιστικόν) 2.2 Spirit (θυμοειδές) 2.3 Appetite (ἐπιθυμητικόν) 3 Reincarnation 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Plato's theory of soul 9 languages Español Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 پښتو Português Suomi Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical theory Likeness of Plato after an engraved gem . The Psyche-wings fastened to his temples allude to his doctrine of the immortality of the soul.

[ 1 ] Part of a series on Platonism Life Works Theory of forms Intelligible form Hyperuranion Theory of soul Nous Thumos Phren Epistemology Anamnesis Peritrope Dianoia Cardinal virtues Moral rationalism Political philosophy Mimesis Orthotes onomaton Euthyphro dilemma The Republic Allegory of the cave Analogy of the Sun Analogy of the divided line Form of the Good Noble lie Philosopher king Plato's number Ship of State Ring of Gyges Myth of Er Timaeus Atlantis Demiurge World soul Organicism Classical element Platonic solid Tertium quid Khôra Related articles Commentaries The Academy in Athens Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Neoplatonism and Christianity Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Pseudo-Platonica Related categories Plato Philosophy portal v t e Plato's theory of the soul , which was inspired variously by the teachings of Socrates , considered the psyche ( Ancient Greek : ψῡχή , romanized : psūkhḗ ) to be the essence of a person, being that which decides how people behave.

Plato considered this essence to be an incorporeal, eternal occupant of a person's being. Plato said that even after death, the soul exists and is able to think. He believed that as bodies die, the soul is continually reborn ( metempsychosis ) in subsequent bodies. Plato divided the soul into three parts: the logistikon (reason), the thymoeides (spirit, which houses anger, as well as other spirited emotions), and the epithymetikon (appetite or desire, which houses the desire for physical pleasures).

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The tripartite soul [ edit ] The Platonic soul consists of three parts, which are located in different regions of the body: [ 4 ] [ 5 ] The logos ( λογιστικόν ), or logistikon , located in the head, is related to reason and regulates the other parts.

The thymos (θυμοειδές), or thumoeides , located near the chest region, is related to spirit.

The eros (ἐπιθυμητικόν), or epithumetikon , located in the stomach, is related to one's desires.

In his treatise The Republic , and also with the chariot allegory in Phaedrus , Plato asserted that the three parts of the psyche also correspond to the three classes of society ( viz.

the rulers, the military, and the ordinary citizens).

[ 6 ] The function of the epithymetikon is to produce and seek pleasure. The function of the logistikon is to rule through the love of learning gently. The function of the thymoeides is to obey the directions of the logistikon while ferociously defending the whole from external invasion and internal disorder.

Whether in a city or an individual, justice ( δικαιοσύνη , dikaiosyne ) is declared to be the state of the whole in which each part fulfills its function, while temperance is the state of the whole where each part does not attempt to interfere in the functions of the others.

[ 7 ] Injustice ( ἀδικία , adikia ) is the contrary state of the whole, often taking the specific form in which the spirited are obedient to the appetitive while they together either ignore the logical entirely or employ it in their pursuits of pleasure.

In the Republic [ edit ] In Book IV, part 4 of the Republic , Socrates and his interlocutors ( Glaucon and Adeimantus ) are attempting to answer whether the soul is one or made of parts. Socrates states: "It is obvious that the same thing will never do or suffer opposites in the same respect in relation to the same thing and at the same time. So that if ever we find these contradictions in the functions of the mind we shall know that it was not the same thing functioning but a plurality." [ 8 ] (This is an example of Plato's principle of non-contradiction .) For instance, it seems that, given each person has only one soul, it should be impossible for a person to simultaneously desire something yet also at that very moment be averse to the same thing, as when one is tempted to commit a crime but also averse to it.

[ 9 ] Both Socrates and Glaucon agree that it should not be possible for the soul to be at the same time both in one state and its opposite. From this, it follows that there must be at least two aspects to the soul. Having named these as "reason" and "appetite", Plato goes on to identify a third aspect, "spirit", which in a healthy psyche ought to be aligned with reason.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Reason (λογιστικόν) [ edit ] See also: Heraclitus § Logos The logical or logistikon (from logos ) is the thinking part of the soul, which loves the truth and seeks to learn it. Plato originally identifies the soul dominated by this part with the Athenian temperament.

[ 11 ] Plato makes the point that the logistikon would be the smallest part of the soul (as the rulers would be the smallest population within the Republic), but that, nevertheless, a soul can be declared just only if all three parts agree that the logistikon should rule.

[ 12 ] Spirit (θυμοειδές) [ edit ] According to Plato, the spirited or thymoeides (from thymos ) is part of the soul by which we are angry or get into a temper.

[ 13 ] He also calls this part 'high spirit' and initially identifies the soul dominated by this part with the Thracians , Scythians , and the people of "northern regions".

[ 13 ] Appetite (ἐπιθυμητικόν) [ edit ] The appetite or epithymetikon (from epithymia , translated to Latin as concupiscentia or desiderium ).

[ 14 ] Reincarnation [ edit ] Plato's theory of the reincarnation of the soul combined the ideas of Socrates and Pythagoras , mixing the divine privileges of men with the path of reincarnation between different animal species. He believed the human prize for the virtuous or the punishment for the guilty were not placed in different parts of the underworld but directly on Earth. After death, a guilty soul would be re-embodied first in a woman (in accordance with Plato's belief that women occupied a lower level of the natural scale), and then in an animal species, descending from quadrupeds down to snakes and fish. According to this theory, women and the lower animals were created only in order to provide a habitat for degraded souls.

[ 15 ] Plato, most of the time, says that there is a distinct reward-and-punishment phase of the afterlife between reincarnations. Only in the Timaeus and Laws does the reward-and-punishment phase disappear; in these two texts, the punishment is said to be the reincarnation itself.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Tripartite (theology) Sigmund Freud 's concepts of the id, ego and superego References [ edit ] ^ King, Charles William (1885).

Handbook of Engraved Gems (2nd ed.). London: George Bell and Sons. p. 236.

^ Lorenz, Hendrik (2009), "Ancient Theories of Soul" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2009 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2023-07-05 ^ Kraut, Richard (2022), "Aristotle's Ethics" , in Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2022 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2023-06-24 ^ Hommel, Bernhard (October 2019).

"Affect and control: A conceptual clarification" .

International Journal of Psychophysiology .

144 : 1– 6.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2019.07.006 .

hdl : 1887/81987 .

PMID 31362029 .

S2CID 198998249 .

^ Long, A. A.

"Psychological Ideas in Antiquity" .

Dictionary of the History of Ideas – via University of Virginia Library.

^ "Plato's Ethics and Politics in The Republic" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved August 29, 2009 .

^ Republic 4.433a – via Perseus.

^ Republic 4.436b–c – via Perseus.

^ a b Calian, Florian (2012).

"Plato's Psychology of Action and the Origin of Agency" . In Šajda, Peter (ed.).

Affectivity, Agency and Intersubjectivity . L'Harmattan. pp.

9– 22.

ISBN 978-963-236-587-9 .

^ "Ancient Theories of Soul" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Republic 4.435e – via Perseus.

^ Republic 4.442a – via Perseus.

^ a b Republic 4.439e – via Perseus.

^ Dixon, T (2003).

From Passions to Emotions: The Creation of a Secular Psychological Category . Cambridge University Press. p. 39.

ISBN 9781139436977 .

^ Sedley, David (2009).

"Socrates vs Darwin" . Christ's College, Oxford . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Kamtekar, Rachana. "The Soul’s (After-) Life," Ancient Philosophy 36 (1): 115-132. 2016.

External links [ edit ] Look up tripartite soul in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

"Plato: Moral Psychology" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Plato Works Apology Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Laws Lysis Menexenus Meno Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Timaeus Of doubtful authenticity Axiochus Definitions Demodocus Epigrams Epinomis Epistles Seventh Letter Eryxias Halcyon Hipparchus Minos On Justice On Virtue Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Theages Life The Academy in Athens Socratic problem List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Legacy Unwritten doctrines List of manuscripts of Plato's dialogues 23 24 228 229 Commentaries Middle Platonism Neoplatonism and Christianity and Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Plato's Dream Poitier Meets Plato Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Plato%27s_theory_of_soul&oldid=1297145915 " Category : Plato's theory of soul Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 11:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Plato's theory of soul 9 languages Add topic

