Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description Toggle Description subsection 1.1 Vapor pressure 1.2 Boiling point 2 Contributing factors Toggle Contributing factors subsection 2.1 Intermolecular forces 2.2 Molecular weight 3 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 3.1 Distillation 3.2 Perfume 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Volatility (chemistry) 32 languages العربية বাংলা Català Čeština الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Shqip Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Tendency of a substance to vaporize This article is about the general concept of volatility in chemistry. For more specialized usages, see Volatility (disambiguation) .

Bromine liquid readily transitions to vapor at room temperature, indicating high volatility.

In chemistry , volatility is a material quality which describes how readily a substance vaporizes . At a given temperature and pressure , a substance with high volatility is more likely to exist as a vapour , while a substance with low volatility is more likely to be a liquid or solid . Volatility can also describe the tendency of a vapor to condense into a liquid or solid; less volatile substances will more readily condense from a vapor than highly volatile ones.

[ 1 ] Differences in volatility can be observed by comparing how fast substances within a group evaporate (or sublimate in the case of solids) when exposed to the atmosphere. A highly volatile substance such as rubbing alcohol ( isopropyl alcohol ) will quickly evaporate, while a substance with low volatility such as vegetable oil will remain condensed.

[ 2 ] In general, solids are much less volatile than liquids, but there are some exceptions. Solids that sublimate (change directly from solid to vapor) such as dry ice (solid carbon dioxide) or iodine can vaporize at a similar rate as some liquids under standard conditions.

[ 3 ] Description [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Volatility itself has no defined numerical value, but it is often described using vapor pressures or boiling points (for liquids). High vapor pressures indicate a high volatility, while high boiling points indicate low volatility. Vapor pressures and boiling points are often presented in tables and charts that can be used to compare chemicals of interest. Volatility data is typically found through experimentation over a range of temperatures and pressures.

Vapor pressure [ edit ] A log-lin vapor pressure chart for various liquids Vapor pressure is a measurement of how readily a condensed phase forms a vapor at a given temperature. A substance enclosed in a sealed vessel initially at vacuum (no air inside) will quickly fill any empty space with vapor. After the system reaches equilibrium and the rate of evaporation matches the rate of condensation, the vapor pressure can be measured. Increasing the temperature increases the amount of vapor that is formed and thus the vapor pressure. In a mixture, each substance contributes to the overall vapor pressure of the mixture, with more volatile compounds making a larger contribution.

Boiling point [ edit ] Boiling point is the temperature at which the vapor pressure of a liquid is equal to the surrounding pressure, causing the liquid to rapidly evaporate, or boil. It is closely related to vapor pressure, but is dependent on pressure. The normal boiling point is the boiling point at atmospheric pressure , but it can also be reported at higher and lower pressures.

[ 3 ] Contributing factors [ edit ] Intermolecular forces [ edit ] Normal boiling point (red) and melting point (blue) of linear alkanes vs. number of carbon atoms.

An important factor influencing a substance's volatility is the strength of the interactions between its molecules. Attractive forces between molecules are what holds materials together, and materials with stronger intermolecular forces , such as most solids, are typically not very volatile.

Ethanol and dimethyl ether , two chemicals with the same formula (C 2 H 6 O), have different volatilities due to the different interactions that occur between their molecules in the liquid phase: ethanol molecules are capable of hydrogen bonding while dimethyl ether molecules are not.

[ 4 ] The result in an overall stronger attractive force between the ethanol molecules, making it the less volatile substance of the two.

Molecular weight [ edit ] In general, volatility tends to decrease with increasing molecular mass because larger molecules can participate in more intermolecular bonding, [ 5 ] although other factors such as structure and polarity play a significant role. The effect of molecular mass can be partially isolated by comparing chemicals of similar structure (i.e.

esters , alkanes, etc.). For instance, linear alkanes exhibit decreasing volatility as the number of carbons in the chain increases.

Applications [ edit ] Distillation [ edit ] A crude oil distillation tower .

Knowledge of volatility is often useful in the separation of components from a mixture. When a mixture of condensed substances contains multiple substances with different levels of volatility, its temperature and pressure can be manipulated such that the more volatile components change to a vapor while the less volatile substances remain in the liquid or solid phase. The newly formed vapor can then be discarded or condensed into a separate container. When the vapors are collected, this process is known as distillation .

[ 6 ] The process of petroleum refinement utilizes a technique known as fractional distillation , which allows several chemicals of varying volatility to be separated in a single step.

Crude oil entering a refinery is composed of many useful chemicals that need to be separated. The crude oil flows into a distillation tower and is heated up, which allows the more volatile components such as butane and kerosene to vaporize. These vapors move up the tower and eventually come in contact with cold surfaces, which causes them to condense and be collected. The most volatile chemical condense at the top of the column while the least volatile chemicals to vaporize condense in the lowest portion.

[ 1 ] The difference in volatility between water and ethanol has long been used to produce concentrated alcoholic beverages (many of these are referred to as " liquors "). In order to increase the concentration of ethanol in the product, beverage makers would heat the initial alcohol mixture to a temperature where most of the ethanol vaporizes while most of the water remains liquid. The ethanol vapor is then collected and condensed in a separate container, resulting in a much more concentrated product.

[ 7 ] Perfume [ edit ] Volatility is an important consideration when crafting perfumes . Humans detect odors when aromatic vapors come in contact with receptors in the nose. Ingredients that vaporize quickly after being applied will produce fragrant vapors for a short time before the oils evaporate. Slow-evaporating ingredients can stay on the skin for weeks or even months, but may not produce enough vapors to produce a strong aroma. To prevent these problems, perfume designers carefully consider the volatility of essential oils and other ingredients in their perfumes. Appropriate evaporation rates are achieved by modifying the amount of highly volatile and non-volatile ingredients used.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Clausius–Clapeyron relation – Relation between vapour pressure and temperature Distillation – Method of separating mixtures Fractional distillation – Separation of a mixture into its component parts Partial pressure – Pressure of a component gas in a mixture Raoult's law – Law of thermodynamics for vapour pressure of a mixture Relative volatility – Comparative volatility of components in a solution Vapor–liquid equilibrium – Concentration of a vapor in contact with its liquid Volatile organic compound – Organic chemicals having a high vapor pressure at room temperature References [ edit ] ^ a b Felder, Richard (2015).

Elementary Principles of Chemical Processes . John Wiley & Sons. pp.

279– 281.

ISBN 978-1-119-17764-7 .

^ Koretsky, Milo D. (2013).

Engineering and Chemical Thermodynamics . John Wiley & Sons. pp.

639– 641.

^ a b Zumdahl, Steven S. (2007).

Chemistry .

Houghton Mifflin . pp.

460 -466.

ISBN 978-0-618-52844-8 .

^ Atkins, Peter (2013).

Chemical Principles . New York: W.H. Freeman and Company. pp.

368– 369.

ISBN 978-1-319-07903-1 .

^ "Hydrocarbon boiling points" . Archived from the original on 7 February 2023 . Retrieved 28 April 2021 .

^ Armarego, Wilfred L. F. (2009).

Purification of Laboratory Chemicals . Elsevier. pp.

9 -12.

ISBN 978-1-85617-567-8 .

^ Kvaalen, Eric.

"Alcohol Distillation: Basic Principles, Equipment, Performance Relationships, and Safety" .

Purdue Extension .

^ Sell, Charles (2006).

The Chemistry of Fragrances . UK: The Royal Society of Chemistry . pp.

200 -202.

ISBN 978-0-85404-824-3 .

External links [ edit ] Look up volatile or volatility in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Volatility from ilpi.com v t e States of matter ( list , timeline ) State Solid Liquid Gas / Vapor Supercritical fluid Plasma Low energy Bose–Einstein condensate Fermionic condensate Degenerate matter Quantum Hall Rydberg matter Strange matter Superfluid Supersolid Photonic molecule High energy QCD matter Quark–gluon plasma Color-glass condensate Other states Colloid Crystal Liquid crystal Time crystal Quantum spin liquid Exotic matter Programmable matter Dark matter Antimatter Magnetically ordered Antiferromagnet Ferrimagnet Ferromagnet String-net liquid Superglass Phase transitions Boiling Boiling point Condensation Critical line Critical point Crystallization Deposition Evaporation Flash evaporation Freezing Chemical ionization Ionization Lambda point Melting Melting point Recombination Regelation Saturated fluid Sublimation Supercooling Triple point Vaporization Vitrification Quantities Enthalpy of fusion Enthalpy of sublimation Enthalpy of vaporization Latent heat Latent internal energy Trouton's rule Volatility Concepts Baryonic matter Binodal Compressed fluid Cooling curve Equation of state Leidenfrost effect Macroscopic quantum phenomena Mpemba effect Order and disorder (physics) Spinodal Superconductivity Superheated vapor Superheating Thermo-dielectric effect Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Volatility_(chemistry)&oldid=1287007159 " Categories : Physical chemistry Chemical properties Thermodynamic properties Engineering thermodynamics Phase transitions Gases Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2025 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 23 April 2025, at 12:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Volatility (chemistry) 32 languages Add topic

