Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 György Lukács 2 Frankfurt School 3 Social construction 4 Phenomenology 5 Louis Althusser 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Reification (Marxism) 18 languages العربية Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Português Русский Slovenčina Svenska Татарча / tatarça Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Treatment of social attributes as real, in Marxist theory For other uses, see Reification (disambiguation) .

This article's lead section may need to be rewritten .

Please review the lead guide and help improve the lead of this article if you can.

( May 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e In Marxist philosophy, reification ( Verdinglichung , "making into a thing") is the process by which human social relations are perceived as inherent attributes of the people involved in them, or attributes of some product of the relation, such as a traded commodity.

As a practice of economics, reification transforms objects into subjects and subjects into objects, with the result that subjects (people) are rendered passive (of determined identity), whilst objects (commodities) are rendered as the active factor that determines the nature of a social relation. Analogously, the term hypostatization describes an effect of reification that results from presuming the existence of any object that can be named and presuming the existence of an abstractly conceived object, which is a fallacy of reification of ontological and epistemological interpretation.

Reification is conceptually related to, but different from Marx's theory of alienation and theory of commodity fetishism ; alienation is the general condition of human estrangement; reification is a specific form of alienation; and commodity fetishism is a specific form of reification.

[ 1 ] György Lukács [ edit ] The concept of reification arose through the work of Lukács in his essay "Reification and the Consciousness of the Proletariat", collected in his book History and Class Consciousness (1923). Lukács treats reification as a problem of capitalist society that is related to the prevalence of the commodity form, through a close reading of "The Fetishism of the Commodity and its Secret" in the first volume of Capital (1867).

Those who have written about this concept include Max Stirner , Guy Debord , Raya Dunayevskaya , Raymond Williams , Timothy Bewes, and Slavoj Žižek .

Marxist humanist Gajo Petrović (1965), drawing from Lukács, defines reification as: [ 1 ] The act (or result of the act) of transforming human properties, relations and actions into properties, relations and actions of man‑produced things which have become independent (and which are imagined as originally independent) of man and govern his life. Also transformation of human beings into thing‑like beings which do not behave in a human way but according to the laws of the thing‑world. Reification is a 'special' case of alienation, its most radical and widespread form characteristic of modern capitalist society .

Andrew Feenberg (1981) reinterprets Lukács's central category of "consciousness" as similar to anthropological notions of culture as a set of practices.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The reification of consciousness in particular, therefore, is more than just an act of misrecognition; it affects the everyday social practice at a fundamental level beyond the individual subject.

Frankfurt School [ edit ] Lukács's account was influential for the philosophers of the Frankfurt School , for example in Horkheimer 's and Adorno's Dialectic of Enlightenment , and in the works of Herbert Marcuse , and Axel Honneth .

Frankfurt School philosopher Axel Honneth (2008) reformulates this " Western Marxist " concept in terms of intersubjective relations of recognition and power.

[ 4 ] Instead of being an effect of the structural character of social systems such as capitalism , as Karl Marx and György Lukács argued, Honneth contends that all forms of reification are due to pathologies of intersubjectively based struggles for recognition.

Social construction [ edit ] Reification occurs when specifically human creations are misconceived as "facts of nature, results of cosmic laws, or manifestations of divine will." [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ need quotation to verify ] However, some scholarship [ who?

] on Lukács's (1923) use of the term "reification" in History and Class Consciousness has challenged this interpretation of the concept, according to which reification implies that a pre-existing subject creates an objective social world from which it is then alienated.

Phenomenology [ edit ] Other scholarship has suggested that Lukács's use of the term may have been strongly influenced by Edmund Husserl 's phenomenology to understand his preoccupation with the reification of consciousness in particular.

[ 7 ] On this reading, reification entails a stance that separates the subject from the objective world, creating a mistaken relation between subject and object that is reduced to disengaged knowing. Applied to the social world, this leaves individual subjects feeling that society is something they can only know as an alien power, rather than interact with. In this respect, Lukács's use of the term could be seen as prefiguring some of the themes Martin Heidegger (1927) touches on in Being and Time , supporting the suggestion of Lucien Goldman (2009) that Lukács and Heidegger were much closer in their philosophical concerns than typically thought.

[ 8 ] Louis Althusser [ edit ] French philosopher Louis Althusser criticized what he called the " ideology of reification" that sees " 'things' everywhere in human relations." [ 9 ] Althusser's critique derives from his understanding that Marx underwent significant theoretical and methodological change or an " epistemological break " between his early and his mature work.

Though the concept of reification is used in Das Kapital by Marx, Althusser finds in it an important influence from the similar concept of alienation developed in the early The German Ideology and in the Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 .

See also [ edit ] Caste – Social stratification conferring status Character mask – Prescribed social role that conceals the contradictions of a social relation or order Commodity fetishism – Concept in Marxist analysis Hauntology – Return or persistence of past ideas Hypostatic abstraction – Formal operation in mathematical logic Immanentize the eschaton – Pejorative term referring to attempts to bring about utopian conditions in the world.

Marx's theory of alienation – Social theory claiming that capitalism alienates workers from their humanity Objectification – Treating persons as objects Reification (fallacy) – Fallacy of treating an abstraction as if it were a real thing The Secret of Hegel References [ edit ] ^ a b Gajo Petrović . 2005 [1983]. " Reification ." Marxists Internet Archive , transcribed by R. Dumain from T. Bottomore , L. Harris, V. G. Kiernan , and R. Miliband (eds.). 1983.

A Dictionary of Marxist Thought.

Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press . Pp. 411–413.

^ Feenberg, Andrew . 1986 [1981].

Lukács, Marx and the Sources of Critical Theory.

New York: Oxford University Press .

^ Feenberg, Andrew . 2014.

The Philosophy of Praxis: Marx, Lukács and the Frankfurt School . London: Verso Press .

^ Honneth, Axel . 2008.

Reification: A New Look , with responses by Butler, Judith , Raymond Geuss , and Jonathan Lear . New York: Oxford University Press .

^ Peter Berger ; Thomas Luckmann (1966).

The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge . New York: Anchor Doubleday .

^ Silva, Sónia (2013). "Reification and fetishism: Processes of transformation".

Theory, Culture & Society .

30 (1): 79– 98.

doi : 10.1177/0263276412452892 .

S2CID 143741288 .

^ Westerman, R. 2010. "The Reification of Consciousness: Husserl’s Phenomenology in Lukács’s Subject-Object." New German Critique 111.

^ Goldman, Lucien . 2009.

Lukács and Heidegger: Towards a New Philosophy , translated by W. Q. Boelhower. London: Routledge .

^ Althusser, Louis . 1969 [1965].

For Marx , translated by B. Brewster. p. 230, " Marxism and Humanism ." Retrieved via From Marx to Mao Archived 16 May 2010 at the Wayback Machine , transcribed by D. J. Romagnolo (2002). Web.

Further reading [ edit ] Arato, Andrew . 1972. "Lukács’s Theory of Reification" Telos .

Bewes, Timothy. 2002. "Reification, or The Anxiety of Late Capitalism" (illustrated ed.). Verso .

ISBN 1-85984-685-8 . Retrieved via Google Books .

Burris, Val. 1988.

"Reification: A marxist perspective ." California Sociologist 10(1). Pp. 22–43.

Dabrowski, Tomash. 2014.

"Reification ." Blackwell Encyclopedia of Political Thought.

Blackwell.

doi : 10.1002/9781118474396.wbept0875 .

Dahms, Harry . 1998. "Beyond the Carousel of Reification: Critical Social Theory after Lukács, Adorno, and Habermas." Current Perspectives in Social Theory 18(1):3–62.

Duarte, German A. 2011.

Reificación Mediática (Sic Editorial) Dunayevskaya, Raya .

"Reification of People and the Fetishism of Commodities ." Pp. 167–91 in The Raya Dunayevskaya Collection .

Floyd, Kevin: "Introduction: On Capital, Sexuality, and the Situations of Knowledge," in The Reification of Desire: Toward a Queer Marxism . Minneapolis, MN.: University of Minnesota Press, 2009.

Gabel, Joseph . 1975.

False Consciousness: An Essay On Reification . New York: Harper & Row .

Goldmann, Lucien . 1959 "Réification." Recherches Dialectiques.

Paris: Gallimard .

Honneth, Axel. 2005 March 14–16.

"Reification: A Recognition-Theoretical View ." The Tanner Lectures on Human Values , delivered at University of California-Berkeley .

Kangrga, Milan . 1968.

Was ist Verdinglichung?

Larsen, Neil. 2011. "Lukács sans Proletariat, or Can History and Class Consciousness be Rehistoricized?." Pp. 81–100 in Georg Lukács: The Fundamental Dissonance of Existence, edited by T. Bewes and T. Hall. London: Continuum .

Löwith, Karl . 1982 [1932].

Max Weber and Karl Marx .

Lukács, György . 167 [1923].

History & Class Consciousness .

Merlin Press. " Reification and the Consciousness of the Proletariat ." Rubin, I. I. 1972 [1928]. "Essays on Marx’s Theory of Value." Schaff, Adam. 1980.

Alienation as a Social Phenomenon .

Tadić, Ljubomir . 1969. "Bureaucracy—Reified Organization," edited by M. Marković and G. Petrović. Praxis.

Vandenberghe, Frederic. 2009.

A Philosophical History of German Sociology . London: Routledge .

Westerman, Richard. 2018.

Lukács' Phenomenology of Capitalism: Reification Revalued . New York: Palgrave Macmillan .

v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Authority control databases : National Latvia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reification_(Marxism)&oldid=1295575192 " Categories : Marxist theory György Lukács Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Use dmy dates from August 2023 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from May 2023 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from May 2023 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from May 2023 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2023 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 16:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reification (Marxism) 18 languages Add topic

