Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Volunteer work 3 Weizmann House 4 Published work 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Vera Weizmann 18 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Հայերեն עברית ქართული Latviešu Македонски مصرى Português Русский Slovenčina Türkçe Українська ייִדיש Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia First Lady of Israel (1881–1966) Vera Weizmann, c.

1929 Vera Weizmann (née Chatzman ) ( Hebrew : ורה ויצמן ; November 27, 1881 – September 24, 1966), wife of Chaim Weizmann , the first president of the State of Israel , was a medical doctor and a Zionist activist.

Biography [ edit ] Albert Einstein and his wife Elsa Einstein (centre) with Zionist leaders, including Chaim Weizmann and Vera Weizmann, Menahem Ussishkin , and Ben-Zion Mossinson, on arrival in New York City in 1921 Vera and Chaim Weizmann , Herbert Samuel , David Lloyd George , Ethel Snowden , and Philip Snowden Vera Chatzman was born in the town of Rostov-on-Don , in the Russian Empire , the daughter of Isaiah and Feodosia Chatzman. She initially studied music before taking up medical training in Geneva , Switzerland .

[ 1 ] There she met Chaim Weizmann at Geneva University 's Zionist Club.

In 1906 she married Weizmann at Zoppot , Prussia, today called Sopot, in Poland , and later that year they settled in Manchester , England . There they had two sons, Benjamin born in 1907, and Michael born in 1916. The Weizmann family lived in Manchester for thirty years, from 1906 until 1937. In 1913, Vera Weizmann received her English medical license and worked as a doctor in the public health service at clinics for infants, developing advanced techniques for infant supervision and nutrition.

[ 2 ] The elder son, Benjamin (Benjie) Weizmann (1907–1980), settled in Ireland and became a dairy farmer. The Weizmanns’ younger son, Michael, served as a pilot in the British Royal Air Force during the Second World War and was killed on active service when his plane was shot down over the Bay of Biscay .

[ 2 ] Volunteer work [ edit ] Vera Weizmann, 1946 In 1916, Weizmann gave up her work as a pediatrician when she joined her husband upon his appointment as the scientific adviser in chemistry to the British Admiralty during the First World War . In 1920, she was one of the founding members of the Women's International Zionist Organization (WIZO), and served as its president, alternating with Lady Sieff , for forty years. When the Second World War broke out in 1939, she devoted all of her efforts to Youth Aliyah ( Aliyat Hanoar ), an organization that she established in England and continued to head as honorary president while living in Israel.

During the 1948 Arab-Israeli War , Weizmann focused on the treatment and rehabilitation of wounded soldiers. Immediately after the war, she established the Association of the War of Independence Handicapped Veterans and served as its president. She also established two centers for the rehabilitation of wounded soldiers, Beit Kay in Nahariya and the Department of Rehabilitation at Sheba— Tel Hashomer Hospital .

In addition to her activity in these organizations, Weizmann gave her support to many voluntary organizations such as ILAN , Magen David Adom , for which she served as president, and dozens of other private and institutional charitable endeavors.

Weizmann House [ edit ] As first lady , Weizmann had the interior of the house built for the couple at Weizmann Institute redesigned.  All of the furniture and art was original, mostly imported from England and France.

[ 3 ] Published work [ edit ] The Impossible Takes Longer: The Memoirs of Vera Weizmann References [ edit ] ^ "SEMP – Evidence based disaster management" . Retrieved 2021-05-08 .

^ a b "Vera Weizmann" .

Jewish Women's Archive . Retrieved 2021-05-08 .

^ "Weizmann House" . Weizmann Institute. Archived from the original on 2005-05-05 . Retrieved 2010-10-01 .

External links [ edit ] [1] VERA WEIZMANN 1881 – 1966 by Esther Carmel-Hakim Wikimedia Commons has media related to Vera Weizmann .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Australia Netherlands Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef SNAC Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vera_Weizmann&oldid=1295010429 " Categories : 1881 births 1966 deaths British emigrants to Israel British Jews British people of Russian-Jewish descent British paediatricians Women pediatricians Emigrants from the Russian Empire to the United Kingdom Israeli Jews Israeli people of British-Jewish descent Israeli people of Russian-Jewish descent Israeli rehabilitation physicians People from Rostov Russian Jews Spouses of presidents of Israel British women medical doctors Zionist activists Weizmann family Women's International Zionist Organization politicians 20th-century Israeli women physicians 21st-century Israeli women physicians 20th-century Israeli physicians 21st-century Israeli physicians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Hebrew-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 June 2025, at 03:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vera Weizmann 18 languages Add topic

