Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Proclamation of the Republic 2.2 Government of National Defense 3 Self-exile to San Sebastián Toggle Self-exile to San Sebastián subsection 3.1 Return 4 Personal life 5 Legacy 6 Gambetta's Ministry, 14 November 1881 – 26 January 1882 7 See also 8 References 9 Sources and further reading Toggle Sources and further reading subsection 9.1 Primary sources Toggle the table of contents Léon Gambetta 44 languages العربية Беларуская Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gàidhlig 한국어 Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 文言 Yorùbá 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French politician (1838–1882) For other uses, see Léon Gambetta (disambiguation) .

You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French .

(April 2025) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the French article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at [[:fr:Léon Gambetta]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|fr|Léon Gambetta}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Léon Gambetta Gambetta photographed by Étienne Carjat Prime Minister of France In office 14 November 1881 – 30 January 1882 President Jules Grévy Preceded by Jules Ferry Succeeded by Charles de Freycinet President of the Chamber of Deputies In office 31 January 1879 – 27 October 1881 Preceded by Jules Grévy Succeeded by Henri Brisson Minister of the Interior In office 4 September 1870 – 6 February 1871 Prime Minister Louis-Jules Trochu Preceded by Henri Chevreau Succeeded by Emmanuel Arago Member of the Chamber of Deputies In office 8 June 1869 – 31 December 1882 Constituency Bouches-du-Rhône (1869–71) Bas-Rhin (1871) Seine (1871–76) Paris (1876–82) Personal details Born ( 1838-04-02 ) 2 April 1838 Cahors , France Died 31 December 1882 (1882-12-31) (aged 44) Sèvres , France Political party Moderate Republican (1863–1869) Republican far-left (1869–1871) Republican Union (1871–1882) Alma mater University of Paris Profession Lawyer Signature Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Léon Gambetta ( French: [leɔ̃ ɡɑ̃bɛta] ; 2 April 1838 – 31 December 1882) was a French lawyer and republican politician who proclaimed the French Third Republic in 1870 and played a prominent role in its early government.

Early life and education [ edit ] Born in Cahors , Gambetta is said to have inherited his vigour and eloquence from his father, a Genoese grocer who had married a Frenchwoman named Massabie.

[ 1 ] At the age of fifteen, Gambetta lost the sight of his right eye in an accident, and it eventually had to be removed. Despite this disability, he distinguished himself at school in Cahors. He then worked at his father's grocery shop in Cahors, the Bazar génois ("Genoese bazaar"), and in 1857 went to study at the Faculty of Law of Paris .

[ 2 ] His temperament gave him great influence among the students of the Quartier latin , and he was soon known as an inveterate enemy of the imperial government.

Career [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this  section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Léon Gambetta" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Carte de visite of Léon Gambetta by Lége, Paris.

Gambetta was called to the bar in 1859. 
He was admitted to the Conférence Molé in 1861 and wrote to his father, "It is no mere lawyers club, but a veritable political assembly with a left, a right, a center; legislative proposals are the sole subject of discussion. It is there that are formed all the political men of France; it is a veritable training ground for the tribune." [ 3 ] Gambetta, like many other French orators, learned the art of public speaking at the Molé.

[ 4 ] However, although he contributed to a Liberal review edited by Challemel-Lacour , Gambetta did not make much of an impression until, on 17 November 1868, he was selected to defend the journalist Delescluze . Delescluze was being prosecuted for having promoted a monument to the representative Baudin , who had been killed while resisting the coup d'état of 1851 , and Gambetta seized his opportunity to attack both the coup d'état and the government with a vigour which made him immediately famous.

In May 1869, he was elected to the Assembly, both by a district in Paris and another in Marseille , defeating Hippolyte Carnot for the former constituency and Adolphe Thiers and Ferdinand de Lesseps for the latter. He chose to sit for Marseille, and lost no opportunity of attacking the Empire in the Assembly. Early in his political career, Gambetta was influenced by Le Programme de Belleville , the seventeen statutes that defined the radical program in French politics throughout the Third Republic .

This made him the leading defender of the lower classes in the Corps Législatif . On 17 January 1870, he spoke out against naming a new Imperial Lord Privy Seal, putting him into direct conflict with the regime's de facto prime minister, Émile Ollivier . (see Reinach, J., Discours et plaidoyers politiques de M. Gambetta , I.102 – 113) His powerful oratory caused a complete breakdown of order in the Corps. The Monarchist Right continually tried to interrupt his speech, only to have Gambetta's supporters on the Left attack them. The disagreement reached a high point when M. le Président Schneider asked him to bring his supporters back into order. Gambetta responded, thundering, "l'indignation exclut le calme!" ("indignation excludes calm!") (Reinach, Discours et plaidoyers politiques de M. Gambetta , I.112) It was also in 1869 that Gambetta was initiated into Freemasonry at "La Réforme" lodge in Paris, sponsored by Louis-Antoine Garnier-Pagès . In this lodge he met Gustave Naquet and Maurice Rouvier .

[ 5 ] Proclamation of the Republic [ edit ] Gambetta proclaiming the French Republic from the Hôtel de Ville, in a painting by Howard Pyle Gambetta opposed the declaration of the Franco-Prussian War . He did not, however, like some of his colleagues, refuse to vote for funds for the army.

[ 2 ] On 2 September 1870, the French Army suffered a disastrous defeat at the Battle of Sedan , in which the emperor Napoleon III surrendered and was taken prisoner. The news arrived in Paris on the night of 3 September, and early on 4 September large-scale protests began in the capital.

Parisians broke into the Palais Bourbon , meeting place of the Chamber of Deputies , interrupting a session and calling for a Republic. Later that day, from the Hôtel de Ville , Gambetta proclaimed the French Republic to a large crowd gathered in the Place de l'Hôtel-de-Ville : [ 6 ] Frenchmen!
The people has forestalled the Chamber which was wavering.

To save the Nation in danger , it has asked for the Republic.

It has put its representatives not in power, but in peril.

The Republic was victorious against the invasion of 1792: the Republic is proclaimed.

The Revolution has been carried in the name of the right of public safety.

Citizens, watch over the City which is entrusted to you, tomorrow, along with the army, you shall avenge the Nation!

[ 7 ] Government of National Defense [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Gambetta was one of the first members of the new Government of National Defense , becoming Minister of the Interior . He advised his colleagues to leave Paris and run the government from some provincial city.

Departure of Léon Gambetta and Eugène Spuller aboard the Armand-Barbès , 1870 This advice was rejected because of fear of another revolution in Paris, and a delegation to organize resistance in the provinces was dispatched to Tours , but when this was seen to be ineffective, Gambetta himself left Paris 7 October with Eugène Spuller in a coal gas -filled balloon—the " Armand-Barbès "—and upon arriving at Tours took control as minister of the interior and of war. Aided by Freycinet , a young officer of engineers, as his assistant secretary of war, he quickly organized an army, which might have relieved Paris if Metz had held out, but Bazaine 's surrender brought the army of the Prussian prince Friederich Karl back into the field, and success was impossible. After the French defeat near Orléans early in December the seat of government was transferred to Bordeaux .

Self-exile to San Sebastián [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Gambetta had hoped for a republican majority in the general elections on 8 February 1871 . These hopes vanished when the conservatives and Monarchists won nearly 2/3 of the six hundred Assembly seats. He had won elections in eight different départements , but the ultimate victor was the Orléanist Adolphe Thiers , winner of twenty-three elections. Thiers's conservative and bourgeois intentions clashed with the growing expectations of political power by the lower classes. Hoping to continue his policy of "guerre à outrance" against the Prussian invaders, he tried in vain to rally the Assembly to the war cause. However, Thiers' peace treaty on 1 March 1871 ended the conflict. Gambetta, disgusted with the Assembly's unwillingness to fight, resigned and quit France for San Sebastián in Spain.

Meanwhile, the Paris Commune had taken control of the city. Despite his earlier career, Gambetta voiced his opposition to the Commune in a letter to Antonin Proust , his former secretary while Minister of the Interior, in which he referred to the Commune as " les horribles aventures dans lesquelles s'engage ce qui reste de cette malheureuse France " or "the ghastly madness blighting what remains of our poor France".

[ 8 ] Gambetta's stance has been explained by reference to his status as a republican lawyer, who fought from the bar instead of the barricade [ 9 ] and also to his father having been a grocer in Marseille. As a small-scale producer during the decades of the Second Industrial Revolution in France, Joseph Gambetta was nearly ruined by the competition of new chain-store food shops. This sort of "big business" made the hard-working middle-class - "petite bourgeoisie" - very resentful, not only of bourgeois industrial capitalism, but also of the working class, which now held the status of backbone of the French economy, rather than the class of small, independent shopkeepers.

[ 10 ] This resentment may have been passed down from father to son, and manifested itself in an unwillingness to support the lower-class Communards in their usurpation of what the "petite bourgeoisie" had won a certain hegemony over.

Return [ edit ] Photo of Gambetta by Nadar , 1871 Léon Gambetta, by Alphonse Legros (1875).

Maison des Jardies , the place where Gambetta died in Sèvres.

On 24 June 1871, a letter was sent by Gambetta to his Parisian confidant, Dr. Édouard Fieuzal: Je veux déjouer l'intrigue de parti de ceux qui vont répétant que je refuse toute candidature à Paris. Non. J'accepte au contraire avec fierté et reconnaissance les suffrages de la démocratie Parisienne si elle veut m'honorer de son choix. Je suis prêt.

There is no truth in the rumours being spread that I am refusing to stand for election in Paris. No. I accept, to the contrary, with pride and gratitude the Parisians' votes, if they would do me the honor of choosing me. I am prepared.
(Lettres de Gambetta, no. 122) Gambetta returned to the political stage and won on three separate ballots. On 5 November 1871 he established a journal, La Republique française , which soon became the most influential in France. His public speeches were more effective than those delivered in the Assembly, especially the one at Bordeaux . His turn towards moderate republicanism first became apparent in Firminy , a small coal-mining town along the Loire River. There, he boldly proclaimed the radical republic he once supported to be "avoided like the plague" ( se tenir éloignés comme de la peste ) (Discours, III.5). From there, he went to Grenoble . On 26 September 1872, he proclaimed the future of the Republic to be in the hands of "a new social level" ( une couche sociale nouvelle ) (Discours, III.101), ostensibly the petite bourgeoisie to which his father belonged.

When Adolphe Thiers resigned in May 1873, and a Royalist, Marshal MacMahon , was placed at the head of the government, Gambetta urged his friends to a moderate course. By his tact, parliamentary dexterity and eloquence, he was instrumental in voting in the French Constitutional Laws of 1875 in February 1875. He gave this policy the appropriate name of "opportunism," and became one of the leader of the " Opportunist Republicans ." On 4 May 1877, he denounced "clericalism" as the enemy. During the 16 May 1877 crisis , Gambetta, in a speech at Lille on 15 August called on President MacMahon se soumettre ou se démettre , to submit to parliament's majority or to resign. Gambetta then campaigned to rouse the republican party throughout France, which culminated in a speech at Romans (18 September 1878) formulating its programme. MacMahon, unwilling both to resign and to provoke civil war, had no choice but to dismiss his advisers and form a moderate republican ministry under the premiership of Dufaure .

When the downfall of the Dufaure cabinet brought about MacMahon's resignation, Gambetta declined to become a candidate for the presidency, but supported Jules Grévy ; nor did he attempt to form a ministry, but accepted the office of president of the chamber of deputies in January 1879. This position did not prevent his occasionally descending from the presidential chair to make speeches, one of which, advocating an amnesty to the communards , [ 11 ] was especially memorable. Although he directed the policy of the various ministries from behind the scenes, he evidently thought that the time was not ripe for asserting openly his direction of the policy of the Republic, and seemed inclined to observe a neutral attitude as far as possible.  However, events hurried him on, and early in 1881 he headed off a movement for restoring scrutin de liste , or the system by which deputies are returned by the entire department which they represent, so that each elector votes for several representatives at once, in place of scrutin d'arrondissement , the system of small constituencies, giving one member to each district and one for vote to each elector. A bill to re-establish scrutin de liste was passed by the Assembly on 19 May 1881, but rejected by the Senate on 19 June.

This personal rebuff could not alter the fact that his name was on the lips of voters at the election. His supporters won a large majority, and Jules Ferry 's cabinet quickly resigned. Gambetta was unwillingly asked by Grévy on 24 November 1881 to form a ministry, known as Le Grand Ministère . Many suspected him of desiring a dictatorship; unjust attacks were directed against him from all sides, and his cabinet fell on 26 January 1882, after only sixty-six days. Had he remained in office, he would have cultivated the British alliance and cooperated with Britain in Egypt; and when the succeeding Freycinet government shrank from that enterprise only to see it undertaken with signal success by Britain alone, Gambetta's foresight was quickly justified.

On 31 December 1882, at his house in Ville d'Avray, near Sèvres , he died from intestine or stomach cancer.

[ 12 ] Even though he was wounded a month earlier from an accidental revolver discharge, the injury had not been life-threatening. Five artists, Jules Bastien-Lepage , a realist painter, Antonin Proust , defender of the vanguard who Gambetta had named Minister of Fine Arts, Léon Bonnat , an academic painter, Alexandre Falguière , who did his mortuary mask, and his personal photographer Étienne Carjat all sat at his death-bed, making five widely different representations of him which were each published by the press the following day.

[ 13 ] His public funeral was on 6 January 1883.

Personal life [ edit ] Léonie Léon in 1875 The love of his life was his connection with Léonie Léon , the full details of which were not known to the public until her death in 1906. She was the daughter of a creole French artillery officer. Gambetta fell in love with her in 1871. She became his mistress, and the liaison lasted until he died. Gambetta constantly urged her to marry him during this period, but she always refused, fearing to compromise his career; she remained, however, his confidante and intimate adviser in all his political plans. It seems she had just consented to become his wife, and the date of the marriage had been fixed, when the accident which caused his death occurred in her presence. Contradictory accounts of this fatal episode exist, but it was certainly accidental, and not suicide. Her influence on Gambetta was absorbing, both as lover and as politician, and the correspondence which has been published shows how much he depended upon her.

However, some of her later recollections are untrustworthy. For example, she claimed that a meeting took place in 1878 between Gambetta and Bismarck. That Gambetta after 1875 felt strongly that relations between France and Germany might be improved, and that he made it his object, by travelling incognito, to become better acquainted with Germany and the adjoining states, may be accepted, but M. Laur appears to have exaggerated the extent to which any actual negotiations took place. On the other hand, the increased knowledge of Gambetta's attitude towards European politics which later information has supplied confirms the view that when he died, France had prematurely lost a clear thinker whom she could ill spare. In April 1905 a monument by Dalou to his memory at Bordeaux was unveiled by President Loubet .

Legacy [ edit ] Gambetta monument at the Louvre , c.1900 Urn containing the heart of Gambetta at the Panthéon Gambetta rendered France three inestimable services: by preserving her self-respect through the gallantry of the resistance he organized during the Franco-Prussian War , by his tact in persuading extreme partisans to accept a moderate Republic, and by his energy in overcoming the usurpation attempted by the advisers of Marshal MacMahon. His death at forty-four cut short a career which had given promise of still greater things, for he had real statesmanship in his conceptions of the future of his country, and he had an eloquence which would have been potent in the education of his supporters.

[ citation needed ] Gambetta proclamation of the Republic and call for a Levée en masse left a lasting impact on Germany in the decades following. Future Field Marshall Colmar Freiherr von der Goltz wrote in 1877: Should it come to pass that...our German fatherland suffers a defeat like that of the French at Sedan, I would wish a man emerges who knows how to inspire the sort of absolute resistance Gambetta tried to organize.

In October 1918, when Germany was on the verge of defeat during the First World War , industrialist Walther Rathenau called for a German Levée en masse to reverse the deteriorating situation. Conservative Revolutionary Edgar Jung was also inspired by Gambetta.

Adolf Hitler favorably contrasted Gambetta's actions with that of the post-revolutionary leaders of the Weimar Republic : With the collapse of France at Sedan, the people rose in revolution to save the fallen tricolor! The war continued with new energy! The revolutionaries bravely fought countless battles. The will to defend the state created the French Republic in 1870. It was a symbol not of dishonor but of the upstanding will to preserve the nation. French national honor was revived by the Third Republic. What a contrast to our republic!

[ 14 ] A tall monument to Léon Gambetta [ fr ] was planned in 1884 and erected in 1888 in the central space of the Louvre Palace , now Cour Napoléon . That initiative carried heavy political symbolism, since Gambetta was widely viewed as the founder of the Third Republic , and his outsized celebration in the middle of Napoleon III's Louvre expansion thus affirmed the final victory of republicanism over monarchism nearly a century after the French Revolution – in the same vein, the Gambetta monument visually overpowered Napoleon 's comparatively diminutive Arc de Triomphe du Carrousel . Most of the monument's sculptures were in bronze and in 1941 were melted for military use by German occupying forces . What remained of the Gambetta Monument was dismantled in 1954.

[ citation needed ] A stone urn containing Gambetta's heart was placed in 1920 in the monumental staircase leading to the crypt of the Panthéon in Paris. The Russian red quartzite stone that was used for the urn was part of the same shipment that was used for Napoleon's tomb at Les Invalides .

[ 15 ] Gambetta's Ministry, 14 November 1881 – 26 January 1882 [ edit ] Léon Gambetta – President of the Council and Minister of Foreign Affairs Jean-Baptiste Campenon – Minister of War Pierre Waldeck-Rousseau – Minister of the Interior François Allain-Targé – Minister of Finance Jules Cazot – Minister of Justice Maurice Rouvier – Minister of the Colonies and of Commerce Auguste Gougeard – Minister of Marine Paul Bert – Minister of Public Instruction and Worship Antonin Proust – Minister of the Arts Paul Devès – Minister of Agriculture David Raynal – Minister of Public Works Adolphe Cochery – Minister of Posts and Telegraphs See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Léon Gambetta .

List of works by Alexandre Falguière References [ edit ] ^ Laborde, Jean Baptiste Vincent (1898).

Léon Gambetta, Biographie psychologique: le cerveau, la parole, la fonction et l'organo. Histoire authentique de la maladie et de la mort . Paris: Schleicher frères. p. 11.

^ a b "Léon Gambetta" .

Larousse (in French) . Retrieved 29 May 2021 .

^ Nord, Philip G. (1995), The Republican Moment: Struggles for Democracy in Nineteenth-century France , Harvard University Press, p. 123, ISBN 978-0-674-76271-8 ^ Fraser's Magazine (1881), "Léon Michael Gambetta" , The Eclectic Magazine of Foreign Literature, Science, and Art , Leavitt, Trow, & Company, p. 348 ^ Dictionnaire Universelle de la Franc-Maçonnerie - Jode and Cara (Larousse - 2011) ^ Fortescue, William (2017).

The Third Republic in France, 1870-1940 .

Routledge . pp.

5– 7.

ISBN 9781351540001 .

^ Thomson, David (1968).

France: Empire and Republic, 1850–1940: Historical Documents . Springer. p. 54.

ISBN 9781349005789 .

^ Gambetta, L., Lettres de Gambetta , no. 118 (a Antonin Proust, 24 Mars 1871.

^ Joly, M., "Le Barreau de Paris"; Debré, J.-L., Les Républiques des Avocats .

^ Nord, P., Paris Shopkeepers and the Politics of Resentment ^ "The French Amnesty Bill" (PDF) .

The New York Times . 5 July 1880.

^ Lannelongue, Blessure et maladie de M. Gambetta , G. Masson, Paris, 1883 ^ Michel Melot, " L'icône démocratique – à propos des portraits de Gambetta " in the review Médium n°12 (July–August–September 2007, dir.

Régis Debray ) (pp. 39–59) ^ Schivelbusch, Wolfgang (2003).

Culture of Defeat . Metropolitan Books. pp.

8– 9, 210– 211.

^ Jacques Touret; Andrey Bulakh (2016), "The Russian contribution to the edification of the Napoleon tombstone in Paris" (PDF) , Vestnik of St Petersburg University , Series 15, archived from the original (PDF) on 22 March 2023 , retrieved 23 May 2021 Sources and further reading [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh (1911). " Gambetta, Léon ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 11 (11th ed.). pp.

435– 436.

Bury, J. P. T.

Gambetta and the Making of the Third Republic (Longman, 1973).

Bury, J. P. T. "Gambetta and the Revolution of 4 September 1870." Cambridge Historical Journal 4#3 (1934): 263–282.

online .

Everdell, William R.

The End of Kings: A History of Republics and Republicans.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000.

ISBN 978-0226224824 Foley, Susan, and Charles Sowerwine.

A Political Romance: Léon Gambetta, Léonie Léon and the Making of the French Republic, 1872–82 (Springer, 2012).

Foley, Susan. "'Your letter is divine, irresistible, infernally seductive': Léon Gambetta, Léonie Léon, and Nineteenth-Century Epistolary Culture." French Historical Studies 30.2 (2007): 237–267 online .

Lehning, James R. "Gossiping about Gambetta: Contested Memories in the Early Third Republic." French Historical Studies (1993): 237–254 online .

Marzials, Frank Thomas.

Life of Léon Gambetta (WH Allen, 1890) online .

Primary sources [ edit ] Gambetta, Léon, and Violette M. Montagu.

Gambetta: Life and Letters (T. Fisher Unwin, 1910).

Gambetta.

Discours et plaidoyers politiques de M. Gambetta , published by J. Reinach in 11 vols. (Paris, 1881–1886) Gambetta.

Dépêches, circulaires, décrets...

in 2 vols. (Paris, 1886–1891) F Laur Le Coeur de Gambetta (1907, Eng. trans., 1908) contains the correspondence with Léonie Leon Caricatures de Léon Gambetta Caricatures et Caricature Political offices Preceded by Henri Chevreau Minister of the Interior 1870–1871 Succeeded by Emmanuel Arago Preceded by Jules Grévy President of the Chamber of Deputies 1879–1881 Succeeded by Henri Brisson Preceded by Jules Ferry Prime Minister of France 1881–1882 Succeeded by Charles de Freycinet Preceded by Jules Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire Minister of Foreign Affairs 1881–1882 v t e Heads of government of France Restoration Talleyrand Richelieu Dessolles Decazes Richelieu Villèle Martignac Polignac July Monarchy V. de Broglie Laffitte Perier Soult Gérard Maret Mortier V. de Broglie Thiers Molé Soult Thiers Soult Guizot Molé Second Republic Dupont de l'Eure Arago Cavaignac Barrot Hautpoul Faucher Second Empire Ollivier Cousin-Montauban Government of National Defense Trochu Third Republic Dufaure A. de Broglie Cissey Buffet Dufaure Simon A. de Broglie Rochebouët Dufaure Waddington Freycinet Ferry Gambetta Freycinet Duclerc Fallières Ferry Brisson Freycinet Goblet Rouvier Floquet Tirard Freycinet Loubet Ribot Dupuy Casimir-Perier Dupuy Ribot Bourgeois Méline Brisson Dupuy Waldeck-Rousseau Combes Rouvier Sarrien Clemenceau Briand Monis Caillaux Poincaré Briand Barthou Doumergue Ribot Viviani Briand Ribot Painlevé Clemenceau Millerand Leygues Briand Poincaré François-Marsal Herriot Painlevé Briand Herriot Poincaré Briand Tardieu Chautemps Tardieu Steeg Laval Tardieu Herriot Paul-Boncour Daladier Sarraut Chautemps Daladier Doumergue Flandin Bouisson Laval Sarraut Blum Chautemps Blum Daladier Reynaud Pétain Vichy France Pétain Laval Flandin Darlan Laval Provisional Government De Gaulle Gouin Bidault Blum Fourth Republic Ramadier Schuman Marie Schuman Queuille Bidault Queuille Pleven Queuille Pleven Faure Pinay Mayer Laniel Mendès France Faure Mollet Bourgès-Maunoury Gaillard Pflimlin De Gaulle Fifth Republic De Gaulle Debré Pompidou Couve de Murville Chaban-Delmas Messmer Chirac Barre Mauroy Fabius Chirac Rocard Cresson Bérégovoy Balladur Juppé Jospin Raffarin Villepin Fillon Ayrault Valls Cazeneuve Philippe Castex Borne Attal Barnier Bayrou Related Chief minister of France (pre-Revolution) Deputy Prime Minister (defunct) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists FID People Sycomore Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Wikiquote has quotations related to Léon Gambetta .

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐8vlm2
Cached time: 20250817044913
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.225 seconds
Real time usage: 1.501 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 15953/1000000
Revision size: 30687/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 208814/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 28881/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 85200/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.710/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27129586/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1306.904      1 -total
 30.37%  396.911      1 Template:Infobox_officeholder
 16.12%  210.707      1 Template:Republicanism_sidebar
 15.94%  208.366      1 Template:Politics_series_sidebar
 15.79%  206.373      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.70%  152.866      1 Template:Reflist
 10.70%  139.891     17 Template:Infobox_officeholder/office
  9.05%  118.339      1 Template:Country2nationality
  7.93%  103.613      4 Template:Cite_book
  7.74%  101.217      1 Template:Transliteration Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:203292:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044913 and revision id 1301689671. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Léon_Gambetta&oldid=1301689671 " Categories : 1838 births 1882 deaths People from Cahors French people of Italian descent People of Ligurian descent Politicians from Occitania (administrative region) French republicans Republican Union (France) politicians Prime ministers of France Foreign ministers of France French interior ministers Members of the 4th Corps législatif of the Second French Empire Members of the National Assembly (1871) Presidents of the Chamber of Deputies (France) Members of the 1st Chamber of Deputies of the French Third Republic Members of the 2nd Chamber of Deputies of the French Third Republic Members of the 3rd Chamber of Deputies of the French Third Republic French people of the Franco-Prussian War Paris Commune French radicals French politicians with disabilities Deaths from stomach cancer in France Burials at Père Lachaise Cemetery Burials at the Panthéon, Paris French Freemasons Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2020 Biography articles needing translation from French Wikipedia Pages with French IPA Articles needing additional references from February 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from July 2023 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing additional references from July 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Commons category link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 05:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Léon Gambetta 44 languages Add topic

