Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure and tasks 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Establishment 2.2 Operational history 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Lithuanian Special Operations Forces 5 languages فارسی Lietuvių Русский Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Lithuanian Special Operations Force ) Lithuanian Special Operations Forces Lietuvos Specialiųjų Operacijų Pajėgos SOF insignia Active 1997–present Country Lithuania Branch Special Operation Forces Type special operations Role direct action , special reconnaissance , unconventional warfare Size Classified Part of Lithuanian Armed Forces Nickname(s) " Žaliukai " ( (in English) like “forest / green brothers”); " Aitvaras " (named after a traditional Lithuanian mythological spirit) Engagements War in Afghanistan (2002–2015) (2018–2021) EU Navfor Med (2017) NATO Response Force (2008–Present) Insignia Flag Military unit Lithuanian Armed Forces Components Land Forces Volunteer Forces Air Force Naval Force Special Operations Force Support branches Logistics Command Territorial Command Cyber Defence Command Training and Doctrine Command Military Police Military Ordinariate Administration Ministry of National Defence Personnel Chief of Defence Chief of the Defence Staff Generals Military ranks and insignia Equipment Current equipment of the Armed Forces History History Timeline Recruitment Lithuania portal v t e The Lithuanian Special Operations Forces (LITHSOF) ( Lithuanian : Lietuvos Specialiųjų Operacijų Pajėgos ) is a special operation unit of the Lithuanian Armed Forces , formed exclusively of carefully selected, motivated and specially trained professionals. The main tasks of the Special Operations Forces are direct action , special reconnaissance , and military assistance.

The Lithuanian Special Operations Forces has been in operation de facto since 2002 and it was established de jure on April 3, 2008, [ 1 ] when amendments of the National Defence System organisation and military service law [ 2 ] came into force. SOF is formed from the Special Operations Unit.

Structure and tasks [ edit ] The structure of the Lithuanian Special Operations Forces is flexible which makes it easy to form squadrons intended for specific operations and missions from its elements. It consists of: Special Operations Forces (SOP - Specialiųjų Operacijų Pajėgos ) in Vilnius Vytautas the Great Jaeger Battalion (VDJB - Vytauto Didžiojo jėgerių batalionas ) in Kaunas . Main tasks: special reconnaissance , direct action , unconventional warfare .

Special Mission Unit (YPT - Ypatingosios paskirties tarnyba ) in Vilnius. Main tasks: counter-terrorism, hostage rescue, special operations on land, water and air.

Combat Divers Service (KNT - Kovinių narų tarnyba ) in Klaipėda . Main tasks: special operations in water, special reconnaissance , direct action .

Training and Combat Support Center (MKPC - Mokymo ir kovinės paramos centras ) in Vilnius .

History [ edit ] Establishment [ edit ] Soon after Lithuania re-established its independence from the Soviet Union on March 11, 1990, the need arose to form armed units. One of the first such units was Aukščiausiosios Tarybos Apsaugos Skyrius ("Supreme Council Security Section").

[ 3 ] One of the main tasks of this unit was to protect the Lithuanian Parliament . In the following years, the Lithuanian army underwent various restructuring processes. After the reorganization of Kaunas Vytautas the Great motorized infantry battalion in 1995, the separate Vytautas the Great Jaeger Battalion (named after Lithuanian Grand Duke Vytautas the Great ) was established, which would become one of the core units of Lithuanian Special Operations Forces.

[ 4 ] Unofficial formation of the Special Purpose Service was started in 1995; after two more years the Service was officially established. After the 9/11 terror attacks , the main tasks of the Special Mission Unit became counter-terrorism, terrorist liquidation and hostage rescue.

[ 5 ] Members of the Special Mission Unit are called Žaliukai , meaning green-men and were named after the Forest Brothers .

After a 2007 reorganization, the Combat Divers Unit was established, whose main task became special underwater and surface operations.

Among the most secretive Lithuanian Special Operations Forces units are squadrons referred to by the codename Aitvaras (named after a traditional Lithuanian mythological spirit). The first public acknowledgment of the existence of Specialiųjų Operacijų Junginys (SOJ) "Aitvaras" (Special Operations Unit "Cockatrice") was in 2000, when Lithuanian sailors were captured in Guinea .

[ 3 ] Aitvaras carries out classified missions.

Operational history [ edit ] The Lithuanian Special Operations Forces units have participated in a number of missions. 
From 2002 to 2004 squadrons of the Aitvaras were deployed to the " Enduring Freedom " operation in Afghanistan . Preparedness and execution of tasks by the SOF squadrons have been especially noted by the coalition partners.

[ 6 ] From 2005 to 2006, the Lithuanian Special Operations Forces was on the operational half-year stand-by period in the NATO Response Force . Since the autumn 2007, SOF have taken part in the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force mission in southern Afghanistan.

[ 7 ] In 2008 soldiers of the SOF continued their service in the NATO Response Force.

In 2017, Lithuanian government has made a decision to send 20 soldiers group to the mission in Medditeranian EU Navfor Med including soldiers from navy forces, land forces and special operations forces.

Gallery [ edit ] KNT Combat Divers YPT HALO YPT troops meet with the US SOCOM SOF in Afghanistan YPT with Norwegian MJK YPT Soldiers VDJB Snipers KNT Combat Diver YPT soldiers in 2024 See also [ edit ] Military of Lithuania References [ edit ] Specific ^ "Ministry of National Defence Republic of Lithuania" . Archived from the original on 8 August 2016 . Retrieved 14 February 2018 .

^ "Amendment of article 11 of the National Defence System organisation and military service law" . Retrieved 14 February 2018 .

^ a b "SOJ "Aitvaras" istorija ir dabartis" (in Lithuanian). Archived from the original on 2009-04-25 . Retrieved 2009-04-16 .

^ "Vytauto Didžiojo jėgerių batalionas (VDJB)" (in Lithuanian). Krašto apsaugos ministerija . Retrieved 2009-04-16 .

^ "Ypatingosios paskirties tarnyba (YPT)" (in Lithuanian). Krašto apsaugos ministerija . Retrieved 2009-04-16 .

^ "Ministry of National Defence Republic of Lithuania :: News » News archives » News archive 2004 » News archive (2004 - 12)" . Retrieved 24 December 2014 .

^ "Ministry of National Defence Republic of Lithuania :: News » News archives » News archive 2009 » News archive (2009 - 03)" . Retrieved 24 December 2014 .

General Lithuanian Ministry of Defence site External links [ edit ] Lithuanian Special Operations Forces official site Video presentation of Lithuanian Special Operations Force Video presentation of Vytautas the Great Jaeger Battalion v t e Lithuanian Armed Forces units (1990–now) Land Land Forces Command Headquarters [ lt ] 1st Division Iron Wolf Brigade Grand Duke Algirdas Mech. Inf. Bn.

[ lt ] • Grand Duchess Birutė Uhlan Bn.

[ lt ] • King Mindaugas Hussar Bn.

[ lt ] • Duke Vaidotas Inf. Bn.

[ lt ] • Gen. Romualdas Giedraitis Arty Bn.

• Logistics Bn.

[ lt ] • NATO Enhanced Forward Presence Žemaitija Bde [ lt ] Grand Duke Butigeidis Dragoon Bn.

[ lt ] • Grand Duke Kęstutis Inf. Bn.

[ lt ] • Duke Margiris Inf. Bn.

[ lt ] • Bde Gen. Motiejus Pečiulionis Arty Bn.

[ lt ] • Logistics Company Aukštaitija Bde (created during wartime from the Training and Doctrine Command and reservists) Colonel Juozas Vitkus Engineer Battalion [ lt ] • Rocket Artillery Battery National Defence Volunteer Forces Dainava District's 1st • Darius and Girėnas District's 2nd [ lt ] • Žemaičiai District's 3rd • Vytis District's 5th • Resurrection District's 6th • Grand Fight District's 8th [ lt ] Juozas Lukša Training Center [ lt ] Air Air Base [ lt ] • Airspace Surveillance and Control Command • Armament and Equipment Repair Depot [ lt ] • Air Defence Battalion Navy Naval Forces Command Headquaters [ lt ] Services Sea and Coastal Surveillance [ lt ] • Naval Logistics [ lt ] Centres Naval Training [ lt ] • Maritime Rescue Coordination [ lt ] Warship Flotilla [ lt ] • General Kazimieras Nestoras Sapiega Fusilier Battalion [ lt ] Special Ops Services Special Purpose [ lt ] • Combat Divers Service [ lt ] Vytautas the Great Jaeger Battalion [ lt ] • Training and Combat Support Center [ lt ] Other Logistics Command [ lt ] Services Depot • Garrison provisioning • Doctor Jonas Basanavičius Military Medical [ lt ] Centres Movement Control • Military Cartography Centre [ lt ] Grand Duke Vytenis General Support Logistics Battalion [ lt ] Training and Doctrine Command Divisional General Stasys Raštikis Lithuanian Armed Forces School [ lt ] • Grand Lithuanian Hetman Jonušas Radvila Training Regiment [ lt ] • General Adolfas Ramanauskas Combat Training Center [ lt ] Military Commandant's Offices Command Military Commandant's Offices Command Headquarters Services Conscription and recruitment service Vilnius Regional Office • Kaunas Regional Office • Klaipėda Regional Office • Panevėžys Regional Office • Šiauliai Regional Office • Alytus Regional Office Cyber Defence Command Cyber Defence Command Headquarters Services Information technologies service Communications and Information Systems Battalion Officers' Clubs Lithuania • Klaipėda Garrison • Vilnius Garrison Bands Armed Forces Headquarters • Land Forces • Air Force • Navy • National Defence Volunteer Force Big Band Grand Duke Gediminas Staff Battalion • Military Police • Ordinariate • Lithuanian Military Aviation Administration Defence Staff v t e Lithuania articles History Early Balts Lithuania proper Lithuania Minor Land Confederation Grand Duchy 1219–1295 Duchy Kingdom Christianization Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Lithuanian Crusade Revival and independence Press ban National Revival Great Seimas of Vilnius Amber Declaration Act of Independence Wars of Independence Lithuanian–Soviet War Polish–Lithuanian War 1919 Polish coup d'état attempt 1926 coup d'état WWII and occupations Occupation of the Baltic states by the Soviet Union (1940) by Nazi Germany by the Soviet Union (1944) State continuity Holocaust Resistance Second Soviet republic Guerrilla war Lithuanian partisans Baltic states under Soviet rule (1944–1991) Government-in-exile Restoration Reform Movement (Sąjūdis) Singing Revolution Baltic Way Act of Re-Establishment Soviet economic blockade of Lithuania January Events 2003 Lithuanian European Union membership referendum EU accession Geography Cities capital Towns Climate Extreme points Protected areas Fauna Flora Forests Lakes Rivers National parks Regional parks Suwałki Gap Politics Administrative divisions counties municipalities elderships Constitution Constitutional Court Elections Foreign relations Government Prime Minister Law Law enforcement Human rights LGBT Political parties President Seimas parliament Speaker Military Land Force Navy Air Force Special Operations Force Economy Agriculture Banks Central bank e-Residency Energy Euro Telecommunications Transport airports rail roads seaport Tourism Society Demographics Education universities Ethnic minorities Ethnographic regions Health Language Lithuanians Religion Culture Calendar Cinema Cuisine Cultural history Cultural regions Design Ethnographic Lithuania Literature Music Monuments of Culture Mythology Name Lithuanian names Public holidays Sport Symbols anthem coat of arms flag Outline Index Category Portal Authority control databases VIAF Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lithuanian_Special_Operations_Forces&oldid=1283149928 " Categories : Special forces of Lithuania 2002 establishments in Lithuania Military units and formations established in 2002 Hidden categories: CS1 Lithuanian-language sources (lt) Articles containing Lithuanian-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 March 2025, at 18:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lithuanian Special Operations Forces 5 languages Add topic

