Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Publishing and works Toggle Publishing and works subsection 2.1 10th Appendix 2.2 Biographical Dictionary of the Italians 2.3 Contemporary art 2.4 Italian Enterprise 2.5 Facsimile reproductions 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Treccani 26 languages Беларуская Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Українська Vèneto 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana ) Italian-language encyclopaedia You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Italian .

(December 2023) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the Italian article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 496 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Italian Wikipedia article at [[:it:Enciclopedia Treccani]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|it|Enciclopedia Treccani}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Treccani Institute Giovanni Treccani for the publication of the Italian Encyclopedia Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana - Treccani ( Italian ) Named after Giovanni Treccani Formation 1925 Founders Giovanni Treccani and Giovanni Gentile Headquarters Rome , Italy Owner Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana fondata da Giovanni Treccani S.p.A.

President Franco Gallo General Manager Massimo Bray Website www .treccani .it This article is part of the series on the Italian language Italo-Dalmatian languages Tuscan ( Florentine ) Regional Italian Accademia della Crusca Enciclopedia Treccani History Veronese Riddle Placiti Cassinesi Sicilian School Dolce Stil Novo The Divine Comedy Pontifical Academy of Arcadia Italian Purism The Last Letters of Jacopo Ortis The Betrothed Literature and other Culture Literature Music Philosophy Poetry Comics Italophilia Grammar Verb conjugation Alphabet Orthography Braille Phonology Syntactic gemination Tuscan gorgia v t e Institute Giovanni Treccani for the publication of the Italian Encyclopedia ( Italian : Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana - Treccani ), [ 1 ] also known as Treccani Institute or simply Treccani , is a cultural institution of national interest, active in the publishing field, founded by Giovanni Treccani and Giovanni Gentile in 1925.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] It is known for publishing the first edition and the subsequent ten supplements of the Italian Encyclopaedia of Science, Literature and Arts ( Italian : Enciclopedia Italiana di scienze, lettere ed arti ).

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] La Conoscenza ("The Knowledge") by Mimmo Paladino at the Institute of the Italian Encyclopedia.

History [ edit ] The Institute of the Italian Encyclopaedia was founded in Rome in 1925 by Giovanni Treccani, with the philosopher Giovanni Gentile as editor-in-chief. The first publication by the Institute was the Enciclopedia Italiana di Scienze, Lettere e Arti ( lit.

' Italian Encyclopaedia of Science, Letters, and Arts ' ). This encyclopaedia , best known as Enciclopedia Italiana or the Great Encyclopaedia , is an Italian-language encyclopaedia and is regarded as one of the great encyclopaedias, being international in scope, alongside Encyclopædia Britannica and others.

[ 5 ] Since the 1990s, Treccani has been playing a leading role as a high-profile publisher, both in the art publishing market and in the facsimile editions industry, reproducing many medieval manuscripts from the most prestigious Italian and European libraries. Alongside these traditional activities Treccani has gained a consistent presence in digital publishing , with the publication of e-books, apps and, above all, the Treccani.it portal, which had been visited in 2022 by more than 80 million unique users.

Publishing and works [ edit ] The first edition of the Great Encyclopaedia was published serially between 1929 and 1937.

[ 2 ] [ 6 ] The encyclopaedia's 35 volumes (plus one index volume) included 60,000 articles and 50 million words.

[ 7 ] Each volume is approximately 1,015 pages, and supplementary volumes were published between 1938 and 2020.

10th Appendix [ edit ] An update to the Great Encyclopaedia , the 10th Appendix is a reflection by Treccani on contemporaneity. Its challenges and problematic issues are analyzed through over 350 keywords assigned to authors of the highest scientific profile and to young scholars who have now established themselves at the international level.

[ 2 ] [ 8 ] Biographical Dictionary of the Italians [ edit ] Main article: Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani This work is a monumental national biography constructed from over forty thousand biographies of Italians who have contributed to the artistic, cultural, political, scientific, religious, literary and economic history of the country, from the fall of the Western Roman Empire to the present day.

Contemporary art [ edit ] This is a work in 4 volumes, edited by Vincenzo Trione and Valeria Della Valle, supported by an international scientific committee: a survey of the art of our time, with the aim of documenting, in the broadest and most inclusive perspective, the various components that make up the system of art throughout the world. The work catalogues not only the artists themselves, but also art historians, critics and curators, gallerists, merchants and dealers.

Italian Enterprise [ edit ] In two volumes, edited by Franco Amatori and Marco D'Alberti , this work recounts the most significant entrepreneurial, technological and scientific developments in the history of Italy. "The Stories", with its wide selection of biographies of the most representative industrial enterprises, aims to provide a picture of Italian companies in their variety of size, territory, sector, and governance. "The Context" frames thematic essays that recount the history of Italian enterprise in its complex operating context, in its relationship with institutions and politics, and in the competitive scene of globalization.

Facsimile reproductions [ edit ] Facsimile reproductions of illuminated manuscripts kept in the most important European libraries contribute to the conservation and diffusion of an immense common artistic and literary heritage. The latest publications are those of the magnificent code preserved in Florence in the Laurentian Library , with the signature Plut. 6.23, an 11th–12th-century Gospel book, accompanied by a systematic illustrative apparatus. The 237 folios contain 285 illustrations. As Tania Velmans defines it in the essay published in the volume accompanying the facsimile ( Il Tetravangelo della Laurenziana , Florence, Laur. Plut. 6.23, 2020), it is "an almost unique specimen for the abundance of his illustrations, fidelity to the evangelical texts, the will to reconstruct the evangelical story through the image, in an almost integral way" (p. 36).

See also [ edit ] Lists of encyclopedias References [ edit ] ^ "Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana - Treccani" .

Turismo Roma . 11 February 2019 . Retrieved 22 January 2025 .

^ a b c d "Istituto della Enciclopedia Treccani" .

Treccani.it . Retrieved 27 February 2024 .

^ a b "La nostra storia" . Retrieved 27 February 2024 .

^ "Enciclopedia Italiana" . Retrieved 27 February 2024 .

^ Collison, Robert (1964).

Encyclopaedias: Their History Throughout The Ages . New York & London: Hafner Publishing Company. p. 207.

^ "Enciclopedia italiana di scienze, lettere ed arti" .

Archived 28 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine .

Encyclopædia Britannica . (2007) ^ Treccani Degli Alfieri, Giovanni. "Enciclopedia italiana" Diccionario Literario (Hora, S.A., 2001) ^ "Treccani. X APPENDICE - PAROLE DEL XXI SECOLO" . Retrieved 27 February 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Enciclopedia Treccani .

Official website Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Treccani&oldid=1294860107 " Categories : Encyclopedias in Italian Italian encyclopedias 20th-century encyclopedias Encyclopedias about countries General encyclopedias Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2023 Articles needing translation from Italian Wikipedia Articles containing Italian-language text Infoboxes without native name language parameter Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 June 2025, at 06:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Treccani 26 languages Add topic

