Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 3D Cinema Technology 2 Auto-Stereoscopic Cell-Matrix 3D Technology 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents MasterImage 3D 2 languages मराठी 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American stereoscopic 3D manufacturing company MasterImage 3D Founded 2004 Founder Younghoon Lee Headquarters Hollywood, California Products 3D Cinema Systems, 3D Eyewear, 3D Glasses-free Displays for Smartphones and Tablets Website masterimage3d.com MasterImage 3D is a company that develops stereoscopic 3D systems for theaters, and auto-stereoscopic 3D displays for mobile devices .

3D Cinema Technology [ edit ] The MasterImage 3D MI-CLARITY3D system for cinemas is a polarized 3D system that is based on the projector presenting a spinning polarized filter, which contains alternating segments of circularly polarized material. Mounted in front of the projector lens, this filter is synchronized to the projected images, giving each frame a polarization perpendicular to the previous one, which can be viewed with polarized 3D glasses . The filter wheel can be lowered out of the lens' path for non-3D material.

[ 1 ] It has been noted that an earlier version of the spinning polarized filter malfunctioned, but the problem has been addressed with an updated replacement filter which was supplied to all theaters using the system.

[ 2 ] MasterImage 3D offers different types of 3D cinema technology (including those based on a polarized filter disc, as well as solid-state liquid crystal), based on different cinema configurations. The company also produces passive 3D eyewear that is optically matched to their 3D systems.

Auto-Stereoscopic Cell-Matrix 3D Technology [ edit ] MasterImage 3D also produces auto-stereoscopic displays for smartphones and tablets , which allow devices to present 3D images without the need for glasses. MasterImage 3D provides screens ranging from 4.3 inches to 10.1 inches. They achieve the effect through its patented Cell-Matrix Parallax Barrier technology, which uses a cell-gap approach that enables landscape and portrait modes, provides a 10 degree viewing angle, and reduces the Moire pattern that causes ghosting. MasterImage 3D's auto-stereoscopic display was used in one of the world's first glasses-free 3D mobile phones, the Hitachi Wooo, available in Japan in 2009. Another device featuring the MasterImage 3D Cell-Matrix 3D display, the Micromax A115 Canvas 3D, was released in April 2013.

MasterImage 3D Cell-Matrix 3D Logo References [ edit ] ^ "MasterImage Digital 3D Cinema System November 5, 2010 ^ Film-Tech (Independent Cinema Technical Site) November 23, 2010 This site disables direct linking. See Forums, "Straight to Video" (the name of their digital cinema forum), thread entitled "Master Image VS. Real D." External links [ edit ] MasterImage 3D website MasterImage 3D blog Film-Tech (independent cinema technology web site) MarketSaw v t e Stereoscopy and 3D display Perception 3D stereo view Binocular rivalry Binocular vision Chromostereopsis Convergence insufficiency Correspondence problem Peripheral vision Depth perception Epipolar geometry Kinetic depth effect Stereoblindness Stereopsis Stereopsis recovery Stereoscopic acuity Vergence-accommodation conflict Display technologies Active shutter 3D system Anaglyph 3D Autostereogram Autostereoscopy Bubblegram Head-mounted display Holography Integral imaging Lenticular lens Multiscopy Parallax barrier Parallax scrolling Polarized 3D system Specular holography Stereo display Stereoscope Vectograph Virtual retinal display Volumetric display Wiggle stereoscopy Other technologies 2D to 3D conversion 2D plus Delta 2D-plus-depth Computer stereo vision Multiview Video Coding Parallax scanning Pseudoscope Stereo photography techniques Stereoautograph Stereoscopic depth rendition Stereoscopic rangefinder Stereoscopic spectroscopy Stereoscopic video coding Product types 3D camcorder 3D film 3D television 3D-enabled mobile phones 4D film Blu-ray 3D Digital 3D Stereo camera Stereo microscope Stereoscopic video game Virtual reality headset Notable products AMD HD3D Dolby 3D Fujifilm FinePix Real 3D Infitec MasterImage 3D Nintendo 3DS New 3DS Nvidia 3D Vision Panavision 3D RealD 3D Sharp Actius RD3D View-Master XpanD 3D Miscellany Stereographer Stereoscopic Displays and Applications This filmmaking article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=MasterImage_3D&oldid=1305880619 " Categories : Motion picture film formats Mass media companies of the United States 3D imaging 3D cinema Filmmaking stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 16:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents MasterImage 3D 2 languages Add topic

