Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concept 2 Historical background 3 Charlotte Perkins Gilman 4 Feminist care ethics 5 Feminist matrixial ethics 6 Feminist justice ethics 7 Womanist Ethics 8 Global Feminist Ethics 9 Feminist ethics and the future 10 Feminist ethics and international relations 11 See also 12 References 13 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Feminist ethics 21 languages العربية অসমীয়া বাংলা Deutsch Español فارسی Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Igbo עברית Latina ଓଡ଼ିଆ ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Português Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Approach to ethics Part of a series on Feminist philosophy Major works A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792) The Subjection of Women (1869) The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State (1884) The Second Sex (1949) The Feminine Mystique (1963) Sexual Politics (1969) The Dialectic of Sex (1970) Speculum of the Other Woman (1974) This Sex Which is Not One (1977) Gyn/Ecology (1978) Throwing Like a Girl (1980) In a Different Voice (1982) The Politics of Reality (1983) Women, Race, and Class (1983) Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center (1984) The Creation of Patriarchy (1986) Toward a Feminist Theory of the State (1989) Gender Trouble (1990) Sexual Personae (1990) Black Feminist Thought (1990) Feminism and the Mastery of Nature (1993) Whipping Girl (2007) The Promise of Happiness (2010) Major thinkers Bartky Baier de Beauvoir Bebel Boggs Butler Cixous Cleyre De la Cruz Cobain Collins Daly Davis Démar Dworkin Faust Federici Firestone Fourier Friedan Frye Gamond Goldman Grosz Hanna Haslanger hooks Irigaray Jaggar Kristeva Lerner Lorde Lugones Luxemburg MacKinnon Mama Michel Mill Taylor Mill Millett Nussbaum Paglia Pankhurst Pateman Plumwood Rubin Saadawi Showalter Solanas Spivak Voilquin Whedon Wittig Wollstonecraft Young Zetkin Ideas Feminism analytical epistemology ethics existentialism metaphysics science Gender equality Gender performativity Social construction of gender Care ethics Intersectionality Standpoint theory Journals Feminist Philosophy Quarterly Hypatia philoSOPHIA Radical Philosophy Signs Category Feminist philosophy v t e Feminist ethics is an approach to ethics that builds on the belief that traditionally ethical theorizing has undervalued and/or underappreciated women 's moral experience, which is largely male-dominated, and it therefore chooses to reimagine ethics through a holistic feminist approach to transform it.

[ 1 ] Concept [ edit ] Feminist philosophers critique traditional ethics as pre-eminently focusing on men's perspective with little regard for women's viewpoints. Caring and the moral issues of private life and family responsibilities were traditionally regarded as trivial matters. Generally, women are portrayed as ethically immature and shallow in comparison to men. Traditional ethics prizes masculine cultural traits like "independence, autonomy, intellect, will, wariness, hierarchy, domination, culture, transcendence, product, asceticism, war, and death," [ 2 ] and gives less weight to culturally feminine traits like "interdependence, community, connection, sharing, emotion, body, trust, absence of hierarchy, nature, immanence , process, joy, peace, and life." [ 2 ] Should women embody or use any traditionally masculine cultural traits they are seen as other or as an attempt to be more like men.

[ 3 ] Traditional ethics has a "male" orientated convention in which moral reasoning is viewed through a framework of rules, rights, universality, and impartiality and becomes the standard of a society. The "female" approaches to moral reasoning emphasizes relationships, responsibilities, particularity, and partiality.

[ 2 ] Historical background [ edit ] Feminist ethics developed from Mary Wollstonecraft 's ' Vindication of the Rights of Women ' published in 1792.

[ 4 ] With the new ideas from the Enlightenment , individual feminists being able to travel more than ever before, generating more opportunities for the exchange of ideas and advancement of women's rights.

[ 5 ] With new social movements like Romanticism there developed unprecedented optimistic outlook on human capacity and destiny. This optimism was reflected in John Stuart Mill 's essay The Subjection of Women (1869).

[ 4 ] Feminist approaches to ethics, were further developed around this period by other notable people like Catherine Beecher , Charlotte Perkins Gilman , Lucretia Mott and Elizabeth Cady Stanton with an emphasis on the gendered nature of morality , specifically related to 'women's morality'.

[ 5 ] Charlotte Perkins Gilman [ edit ] The American writer and sociologist Charlotte Perkins Gilman imagined a fictional " Herland ". In this male-free society, women produce their daughters through parthenogenesis and live a superior morality. This women-centered society valued both industriousness and motherhood while discouraged individualistic competitive approaches to life. Gilman thought that in such a scenario women could relate cooperatively as there would be no requirement to dominate each other. Herland cultivates and combines the best "feminine" virtues and the best "masculine" virtues together as co-extensive with human virtue . If a society wants to be virtuous, according to Gilman, it should exemplify the fictional utopia of Herland.

[ 6 ] However so long as women are dependent on men for economic support, women will continue to be known for their servility and men for their arrogance. Women need to be men's economic equals before they can develop truly human moral virtue, this is a perfect blend of pride and humility that we call self-respect .

[ 7 ] Feminist care ethics [ edit ] Main article: Ethics of care Carol Gilligan and Nel Noddings are exponents of a feminist care ethics which criticize traditional ethics as deficient to the degree they lack, disregard, trivialize or attack women's cultural values and virtues.

[ 8 ] In the 20th-century feminist ethicists developed a variety of care focused feminist approaches to ethics in comparison to non-feminist care-focused approaches to ethics, feminist ones tend to appreciate the impact of gender issues more fully.

[ 9 ] Feminist care-focused ethicists note the tendencies of patriarchal societies not to appreciate the value and benefits of women's ways of loving, thinking, working and writing and tend to view females as subordinate.

[ 8 ] This is why some social studies make a conscious effort to adopt feminist ethics, rather than just the traditional ethics of studies. An example of this was Roffee and Waling's 2016 study into microaggressions against the LGBTIQ community. Even though it was focused on the LGBTIQ community the feminist ethics were better suited, as they are more considerate to the vulnerabilities and needs of the participants.

[ 10 ] Medical fields also fail to recognize that ethics plays an often negative part in the LGBTIQ community in how they receive treatment and what treatments are given as options to them. As well as how women are also treated within medical fields.

[ 11 ] Feminist matrixial ethics [ edit ] The 'metafeminist' theory of the matrixial gaze and the matrixial [ 12 ] [ 13 ] time-space, coined and developed by artist, philosopher and psychoanalyst Bracha L. Ettinger since 1985, [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] articulates a revolutionary philosophical approach that, in "daring to approach", to use Griselda Pollock 's description of Ettinger's ethical turn, [ 18 ] [ 19 ] "the prenatal with the pre-maternal encounter", violence toward women at war, and the Shoah, has philosophically established the rights of each female subject over her own reproductive body, and offered a language to relate to human experiences which escape the phallic domain.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Ettingerian matrixial sphere is both a matricial space of encounter in archaic corporeality and a symbolic ethical and aesthetical field - feminnine/maternal and prenatal/prematernal conceptual-psychoanalytical field with a psychic and symbolic dimension that the 'phallic' language and regulations cannot control. Thus, Ettinger offers a language to talk on the female rights over her reproductive body while revolutionizing philosophy and psychoanalysis through matrixiality where feminine sexuality and symbolic responsibility coexist. In Ettinger's model, the relations between self and other are of neither assimilation nor rejection but 'coemergence'. Feminine sexuality is not foreclosed when maternality emerges, matrixial desire is a mixture of both, thus the contradiction between them established by Sigmund Freud and Jacques Lacan recedes. The feminine is not an absolute alterity (the alterity established by Jacques Lacan and Emmanuel Levinas ) and we are offered a language to rethink the archaic mother and the source of humainised life. With the 'originary response-ability', 'wit(h)nessing', 'borderlinking', 'communicaring', 'com-passion', 'seduction into life' [ 22 ] [ 23 ] and other processes invested by affects that occur in the Ettingerian matrixial time-space, (each process of transformation is named 'metramorphose') the feminine is presented as the source of humanized Ethics in all genders and enters all subjectivities. What Ettinger named 'seduction into life' occurs earlier than the primary seduction which passes through enigmatic signals from the maternal sexuality according to Jean Laplanche , since it is active in 'coemergence' in 'withnessing' for any born subject, earlier to its birth. Ettinger suggests to Emanuel Levinas in their conversations in 1991, that the feminine understood via the matrixial perspective is the heart and the source of Ethics.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] At the beginning of life, an originary 'fascinance' felt by the infant [ 26 ] is related to the passage from response-ability to responsibility, from com-passion to compassion, and from wit(h)nessing to witnessing operated and transmitted by the m/Other. The 'differentiation in jointness' that is at the heart of the matrixial borderspace has deep implications in the relational field [ 27 ] and for the ethics of care.

[ 28 ] The matrixial theory that proposes new ways to rethink sexual difference through the fluidity of boundaries informs aesthetics and ethics of compassion, carrying and non-abandonment in 'subjectivity as encounter-event'.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] It has become significant in transgender studies.

[ 31 ] Feminist justice ethics [ edit ] Main article: Feminist justice ethics Feminist justice ethics is a feminist view on morality which seeks to engage with, and ultimately transform, traditional universal approaches to ethics .

[ 32 ] Like most types of feminist ethics, feminist justice ethics looks at how gender is left out of mainstream ethical considerations. Mainstream ethics are argued to be male-oriented. However, feminist justice ethics does differ considerably from other feminist ethics. A universal set of ethics is a significant part of feminist justice ethics [ 33 ] but depending on the geographical location, such as the difference between the Global North and Global South, may differ in how justice is applied and may change what is considered justice. Feminist justice ethics is clear in dividing "thick" morality from "thin" morality. Other ethical approaches that define themselves by differentiating groups from one another through culture or other phenomena are regarded as "thick" accounts of morality. Feminist justice ethics claims that "thick" accounts of morality, as opposed to "thin" accounts of morality, are intrinsically prone to eroding valid feminist critique.

[ 32 ] Womanist Ethics [ edit ] Alice Walker devised the womanist ethical approach to redefine black women’s experiences. The mainstream feminist and black equality movements neglected to fully capture the experiences of black women experiencing the intersection of racism and sexism. Walker thus developed womanist ethics to reposition the black woman as a autonomous, moral agent capable of participating equally in feminist discourse.

[ 34 ] Womanists examine the philosophical ideas of white, wealthy men and reject the universalized perspectives which fail to accurately capture the experience of nonwhites and women.

[ 35 ] Womanism instead focuses on promoting autonomy through developing the “self-awareness” of one’s own moral agency in an oppressive society.

[ 36 ] Womanists develop this "self-awareness" by reexamining and articulating the unique experiences of black women in relation to their families, local communities, and larger society.

[ 34 ] Black feminists perceive themselves as the de facto representatives of their communities with a moral obligation to accurately represent not only their personal experiences, but the experiences of the broader community of blacks and black women specifically. With this burden in mind, black feminists adhering to womanist ethics work to reject stereotypes and misrepresentations from both white men and women and create their own narrative.

[ 36 ] Womanists thus believe in the necessity to incorporate contextual factors into ethical theories to avoid the problem of overgeneralizing a dominant group's worldview.

[ 35 ] Global Feminist Ethics [ edit ] Global feminist ethics (also known as cosmopolitan feminist ethics) seeks to address challenges defining feminist thought in an international community with many different perspectives.

[ 37 ] International law typically uses a rights-based discourse promoting equal treatment; however, these rights typically are focused on a universalized male perspective, and equality in the law often neglects to combat the patriarchal norms consistent across countries with legal systems based on equal rights.

[ 38 ] For example, forced pregnancy would not even be considered a human rights violation because only women experience this form of assault. Thus, traditional definitions of international human rights frequently fail to address gendered experiences of violence and discrimination.

[ 37 ] Global feminist ethicists attempt to resolve the male-focused universalization of human rights by conceptualizing a "global feminist consciousness." This concept seeks to address and incorporate different women's experiences based on religion, culture, race, and nationality while also resisting patriarchy.

[ 37 ] While it appears differently across contexts, patriarchy appears consistently in almost all countries, warranting a similarly unified response.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] However, this unification should not consist of a single identity or set of principles or values, or else it would fall prey to universalizing a single group's experiences.

[ 38 ] Instead, global feminists believe a "global feminist consciousness" requires collaborative effort of feminists from around the world to acknowledge multicultural differences and intersectionality.

[ 37 ] Feminist ethics and the future [ edit ] Feminist ethicists believe there is an obligation for women's differing points of view to be heard and then to fashion an inclusive consensus view from them. To attempt to achieve this and to push towards gender equality with men together is the goal of feminist ethics. The fixing of these issues are important in modern times because of the shifting view points as well as what has considered to be 'ethical' in terms of treatment and how women, in particular, women's bodies should be treated.

[ 3 ] "The goal of feminist ethics is the transformation of societies and situations where women are harmed through violence, subordination and exclusion. When such injustices are evident now and in the future, radical feminist activists will continue their work of protest and action following careful appraisal and reflection" [ 39 ] With violence, it once again circles back to masculine behavior and traditional ethics that such behavior and treatment was encouraged. In today's society, the twentieth century, it is becoming less socially acceptable to commit violence against women.

[ 11 ] Feminist ethics and international relations [ edit ] Main article: Feminism (international relations) Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Feminist theories and that of ethics broaden the scope of the predominantly masculine sphere of International Relations. This is especially important for issues of the private realm to take stage into the public which includes issues such as children's rights, gender violence and discrimination, gender relations in war-torn societies, and other similar issues which remain difficult to appear relevant in the mainstream discussions of ethics in international relations. The feminist dialogues of ethics are almost inescapably present in the private realm and are known to only shadow dominant 'male' paradigms of ethics in the public realm. This is especially a reality in discussion of ethics in International Relations where it is predominantly built on a language of violence, technologies or economics and what are known to be the masculine topics of discussion.

[ 40 ] See also [ edit ] Bracha L. Ettinger Feminism in 1950s Britain Feminist political ecology First-wave feminism Eugenic Feminism Gender equality Gender mainstreaming Girl power Griselda Pollock Hilde Lindemann Jessica Valenti Judith Butler Mary Wollstonecraft Material feminism Matrixial Gaze Morality Naomi Wolf Postmodern feminism Pro-life feminism Rebecca Walker Second-wave feminism Sex-positive feminism Sheila Cavanagh The left and feminism References [ edit ] ^ Tong, R. and Williams N., Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Feminist Ethics, First published Tue May 12, 1998; substantive revision Mon May 4, 2009.

^ a b c Jaggar, "Feminist Ethics," 1992 ^ a b Hooks, B. (1994). Teaching to Transgress: Education as the Practice of Freedom, New York:Routledge. Google Scholar.

^ a b Abruzzese, Jaclyn; Brayne, Allison; Shastri, Julie; Sakofsky, Rachel; Hewitt, Nancy; Sklar, Kathryn (Spring 2002).

"From Wollstonecraft to Mill: What British and European Ideas and Social Movements Influenced the Emergence of Feminism in the Atlantic World, 1792-1869?" .

Women and Social Movements in the United States, 1600-2000 . Alexander Street Press.

^ a b Larson, Jennifer L.

"The Mothers of a Movement: Remembering 19th-Century Feminists" .

Documenting the American South . The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

^ Gilman, Charlotte Perkins (1915).

Herland . Archived from the original on 2015-09-08 . Retrieved 2018-03-02 .

^ Gilman, Charlotte Perkins (1898).

Women and Economics . Boston: Small, Maynard, & Co.

^ a b Noddings, N., Caring: A Feminine Approach to Ethics and Moral Education. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1984.

^ Gilligan, C., In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and Women's Development, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press., 1982 ^ "James Roffee & Andrea Waling Resolving ethical challenges when researching with minority and vulnerable populations: LGBTIQ victims of violence, harassment and bullying" .

^ a b Mohrmann, M (2015). "Feminist Ethics and Religious".

Journal of Religious Ethics .

43 (2): 185– 192.

doi : 10.1111/jore.12093 .

^ Ettinger, Bracha L., "Matrix and Metramorphosis." In: Differences . Vol. 4, nº 3, 1992.

^ Ettinger, Bracha L., Proto-ethica Matricial , Gedisa, 2019.

^ Bracha L. Ettinger, The Matrixial Gaze . Fine Art, Leeds University, 1995.

^ Bracha L. Ettinger , "Trans-Subjective Transferential Borderspace." In: Mazin, V., Tourkina, O., and Seppala, M., eds.

Doctor and Patient. Memory and Amnesia . Ylojarvi: Pori Art Museum Publications, 1997. Reprinted: Brian Massumi , ed. A Shock to Thought. Routledge, 2002 ^ Bracha L. Ettinger, "Wit(h)nessing Trauma and the Gaze." In: Vandenbroeck, P. et al eds.

The Fascinating Face of Flanders. Through Art and Society (English, Portuguese, Flemish). Stad Antwerpen, 1998 ^ Bracha L. Ettinger, Matrixial Subjectivity, Aesthetics, Ethics. Vol 1: 1990-2000 . Ed. by Griselda Pollock . Pelgrave Macmillan 2020 ^ Pollock, Griselda. "Aesthetic Wit(h)nessing in the Era of Trauma." In: EurAmerica vol 40 n. 4, December 2010 < http://www.ea.sinica.edu.tw/eu_file/12929220264.pdf > ^ Pollock, Griselda.

Generations and Geographies . Routledge, 1996.

^ "Bracha L Ettinger Metafeminist and Feminist Notes. Oxytocin Mothering the World, London March 2019 - YouTube" .

YouTube . 23 August 2020.

^ Ettinger, Bracha L., "Beyond the Death-drive, Beyond the Life-drive—Being-toward-Birthing with Being-toward-Birth. Copoiesis and the Matrixial Eros—Metafeminist Notes." in: Aberrant Nuptials . Edited by P. de Assis & P. Giudici. Leuven Univ. Press. 2019.

^ "Communicaring". In: PostGender: Sexuality and Performativeivity in Japanese Culture . Ed. Ayelet Zohar. Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2010 ^ Mandeville, Kat, Seduction into Life . NY: Antropos, 2016.

^ Emmanuel Levinas and Bracha L. Ettinger, Time is the Breath of the Spirit . Oxford: Museum of Modern Art, 1993.

^ Emmanuel Levinas and Bracha L. Ettinger, Que dirait Eurydice?"/"What Would Eurydice Say?

Paris: BLE Atelier, 1997. Reprinted in Athena: Philosophical Studies. Vol. 2, 2006.

http://lkti.lt/athena/pdf/2/100-145.pdf Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine ^ Bracha L. Ettinger, "Fascinance. The Woman-to-woman (Girl-to-m/Other) Matrixial Feminine Difference." In: Pollock, Griselda, ed.

Psychoanalysis and the Image . Oxford: Blackwell, 2006.

^ Bracha L. Ettinger, "Diotima and the Matrixial Transference: Psychoanalytical Encounter-Event as Pregnancy in Beauty." In: der Merwe, V., Chris N., Viljoen, H., eds.

Across the Threshold . Peter Lang, 2007.

^ Birgit M. Kaiser, Kathrin Thiele, "If You Do Well, Carry! The Difference of the Humane: An Interview with Bracha L. Ettinger". philoSOPHIA, Volume 8, Number 1, Winter 2018, pp. 101-125 (Article).

https://doi.org/10.1353/phi.2018.0005 ^ Smith, Marielle, "Subjectivity as Encounter: Feminine Ethics in the Work of Bracha Lichtenberg-Ettinger and Anne Enright", Hypatia Vol. 28, No. 3 (SUMMER 2013) ^ Angie Voela and Cigdem Esin, "Movement, Embrace: Adriana Cavarero with Bracha Lichtenberg Ettinger (and the Death Drive)", Hypatia 36 (1):101-119 (2021) ^ Cavanagh, Sheila, "Bracha L. Ettinger, Jacques Lacan and Tiresias: The Other Sexual Difference".

The Site for Contemporary Psychoanalysis , n.18 2018.

http://www.the-site.org.uk/sitegeist/spring-2018/bracha-l-ettinger-jacques-lacan-and-tiresias-the-other-sexual-difference/3/ ^ a b Hutchings, Kimberley. "Ethics." In Gender Matters in Global Politics , edited by Laura J Shepherd, 68. New York: Routledge, 2010.

^ Hutchings, Kimberley. "Ethics." In Gender Matters in Global Politics , edited by Laura J Shepherd, 69. New York: Routledge, 2010.

^ a b Hayes, Diana L. (2024-06-20).

"Womanist Theology" .

St Andrews Encyclopaedia of Theology .

^ a b Guth, Karen V. (2018).

"Moral Injury, Feminist and Womanist Ethics, and Tainted Legacies" .

Journal of the Society of Christian Ethics .

38 (1): 167– 186.

ISSN 1540-7942 .

^ a b Olaussen, Maria (1993).

"Feminist criticism as ethical criticism" .

Critical Survey .

5 (1): 83– 91.

ISSN 0011-1570 .

^ a b c d e Reilly, Niamh (2007).

"Cosmopolitan Feminism and Human Rights" .

Hypatia .

22 (4): 180– 198.

ISSN 0887-5367 .

^ a b c Cook, Rebecca J. (1994).

Human Rights of Women: National and International Perspectives . Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: University of Pennsylvania Press. pp.

58– 76.

ISBN 0-8122-1538-9 .

^ McLellan, Betty (February 2010).

Unspeakable: A feminist ethic of speech . OtherWise Publications. p. 240.

ISBN 978-0-646-51778-0 . Archived from the original on 2020-05-13 . Retrieved 2018-03-02 .

^ Hutchings, Kimberly. "Ethics." In: Shepherd, Laura J. and Caitlin Hamilton (eds.).

Gender Matters in Global Politics: A Feminist Introduction to International Relations . 2009. 61–74.

Further reading [ edit ] Abel, Emily K. and Margaret K. Nelson, (eds.), (1990). Circles of Care: Work and Identity in Women's Lives, Albany: SUNY Press.

Armbruster, H. Feminist Theories and Anthropology Barker, Drucilla K. and Susan F. Feiner. Liberating Economics: Feminist Perspectives on Families, Work, and Globalization. University of Michigan Press, 2004.

Kuiper, Edith ; Barker, Drucilla K. (2003).

Toward a feminist philosophy of economics . London New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9780415283885 .

Beasley, Chris . (1999). What is Feminism?: An Introduction to Feminist Theory, London: Sage Publications.

Beecher, C.E. and Stowe, H.B. (1971). The American Woman's Home: Principle of Domestic Science, New York: Aeno Press and The New York Times.

Pembroke Center for Teaching and Research on Women, Brown University Feminist Theory Papers, Brown University Brownmiller, S.(1993). Against Our Will: Men, Women, and Rape, New York: Fawcett Columbine.

Buhle, M.J., Buhle, P. (eds.) (1978). The Concise History of Women's Suffrage, Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

Bulbeck, Chilla (1998).

Re-orienting western feminisms: women's diversity in a postcolonial world . Cambridge New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521589758 .

Butler, Judith. (1990). Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity, New Your: Routledge.

. (1999). On Feminist Ethics and Politics, Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas.

Chodorow, N. (1999). The Reproduction of Mothering: Psychoanalysis and the Sociology of Gender, updated edition, Berkeley: University of California Press.

Confessore, N.and D. Hakim. (2009). "Paterson picks Gillibrand for Senate seat". NYTimes.com, January 23.

Copjec, Joan. (2002). Imagine There's No Woman: Ethics and Sublimation, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

Daly, M. (1984). Pure Lust: Elemental Feminist Philosophy, Boston: Beacon Press.

Donovan, Josephine. (2003). Feminist Theory: The Intellectual Traditions, 3rd ed., New York: Continuum..

Donovan, Josephine and Carol Adams. (2007). Feminist Care Tradition in Animal Ethics: A Reader, New York: Columbia University Press, 1-20.

The Feminist eZine- 1001 Feminist Links and Other Interesting Topics Ettinger, Bracha L. (2006). The Matrixial Borderspace. Univ. of Minnesota Press.

Ettinger, Bracha L. (2020). Matrixial Subjectivity, Aesthetics, Ethics. Pelgrave Macmillan.

Friedan, B. (1997). Feminist Mystique, New York: W.W. Norton & Company.

Friedan, B. (1998). The Second Stage, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

Frye. M. (1991). "A response to Lesbian Ethics: Why ethics?" In C. Card (ed.), Feminist Ethics, Lawrence, Kans.: University Press of Kansas, 52–59.

Gilligan, C. and D.A.J. Richards (2008). The Deepening Darkness: Patriarchy, Resistance, and Democracy's Future, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

Gilligan's stages of moral development Halberstam, J, 1994, “F2M: The making of female masculinity”, in The lesbian postmodern , Laura Doan (ed.), New York: Columbia University Press, 210–28.

Hanigsberg, Julia E. and Sara Ruddick, (eds.), (1999). Mother Troubles: Rethinking Contemporary Maternal Dilemmas, Boston: Beacon Press.

Held, V. (1993). Feminist Morality: Transforming Culture, Society, and Politics, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Held, V. (ed.), (1995). Justice and Care: Essential Readings in Feminist Ethics, Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

Held, Virginia (2005).

The Ethics of Care: Personal, Political, and Global . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/0195180992.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-518099-2 .

Heywood, Leslie and Jennifer Drake, (eds.), (1997). Third Wave Agenda: Being Feminist, Doing Feminism, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Larry Hinman's Ethics Updates Himan, L. Ethics Updates, University of San Diego.

Hoagland, S.L. (1988). Lesbian Ethics, Palo Alto, Calif.: Institute of Lesbian Studies.

Howard, Judith A. and Carolyn Allen. (2000). Feminisms at a Millennium, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Hypatia, a Journal of Feminist Philosophy, Simpson center for the humanities, University of washington.

Jaggar, A.M. (1994). Living with Contradictions: Controversies in Feminist Social Ethics, Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

King, Y.(1995). "Engendering a peaceful planet: ecology, economy, and ecofeminism in contemporary context".Women's Studies Quarterly, 23: 15–25.

Kittay, E. F. and E.K. Feder (2003). The Subject of Care: Feminist Perspectives on Dependency, Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.

Kolmar, W and Bartowski, F., "Lexicon of Debates". Feminist Theory: A Reader. 2nd Ed, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005. 42–60.

Lindemann, Hilde, Marian Verkerk, and Margaret Urban Walker.(2009). Naturalized Bioethics: Toward Responsible Knowing and Practice, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Cambridge University Press.

Maher, K.(2008). "Campaign '08: Obama puts spotlight on women's pay gap". The Wall Street Journal, September 25: A15.

Mero, J. (2008). "The myths or catching-up development". In M. Mies and V. Shiva(eds.), Ecofeminism, Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 125: 55–69.

Mies, M. and Shiva, N. (1993). "Fortune 500 women CEOs". In Fortune.

Mitchell, J. and S.K. Mishra (2000). Psychoanalysis and Feminism: A Radical Reassessment of Freudian Psychoanalysis, New York: Basic Books.

n.paradoxa: international feminist art journal: feminist theory and contemporary women artists Narayan, U. (1997). Decentering the center: Philosophy for a Multicultural, Postcolonial, and Feminist World, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.

Narayan, U. and S. Harding(2000). The Subject of Care: Feminist Perspectives on Dependency, Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.

Noddings, N. (2002). Starting at Home: Caring and Social Policy, Berkeley, CA.: University of California Press.

Nussbaum, Martha. (1999). "The Feminist Critique of Liberalism". In A. Jeffries (ed.), Women's Voices, Women's Rights: Oxford Amnesty Lectures, The Oxford Amnesty Lecture Series. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

Nussbaum, Martha. (2003). "Capabilities and Functional Entitlements: Sen and Social Justice". Feminist Economics, 9 (2–3): 33–59.

The Radical Women Manifesto: Socialist Feminist Theory, Program and Organizational Structure (Seattle: Red Letter Press, 2001) Robinson, F. (1999). Globalizing Care: Toward a Politics of Peace, Boston, MA: Beacon Press.

Slote, Michael A. (2007).

The Ethics of Care and Empathy . London; New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-77200-6 .

Sterba, James P., (ed.), (2000). Ethics: Classical Western Texts in Feminist and Multicultural Perspectives, New York: Oxford University Press.

The Third Wave Foundation Tong, R. and Williams N., Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Feminist Ethics, First published Tue May 12, 1998; substantive revision Mon May 4, 2009.

Tong, R. (2009). Feminist Thought: A More Comprehensive Introduction, 3rd edition, Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

UN Women, 'Women, Poverty, and Economics- Facts and Figures' Virginia Tech, Feminist theory website Center for Digital Discourse and Culture Walker, Margaret Urban. (2007). Moral Understandings: A Feminist Study in Ethics, 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press.

Warren, K.J. (2000). Ecofeminist Philosophy: A Western Perspective on What It Is and Why It Matters, Lanham, Md: Rowman & Littlefield.

Wollstonecraft, M. (1988). A Vindication of the Rights of Women, M. Brody (ed.), London: Penguin.

Ziarek, Ewa Plonowska. (2001). An Ethics of Dissensus: Postmodernity, Feminism, and the Politics of Radical Democracy, Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

v t e Feminist theory Academic fields Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Film theory Literary criticism Biology Composition studies Criminology Digital humanities Economics FPDA Geography History International relations ( Constructivism ) Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Political ecology Political theory Postmodernism Psychology Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology Womanist Asian Feminism portal Related subjects Ecofeminism Feminist method Hegemonic masculinity Women's history Women's studies Feminist theorists Elizabeth Anderson Karen Barad Simone de Beauvoir Wendy Brown Nancy Bauer Judith Butler Kimberlé Crenshaw Hélène Cixous Alice Crary Andrea Dworkin Cynthia Enloe Martha Fineman Nancy Fraser Germaine Greer Donna Haraway Sandra Harding Patricia Hill Collins bell hooks Luce Irigaray Julia Kristeva Catharine A. MacKinnon Martha Nussbaum Val Plumwood Diana E. H. Russell Dorothy E. Smith Marilyn Waring Lists Women's studies journals v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐6856fbd995‐kcvfn
Cached time: 20250818110640
Cache expiry: 21600
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.858 seconds
Real time usage: 1.048 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5424/1000000
Revision size: 34457/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 281027/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 33504/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 254909/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.457/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6568079/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  756.366      1 -total
 28.53%  215.815      6 Template:Navbox
 27.15%  205.379      1 Template:Reflist
 18.19%  137.559      1 Template:Feminist_philosophy_sidebar
 17.90%  135.409      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.84%  119.771      1 Template:Feminism
 14.71%  111.251      4 Template:Cite_web
 13.13%   99.298      3 Template:Excerpt
  7.78%   58.819      1 Template:Short_description
  6.37%   48.218      8 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:31847810:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818110640 and revision id 1301349303. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminist_ethics&oldid=1301349303 " Categories : Feminist ethics Applied ethics Black feminism Gender equality Egalitarianism Equality rights Feminism Feminism and society Feminist movement Feminist philosophy Human sciences Identity politics Multicultural feminism Postmodernism Professional ethics Relational ethics Rights Social ethics Social inequality Womanism Women's rights Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 09:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminist ethics 21 languages Add topic

