Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Scientific accounts of perception 2 Problem of Perception 3 Spatial representation 4 Beyond spatial representation 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 8.1 Historical 8.2 Contemporary Toggle the table of contents Philosophy of perception 14 languages العربية Asturianu Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Papiamentu پښتو Português Shqip தமிழ் Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of philosophy Checker shadow illusion The two areas of the image that are marked A and B and the rectangle connecting them are all of the same shade: one's eyes automatically "correct" for the shadow of the cylinder.

The philosophy of perception is concerned with the nature of perceptual experience and the status of perceptual data , in particular how they relate to beliefs about, or knowledge of, the world.

[ 1 ] Any explicit account of perception requires a commitment to one of a variety of ontological or metaphysical views. Philosophers distinguish internalist accounts, which assume that perceptions of objects, and knowledge or beliefs about them, are aspects of an individual's mind, and externalist accounts, which state that they constitute real aspects of the world external to the individual.

[ 1 ] [ failed verification ] The position of naïve realism —the 'everyday' impression of physical objects constituting what is perceived—is to some extent contradicted by the occurrence of perceptual illusions and hallucinations [ 2 ] and the relativity of perceptual experience [ 1 ] as well as certain insights in science.

[ 3 ] Realist conceptions include phenomenalism and direct and indirect realism .

Anti-realist conceptions include idealism and skepticism .

[ 1 ] Recent philosophical work have expanded on the philosophical features of perception by going beyond the single paradigm of vision (for instance, by investigating the uniqueness of olfaction [ 4 ] ).

Scientific accounts of perception [ edit ] An object at some distance from an observer will reflect light in all directions, some of which will fall upon the corneae of the eyes , where it will be focussed upon each retina , forming an image. The disparity between the electrical output of these two slightly different images is resolved either at the level of the lateral geniculate nucleus or in a part of the visual cortex called 'V1'. The resolved data is further processed in the visual cortex where some areas have specialised functions, for instance area V5 is involved in the modelling of motion and V4 in adding colour. The resulting single image that subjects report as their experience is called a 'percept'. Studies involving rapidly changing scenes show the percept derives from numerous processes that involve time delays.

[ 5 ] Recent fMRI studies [ 6 ] show that dreams, imaginings and perceptions of things such as faces are accompanied by activity in many of the same areas of brain as are involved with physical sight. Imagery that originates from the senses and internally generated imagery may have a shared ontology at higher levels of cortical processing.

Sound is analyzed in term of pressure waves sensed by the cochlea in the ear. Data from the eyes and ears is combined to form a 'bound' percept. The problem of how this is produced, known as the binding problem .

Perception is analyzed as a cognitive process in which information processing is used to transfer information into the mind where it is related to other information. Some psychologists propose that this processing gives rise to particular mental states ( cognitivism ) whilst others envisage a direct path back into the external world in the form of action (radical behaviourism ). Behaviourists such as John B. Watson and B.F. Skinner have proposed that perception acts largely as a process between a stimulus and a response but have noted that Gilbert Ryle 's " ghost in the machine of the brain" still seems to exist. "The objection to inner states is not that they do not exist, but that they are not relevant in a functional analysis".

[ 7 ] This view, in which experience is thought to be an incidental by-product of information processing, is known as epiphenomenalism .

Contrary to the behaviouralist approach to understanding the elements of cognitive processes, gestalt psychology sought to understand their organization as a whole, studying perception as a process of figure and ground .

Problem of Perception [ edit ] Important philosophical problems derive from the epistemology of perception—how we can gain knowledge via perception—such as the question of the nature of qualia .

[ 8 ] Within the biological study of perception naive realism is unusable.

[ 9 ] However, outside biology modified forms of naive realism are defended.

Thomas Reid , the eighteenth-century founder of the Scottish School of Common Sense , formulated the idea that sensation was composed of a set of data transfers but also declared that there is still a direct connection between perception and the world. This idea, called direct realism, has again become popular in recent years with the rise of postmodernism .

The succession of data transfers involved in perception suggests that sense data are somehow available to a perceiving subject that is the substrate of the percept. Indirect realism, the view held by John Locke and Nicolas Malebranche , proposes that we can only be aware of mental representations of objects. However, this may imply an infinite regress (a perceiver within a perceiver within a perceiver...), though a finite regress is perfectly possible.

[ 10 ] It also assumes that perception is entirely due to data transfer and information processing, an argument that can be avoided by proposing that the percept does not depend wholly upon the transfer and rearrangement of data. This still involves basic ontological issues of the sort raised by Leibniz , [ 11 ] Locke, Hume , Whitehead and others, which remain outstanding particularly in relation to the binding problem , the question of how different perceptions (e.g. color and contour in vision) are "bound" to the same object when they are processed by separate areas of the brain.

Indirect realism (representational views) provides an account of issues such as perceptual contents, [ 12 ] [ 13 ] qualia , dreams, imaginings, hallucinations , illusions, the resolution of binocular rivalry , the resolution of multistable perception , the modelling of motion that allows us to watch TV, the sensations that result from direct brain stimulation, the update of the mental image by saccades of the eyes and the referral of events backwards in time. Direct realists must either argue that these experiences do not occur or else refuse to define them as perceptions.

Idealism holds that reality is limited to mental qualities while skepticism challenges our ability to know anything outside our minds. One of the most influential proponents of idealism was George Berkeley who maintained that everything was mind or dependent upon mind. Berkeley's idealism has two main strands, phenomenalism in which physical events are viewed as a special kind of mental event and subjective idealism .

David Hume is probably the most influential proponent of skepticism.

A fourth theory of perception in opposition to naive realism, enactivism , attempts to find a middle path between direct realist and indirect realist theories, positing that cognition is a process of dynamic interplay between an organism's sensory-motor capabilities and the environment it brings forth.

[ 14 ] Instead of seeing perception as a passive process determined entirely by the features of an independently existing world, enactivism suggests that organism and environment are structurally coupled and co-determining. The theory was first formalized by Francisco Varela, Evan Thompson, and Eleanor Rosch in "The Embodied Mind".

[ 15 ] Spatial representation [ edit ] An aspect of perception that is common to both realists and anti-realists is the idea of mental or perceptual space .

David Hume concluded that things appear extended because they have attributes of colour and solidity. A popular modern philosophical view is that the brain cannot contain images so our sense of space must be due to the actual space occupied by physical things. However, as René Descartes noticed, perceptual space has a projective geometry, things within it appear as if they are viewed from a point. The phenomenon of perspective was closely studied by artists and architects in the Renaissance, who relied mainly on the 11th century polymath, Alhazen (Ibn al-Haytham), who affirmed the visibility of perceptual space in geometric structuring projections.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Mathematicians now know of many types of projective geometry such as complex Minkowski space that might describe the layout of things in perception (see Peters (2000)) and it has also emerged that parts of the brain contain patterns of electrical activity that correspond closely to the layout of the retinal image (this is known as retinotopy ). How or whether these become conscious experience is still unknown (see McGinn (1995)).

Beyond spatial representation [ edit ] Traditionally, the philosophical investigation of perception has focused on the sense of vision as the paradigm of sensory perception.

[ 18 ] However, studies on the other sensory modalities, such as the sense of smell, can challenge what we consider characteristic or essential features of perception. Take olfaction as an example. Spatial representation relies on a "mapping" paradigm that maps the spatial structures of the stimuli onto discrete neural structures and representations.

[ 19 ] However, olfactory science has shown us that perception is also a matter of associative learning, observational refinement, and a decision-making process that is context-dependent. One of the consequences of these discoveries on the philosophy of perception is that common perceptual effects such as conceptual imagery turn more on the neural architecture and its development than the topology of the stimulus itself.

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Anil Gupta Argument from illusion Arthur Schopenhauer Āyatana Binding problem Charles Sanders Peirce Consciousness Direct realism Epistemology Fiona Macpherson George Berkeley Hallucinations in the sane Idealism Immanuel Kant Indirect realism John McDowell Map-territory relation Maurice Merleau-Ponty Mind's eye Multistable perception Open individualism Perceptual conceptualism Philosophical realism Philosophy of mind Qualia Roderick Chisholm Sensorium Solipsism Subjective character of experience Susanna Schellenberg Susanna Siegel Theories of perception Thomas Reid Transcendental idealism Vertiginous question Visual perception Visual space Wilfrid Sellars Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d cf.

http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/perception-episprob/ BonJour, Laurence (2007): "Epistemological Problems of Perception." Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , accessed 1.9.2010.

^ cf.

http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/perception-problem/ Crane, Tim (2005): "The Problem of Perception." Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , accessed 1.9.2010; Drestske, Fred (1999): "Perception." In: Robert Audi, The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy , Second Edition, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Cambridge University Press, pp. 654–658, here p. 656.

^ cf.

Alva Noë (2006): Perception. In: Sahotra Sarkar/Jessica Pfeifer (Eds.), The Philosophy of Science: An Encyclopedia , New York: Routledge, pp. 545–550, here p. 546 ff.

^ Ann-Sophie Barwich (2020).

Smellosophy: What the Nose tells the Mind . Harvard University Press. p. 384.

ISBN 9780674983694 .

^ see Moutoussis and Zeki (1997) ^ Smith, Kerri (2013).

"Brain decoding: Reading minds" .

Nature .

502 (7472): 428– 430.

Bibcode : 2013Natur.502..428S .

doi : 10.1038/502428a .

PMID 24153277 .

S2CID 4452222 .

^ Skinner 1953 ^ Chalmers DJ. (1995) "Facing up to the hard problem of consciousness." Journal of Consciousness Studies 2, 3, 200–219 ^ Smythies J. (2003) "Space, time and consciousness." Journal of Consciousness Studies 10, 3, 47–64.

^ Edwards JC. (2008) "Are our spaces made of words?" Journal of Consciousness Studies 15, 1, 63–83.

^ Woolhouse RS and Franks R. (1998) GW Leibniz, Philosophical Texts , Oxford University Press.

^ Siegel, S. (2011)."The Contents of Perception", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2011 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = < http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2011/entries/perception-contents/ >.

^ Siegel, S.: The Contents of Visual Experience. New York: Oxford University Press. 2010 ^ p 206, Varela F, Thompson E, Rosch E (1991) "The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Experience" MIT Press ^ Varela F, Thompson E, Rosch E (1991) "The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Experience" MIT Press ^ Nader El-Bizri (2004). "La perception de la profondeur: Alhazen, Berkeley et Merleau-Ponty".

Oriens-Occidens, CNRS .

5 .

Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique : 171– 184.

^ Nader El-Bizri (2007). "In Defence of the Sovereignty of Philosophy: al-Baghdadi's Critique of Ibn al-Haytham's Geometrisation of Place".

Arabic Sciences and Philosophy .

17 .

Cambridge University Press : 57– 80.

doi : 10.1017/s0957423907000367 .

S2CID 170960993 .

^ Barwich, Ann-Sophie (2020).

Smellosophy: What the Nose tells the Mind . Harvard University Press. p. 310.

ISBN 9780674983694 .

^ "Nautilus | Science Connected" .

Nautilus . 2020-12-11 . Retrieved 2020-12-11 .

^ Barwich, Ann-Sophie (2020).

Smellosophy: What the Nose tells the Mind . Harvard University Press. p. 311.

ISBN 9780674983694 .

References [ edit ] BonJour, L. (2007).

"Epistemological Problems of Perception" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Crane, Tim; French, C. (2015).

"The Problem of Perception" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Georgakakis, Christos; Moretti, Luca.

"Cognitive Penetrability of Perception and Epistemic Justification" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Zalta, Edward N.

, ed. (2004).

"Maurice Merleau-Ponty" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

O'Brien, Daniel.

"Epistemology of Perception" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

O'Brien, Daniel.

"Objects of Perception" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Siegel, Susanna (2005).

"The Contents of Perception" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Further reading [ edit ] Historical [ edit ] Descartes, Rene (1641).

Meditations on First Philosophy .

Online text Hume, David (1739–40).

A Treatise of Human Nature: Being An Attempt to Introduce the Experimental Method of Reasoning Into Moral Subjects .

Online text Kant, Immanuel (1781).

Critique of Pure Reason . Norman Kemp Smith (trans.) with preface by Howard Caygill , Palgrave Macmillan.

Online text Locke, John (1689).

An Essay Concerning Human Understanding .

Online text Russell, Bertrand (1912).

The Problems of Philosophy , London: Williams and Norgate; New York: Henry Holt and Company.

Online text Contemporary [ edit ] Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Consciousness Studies Burge, Tyler (1991). "Vision and Intentional Content," in E. LePore and R. Van Gulick (eds.) John Searle and his Critics , Oxford: Blackwell.

Chalmers DJ. (1995) "Facing up to the hard problem of consciousness." Journal of Consciousness Studies 2, 3, 200–219.

Dretske, Fred (1981).

Knowledge and the Flow of Information , Oxford: Blackwell.

Evans, Gareth (1982).

The Varieties of Reference , Oxford: Clarendon Press.

McDowell, John, (1982). "Criteria, Defeasibility, and Knowledge," Proceedings of the British Academy , pp. 455–79.

McDowell, John, (1994).

Mind and World , Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

McGinn, Colin (1995). "Consciousness and Space," In Conscious Experience , Thomas Metzinger (ed.), Imprint Academic.

Mead, George Herbert (1938). "Mediate Factors in Perception," Essay 8 in The Philosophy of the Act , Charles W. Morris with John M. Brewster, Albert M. Dunham and David Miller (eds.), Chicago: University of Chicago, pp. 125–139.

Moutoussis, K. and Zeki, S. (1997). "A Direct Demonstration of Perceptual Asynchrony in Vision," Proceedings of the Royal Society of London , Series B: Biological Sciences, 264, pp. 393–399.

Noe, Alva/Thompson, Evan T.: Vision and Mind: Selected Readings in the Philosophy of Perception, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2002.

Peacocke, Christopher (1983).

Sense and Content , Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Putnam, Hilary (1999).

The Threefold Cord , New York: Columbia University Press.

Shoemaker, Sydney (1990). "Qualities and Qualia: What's in the Mind?" Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 50, Supplement, pp. 109–31.

Tong, Frank (2003). "Primary Visual Cortex and Visual Awareness," Nature Reviews, Neuroscience , Vol 4, 219.

Online text Tye, Michael (2000).

Consciousness, Color and Content , Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philosophy_of_perception&oldid=1295089835 " Categories : Subjective experience Philosophy of perception Internalism and externalism Theory of mind Phenomenology Justification (epistemology) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from April 2020 Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 11 June 2025, at 16:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philosophy of perception 14 languages Add topic

