Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Archaeology 2 Culture 3 Religion 4 Economy 5 Museum 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Çatalhöyük 63 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Italiano עברית ქართული Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Malti مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Simple English Slovenščina Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 37°40′00″N 32°49′41″E ﻿ / ﻿ 37.66667°N 32.82806°E ﻿ / 37.66667; 32.82806 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Archaeological site in Turkey "Çatalhüyük" redirects here; not to be confused with Çatalhüyük, Ceyhan .

Çatalhöyük Ruins of Çatalhöyük Shown within Turkey Show map of Turkey Çatalhöyük (Near East) Show map of Near East Çatalhöyük (West and Central Asia) Show map of West and Central Asia Location Küçükköy, Konya Province , Turkey Region Anatolia Coordinates 37°40′00″N 32°49′41″E ﻿ / ﻿ 37.66667°N 32.82806°E ﻿ / 37.66667; 32.82806 Type Settlement History Founded Approximately 7100 BC; 9125 years ago Abandoned Approximately 5700 BC; 7725 years ago Periods Neolithic to Chalcolithic UNESCO World Heritage Site Official name Neolithic Site of Çatalhöyük Type Cultural Criteria iii, iv Designated 2012 (36th session ) Reference no.

1405 Region Western Asia Calibrated carbon-14 dates for Çatalhöyük, as of 2013 [ 1 ] Çatalhöyük (English: Chatalhoyuk / ˌ tʃ ɑː t ɑː l ˈ h uː j ʊ k / cha-tal- HOO -yuhk ; Turkish pronunciation: [tʃaˈtaɫhœjyc] ; also Çatal Höyük and Çatal Hüyük ; from Turkish çatal "fork" + höyük " tumulus ") is a tell (a mounded accretion resulting from long-term human settlement) of a very large Neolithic and Chalcolithic proto-city settlement in southern Anatolia , which existed from approximately 7500 BC to 5600 BC and flourished around 7000 BC.

[ 2 ] In July 2012, it was inscribed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site .

[ 3 ] Çatalhöyük overlooks the Konya Plain , southeast of the present-day city of Konya (ancient Iconium ) in Turkey , approximately 140 km (87 mi) from the twin-coned volcano of Mount Hasan . The eastern settlement forms a mound that would have risen about 20 m (66 ft) above the plain at the time of the latest Neolithic occupation. There is also a smaller settlement mound to the west and a Byzantine settlement a few hundred meters to the east. The prehistoric mound settlements were abandoned before the Bronze Age . A channel of the Çarşamba River once flowed between the two mounds, and the settlement was built on alluvial clay which may have been favorable for early agriculture. Currently, the closest river is the Euphrates .

Archaeology [ edit ] Model of the neolithic settlement (7300 BC) of Catal Höyük The site was first excavated by James Mellaart in 1958. He later led a team which further excavated there for four seasons between 1961 and 1965.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] These excavations revealed this section of Anatolia as a centre of advanced culture in the Neolithic period.

[ 8 ] Excavation revealed 18 successive layers of buildings signifying various stages of the settlement and eras of history. The bottom layer of buildings can be dated as early as 7100 BC while the top layer of the later West Mound is from 5600 BC.

[ 9 ] Mellaart was banned from Turkey for his involvement in the Dorak affair , in which he published drawings of supposedly important Bronze Age artifacts that later went missing.

[ 10 ] After this scandal, the site lay idle until 1993, when excavations began under the leadership of Ian Hodder , then at the University of Cambridge .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] The Hodder-led excavations ended in 2018.

[ 16 ] The first two seasons of work were surface surveys with excavation beginning in 1995.

[ 17 ] Hodder, a former student of Mellaart, chose the site as the first "real world" test of his controversial theory of post-processual archaeology .

[ 18 ] The site has always had a strong research emphasis upon engagement with digital methodologies, driven by the project's experimental and reflexive methodological framework.

[ 19 ] According to Mickel, Hodder's Çatalhöyük Research Project (ÇRP) established itself as a site for progressive methodologies – in terms of adaptable and democratized recording, integration of computerized technologies, sampling strategies, and community involvement." [ 20 ] Excavations continue under the direction of Ali Umut Türkcan from Anadolu University .

[ 21 ] Culture [ edit ] On-site restoration of a typical interior The earliest excavations of the site Deep trenches in the site Animation showing a reconstruction of Catalhöyük, German narration with English subtitles Çatalhöyük was composed entirely of domestic buildings with no obvious public buildings. While some of the larger rooms have rather ornate murals , the purpose of others remains unclear.

[ 8 ] Initial estimates suggested an average population of between 5,000 and 7,000. However, more recent work using revised ideas of the distribution of residential buildings, and employing archaeological and ethnographic data exploring building use, suggests that between 600 and 800 people would have lived at Çatalhöyük East during an average year during the Middle phase (6700–6500 BC).

[ 22 ] Genetic studies published during 2025 indicate that the social organization began with a culture organized along matrilocality and matrilineality and that the households passed from mother to daughter.

[ 23 ] The sites were set up as large numbers of buildings clustered together. Households looked to their neighbors for help, trade, and possible marriage for their children.

[ 24 ] The inhabitants lived in mudbrick houses that were crammed together in an aggregate structure. No footpaths or streets were used between the dwellings, which were clustered in a honeycomb-like maze. Most were accessed by holes in the ceiling and doors on the side of the houses, with doors reached by ladders and stairs. The rooftops were effectively streets. The ceiling openings also served as the only source of ventilation, allowing smoke from the houses' open hearths and ovens to escape. 
Houses had plaster interiors accessed by squared-off timber ladders or steep stairs. These were usually on the south wall of the room, as were cooking hearths and ovens. The main rooms contained raised platforms that may have been used for a range of domestic activities. Typical houses contained two rooms for everyday activity, such as cooking and crafting.

[ 24 ] All interior walls and platforms were plastered to a smooth finish.

[ 8 ] Ancillary rooms were used as storage, and were accessed through low openings from main rooms.

All rooms were kept scrupulously clean. Archaeologists identified very little rubbish in the buildings, finding middens outside the ruins, with sewage and food waste , as well as significant amounts of ash from burning wood, reeds, and animal dung.

[ 25 ] In good weather, many daily activities may also have taken place on the rooftops, which may have formed a plaza. In later periods, large communal ovens appear to have been built on these rooftops. Over time, houses were renewed by partial demolition and rebuilding on a foundation of rubble, which was how the mound was gradually built up. As many as eighteen levels of settlement have been uncovered.

[ 26 ] As a part of ritual life, the people of Çatalhöyük buried their dead within the village.

[ 24 ] Human remains have been found in pits beneath the floors and especially beneath hearths, the platforms within the main rooms, and beds. Bodies were tightly flexed before burial and were often placed in baskets or wound and wrapped in reed mats. Disarticulated bones in some graves suggest that bodies may have been exposed in the open air for a time before the bones were gathered and buried. In some cases, graves were disturbed, and the individual's head removed from the skeleton. These heads may have been used in rituals, as some were found in other areas of the community. In a woman's grave, spinning whorls were recovered and in a man's grave, stone axes .

[ 24 ] Some skulls were plastered and painted with ochre to recreate faces, a custom more characteristic of Neolithic sites in Syria and Neolithic Jericho than at sites closer by.

Detail of the mural showing the hind part of the aurochs, a deer and hunters Vivid murals and figurines are found throughout the settlement on interior and exterior walls. Distinctive clay figurines of women, notably the Seated Woman of Çatalhöyük , have been found in the upper levels of the site.

[ 27 ] Although no identifiable temples have been found, the graves, murals, and figurines suggest that the people of Çatalhöyük had a religion rich in symbols. Rooms with concentrations of these items may have been shrines or public meeting areas. Predominant images include men with erect phalluses, hunting scenes, red images of the now extinct aurochs (wild cattle) and stags , and vultures swooping down on headless figures.

[ 8 ] Relief figures are carved on walls, such as of lionesses facing one another.

Heads of animals, especially of cattle, were mounted on walls. A painting of the village, with the twin mountain peaks of Hasan Dağ in the background, [ 28 ] is frequently cited as the world's oldest map , [ 29 ] and the first landscape painting.

[ 8 ] However, some archaeologists question this interpretation. Stephanie Meece, for example, argues that it is more likely a painting of a leopard skin instead of a volcano, and a decorative geometric design instead of a map.

[ 30 ] Religion [ edit ] Mural, Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Neolithic hunters attacking an aurochs, Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Seated goddess flanked by two lionesses .

See also: History of religion A feature of Çatalhöyük are its female figurines. Mellaart, the original excavator, argued that these carefully made figurines, carved and molded from marble , blue and brown limestone , schist , calcite, basalt , alabaster , and clay, represented a female deity . Although a male deity existed as well, "statues of a female deity far outnumber those of the male deity, who moreover, does not appear to be represented at all after Level VI".

[ 31 ] To date, eighteen levels have been identified. These figurines were found primarily in areas Mellaart believed to be shrines. The stately goddess seated on a throne flanked by two lionesses was found in a grain bin, which Mellaart suggests might have been a means of ensuring the harvest or protecting the food supply.

[ 32 ] Whereas Mellaart excavated nearly two hundred buildings in four seasons, the current excavator, Ian Hodder, spent an entire season excavating one building alone.

[ 33 ] Hodder and his team, in 2004 and 2005, began to believe that the patterns suggested by Mellaart were false. They found one similar figurine, but the vast majority did not imitate the Mother Goddess style that Mellaart suggested. Instead of a Mother Goddess culture, Hodder points out that the site gives little indication of a matriarchy or patriarchy .

[ 34 ] There are full breasts on which the hands rest, and the stomach is extended in the central part. There is a hole in the top for the head which is missing. As one turns the figurine around one notices that the arms are very thin, and then on the back of the figurine one sees a depiction of either a skeleton or the bones of a very thin and depleted human. The ribs and vertebrae are clear, as are the scapulae and the main pelvic bones. The figurine can be interpreted in a number of ways – as a woman turning into an ancestor, as a woman associated with death, or as death and life conjoined. It is possible that the lines around the body represent wrapping rather than ribs. Whatever the specific interpretation, this is a unique piece that may force us to change our views of the nature of Çatalhöyük society and imagery. Perhaps the importance of female imagery was related to some special role of the female in relation to death as much as to the roles of mother and nurturer.

[ 35 ] In an article in the Turkish Daily News , Hodder is reported as denying that Çatalhöyük was a matriarchal society and quoted as saying "When we look at what they eat and drink and at their social statues, we see that men and women had the same social status. There was a balance of power. Another example is the skulls found. If one's social status was of high importance in Çatalhöyük, the body and head were separated after death. The number of female and male skulls found during the excavations is almost equal." [ 36 ] In another article in the Hurriyet Daily News Hodder is reported to say "We have learned that men and women were equally approached".

[ 37 ] In a report in September 2009 on the discovery of around 2000 figurines Hodder is quoted as saying: Çatalhöyük was excavated in the 1960s in a methodical way, but not using the full range of natural science techniques that are available to us today. Sir James Mellaart who excavated the site in the 1960s came up with all sorts of ideas about the way the site was organized and how it was lived in and so on ... We've now started working there since the mid 1990s and come up with very different ideas about the site. One of the most obvious examples of that is that Çatalhöyük is perhaps best known for the idea of the mother goddess . But our work more recently has tended to show that in fact there is very little evidence of a mother goddess and very little evidence of some sort of female-based matriarchy. That's just one of the many myths that the modern scientific work is undermining.

[ 38 ] Professor Lynn Meskell explained that while the original excavations had found only 200 figures, the new excavations had uncovered 2,000 figures, most of which depicted animals, and fewer than 5% of the figurines depicted women.

[ 38 ] Estonian folklorist Uku Masing has suggested as early as in 1976, that Çatalhöyük was probably a hunting and gathering religion and the Mother Goddess figurine did not represent a female deity. He implied that perhaps a longer period of time was needed to develop symbols for agricultural rites.

[ 39 ] His theory was developed in the paper "Some remarks on the mythology of the people of Catal Hüyük".

[ 40 ] Economy [ edit ] Çatalhöyük has strong evidence of an egalitarian society, as no houses with distinctive features (belonging to royalty or religious hierarchy for example) have been found so far. The most recent investigations also reveal little social distinction based on gender, with men and women receiving equivalent nutrition and seeming to have equal social status, as typically found in Paleolithic cultures.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Children observed domestic areas. They learned how to perform rituals and how to build or repair houses by watching the adults make statues, beads, and other objects.

[ 24 ] Çatalhöyük's spatial layout may be due to the close kin relations exhibited amongst the people. It can be seen, in the layout, that the people were "divided into two groups who lived on opposite sides of the town, separated by a gully." Furthermore, because no nearby towns were found from which marriage partners could be drawn, "this spatial separation must have marked two intermarrying kinship groups." This would help explain how a settlement so early on would become so large.

[ 43 ] Protective roof of the archeological site In the upper levels of the site, it becomes apparent that the people of Çatalhöyük were honing skills in agriculture and the domestication of animals. Female figurines have been found within bins used for storage of cereals, such as wheat and barley , and the figurines are presumed to be of a deity protecting the grain.

Peas were also grown, and almonds , pistachios , and fruit were harvested from trees in the surrounding hills.

Sheep were domesticated and evidence suggests the beginning of cattle domestication as well. However, hunting continued to be a major source of food for the community.

Pottery and obsidian tools appear to have been major industries; obsidian tools were probably both used and also traded for items such as Mediterranean sea shells and flint from Syria . Noting the lack of hierarchy and economic inequality , historian and anti-capitalist author Murray Bookchin has argued that Çatalhöyük was an early example of anarcho-communism .

[ 44 ] Conversely, a 2014 paper argues that the picture of Çatalhöyük is more complex and that while there seemed to have been an egalitarian distribution of cooking tools and some stone tools, unbroken quern-stones and storage units were more unevenly distributed. Private possessions existed but shared tools also existed. It was also suggested that Çatalhöyük was becoming less egalitarian, with greater inter-generational wealth transmission.

[ 45 ] Museum [ edit ] In 2023 a new state-of-the-art museum has opened on the site, constructed by the Konya municipality. In October 2024 a bookshop and cafe was added to the site. Non-Turkish visitors are charged five euros per person for entry. There are numerous visitor-activated information kiosks, some of which provide information in English as well as Turkish. Full information on all aspects of the various discoveries is available in eight rooms, including an underground reconstruction of a typical dwelling used by people of 90 centuries ago.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Körtiktepe Göbekli Tepe Boncuklu Höyük Cities of the ancient Near East Cucuteni–Trypillian culture Kamyana Mohyla List of largest cities throughout history List of Stone Age art Matriarchy Neolithic Revolution Old Europe (archaeology) Sacred bull Venus figurines References [ edit ] ^ Shukurov, Anvar; Sarson, Graeme R.; Gangal, Kavita (7 May 2014).

"The Near-Eastern Roots of the Neolithic in South Asia" .

PLOS ONE .

9 (5): Appendix S1.

Bibcode : 2014PLoSO...995714G .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0095714 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 4012948 .

PMID 24806472 .

^ Renfrew, Colin (2006).

"Inception of agriculture and rearing in the Middle East" .

Human Palaeontology and Prehistory .

5 (1): 395– 404.

Bibcode : 2006CRPal...5..395R .

doi : 10.1016/j.crpv.2005.10.012 .

^ [1] Çatalhöyük entry on the UNESCO World Heritage List site ^ J. Mellaart, Excavations at Çatal Hüyük, first preliminary report: 1961. Anatolian Studies, vol. 12, pp. 41–65, 1962 ^ J. Mellaart, Excavations at Çatal Hüyük, second preliminary report: 1962. Anatolian Studies, vol. 13, pp. 43–103, 1963 ^ J. Mellaart, Excavations at Çatal Hüyük, third preliminary report: 1963. Anatolian Studies, vol. 14, pp. 39–119, 1964 ^ J. Mellaart, Excavations at Çatal Hüyük, fourth preliminary report: at 1965. Anatolian Studies, vol. 16, pp. 15–191, 1966 ^ a b c d e Kleiner, Fred S.; Mamiya, Christin J. (2006).

Gardner's Art Through the Ages: The Western Perspective: Volume 1 (Twelfth ed.). Belmont, California: Wadsworth Publishing. pp.

12– 4.

ISBN 978-0-495-00479-0 .

^ [2] David Orton et al., A tale of two tells: dating the Çatalhöyük West Mound, Antiquity, vol. 92, iss. 363, pp. 620–639, June 2018 ^ Kenneth Pearson and Patricia Connor, The Dorak affair, New York, Atheneum, 1968 ^ I. Hodder, Çatalhöyük, Anatolian Archaeology, vol. 4, pp. 8–10, 1998 ^ I. Hodder, Getting to the Bottom of Thing: Çatalhöyük 1999, Anatolian Archaeology, vol. 5, pp. 4–7, 1999 ^ I. Hodder, Çatalhöyük, Anatolian Archaeology, vol. 8, pp. 5–7, 2002 ^ I. Hodder, A New Phase of Excavation at Çatalhöyük, Anatolian Archaeology, vol. 9, pp. 9–11, 2003 ^ [3] Çatalhöyük: Excavations of a Neolithic Anatolian Höyük – Çatalhöyük Archive Report 2008 ^ Hodder, Ian, ed., "Çatalhöyük Excavations: The 2009-2017 Seasons", British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara, 2023 ISBN 978-1912090204 ^ Hodder, Ian, "“If only those jaws could move”. A narrative of Building 1 at Çatalhöyük", TRACING TRANSITIONS & CONNECTING COMMUNITIES, pp. 41-52, 2025 ^ Morgan, Colleen; University (2016).

"Analog to Digital: Transitions in Theory and Practice in Archaeological Photography at Çatalhöyük" (PDF) .

Internet Archaeology (42).

doi : 10.11141/ia.42.7 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2022.

^ Taylor, James; Issavi, Justine; Berggren, Åsa; Lukas, Dominik; Mazzucato, Camilla; Tung, Burcu; Dell'Unto, Nicoló (2018).

" 'The Rise of the Machine': the impact of digital tablet recording in the field at Çatalhöyük" .

Internet Archaeology (47).

doi : 10.11141/ia.47.1 .

^ Mickel, Allison (2021).

Why Those Who Shovel Are Silent . Louisville: University Press of Colorado. pp.

6– 7.

ISBN 9781646421152 .

^ [4] Marciniak, Arkadiusz, et al., Jędrzej Hordecki, "The excavations of the East Area at Çatalhöyük in the 2021 season", 2024 ^ Kuijt, Ian; Marciniak, Arkadiusz (2024). "How many people lived in the world's earliest villages? Reconsidering community size and population pressure at Neolithic Çatalhöyük".

Journal of Anthropological Archaeology .

74 : 101573.

doi : 10.1016/j.jaa.2024.101573 .

^ Curry, Andrew, Stone Age farmers’ households passed from mother to daughter: moms and daughters were at the center of the family in ancient Çatalhöyük, ancient DNA and archaeological evidence suggest , Science, June 26, 2025 ^ a b c d e Maynes, Mary Jo; Waltner, Ann (2012).

The Family: A World History . New York City: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-530476-3 .

^ Shillito, Lisa-Marie ; Matthews, Wendy; Almond, Matthew; Bull, Ian D. (2011).

"The microstratigraphy of middens: capturing daily routine in rubbish at Neolithic Çatalhöyük, Turkey" (PDF) .

Antiquity .

85 (329): 1024– 1038.

doi : 10.1017/S0003598X00068460 .

S2CID 56433872 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 October 2022.

^ "Neolithic Site of Çatalhöyük" .

UNESCO World Heritage Centre . Retrieved 4 January 2020 .

^ "Incredible discovery of intact female figurine from neolithic era in Turkey | Ars Technica" . 16 September 2016.

^ Noah Wiener (1 November 2013).

"Çatalhöyük mural" .

Bible History Daily . Biblical Archaeology Society. Archived from the original on 5 November 2013.

This Çatalhöyük mural is thought to represent a nearby volcanic eruption. New scientific evidence confirms a contemporaneous eruption at nearby Hasan Dağ.

Alt URL ^ Cartographic Images (accessed 23 February 2014) ^ A bird's eye view – of a leopard's spots. The Çatalhöyük 'map' and the development of cartographic representation in prehistory.

Anatolian Studies 56, 2006, pp. 1–16. Published by The British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara ^ Mellaart, James (1967).

Catal Huyuk: A Neolithic Town in Anatolia .

McGraw-Hill . p. 181.

^ Mellaart (1967), 180.

^ Balter, Michael (2005).

The Goddess and the Bull . New York: Free Press. p. 127.

ISBN 978-0-7432-4360-5 .

^ "Çatalhöyük: Ancient History of the Anatolia" .

^ Hodder, Ian (2005).

"New finds and new interpretations at Çatalhöyük" .

Çatalhöyük 2005 Archive Report . Catalhoyuk Research Project, Institute of Archaeology.

^ Hodder, Ian (1 January 2008).

"A Journey to 9000 years ago" . Retrieved 7 August 2008 .

^ Hodder, Ian (2 March 2015).

"Çatalhöyük excavations reveal gender equality in ancient settled life" . Retrieved 25 March 2015 .

^ a b Jeremy, O'Brien (10 September 2009).

"New techniques undermine 'mother goddess' role in ancient community" .

Irish Times . Archived from the original on 21 January 2025 . Retrieved 2 June 2025 .

^ Masing, Uku (2011).

Aarded Tellistes . Tartu, Estonia: Ilmamaa. pp.

209– 227.

ISBN 978-9985-77-351-2 .

^ Oriental Studies 3. Acta et Commentationes Universitatis Tartuensis 392 / Tartu Riikliku Ülikooli Toimetised 392. Tartu 1976, 75–92.

^ Leften Stavros Stavrianos (1991).

A Global History from Prehistory to the Present . New Jersey, USA: Prentice Hall.

ISBN 978-0-13-357005-2 .

Pages 9–13 ^ R Dale Gutrie (2005).

The Nature of Paleolithic art . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-31126-5 .

Page 420-422 ^ Maynes, Mary Jo; Waltner, Ann (2012).

The Family: A World History . New York City: Oxford University Press. p. 8.

ISBN 978-0-19-530476-3 .

^ Bookchin, Murray.

The Rise of Urbanisation and Decline of Citizenship . pp.

18– 22.

^ Wright, Katherine I. Karen. "Domestication and inequality? Households, corporate groups and food processing tools at Neolithic Çatalhöyük." Journal of Anthropological Archaeology 33 (2014): 1–33.

Further reading [ edit ] Bailey, Douglass.

Prehistoric Figurines: Representation and Corporeality in the Neolithic.

New York: Routledge, 2005 (hardcover, ISBN 0-415-33151-X ; paperback, ISBN 0-415-33152-8 ).

Balter, Michael .

The Goddess and the Bull: Çatalhöyük: An Archaeological Journey to the Dawn of Civilization.

New York: Free Press, 2004 (hardcover, ISBN 0-7432-4360-9 ); Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, 2006 (paperback, ISBN 1-59874-069-5 ). A highly condensed version was published in The Smithsonian Magazine , May 2005.

Dural, Sadrettin. "Protecting Catalhoyuk: Memoir of an Archaeological Site Guard." Contributions by Ian Hodder. Translated by Duygu Camurcuoglu Cleere. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, 2007.

ISBN 978-1-59874-050-9 .

Hodder, Ian . "Women and Men at Çatalhöyük," Scientific American Magazine , January 2004 (update V15:1, 2005).

Hodder, I. (2014). "Çatalhöyük excavations: the 2000-2008 seasons.", British Institute at Ankara, Monumenta Archaeologica 29, ISBN 978-1-898249-29-0 Hodder, Ian.

Twenty-Five Years of Research at Çatalhöyük , Near Eastern Archaeology; Chicago, vol. 83, iss. 2, pp. 72–29, June 2020 Hodder, Ian.

The Leopard's Tale: Revealing the Mysteries of Çatalhöyük . London; New York: Thames & Hudson, 2006 (hardcover, ISBN 0-500-05141-0 ). (The UK title of this work is Çatalhöyük: The Leopard's Tale .) Hodder, Ian; Bogaard, Amy; Engel, Claudia; Pearson, Jessica; Wolfhagen, Jesse., "Spatial autocorrelation analysis and the social organisation of crop and herd management at Çatalhöyük", Anatolian Studies, London, vol. 72, pp. 1–15, 2022 Mallett, Marla, "The Goddess from Anatolia: An Updated View of the Catak Huyuk Controversy Archived 30 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine ," in Oriental Rug Review, Vol. XIII, No. 2 (December 1992/January 1993).

Mellaart, James .

Çatal Hüyük: A Neolithic Town in Anatolia.

London: Thames & Hudson, 1967; New York: McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1967.

Online at archive.org On the Surface: Çatalhöyük 1993–95 , edited by Ian Hodder. Cambridge: McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research and British Institute of Archaeology at Ankara, 1996 ( ISBN 0-9519420-3-4 ).

Rast-Eicher, Antoinette, Sabine Karg, and Lise Bender Jørgensen, "The use of local fibres for textiles at Neolithic Çatalhöyük", Antiquity 95.383, pp. 1129-1144, 2021 Taylor, James Stuart (2016), Making Time For Space At Çatalhöyük: GIS as a tool for exploring intra-site spatiotemporality within complex stratigraphic sequences (PhD thesis), University of York Todd, Ian A.

Çatal Hüyük in Perspective . Menlo Park, CA: Cummings Pub. Co., 1976 ( ISBN 0-8465-1958-5 ; ISBN 0-8465-1957-7 ) Twiss, Katheryn C., et al., "“But some were more equal than others:” Exploring inequality at Neolithic Çatalhöyük", Plos one 19.9, e0307067, 2024 External links [ edit ] Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Çatalhöyük .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Çatalhöyük .

What we learned from 25 Years of Research at Catalhoyuk - Ian Hodder - Oriental Institute lecture Dec 4, 2019 Çatalhöyük — Excavations of a Neolithic Anatolian Höyük , Çatalhöyük excavation official website Çatalhöyük photos The First Cities: Why Settle Down? The Mystery of Communities , by Michael Balter, Çatalhöyük excavation official biographer Interview with Ian Hodder March 201 "Ian Hodder: Çatalhöyük, Religion & Templeton's 25%" v t e Ancient settlements in Turkey Aegean Abbassus Abrostola Achaion Limen Acharaca Acmonia Acrassus Adramyttium Agatheira Aegae Airai Aizanoi Alabanda Alia Alinda Allianoi Almura Amnista Amorium Amos Amynanda Amyzon Anaua Anineta Annaea Antandrus Antioch on the Maeander Apamea in Phrygia Aphrodisias Apollonia in Mysia Apollonia Salbaces Apollonis Apollonos Hieron Appia Appolena Aragokome Araukome Arcadiopolis Arilla Aroma Aspaneus Astragon Astyra near Adramyttium Astyra near Pergamon Astyria Atarneus Atarneus sub Pitanem Attea Attuda Augustopolis Aulae Aurelia Neapolis Aureliopolis in Lydia Aurokra Bageis Bargasa Bargasa in northern Caria Bargylia Beudos Beycesultan Birgena Blaundus Bonitai Boukolion Boutheia Briula Bruzus Bybassus Cadi Callipolis Caloe Canae Carene Carmylessus Carura Caryanda Castabus Casystes Cedreae Celaenae Ceramus Chalcetor Choria Chrysaoris Chytrium Cidramus Cindye Cisthene Clannuda Claros Colophon Colossae Conium Coryphas Cybeleia Cyllandus Cyme Daldis Dareioukome Dideiphyta Didyma Digda Dioclea Dionysiopolis Dios Hieron in Ionia Dios Hieron in Lydia Dioskome Docimium Doroukome Eibeos Eiokome Elaea Eluza Embatum Emoddi Ephesus Erines Erythrae Erythras Etsyena Euaza Eukarpia Euhippe Eumeneia Euromus Euthenae Euxine Gambrium Gerga Gergitha Gerriadai Glauke Gryneium Halicarnassus Halisarna Harpasa Helos Heraclea at Latmus Heraclea in Aeolis Heraclea in Lydia Heraclea Salbace Hermocapelia Hierapolis Hieropolis Hierocaesarea Homadena Hydai Hydas Hydissus Hygassos Hyllarima Hypaepa Hypokremnos Hyrcanis Iasos Iaza Idyma Ioniapolis Ioudda Ipsus Isinda in Ionia Iskome Kadyie Kaira Kalabantia Kasara Kasossos Kaualena Kaunos Kaymakçı Tepe Kilaraza Kildara Klazomenai Kleimaka Kleros Politike Knidos Koddinou Petra Koraia Korakoe Koresa Kouara Kyllene Kymnissa Kys Labraunda Lagina Lalandos Lamyana Lankena Laodicea on the Lycus Larisa in Caria Larisa in Ionia Larisa in Lydia Larissa Phrikonis Larymna Lasnedda Latmus Lebedus Leimon Leucae Leucophrys Limantepe Lobolda Loryma Lunda Lydae Lyrna Lysimachia Madnasa Maeandropolis Magnesia ad Sipylum Magnesia on the Maeander Maiboza Maionia in Lydia Malene Marathesium Mastaura Meiros Meiros Megale Melampagos Meloukome Metropolis in Lydia Metropolis in southern Phrygia Miletus Mylasa Mobolla Mokolda Mossyna Mostene Motella Myloukome Myndus Myrina Myus Nais Nasos Naulochon Naulochus Naxia Neapolis Neonteichos Nisyra Notion Nymphaeum Nysa on the Maeander Odon Oenoanda Olaeis Olymos Oroanna Orthoisa Ortygia Otrus Palaemyndus Palaeopolis Panasion Panormus near Miletus Panormus near Halicarnassus Parsada Parthenium Passala Passanda Pedasa Peltae Pepuza Pergamon Perperene Philadelphia in Lydia Phocaea Phoenix in Caria Physcus Phyteia Pidasa Pinara Pisilis Pisye Pitane Pladasa Plarasa Polichna in Ionia Polichne in Ionia Polybotus Pordoselene Priene Prymnessus Pteleum Pydnae Pygela Pyrnus Pyrrha Saouenda Sardis Satala in Lydia Sebaste in Phrygia Sebastopolis in Caria Setae Side in Caria Sidussa Silandus Sillyos Sion Skolopoeis Smyrna Soa Spore Stadia Stectorium Stratonicea in Lydia Stratonicea in Caria Strobilos Syangela Symbra Synaus Syneta Synnada Syrna Tabae Tabala Tateikome Taza Teichiussa Telandrus Temenothyra Temnos Tempsis Tendeba Teos Termera Teuthrania Thasthara Theangela Thebe Hypoplakia Thebes Thera Thyaira Thyatira Thymbrara Thyssanus Tisna Tlos in Caria Tomara Traianopolis Trapezopolis Trarium Triopium Tripolis on the Meander Troketta Tyanollos Tymion Tymnos Ula Uranium Zemmeana Zingotos Kome Black Sea Abonoteichos Aegialus Aiginetes Alaca Höyük Amasia Amastris Ancon Anticinolis Argyria Armene Athenae Berissa Bonita Boon Cabira Cales Callistratia Carambis Carissa Carussa Cerasus Chadisia Cinolis Cizari Colonia in Armenia Colussa Comana in the Pontus Coralla Cordyle Cratia Crenides Cromen Cromna Cyptasia Cytorus Dia Diacopa Elaeus Endeira Erythini Euchaita Eusene Gadilon Garius Garzoubanthon Gaziura Gozalena Hadrianopolis in Paphlagonia Hattusa Heraclea Pontica Heracleium Hermonassa Hieron Oros Hüseyindede Tepe Hyssus Ibora Ischopolis Karza Kelesa Kimista Laodicea Pontica Libiopolis Lillium Metroon Mokata Naustathmus Nerik Nicopolis Ophis Oxinas Patara Pharnacia Phazemon Philocaleia Pida Pimolisa Polemonium Pompeiopolis Potami Prusias ad Hypium Pteria in Paphlagonia Salatiwara Samuha Sandaraca Sapinuwa Satala Saurania Sebastopolis in Pontus Stephane Syderos Themiscyra Thymena Timolaeum Tium Tripolis Virasia Yazılıkaya Zagorus Zaliche Zephyrium in Paphlagonia Ziporea Central Anatolia Abouadeineita Alişar Hüyük Amblada Anadynata Anastasiopolis Andabalis Anisa Anniaca Antoniopolis Anzoulada Aquae Saravenae Aralla Arasaxa Archalla Ardistama Ariaramneia Ariarathia Armaxa Artiknos Aspenzinsos Astra Atenia Balbissa Balgatia Barate Bathys Rhyax Binbirkilise Blucium Borissos Campae Camuliana Candara Carus Vicus Çatalhöyük Cimiata Ciscissus Cinna Claneus Comitanassus Congustus Corna Corniaspa Coropassus Cotenna Cybistra Cyzistra Dadastana Dasmenda Derbe Diocaesarea Doara Dometiopolis Dorylaeum Ecdaumava Ecobriga Ergobrotis Euaissa Eudocia (Cappadocia) Eudocia (Phrygia) Eulepa Faustinopolis Germa Gorbeus Gordium Hadrianopolis in Phrygia Heraclea Cybistra Herpha Hieropotamon Homana Hyde Ilistra Irenopolis Isauropolis Juliopolis Kaman-Kalehöyük Kanotala Karbala Keissia Kerkenes Kilistra Kindyria Kobara Kodylessos Korama Koron Kültepe (Kanesh) Lageina Lamatorma Laodicea Combusta Laroumada Lauzadus Limnae Lystra Malandasa Malus in Galatia Malus in Phrygia Meloë Metropolis in northern Phrygia Midaeium Mistea Mnizus Mokissos Mourisa Moutalaske Musbanda Myrika Nakoleia Nazianzus Nitazi Nora Nyssa Ochras Olosada Orcistus Papirion Parnassus Pedachtoë Pedaia Peium Perta Pessinus Pharax Phlara Pillitokome Pissia Pithoi Pontanena Posala Pteria Purushanda Pyrgoi Sadagolthina Salamboreia Salarama Sasima Savatra Sbida Sedasa Senzousa Sereana Sibora Sidamaria Skandos Soanda Soandos Sora Takourtha Tavium Thebasa Thouththourbia Tiberiopolis Trocmades Tyana Tynna Tyriaeum Vasada Verinopolis Zeita Zizima Eastern Anatolia Altıntepe Ani Arsamosata Cafer Höyük Camachus Citharizum Dadima Justinianopolis Melid Sugunia Theodosiopolis Tushpa Marmara Abarnis Abydos Achaiion Achilleion Ad Statuas Adrasteia Aegospotami Agora Aianteion in Thrace Aianteion in the Troad Ainos Alexandria Troas Alopeconnesus Ammoi Amycus Anaplous Apamea Myrlea Aphrodisias Apollonia on the Rhyndacus Aprus Apsoda Arbeila Argiza Argyria Argyronion Argyropolis Arisba Artace Artaiouteichos Artanes Assos Astacus Astyra in Troad Athyras Aureliane Aureliopolis Baradendromia Baris Basilica Therma Basilinopolis Bathonea Bathys Limen Beodizo Bergule Birytis Bisanthe Bitenas Bithynium Blachernae Bolos Boradion Brunca Burtudizon Bythias Byzantium Byzapena Caenophrurium Callum Calpe Canopus Cardia Cebrene Cenchreae Cenon Gallicanon Chalcaea Chalcedon Charax Charmidea Chelae on the Black Sea Chelae on the Asian coast of the Bosphorus Chelae on the European coast of the Bosphorus Choiragria Chryse Chrysopolis Cius Clitae Cobrys Cocylium Colla Colonae Cremaste Crenides Cressa Crithote Cypasis Cypsela Cyzicus Dadokome Dacibyza Damalis Daphne Mainomene Daphnus Dardanus Dascylium Dascylium in Bithynia Dekaton in Bithynia Dekaton in Thrace Delkos Delphin Deris Desa Didymateiche Diolkides Drabus Drizipara/Drusipara Eirakla Elaea in Bithynia Elaeus Elekosmioi Embolos Ergasteria Eribolum Gargara Gentinos Gergis Germa Germanicopolis Hadriani ad Olympum Hadriania Hadrianotherae Halone Hamaxitus Harpagion Hebdomon Helenopolis/Drepanum Heracleium Hermaion Hieria Hierion Iasonion Ide Ilieon Kome Kabia Kalamos Kalasyrta Kale Peuke Kalos Agros Kampos Kassa Katapaspanas Kepos Kizoura Koila Kolonai Kosilaos Koubaita Kyparodes Kypra Lamponeia Lampsacus Larisa in Troad Lasthenes Leptoia Liada Libum Libyssa Limnae in Bithynia Limnae in Thrace Linus Lupadium Lygos Lysimachia Madytus Mantineion Marpessos Miletopolis Mocasura Mochadion Modra Morzapena Mossynea Moukaporis Myrileion Narco Nassete Nausikleia Nausimachion Neandreia Neapolis on the Bosphorus Neapolis on the Thracian Chersonese Neonteichos Nerola Nicomedia Oka Ontoraita Ophryneion Orestias Orni Ostreodes Pactya Paeon Paesus Palodes Panion Pantichium Parabolos Parium Paulines Pegae in Mysia Pegae in Thrace Pege Pentephyle Percote Pericharaxis Perinthus Petrozetoi Pharmakia Phidalia Petra Phiela Philia Phosphorus Pionia Pitheci Portus Placia Ploketta Poemanenum Poleatikon Polychron Polymedium Potamoi Potamonion Praenetus Pratomysia Prepa Priapus Prindea Proconnesus Proochthoi Prusa Psarela Psyllium Pyrrhias Cyon Pytheion Rhebas Rhegion Rhesion Rhoiteion Rouphinianai Salmydessus Sangarus Scamandria Scamandrus Scepsis Scylace Scylla Selymbria Semystra Serrion Teichos Sestos Sigeion Sirkanos Smintheion Soka Strobilos Sykai Syllanta Tarpodizo Tarsus in Bithynia Tattaios Tenba Terbos Tesderamoska Tetrakomia Tipaso Tragasai Thynias Traron Tricomia in Bithynia Troy ( Hisarlik ) Tyrodiza Tzurulum Urisio Utsurgae Zeleia Mediterranean Acalissus Acarassus Adada Adrasus Aegae Agrae Alalakh Amelas Anabura in Pisidia Anazarbus Anchiale Andeda Andriaca Anemurium Ano Kotradis Antigonia Antioch on the Orontes Antioch of Pisidia Antiochia Lamotis Antioch on the Cragus Antioch on the Pyramis Antiphellus Aperlae Aphrodisias of Cilicia Apollonia in Lycia Arabissus Araxa Ariassus Arima Arnabanda Arneae Arsada Arsinoe Artanada Arycanda Aspendos Augai Augusta Aulae Aunesis Bab al-Hawa Border Crossing Balbura Baris Bindaios Bubon Cabassus Cadrema Cadyanda Callimache Calynda Carallia Carmylessus Casae Castabala Ceretapa Cestrus Charadrus Choma Cibyra Mikra Claudiopolis Colybrassus Comama Comana in Cappadocia Comba Conana Coracesium Corycium Antrum Corycus (Kızkalesi) Corydala Cremna Cretopolis Crya Cyaneae Cyrrhus Daedala Dalisandus in Isauria Dalisandus in Pamphylia Damasei Dias Diocaesarea Domuztepe Elaiussa Sebaste Elbessos Emirzeli Epiphania Erymna Etenna Eudocia (Lycia) Eudocias (Pamphylia) Flaviopolis Gagae Gözlükule Hacilar Hadrianopolis in Pisidia Halae Hamaxia Hierapolis Hippucome Holmi Hyia Idebessos Idyros Iotape Irenopolis Isaura Nea Isaura Palaea Isba Isinda in Lycia Isinda in Pisidia Issus Istlada Juliosebaste Kalanthia Kalelibelen Kandyba Kanytelis Karakabaklı Karatepe Karkabo Kastellon Kendema Keraia Kibyra Kiphisos Kirkota Kitanaura Kodroula Kolbasa Korasion Korma Kynosarion Laertes Lagbe Lamos Lebessus Legeita Limnae in Pamphylia Limnae in Pisidia Limyra Lissa Lycae Lyrbe Lysinia Magarsa Magastara Magydus Mallus Malus in Pisidia Mampsoukrenai Mamure Castle Manava Mandane Marciana Marmara (Mnara) Mastaura Meloë Melanippe Meriana Mezgitkale Moatra Mopsucrene Mopsuestia Morka Moron Hydor Moumoustra Mylae Mylios Myra Myriandus Nagidos Nauloi Neapolis in Pisidia Nephelis Nisa Octapolis Olba Olbasa Olbia Olympus Öküzlü Onobara Orokenda Otanada Ouerbe Padyandus Palaeopolis Panemotichus Panhormus Pargais Parlais Patara Pednelissus Perga Perminounda Phaselis Phellus Philadelphia in Cilicia Philaea Phoenicus Phoenix in Lycia Pisarissos Pisurgia Placoma Platanus Podalia Pogla Prostanna Pseudokorasion Ptolemais Rhodiapolis Rhoscopus Rhosus Rygmanoi Sabandus Sagalassos Sandalium Saraganda Sebeda Seleucia in Pamphylia Seleucia Pieria Seleucia Sidera Selge Selinus Seroiata Serraepolis Sia Sibidounda Sibyla Side Siderus Sidyma Sillyon Simena Sinda Siricae Soli Solyma Sozopolis Sura Syca Syedra Takina Tapureli Tardequeia Tarsus Teimiussa Tell Judaidah Tell Tayinat Telmessos Telmessos (Caria) Tenedos Termessos Tetrapyrgia in Cappadocia Tetrapyrgia in Pamphylia Titiopolis Tityassus Tlos Toriaeum Tragalassus Trebendae Trebenna Trysa Tyberissus Tyinda Tymandus Tynada Typallia Xanthos Yanıkhan Yumuktepe Zenopolis in Isauria Zenopolis in Lycia Zephyrium on the Calycadnus Southeastern Anatolia Amida Antioch in the Taurus Antioch in Mesopotamia (Constantia) Apamea on the Euphrates Carcathiocerta Carchemish Çayönü Dabanas Dara Doliche Edessa Göbekli Tepe Hallan Çemi Tepesi Harran Khashshum Kussara Matiate Nevalı Çori Nicopolis in Cilicia Nisibis Sakçagözü Sam'al Samosata Sareisa Seleucia at the Zeugma Sitai Sultantepe Tille Tushhan Urima Urshu Zeugma v t e World Heritage Sites in Turkey Aegean Aphrodisias Ephesus Hierapolis / Pamukkale Pergamon Sardis and the Lydian Tumuli of Bin Tepe Black Sea Hattusa Safranbolu Central Anatolia Çatalhöyük Divriği Great Mosque and Hospital Gordion Göreme National Park and Cappadocia East Anatolia Ani Arslantepe Mound Marmara Bursa and Cumalıkızık Historic Areas of Istanbul Selimiye Mosque and its Social Complex Troy Mediterranean Xanthos / Letoon Southeastern Anatolia Diyarbakır Fortress and Hevsel Gardens Göbekli Tepe Mount Nemrut Multiple regions Wooden Hypostyle Mosques of Medieval Anatolia Turkey portal Category v t e Prehistoric technology Prehistory Timeline Outline Stone Age Subdivisions New Stone Age Technology history Glossary Tools Farming Neolithic Revolution Founder crops New World crops Ard / plough Celt Digging stick Domestication Goad Irrigation Secondary products Sickle Terracing Food processing ( Paleolithic diet ) Fire Basket Cooking Earth oven Granaries Grinding slab Ground stone Hearth Aşıklı Höyük Qesem cave Manos Metate Mortar and pestle Pottery Quern-stone Storage pits Hunting Arrow Boomerang throwing stick Bow and arrow history Nets Spear spear-thrower baton harpoon Schöningen woomera Projectile points Arrowhead Transverse Bare Island Cascade Clovis Cresswell Cumberland Eden Folsom Lamoka Manis Mastodon Plano Systems Game drive system Buffalo jump Toolmaking Earliest toolmaking Oldowan Acheulean Mousterian Aurignacian Clovis culture Cupstone Fire hardening Gravettian culture Hafting Hand axe Grooves Langdale axe industry Levallois technique Lithic core Lithic reduction analysis debitage flake Lithic technology Magdalenian culture Metallurgy Microblade technology Mining Prepared-core technique Solutrean industry Striking platform Tool stone Uniface Yubetsu technique Other tools Adze Awl bone Axe Bannerstone Blade prismatic Bone tool Bow drill Burin Canoe Oar Pesse canoe Chopper tool Cleaver Denticulate tool Fire plough Fire-saw Hammerstone Knife Microlith Quern-stone Racloir Rope Scraper side Stone tool Tally stick Weapons Wheel illustration Architecture Ceremonial Kiva Pyramid Standing stones megalith row Stonehenge Dwellings Neolithic architecture long house British megalith architecture Nordic megalith architecture Burdei Cave Cliff dwelling Dugout Hut Quiggly hole Jacal Longhouse Mudbrick Mehrgarh Pit-house Pueblitos Pueblo Rock shelter Blombos Cave Abri de la Madeleine Sibudu Cave Roundhouse Stilt house Alp pile dwellings Stone roof Wattle and daub Water management Check dam Cistern Flush toilet Reservoir Well Other architecture Archaeological features Broch Burnt mound fulacht fiadh Causewayed enclosure Tor enclosure Circular enclosure Goseck Cursus Henge Thornborough Megalithic architectural elements Midden Oldest extant buildings Timber circle Timber trackway Sweet Track Arts and culture Material goods Baskets Beadwork Beds Chalcolithic Clothing/textiles timeline Cosmetics Glue Hides shoes Ötzi Jewelry amber use Mirrors Pottery Cardium Cord-marked Grooved ware Jōmon Linear Unstan ware Sewing needle Weaving Wine winery wine press Prehistoric art Art of the Upper Paleolithic Art of the Middle Paleolithic Blombos Cave List of Stone Age art Bird stone Cairn Carved stone balls Cave paintings Cup and ring mark Geoglyph Hill figure Golden hats Guardian stones Gwion Gwion rock paintings painting pigment Megalithic art Petroform Petroglyph Petrosomatoglyph Pictogram Rock art Rock cupule Stone carving Sculpture Statue menhir Stone circle list British Isles and Brittany Venus figurine Prehistoric music Evolutionary musicology music archaeology Alligator drum Paleolithic flute Divje Babe flute Gudi Prehistoric religion Evolutionary origin of religion Paleolithic religion Spiritual drug use Burial Burial mounds Bowl barrow Round barrow Mound Builders culture U.S. sites Chamber tomb Cotswold-Severn Cist Dartmoor kistvaens Clava cairn Court cairn Cremation Dolmen Great dolmen Funeral pyre Gallery grave transepted wedge-shaped Grave goods Jar burial Long barrow unchambered Grønsalen Megalithic tomb Mummy Passage grave Rectangular dolmen Ring cairn Simple dolmen Stone box grave Tor cairn Unchambered long cairn Other cultural Archaeoastronomy sites lunar calendar Behavioral modernity Origin of language Prehistoric counting Prehistoric medicine trepanning Prehistoric warfare Symbols symbolism v t e Archaeological museums in Turkey Aegean region Afyonkarahisar Archaeological Museum Aydın Archaeological Museum Bodrum Castle Bolvadin Museum Bostanlı Open-air Archaeological Museum Ephesus Archaeological Museum Hierapolis Izmir Archeology Museum Archaeological Museum of Manisa Uşak Museum of Archaeology Black Sea region Amasya Museum Bolu Museum Çorum Archaeological Museum Kastamonu Archaeological Museum Konuralp Museum Samsun Museum of Archaeology and Ethnography Sinop Archaeological Museum Tokat Museum Trabzon Museum Central Anatolia region Çatalhöyük Eskişehir Archaeological Museum Konya Archaeological Museum Gordion Museum Museum of Anatolian Civilizations Eastern Anatolia region Kars Museum Van Museum Marmara region Bursa Archaeological Museum Çanakkale Archaeological Museum Great Palace Mosaic Museum Istanbul Archaeology Museums Kırklareli Museum Sadberk Hanım Museum Tekirdağ Museum of Archaeology and Ethnography Mediterranean region Adana Archaeology Museum Alanya Archaeological Museum Antalya Museum Arslan Eyce Private Amphora Museum Burdur Archaeological Museum Hatay Archaeology Museum Karatepe-Aslantaş Open-Air Museum Mersin Museum Misis Mosaic Museum Silifke Museum Tarsus Museum Southeastern Anatolia region Adıyaman Archaeological Museum Diyarbakır Archaeological Museum Gaziantep Museum of Archaeology Şanlıurfa Museum Zeugma Mosaic Museum Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Geographic Pleiades Other Kulturenvanteri monument Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐vrqct
Cached time: 20250817045246
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.036 seconds
Real time usage: 1.354 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4685/1000000
Revision size: 36536/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 261170/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8124/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 177808/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.536/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19293727/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  903.835      1 -total
 26.07%  235.651      1 Template:Reflist
 22.12%  199.899      3 Template:Infobox
 16.29%  147.228      1 Template:Infobox_ancient_site
 11.49%  103.816      1 Template:IPA
 10.93%   98.810      6 Template:Cite_journal
 10.18%   91.995      3 Template:Navbox
  8.00%   72.305      1 Template:Former_settlements_in_Turkey
  7.18%   64.925     10 Template:Cite_book
  7.07%   63.918      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5765:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045246 and revision id 1305912210. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Çatalhöyük&oldid=1305912210 " Categories : World Heritage Sites in Turkey Çatalhöyük Populated places established in the 8th millennium BC Populated places disestablished in the 7th millennium BC 1958 archaeological discoveries Archaeological discoveries in Turkey Archaeological museums in Turkey Archaeological sites in the Central Anatolia region Archaeological sites of prehistoric Anatolia Buildings and structures in Konya Province Chalcolithic sites of Asia Former populated places in Turkey Megasites Museums in Konya Province Neolithic settlements Neolithic sites of Asia Tells (archaeology) Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 Coordinates on Wikidata Pages with Turkish IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 Webarchive template wayback links Commons link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 20:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Çatalhöyük 63 languages Add topic

