Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Basic explanation Toggle Basic explanation subsection 1.1 Value relation 1.2 Evolution of forms 1.3 Metamorphosis 1.4 Primitive exchange 1.5 Social relations 2 Genesis of the forms of value Toggle Genesis of the forms of value subsection 2.1 Simple form of value 2.2 Expanded form of value 2.3 General form of value 2.4 Money-form of value 2.5 Credit money 2.6 Implications 2.7 Generalized commodity production 2.8 Reification 2.9 Marketisation 3 Value-form and price-form Toggle Value-form and price-form subsection 3.1 Price-form 3.1.1 Latin root 3.1.2 Value vs. price 3.1.3 Real prices and ideal prices 4 Marx's sources Toggle Marx's sources subsection 4.1 Aristotle and Samuel Bailey 4.2 Preparatory writings 5 Engels, Dühring, and the Soviet Union 6 Issues of interpretation Toggle Issues of interpretation subsection 6.1 Common difficulties 6.2 Problematic 6.3 Althusserian interpretation 6.4 Fetishism 7 Criticism 8 Ecology 9 Women's studies 10 Erosion of the value-form and energy Toggle Erosion of the value-form and energy subsection 10.1 Market corrosion 10.2 Loss of value 10.3 Price volatility 10.4 Unreliable valuations 10.5 The commons 10.6 Misvaluation of work 10.7 Market failure 10.8 Organizational instability 10.9 The informal circuit 10.10 Alternatives 10.11 Prospects 10.12 Thermodynamics 11 See also 12 References Toggle the table of contents Value-form 8 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Հայերեն پښتو Svenska Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Central concept in Marxian critique of political economy Part of a series on the Marxian critique of political economy Concepts Capitalist mode of production Capital Commodity Concrete and abstract labour Critique of political economy Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Relations of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Wage labour Wage slavery Wertkritik Wertabspaltungskritik Value-form Topics Crisis theory Imperialism Historical materialism Technological unemployment Falling profit-rate tendency Works Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 Wage Labour and Capital A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Grundrisse Das Kapital Theories of Surplus Value Value, Price and Profit People Karl Marx Friedrich Engels Roman Rosdolsky Isaak Illich Rubin Étienne Balibar Robert Kurz Mark Fisher Claus Peter Ortlieb Moishe Postone NML Hans-Georg Backhaus Helmut Reichelt Michael Heinrich Journals Monthly Review New School Economic Review Crisis and Critique Historical Materialism Socialist register Capital & Class Related topics Critique of political economy Economics Marxist sociology Socialism portal v t e Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e The value-form or form of value ( "Wertform" in German) [ 1 ] is an important concept in Karl Marx 's critique of political economy, discussed in the first chapter of Capital, Volume 1 .

[ 2 ] It refers to the social form of tradeable things as units of value, which contrast with their tangible features, as objects which can satisfy human needs and wants or serve a useful purpose.

[ 3 ] The physical appearance or the price tag of a traded object may be directly observable, but the meaning of its social form (as an object of value) is not.

[ 4 ] Marx intended to correct errors made by the classical economists in their definitions of exchange, value, money and capital, by showing more precisely how these economic categories evolved out of the development of trading relations themselves.

Playfully narrating the "metaphysical subtleties and theological niceties" of ordinary things when they become instruments of trade, [ 5 ] Marx provides a brief social morphology of value as such — what its substance really is, the forms which this substance takes, and how its magnitude is determined or expressed. He analyzes the evolution of the form of value in the first instance by considering the meaning of the value-relationship that exists between two quantities of traded objects.

[ 6 ] He then shows how, as the exchange process develops, it gives rise to the money-form of value – which facilitates trade, by providing standard units of exchange value. Lastly, he shows how the trade of commodities for money gives rise to investment capital. Tradeable wares, money and capital are historical preconditions for the emergence of the factory system (discussed in subsequent chapters of Capital, Volume 1 ). With the aid of wage labour , money can be converted into production capital, which creates new value that pays wages and generates profits, when the output of production is sold in markets.

[ 7 ] The value-form concept has been the subject of numerous theoretical controversies among academics working in the Marxian tradition, [ 8 ] giving rise to many different interpretations (see Criticism of value-form theory ). Especially from the late 1960s [ 9 ] and since the rediscovery and translation of Isaac Rubin 's Essays on Marx's theory of value , [ 10 ] the theory of the value-form has been appraised by many Western Marxist scholars [ 11 ] as well as by Frankfurt School theorists [ 12 ] and Post-Marxist theorists .

[ 13 ] There has also been considerable discussion about the value-form concept by Japanese Marxian scholars.

[ 14 ] The academic debates about Marx’s value-form idea often seem obscure, complicated or hyper-abstract. Nevertheless, they continue to have a theoretical importance for the foundations of economic theory and its critique. What position is taken on the issues involved, influences how the relationships of value, prices, money, labour and capital are understood. It will also influence how the historical evolution of trading systems is perceived, and how the reifying effects associated with commerce are interpreted.

[ 15 ] Basic explanation [ edit ] When the concept of the form of value is introduced in the first chapter of Capital, Volume I , [ 16 ] Marx clarifies that economic value becomes manifest in an objectified way (as a separate "thing") only through the form of value established by the exchange of products.

People know very well that any product represents a value , i.e. that there is a normal economic cost of supply (an average current replacement cost) for the product – some people have to work to produce and supply it, so that others can use it. But according to Marx, various further questions arise about that simple insight, such as: how much value is that, exactly? How does that value exist, or what really determines that value? What is the source of that value? How can value be expressed or measured? What explains differences in value? Answering these sorts of questions convincingly turns out to be more challenging than one might think at first sight.

Value relation [ edit ] What something is economically "worth" can be expressed only relatively , by relating, weighing, comparing and equating it [ 17 ] to amounts of other tradeable objects (or to the labour effort, resources or sum of money those objects represent).

[ 18 ] The value of products is expressed by their "exchange-value": [ 19 ] what they can trade for, but that exchange-value can be expressed in many different ways (it can be equated to a quantity of a currency or a financial claim, a quantity of goods, a quantity of labour, a quantity of services etc.). Since exchange-value is most often expressed by a "money-price", it then seems that "exchange value", "value", "price" and "money" are really all the same thing. But Marx argues they are not the same things at all.

[ 20 ] For Marx, this point is absolutely vital for a scientifically adequate understanding of economic value and markets. Precisely because the political economists kept conflating and confusing the most basic economic categories, Marx argued, they were unable to provide a fully consistent, integral theory of the economy. One might be able to quantify and measure economic phenomena, but that does not necessarily mean that they are measured in a way that they are fully understood.

[ 21 ] In a preface to the first edition of Capital, Volume I , Marx stated: "I have popularised the passages concerning the substance of value and the magnitude of value as much as possible. The value-form, whose fully developed shape is the money-form, is very simple and slight in content. Nevertheless, the human mind has sought in vain for more than 2,000 years to get to the bottom of it..." [ 22 ] Marx gives various reasons for this ancient puzzle. The main obstacle seems to be that trading relations refer to social relations which are not directly observable. What these social relations are, has to be conceptualized with abstract ideas. The trading ratios between commodities and money are certainly observable, via prices and transaction data. Yet how exactly the things being traded get the value they have, is not observable. It seems like "the market" does that, but what the market is, and how that happens, remains rather vague. This story does not get much further than the idea, that things have value, because people want to have them, and are prepared to pay money for them.

Marx's comment clarifies, that according to Marx the value-form of commodities is not simply a feature of industrial capitalism. It is associated with the whole history of commodity trade ("more than 2,000 years").

[ 23 ] Marx claimed that the origin of the money-form of value had never before been explained by bourgeois economics, and that "the mystery of money will immediately disappear" once the evolution of value-relations has been traced out from its simplest beginnings.

[ 24 ] This was probably a vain hope; even today economists and economic historians cannot agree about what is the correct theory of money.

Wolfgang Streeck states that "money is easily the most unpredictable and least governable human institution we have ever known".

[ 25 ] Put another way, the possibilities for arranging any type of trade or deal are extremely diverse; the only operative requirement is that the trading partners agree to the terms of the arrangement, however simple or complicated it may be. It follows that, what specific role money has in the given arrangement, can vary greatly.

[ 26 ] In addition, new kinds of credit instruments and types of money-tokens keep emerging that were previously unheard of (such as securitization techniques, asset tokenization and cryptocurrencies ).

Only when market production and its corresponding legal system are highly developed, does it becomes possible to understand what "economic value" actually means in a comprehensive and theoretically consistent way, separate from other sorts of value (like aesthetic value or moral value ). The reason is that, to a large extent, the different kinds of value have become practically separated in reality and become increasingly universal in their applications. When Marx considers "value" as such or in itself, as a general social form in the economic history of humans, i.e. "the form of value as such", he is abstracting from all the particular expressions it might have.

Marx admitted that the form of value was a somewhat difficult notion, but he assumed "a reader who is willing to learn something new and therefore to think for himself." [ 27 ] In a preface to the second edition of Capital, Volume I , Marx claimed that he had "completely revised" his treatment, because his friend Dr.

Louis Kugelmann had convinced him that a "more didactic exposition of the form of value" was needed.

[ 28 ] Usually Marx-scholars refer to both versions anyhow, because each of them provides some extra information which does not occur in the other version.

[ 29 ] Hans-Georg Backhaus however distinguishes between no less than four different versions of Marx's story about the value-form: (i) the first version in Marx's A contribution to the critique of political economy (1859), (ii) the second version in the first chapter of the first edition of Capital, Volume 1 (1867a), [ 30 ] (iii) the third version in a special appendix added to the first edition of Capital, Volume 1 (1867b), and (iv) the fourth revised version in the first chapter of the second edition of Capital, Volume 1 (1873), where the appendix of the first edition was scrapped.

[ 31 ] Evolution of forms [ edit ] Marx calls commodities, as a basic form of value, "the economic cell-form of bourgeois society", meaning that commodities are the simplest economic units out of which the "body" of West European capitalist civilization was developed and built up, across many centuries.

[ 32 ] Wares trade for money, money trades for wares, more and more money is made from this trade, and the markets reach more and more areas – transforming society into the world of business, where products and people originating from everywhere are assembled to create buildings, tools, facilities, clothing, foodstuffs, weapons etc. (see also simple commodity production ).

[ 33 ] The capitalist mode of production is viewed as "generalized" (or universalized) commodity production, [ 34 ] i.e. the production of commodities by means of commodities, in a circular self-reproducing flow of actions and transactions (money is exchanged for commodities (including the commodity labour power ), used to produce new commodities exchanged for more money, financing more production and consumption).

[ 35 ] Already in his Grundrisse manuscript of 1858, Marx worked out his insight that "The first category in which bourgeois wealth presents itself is that of the commodity " [ 36 ] and that became the opening statement of his 1859 Critique and the first volume of Capital (1867). In their pathbreaking treatises on political economy , both Adam Smith and David Ricardo had started out from an analysis of the value of traded commodities produced by human labour.

[ 37 ] The "forms of value" of commodities are only the first of a series of social forms which Marx analyzes in Das Kapital , such as the forms of money, the forms of capital, the forms of wages, and the forms of profit.

[ 38 ] All of these are different forms of value, normally expressed by prices, yet they all presuppose the exchange of tradeable wares. In Marx's dialectical story, [ 39 ] each of these forms is shown to grow out of (or "transform" into) [ 40 ] other forms, and so all the forms are connected with each other, step by step, logically and historically.

[ 41 ] Each form is expressed with categories, the content of which evolves or mutates to some degree in response to new distinctions or circumstances.

[ 42 ] At the end of the story, all the forms appear seamlessly integrated with each other in a self-reproducing, constantly expanding capitalist system, of which the distant historical origin has become hidden and obscure; the fully developed system appears other than it really is, and does not transparently disclose its real nature.

If the workings of the capitalist system were perfectly obvious and transparent, Marx argues, then there would be no need for any special economic "science"; one would just be stating platitudes.

[ 43 ] They prompt further inquiry, because they turn out to be not as obvious as they seem, and indeed become rather puzzling or even mindboggling, on further reflection. Economists are constantly trying to "second-guess" what the market will do, and what the overall effects might be of transaction patterns, but in truth they often don't succeed any better than astrologers.

[ 44 ] A critical re-examination is then called for, of precisely those ordinary phenomena which were previously taken for granted.

After his first cryptic attempt at telling the story (in 168 pages) flopped when he published it in Germany, [ 45 ] Marx resolved to tell it another time, in a much more interesting, intriguing and elaborate way, so that people would really grasp the significance of it—beginning from exactly the same starting point. That became Das Kapital (1867–1894), which is still being read and discussed today.

[ 46 ] Marx initially defines a product of human labour that has become a commodity (in German: Kaufware , i.e., merchandise, ware for sale) as being simultaneously: A useful object that can satisfy a want or need (a use value ); this is the object valued from the point of view of consuming or using it, referring to its observable material form, i.e., the tangible, observable characteristics it has that make it useful, and therefore valued by people, even if the use is only symbolic.

An object of economic value generally; this is the value of the object considered from the point of view of its supply cost, commercial value, or "what you can get for it". The reference here is to the social form of the product, which is not directly observable.

The "form of value" (also a reference to phenomenology in the classical philosophical sense used by Hegel ) [ 47 ] then refers to the specific ways of relating through which "what a commodity is worth" happens to be socially expressed in trading processes, when different products and assets are compared with each other.

Practically speaking, Marx argues that the product values cannot be directly observed and can become observably manifest only as exchange-values , i.e., as relative expressions, by comparing their worth to other goods they can be traded for (usually via money prices). This causes people to think value and exchange-value are the same thing, but Marx argues they are not; the content, magnitude and form of value must be distinguished, and according to the law of value , the exchange value of products being traded is determined and regulated by their value. His argument is, that the market prices of a commodity will oscillate around its value, and that its value is the outcome of the average, normal labour requirements to produce it.

Metamorphosis [ edit ] Marx argues that the forms of value are not "static" or "fixed once and for all", but rather, that they develop logically and historically [ 48 ] in trading processes from very simple, primitive expressions to very complicated or sophisticated expressions. Subsequently, he also examines the various forms taken by capital, the forms of wages, the forms of profit and so forth. In each case, the form denotes how a specific social or economic relationship among people is expressed or symbolized.

[ 49 ] In the process of circulation, production, distribution, and consumption, value metamorphoses from one form to another.

[ 50 ] Different forms of value – currencies, commodities and capitals – all trade for each other, where buyers and sellers convert money into goods, and goods into money, or convert one type of capital asset into another type of capital asset, in markets where prices fluctuate all the time.

According to Marx, the individual acts of exchange in themselves cannot alter the underlying value of goods and assets, at least not in the ordinary situation.

[ 51 ] One reason is that value is ordinarily conserved with living labour through successive acts of exchange (a "conservation principle") even although the forms that value takes can change. If goods and assets did not at least hold their value upon exchange, then warehousing, freighting and commercial trade itself would very likely break down. That insight existed already in ancient times.

[ 52 ] Another reason is that the value of goods and assets really refers not to the labour they "embody", but to their average current replacement cost in labour time (a social reproduction cost).

[ 53 ] In speculative activity , the principle of value conservation is, however, not always true.

[ 54 ] Primitive exchange [ edit ] Initially, in primitive exchange, [ 55 ] the form that economic value takes does not involve any prices , since what something is "worth" is very simply expressed in (a quantity of) some other good (an occasional barter relationship).

[ 56 ] Some scholars, such as Hans-Georg Backhaus , argue that for this reason value simply did not exist in societies where money was not used, or where it played only a marginal role.

[ 57 ] The old Friedrich Engels claimed that "in primitive communism value was unknown", because there was no regular commodity trade.

[ 58 ] Marx, though, acknowledged that product-values "of a sort" did exist in primitive economies, although value did not exist as a separate "thing" in such communities. Establishing how much products were worth, he says, followed "customary practices", rather than purely a comparison with the value of other products, or reckoning with money; thus, the valuation of products was expressed in a different way (see also archaeology of trade ). An "economy of labour-time" existed, although no supremely exact measures were available for work effort, time, storage and energy.

[ 59 ] All the time, that is, people knew quite well that their products had value, because it cost work-effort to replace them, and, consequently, they also valued their products. They could hardly afford to trade products on very unfavourable terms, because that would take them beyond the limits of their own available work-time; that mattered, because average labour productivity was low – it took a lot of time to produce food, clothing, shelter, tools and weapons. Whatever the trading custom was, it had to be at least compatible with survival requirements. If not, the custom would die out — because people died out.

In the most primitive (simplest) situation, people acquire objects for which they have a use by borrowing, trading or bartering, in exchange for other goods that they don't particularly have a need for themselves. They value things directly because of their useful qualities and because it takes work-time to get them (their own work and/or the work of others). In the process, customary norms develop for what counts as a normal, balanced exchange. There isn't just one way to trade a good, goods could be traded on all kinds of terms, but to pick the appropriate method, all kinds of factors might have to be taken in consideration.

[ 60 ] If a good was traded in the wrong way, for example because cultural conventions were not respected, it might have consequences that the traders were not really looking for.

At the most abstract, developed level though, the value form is only a purely monetary relationship between objects, or an abstract earnings potential or credit provision, based on some assumptions, which may not even refer to any tangible object of trade anymore at all. There is, for example, only a number on a computer screen. At that point, it appears that the value of an asset is simply determined by the amount of capital (the outlay + net profit) that could be obtained if the asset were traded under certain conditions, and within a given time interval.

Social relations [ edit ] By analyzing the forms of value, Marx shows that when people bring their products into relation with each other in market trade, they are also socially related in specific ways (whether they like it or not, and whether they are aware of it or not), and that this fact very strongly influences the very way in which they think about how they are related.

[ 61 ] It influences how they will view the whole human interactive process of giving and receiving, taking and procuring, sharing and relinquishing, accepting and rejecting—and how to balance all that (see also Norm of reciprocity ).

[ 62 ] Some social relations we choose and make ourselves, but we are also socially related simply by being part of a community, a market-system and a nation (or part of a family, a tribe, an organization, a business etc.), whether we like that or not. In trading roles, people have to deal with both of these kinds of social relations – simultaneously competing to get the best deal, and co-operating to obtain what they want.

[ 63 ] The trading process has both a voluntary aspect (freedoms, things to choose) and an involuntary aspect (constraints, things that have to be worked with to make a deal). To make the trade, buyers and sellers must respect each other's right to their own property, and their right to do with their own property what they want, within the framework of laws, customs and norms (Marx discusses the formal equality of market actors in exchange more in chapter 2 of Capital, Volume I [ 64 ] and in the Grundrisse ).

[ 65 ] If the market actors simply grabbed stuff from others, that would not be trade, but robbery or theft (which would not qualify as civilized conduct, and carries a reputational risk as well as being subject to legal sanctions).

The forms of value of products do not merely refer to a "trading valuation of objects"; they refer also to a certain way of relating or interacting, and a mentality , [ 66 ] among human subjects who internalize the forms of value, so that the manifestations of economic value become regarded as completely normal, natural and self-evident in human interactions (a "market culture," [ 67 ] which is also reflected in language use).

[ 68 ] Marx himself refers surrealistically to "the language of commodities", [ 69 ] the talk and signals they send and receive in the topsy-turvy world (in German: verkehrte Welt , literally "the world turned upside down" or "inverted world") [ 70 ] of trading processes, and he adds satirically in a footnote that "in a certain sense, people are in the same situation as commodities…".

[ 71 ] The suggestion is that, by analogy, the recognition of a person's identity, status and worth occurs only through contact with other people, and that one person becomes the species-model for another, just as commodities need to relate to each other and to money to establish what the magnitude of their value is.

Marx's description of what goes on in commodity exchanges highlights not only that value relationships appear to exist between commodities quite independently of the valuers, but also that people accept that these relationships exist, even although they do not understand exactly what they are, or why they exist at all.

[ 72 ] We know that a particular market exists, if there are buyers and sellers. With experience, we can identify them, and estimate a normal turnover. However, the totality of interactions and transactions in all markets combined simultaneously, can easily appear as an unfathomable abstraction.

[ 73 ] Genesis of the forms of value [ edit ] Marx distinguishes between four successive steps in the process of trading products, i.e., in the circulation of commodities, through which fairly stable and objective value proportionalities ( Wertverhältnisse in German) are formed that express "what products are worth". These steps are: 1. The simple form of value , an expression that contains the duality of relative value and equivalent value.

2. The expanded or total form of value , a quantitative "chaining together" of the simple forms of expressing value.

3. The general form of value , i.e., the expression of the worth of all products reckoned in a general equivalent which functions as a standard of value.

4. The money-form of value, which is a general equivalent used in trading (a medium of exchange) that is universally exchangeable .

These forms are different ways of symbolizing and representing what goods are worth, to facilitate trade and cost/benefit calculations. The simple form of value does not (or not necessarily) involve a money-referent at all, and the expanded and general forms are intermediary expressions between a non-monetary and a monetary expression of economic value. The four steps are an abstract summary of what essentially happens to the trading relationship when the trade in products grows and develops beyond incidental barter. There is some similarity here with the concept of the " double coincidence of wants " later formulated by Stanley Jevons in Money and the Mechanism of Exchange (1875), [ 74 ] but the intention of Marx's idea is different.

[ 75 ] Simple form of value [ edit ] The value relationship in Marx's economic sense (which in the first instance concerns reproducible commodities) begins to emerge, when we are able to state that one bundle of use-values is "worth the same" as another bundle of (different) use-values. That happens when the bundles of products are regularly traded for each other, and thus are regarded as instruments of trade. It is a quantitative relationship between quantities, implicitly expressed in the same unit of measurement. The simplest expression of the form of value can be stated as the following equation: X quantity of commodity A is worth Y quantity of commodity B where the value of X{A} is expressed relatively , as being equal to a certain quantity of B, meaning that X{A} is the relative form of value and Y{B} the equivalent form of value, so that B is effectively the value-form of (expresses the value of) A. To find and express the value of A, A is related to its equivalent B. If we ask "how much is X quantity of commodity A worth?" the answer is "Y quantity of commodity B".

This simple equation, expressing a simple value proportion between products, however permits several possibilities of differences in valuation emerging within the circulation of products: the absolute value of X{A} changes, but the absolute value of Y{B} stays constant; in this case, the change in the relative value of X{A} depends only on a change in the absolute value of A (The absolute value, Marx argues, is the total labour cost on average implicated in making a commodity).

the absolute value of X{A} stays constant, but the absolute value of Y{B} changes; in this case, the relative value of X{A} fluctuates in inverse relation to changes in the absolute value of B, meaning that if Y{B} goes down then X{A} goes up, while if Y{B} goes up then X{A} goes down.

the values of X{A} and Y{B} both change in the same direction and in the same proportion. In this case, the equation still holds, but the change in absolute value is noticeable only if X{A} and Y{B} are compared with a commodity C, where C's value stays constant. If all commodities increase or decrease in value by the same amount, then their relative values all remain exactly the same.

the values of X{A} and Y{B} change in the same direction, but not by the same amount, or vary in opposite directions.

These possible changes in valuation enable us to understand already that what any particular product will trade for is delimited by what other products will trade for, quite independently of how much the buyer would like to pay, or how much the seller would like to get in return.

Value should not be confused with price here, however, because products can be traded at prices above or below what they are worth (implying value-price deviations; this complicates the picture and is elaborated only in the third volume of Das Kapital ). There are value-structures and price-structures. For simplicity's sake, Marx assumes initially that the money-price of a commodity will be equal to its value (ordinarily, price-value deviations would not be very great); but in Capital, Volume III it becomes clear that the sale of goods above or below their value has a crucial effect on aggregate profits. For a simple example, depending on market conditions, the profit from selling a lot of goods very fast below their value can be higher than the profit from selling a few goods above their value in the same time interval. Across longer intervals of time, the price level is however likely to approximate a normal, average value,  under the pressure of business competition. At this average price level, sellers can profitably continue to supply goods, and buyers can afford to buy them.

The main implications of the simple relative form of value are that: The value of an individual commodity can change relative to other commodities, although the real cost in labour of that particular commodity stays constant, and vice versa, the real labour cost of that particular commodity can vary, although its relative value remains the same; this means that goods can be devalued or revalued depending on what happens elsewhere in the trading system and on changes in the conditions of producing them elsewhere. It would therefore be wrong to claim, as some Marxists (Mandel, Ollman, Carchedi) [ 76 ] argue, that for Marx "economic value is labour"; rather, the economic value of products really refers to the current social valuation of average labour effort implicated in products.

That the absolute and relative values of commodities can change constantly, in proportions which do not exactly compensate each other, or cancel each other out, via haphazard adjustments to new production and demand conditions.

[ 77 ] Marx also argues that, at the same time, such an economic equation accomplishes two other things: the value of specific labour activities is implicitly related in proportion to the value of labour in general, and private labour activities, carried out independently of each other, are socially recognized as being a fraction of society's total labour.

Effectively, a social nexus (a societal connection or bond) [ 78 ] is established and affirmed via the value-comparisons in the marketplace, which makes relative labour costs (the expenditures of human work energy) the real substance of product-value. Obviously, some assets are not produced by human labour at all, but how they are valued commercially will nevertheless refer, explicitly or implicitly, directly or indirectly, to the comparative cost structure of related assets that are labour-products.

A tree in the middle of the Amazon Rain Forest has no commercial value where it stands. We can estimate its value only by estimating what it would cost to cut it down, what it would sell for in markets, or what income we could currently get from it — or how much we could charge people to look at it. Imputing an "acceptable price" to the tree, assumes that there already exists a market in timber, or in forests, that tells us what the tree would normally be worth.

[ 79 ] Expanded form of value [ edit ] In the expanded form of value, the equation process between quantities of different commodities is simply continued serially, so that their values relative to each other are established, and they can all be expressed in some or other commodity-equivalent. The expanded value-form expression really represents only an extension of the simple value form, where products alternate as relative and equivalent forms in order to be equated to each other.

Marx argues that, as such, the expanded form of value is practically inadequate, because to express what any commodity is worth might now require the calculation of a whole "chain" of comparisons, i.e.

X amount of commodity A is worth Y commodity B, is worth Z commodity C ... etc.

What this means is, that if A is normally traded for B, and B is normally traded for C, then to find out how much A is worth in terms of C, we first have to convert the amounts into B (and maybe many more intermediate steps). This is obviously inefficient if many goods are traded at the same time.

General form of value [ edit ] The practical solution in trade is therefore the emergence of a general form of value, in which the values of all kinds of bundles of commodities can be expressed in amounts of one standard commodity (or just a few standards) which function as a general equivalent. The general equivalent has itself no relative form of value in common with other commodities; instead its value is expressed only in a myriad of other commodities.

[ e i t h e r A a m o u n t o f c o m m o d i t y B o r , C a m o u n t o f c o m m o d i t y D o r , E a m o u n t o f c o m m o d i t y F o r , G a m o u n t o f c o m m o d i t y H o r , J a m o u n t o f c o m m o d i t y K ] {\displaystyle {\begin{bmatrix}either&A&amount&of&commodity&B\\or,&C&amount&of&commodity&D\\or,&E&amount&of&commodity&F\\or,&G&amount&of&commodity&H\\or,&J&amount&of&commodity&K\\\end{bmatrix}}} = [ X a m o u n t o f c o m m o d i t y Y ] {\displaystyle {\begin{bmatrix}X&amount&of&commodity&Y\end{bmatrix}}} In ancient civilizations where considerable market trade occurred, there were usually a few types of goods that could function as a general standard of value. This standard served for value comparisons; it did not necessarily mean that goods were actually traded for the standard commodity.

[ 80 ] This rather cumbersome approach is solved with the introduction of money —the owner of a product can sell it for money, and buy another product he wants with money, without worrying anymore about whether the thing offered in exchange for his own product is indeed the product that he wants himself. Now, the only limit to trade is the development and growth rate of the market.

Money-form of value [ edit ] Just because quantities of goods can be expressed in amounts of a general equivalent, which acts as a referent, this does not mean that they can necessarily all be traded for that equivalent.

[ 81 ] The general equivalent may only be a sort of yardstick used to compare what goods are worth. Hence, the general equivalent form in practice gives way to the money -commodity, which is a universal equivalent, meaning that (provided people are willing to trade) it possesses the characteristic of direct and universal exchangeability in precisely measured quantities.

[ e i t h e r A a m o u n t o f c o m m o d i t y B o r , C a m o u n t o f c o m m o d i t y D o r , E a m o u n t o f c o m m o d i t y F o r , G a m o u n t o f c o m m o d i t y H o r , J a m o u n t o f c o m m o d i t y K ] {\displaystyle {\begin{bmatrix}either&A&amount&of&commodity&B\\or,&C&amount&of&commodity&D\\or,&E&amount&of&commodity&F\\or,&G&amount&of&commodity&H\\or,&J&amount&of&commodity&K\\\end{bmatrix}}} = [ X a m o u n t o f m o n e y ] {\displaystyle {\begin{bmatrix}X&amount&of&money\end{bmatrix}}} But for most of the history of human civilization, currencies were not universally used as means of exchange, because (1) the prevailing systems of property rights and cultural custom did not allow many goods to be sold for money, (2) many products were distributed and traded without using money through forms of barter or reciprocal obligations, and (3) several different currencies were often used side by side. Marx himself believed that nomadic peoples were the first to develop the money-form of value (in the sense of a universal equivalent in trade) because all their possessions were mobile, and because they were regularly in contact with different communities, which encouraged the exchange of products.

[ 82 ] When money is generally used in trade, money becomes the general expression of the form of value of goods being traded; usually this is associated with the emergence of a state authority issuing legal currency ( coinage ). At that point the form of value appears to have acquired a fully independent, separate existence from any particular traded object (behind this autonomy, however, is the power of state authorities or private agencies to regulate trade, enforce financial claims, and control currency issues). Money functions simultaneously as (1) the tangible form of appearance of value, (3) the means for the social recognition of value, and (3) the universal equivalent mediating commodity trade.

Marx concludes about the money-form of value that: "It is not money that renders the commodities commensurable. Quite the contrary. Because all commodities, as values, are objectified human labour, and therefore in themselves commensurable, their values can be communally measured in one and the same specific commodity, and this commodity can be converted into the common measure of their values, that is into money. Money as a measure of value is the necessary form of appearance of the measure of value which is immanent in commodities, namely labour-time." [ 83 ] He adds that: "The difficulty lies not in comprehending that money is a commodity, but in discovering how, why and by what means a commodity becomes money. (...) What appears to happen is not that a particular commodity becomes money because all other commodities express their values in it, but, on the contrary, that all other commodities universally express their values in a particular commodity because it is money. The movement through which the process has been mediated vanishes in its own result, leaving no trace behind." [ 84 ] As soon as a stable currency exists that is generally used, it really looks like (1) that it is money which renders commodities commensurable in exchange, and (2) that commodities have value because they have a money-price. It looks like everything that can be priced has a value. The more the money-form of value develops and expands, the more the historical origin of the money-form of value disappears from view. According to Marx, money originated as a standard commodity that functions as a currency. But when fiat money replaces a commodity-currency, the exchange process appears completely regulated by money prices which rise and fall according to the forces of supply and demand. The origin of value is henceforth explained by the origin of money, as a better alternative to bartering. The classical idea that price-levels and cost-prices for products are regulated by labour-values no longer seems credible, because these labour-values are not directly visible, while money-prices are directly visible as transaction data. The very idea, that behind visible commodity-prices there exist labour-expenditures that regulate price-levels looks implausible, because labour-values cannot be directly observed. For Marx, erroneous perceptions about trade do not emerge primarily from "false theories about trade", but out of the real development of trading practices and trading relations themselves.

Credit money [ edit ] Once the money-commodity (e.g., gold , silver , bronze ) is securely established as a stable medium of exchange and standard of value, symbolic money-tokens (e.g., bank notes and debt claims issued by the state, trading houses or corporations) can in principle substitute for the "real thing" on a regular basis.

At first, these "paper claims" (legal tender) are by law convertible on demand into quantities of gold, silver etc., and they circulate alongside precious metals. But gradually currencies come into use that are not so convertible, i.e., "fiduciary money" or fiat money which relies on social trust that people will honor their transactional obligations. These kinds of fiduciary money rely not on the value of money-tokens themselves (as in commodity money ), but on the ability to enforce financial claims and contracts, principally by means of the power and laws of the state, but also by other institutional methods. Eventually, as Marx already anticipated in 1844, precious metals play very little role anymore in the monetary system.

[ 85 ] Alongside fiat money, credit money also develops more and more. Credit money, although expressed in currency units, usually does not consist of money tokens. It consists rather of financial claims, including of all kinds of debt certificates (promissory notes) which entitle the holder to future income under contractually specified conditions. These claims can themselves be traded for profit. Credit arrangements existed already in the ancient world, [ 86 ] but there was no very large-scale trade in debt obligations. In the modern world, the majority of money no longer consists of money tokens, but of credit money.

[ 87 ] Marx was quite aware of the role of credit money, but he did not analyze it in depth in Capital . His concern was only with how the credit system directly impacted on the capitalist production process.

[ 88 ] The ultimate universal equivalent according to Marx is "world money", i.e., financial instruments that are accepted and usable for trading purposes everywhere, such as bullion .

[ 89 ] In the world market, the value of commodities is expressed by a universal standard, so that their "independent value-form" appears to traders as "universal money".

[ 90 ] Nowadays the US dollar , [ 91 ] the European Euro , the Japanese Yen and the Chinese Renminbi are widely used as "world currencies" providing a near-universal standard and measure of value. They are used as a means of exchange worldwide, and consequently most countries have significant reserves or claims to these currencies.

Implications [ edit ] Marx's four steps in the development of the form of value are mainly an analytical or logical progression, which may not always conform to the actual historical processes by which objects begin to acquire a relatively stable value and are traded as commodities.

[ 92 ] Three reasons are: Various different methods of trade (including counter-trade ) may always exist and persist side by side.

[ 93 ] Thus, simpler and more developed expressions of value may be used in trade at the same time, or combined (for example, in order to fix a rate of exchange, traders may have to reckon how much of commodity B can be acquired, if commodity A is traded).

Market and non-market methods of allocating resources may combine, and they can combine in rather unusual ways. The act of sale, for example, may not only give the new owner of a good possession of it, but also grant or deny access to other goods. The actual distinction between selling and barter may not be so easy to draw, and all kinds of "deals" can be done in which the trade of one thing has consequences for the possession of other things.

Objects that previously had no socially accepted value at all, may acquire it in a situation where money is already used, simply by imputing or attaching a money-price to them. In this way, objects can acquire the form of value "all at once"—they are suddenly integrated in an already existing market (the only prerequisite is, that somebody owns the trading rights for those objects).

Bertram Schefold notes that in medieval Japan, the Empress Genmei simply decreed the introduction of minted coinage one day in 708 CE (the so-called wadōkaichin ), to "lighten the burden of carrying around commodity equivalents" such as arrowheads, rice and gold.

[ 94 ] It is just that, typically, what the socially accepted value of a wholly new kind of object will be, requires the practical "test" of a regular trading process, assuming a regular supply by producers and a regular demand for it, which establishes a trading "norm" consistent with production costs. A new object that wasn't traded previously may be traded far above or below its real value, until the supply and demand for it stabilizes, and its exchange-value fluctuates only within relatively narrow margins (in orthodox economics, this process is acknowledged as a form of price discovery ).

[ 95 ] The development of the form of value through the growth of trading processes involves a continuous dual equalization & relativization process (this is sometimes referred to as a type of "market adjustment"): the worth of products and assets relative to each other is established with increasingly precise equations, creating a structure of relative values; the comparative labour efforts required to make the products are also valued in an increasingly standardized way at the same time. For almost any particular type of labour, it can then be specified, fairly accurately, how much money it would take, on average, to employ that labour and get the use out of that labour. To get any type of job done, there is then a normal price tag for the labour involved.

[ 96 ] Six main effects of this are: The process of market-expansion, involving the circulation of more and more goods, services and money, leads to the development of the form of value of products, which includes and transforms more and more aspects of human life, until almost everything is structured by the forms of value; [ 97 ] That it increasingly seems as though economic value ("what things are worth") is a natural, intrinsic characteristic of products and assets (just like the characteristics that make them useful) rather than a social effect created by labour-cooperation and human effort; what any particular kind of labour is worth, becomes largely determined by the value of the tradeable product of the labour, and labour becomes organized according to the value it produces.

The development of markets leads to the capitalization of money, products and services: the trade of money for goods, and goods for money, leads directly to the use of the trading process purely to "make money" from it (a practice known in classical Greece as " chrematistics "). This is what Marx regards as the true origin of capital, long before capital's conquest of the whole of production.

Labour power that creates no commodity value or does not have the potential to do so, has no value for commercial purposes, and is therefore usually not highly valued economically, except insofar as it reduces costs that would otherwise be incurred.

The diffusion of value relations eradicates traditional social relations and corrodes all social relations not compatible with commerce; the valuation that becomes of prime importance is what something will trade for. The result is the emergence of the trading circuit M-C...P...C'-M', which indicates that production has become a means for the process of making money (that is, Money [=M] buys commodities [=C] which are transformed through production [=P] into new commodities [=C'], and, upon sale, result in more money [=M'] than existed at the start).

Generalized commodity production [ edit ] Capital existed in the form of trading capital already thousands of years before capitalist factories emerged in the towns; [ 98 ] its owners (whether rentiers, merchants, religious functionaries or state officials) often functioned as intermediaries between commodity producers. They facilitated exchange, for a price — they made money from trade.

[ 99 ] However, the ancient economy was not dominated by commodity trade, and production for the market occurred alongside subsistence production.

[ 100 ] Marx defines the capitalist mode of production as "generalized (or universalized) commodity production", meaning that most goods and services are produced primarily for commercial purposes, for profitable market sale in a universal market.

[ 101 ] This has the consequence, that both the inputs and the outputs of production (including labour power ) become tradeable objects with prices, and that the whole of production is reorganized according to commercial principles. Whereas originally commercial trade occurred episodically at the boundaries of different communities, Marx argues, [ 102 ] eventually commerce engulfs and reshapes the whole production process of those communities.

[ 103 ] This involves the transformation of a large part of the labour force into wage-labour (the sale of labour power as a commodity), and the capitalization of labour employed ( surplus labour creates surplus value ).

In turn, this means what whether or not a product will be produced, and how it will be produced, depends not simply on whether it is physically possible to produce it or on whether people need it, but on its financial cost of production, whether a sufficient amount can be sold, and whether its production yields sufficient profit income. That is also why Marx regarded the individual commodity, which simultaneously represents value and use-value as the "cell" (or the "cell-form") in the "body" of capitalism. The seller primarily wants money for his product and is not really concerned with its consumption or use (other than from the point of view of making sales); the consumer wants to use or consume the product, and money is the means to acquire it from any convenient source.

Thus the seller does not aim directly to satisfy the need of the buyer, nor does the buyer aim to enrich the seller. Rather, the buyer and the seller are the means for each other to acquire money or goods.

[ 104 ] As a corollary, production may become less and less a creative activity to satisfy human needs, but simply a means to make money or acquire access to goods and services.

Richard Sennett provides a eulogy for the vanishing art of craftsmanship in capitalist society.

[ 105 ] As against that, products obviously could not be sold unless people need them, and unless that need is practically acknowledged. The social effect is that the motives for trading may be hidden to some or other extent, or appear somewhat differently from what they really are (in this sense, Marx uses the concept of " character masks "). One response is the emergence of a post-industrial "neo-craft economy" with an emphasis on supplying authentic, quality products and services.

[ 106 ] Reification [ edit ] Main article: Reification (Marxism) The concept of the form of value shows how, with the development of commodity trade, anything with a utility for people can be transformed into an abstract value, objectively expressible as a sum of money; but, also, how this transformation changes the organization of labour to maximize its value-creating capacity, how it changes social interactions and the very way people are aware of their interactions.

However, the quantification of objects and the manipulation of quantities ineluctably leads to distortions ( reifications ) of their qualitative properties. For the sake of obtaining a measure of magnitude, it is frequently assumed that objects are quantifiable, but in the process of quantification, various qualitative aspects are conveniently ignored or abstracted away from.

[ 107 ] Obviously the expression of everything in money prices is not the only valuation that can, or should, be made.

[ 108 ] Mathematics is enormously important for economic analysis, but it is, potentially, also a formidable source of ultimate reification (reducing an economic phenomenon to an abstract number might disregard almost everything necessary to understand the economic phenomenon).

[ 109 ] Essentially, Marx argues that if the values of things are to express social relations, then, in trading activity, people necessarily have to "act" symbolically in a way that inverts the relations among objects and subjects, whether they are aware of that or not. They have to treat a relationship as if it is a thing in its own right. In an advertisement, a financial institution might for example say "with us, your money works for you", but money does not "work", people do. A relationship gets treated as a thing, and a relationship between people is expressed as a relationship between things.

Marketisation [ edit ] Main article: Commodification The total implications of the development of the forms of value are much more farreaching than can be described in this article, since (1) the processes by which the things people use are transformed into objects of trade (often called commodification , commercialization or marketization ) and (2) the social effects of these processes, are both extremely diverse.

[ 110 ] A very large literature exists about the growth of business relationships in all sorts of areas, highlighting both progress, and destruction of traditional ways.

For capitalism to exist, markets must grow, but market growth requires changes in the way people relate socially, and changes in property rights. This is often a problem-fraught and conflict-ridden process, as Marx describes in his story about primitive accumulation . During the 20th century, there was hardly a year without wars occurring somewhere in the world.

[ 111 ] As the global expansion of business competition broke up the traditional social structures and traditional property rights everywhere, it caused political instability and continual conflicts between social classes, ethnic groups, religions and nations, in different places, as well as a series of revolutions and coups d'état (analyzed e.g. by sociologists like Theda Skocpol and Charles Tilly ). Almost all socialist countries that appeared in the 20th century arose out of wars.

Wars are generally bad for business (except for the military industry and its suppliers, or war profiteers ), nobody likes them, [ 112 ] and governments try to prevent them, [ 113 ] but in reality the marketisation of the world has often been a very aggressive, violent process. Typically, therefore, the advocates of peaceful market trade blame "everything but the market" for the explosions of mass violence that occur, with the promise that, if people would just sit down and negotiate a deal, they wouldn't have to use force to get what they want. This assumes that market trade is something quite separate from political power, because it is market-trade, i.e. a free negotiation between trading partners who are equals in the marketplace.

[ 114 ] Value-form and price-form [ edit ] In his story, Marx defines the magnitude of "value" simply as the ratio of a physical quantity of product to a quantity of average labour-time, which is equal to a quantity of gold-money (in other words, a scalar ): X quantity of product = Y quantity of average labour hours = Z quantity of gold-money He admits early on, that the assumption of gold-money is a theoretical simplification.

[ 115 ] The buying power of money tokens can vary due to causes that have nothing to do with the production system. Within certain limits, X, Y and Z can vary independently of each other. Nevertheless the simplifying assumption was useful to reveal the structure of economic relationships involved in the capitalist mode of production, as a prologue to analyzing the motion of the system as a whole. Marx believed that variations in the buying power of money did not alter the economic structure at all, insofar as the working population was forced to produce in order to survive, and in so doing entered into societal relations of production independent of their will. Whether products and labour were traded for a higher or a lower price did not alter the basic system of property rights.

As any banker or speculator knows, however, the expression of the value of something as a quantity of money-units is by no means the "final and ultimate expression of value".

At the simplest level, the reason is that different "monies" (currencies) may be used side by side in the trading process, meaning that "what something is worth" may require expressing one currency in another currency and that one currency is traded against another, where currency exchange rates fluctuate all the time. Thus, money itself can take many different forms.

[ 116 ] In more sophisticated trade, moreover, what is traded is not money itself, but rather claims to money ("financial claims" and counter-claims, for example debt obligations, borrowing facilities or stocks that provide the holder with an income). The value of a capital asset today may be strongly influenced by what it is likely to be worth in the future.

In even more sophisticated trade, what is traded is the insurance of financial claims against the risk of possible monetary loss.

[ 117 ] In turn, money can be made just from the knowledge about the probability that a financial trend or risk will occur, or will not occur (see prediction market ).

Eventually financial trade becomes so complex, that what a financial asset is worth is often no longer expressible in any exact quantity of money (a "cash value") without all sorts of qualifications, and that its worth becomes entirely conditional on its expected earnings potential.

[ 118 ] In Capital Volume 3 , which he drafted before Volume I , Marx shows he was well aware of this. He distinguished not only between "real capital" (physical, tangible capital assets) and "money capital", [ 119 ] but also noted the existence of " fictitious capital " [ 120 ] and pseudo-commodities that strictly speaking have only symbolic value.

[ 121 ] Marx believed that a failure to theorize the forms of value correctly led to "the strangest and most contradictory ideas about money," which "emerges sharply... in [the theory of] banking, where the commonplace definitions of money no longer hold water".

[ 122 ] Price-form [ edit ] Consistent with this, Marx explicitly introduced a distinction between the form of value and the price-form early on in Capital, Volume I .

[ 123 ] Simply put, the price-form is a mediator of trade that is separate and distinct from the forms of value that products have.

[ 124 ] Prices express exchange-value in units of money.

[ 125 ] A price is a "sign" that conveys information about either a possible or a realized transaction (or both at the same time). The information may be true or false; it may refer to observables or unobservables; it may be estimated, assumed or probable. However, because prices are also numbers, it is easy to treat them as manipulable "things" in their own right, in abstraction from their appropriate context. As Viktor Mayer-Schönberger puts it, "...in the process of distilling information down to price, many details get lost." [ 126 ] Frequently the expression of an exchange value as a price is conflated with the real quantity of money which the price represents.

Latin root [ edit ] The ambiguity of the modern concept of "price" already existed in the Latin root meaning of the word, in Roman times. It has persisted in modern times. Thus, for example, in 1912, Frank Fetter gathered 117 different definitions of "price" used by economists, which he grouped under three categories: objective exchange-value, subjective value, and ratio of exchange.

[ 127 ] The 
words pris or prix (French), Preis (German), prezzo (Italian), precio (Spanish), preço (Portuguese) and price (English) were all derived, directly or via-via, from the Latin equivalent pretium or precium (which was possibly a contraction of per itium or pre itium , i.e., what goes across from buyer to seller, in an exchange). The Latin verb itio means "going, travelling", as in " itinerary ", and the Latin derivation pretiosus means "valuable or costly".

"Pretium", the Latin word for price, had no less than ten discrete sorts of meanings, depending on the context: what something is worth: the value, the valuation, the (sum of) money represented, or the exchange-value of something.

the purchase (or acquisition) cost, or the expense of something.

the amount of a bid, a bet, an offer, or an estimate.

a compensation, a requital, a payment or a return for a service rendered.

the worth, yield, or benefit of a thing or an activity, in terms of what is gained (as compared to cost or effort).

a reward, an honour, a grant or a prize given.

an incentive or a stimulus.

the wage of a hireling, the payment for a slave or a harlot, the rent for a hired good.

the penalty, punishment or retribution for a mistake, for a failure, or for a crime.

the amount of a bribe, a graft payment, or a ransom deal.

[ 128 ] Each of these ten sorts of price ideas referred to different social relations. Each social relationship, in turn, involves some kind of transaction – an exchange, an investment, an award, a grant, a fine, a disbursement or transfer, a compensation payment etc. The word "transaction" is itself derived from the Latin transactionem , meaning an "agreement", "an accomplishment", "a done deal". The Latin word transactor refers to the mediator, the "go-between" or intermediary operative in some kind of deal, and transactus means "pierced", "penetrated", or "stuck through" (many Roman coins had holes through them, for storage on a string, or decorative purposes).

The word pretium , or a price number, do not make all that explicit. Nevertheless, the classical concept of price already clearly displayed both an economic or instrumental dimension, and a moral dimension (some prices are appropriate and just, others aren't). According to Stephen Gudeman, one aspect of the fetish of prices can manifest itself, when "prices only refer to themselves".

[ 129 ] Prices refer only to themselves, when they are lifted out of the transactional and social context from which they originated, and acquire an independent reality, where price numbers only relate to other price numbers. In that sense, the price numbers might hide as much as they reveal. While people are focused on the numbers, they forget about the real context that gives rise to the numbers. By the time that price numbers decide how people will be relating, prices have acquired a tremendous power in human affairs.

The price resulting from a calculation may be regarded as symbolizing (representing) one transaction, or many transactions at once, but the validity of this "price abstraction" all depends on whether the computational procedure and valuation method are accepted. The modern notion of "the price of something" is often applied to sums of money denoting various quite different financial categories (e.g. a purchase or sale cost, the amount of a liability, the amount of a compensation, an asset value, an asset yield, an interest rate etc.). It can be difficult to work out, even for an economist, what a price really means, and price information can be deceptive.

A (simple) price is transparent, if (1) it expresses clearly how much money has to be paid to acquire a product, asset or service, and if (2) its meaning is understood in the same way by all concerned. Things get more complicated, if many prices have to be added, subtracted, divided and multiplied in order to value something (an aggregated total price). Here, a method of price calculation is involved which assumes conventions, definitions and concepts which could vary to some or other extent. In order to understand this price, it is necessary to understand how it is arrived at, and whether the method is acceptable or correct.

Value vs. price [ edit ] According to Marx, the price-form is the idealized (symbolic) expression of the money-form of value that is used in trading things, calculating costs and benefits, and assessing what things are worth. As such, it is not a "further development" of the form of value itself, and exists independently of the latter, [ 130 ] for five reasons: The (simple) price equates a quantity of one specific type of use-value to a quantity of money, whereas the meaning of "money form of value" is, that a given quantity of money is exchangeable for a quantity of any of the different kinds of use-values which the money can buy. So, the "money form of value" is not the same as a "price", in the first instance because the money form of value refers to an indeterminate variety of N commodities that are all equivalents for a given quantity of money. If we want to know "the price of fish", we need specific information about the kind of fish which are currently on offer. At best one could say, that the money form of value is an "index of monetized exchangeability".

As Marx notes, [ 131 ] prices may be attached to almost anything at all ("the price of owning, using or borrowing something"), and therefore need not express product-values at all. The price form expressing a type of transaction does not have to express a form of product-value . Prices do not necessarily have anything to do with the production or consumption of tangible wealth, although they might facilitate claims to it. The prices of some types of assets are not formed by any product-values at all. This point becomes especially important when we leave the sphere of production and the distribution of products altogether, and enter other sectors of economic life.

Each of Marx's four forms of value which mark successive developmental phases in the trading process can alternatively also be reckoned in terms of money prices, once a generally accepted currency exists. Money-prices can exist, even although stable product-values have not (yet) been formed through regular production and trade.

Insofar as the price of a commodity does express its value accurately, this does not necessarily mean that it will actually trade at this price; products can trade at prices above or below what the goods are really worth, or fail to be traded at any price.

Although as a rule there will be a strong positive correlation between product-prices and product-values, they may change completely independently of each other for all kinds of reasons. When things are bought or sold, they may be over-valued or under-valued due to all kinds of circumstances.

In Marx's theory of the capitalist mode of production, not just anything has a value in the economic sense, even if things can be priced.

[ 132 ] Only the products of human labour have the property of value, and their "value" is the currently average labour cost of supplying them. Financial assets are regarded as tradeable claims to value, which can be exchanged for tangible assets. The "value" of a financial asset is defined by what and how much the owner can buy, if the asset is traded/sold.

Value relationships among physical products or labour-services and physical assets — as proportions of current labour effort involved in making them — exist according to Marx quite independently from price information, and prices can oscillate in all sorts of ways around economic values, or indeed quite independently of them. However, the expression of product-value by prices in money-units in most cases does not diverge very greatly from the actual value; if there was a very big difference, people would not be able to sell them (insufficient income), or they would not buy them (too expensive, relative to other options).

If prices for products rise, hours worked may rise, and if prices fall, hours worked may fall (sometimes the reverse may also occur, to the extent that extra hours are worked, to compensate for lower income resulting from lower prices, or if more sales occur because prices are lowered). In that sense, it is certainly true that product-prices and product-values mutually influence each other. It is just that, according to Marx, product-values are not determined by the labor-efforts of any particular enterprise, but by the combined result of all of them.

[ 133 ] Real prices and ideal prices [ edit ] Main article: Real prices and ideal prices In discussing the form of prices in various draft manuscripts and in Das Kapital , Marx drew an essential distinction between actual prices charged and paid, i.e., prices that express how much money really changed hands, and various " ideal prices " (imaginary or notional prices).

[ 134 ] Because prices are symbols or indicators in more or less the same way as traffic lights are, they can symbolize something that really exists (e.g., hard cash) but they can also symbolize something that doesn't exist, or symbolize other symbols.

[ 135 ] The concept of price is often used in a very loose sense to refer to all kinds of transactional possibilities. That can make the forms of prices highly variegated, flexible and complex to understand, but also potentially very deceptive, disguising the real relationships involved. If justabout anything can be priced, and prices can be attached or imputed to anything, money-prices become the universal measure of value. Any other measure of value is erased from economic analysis (including from national accounts ).

Modern economics is largely a "price science" (a science of "price behaviour"), in which economists attempt to analyze, explain and predict the relationships between different kinds of prices—using the laws of supply and demand as a guiding principle.

[ 136 ] These prices are mostly just numbers, where the numbers are believed to represent real prices, in some way, as an idealization. Mathematics then provides a logical language, to talk about what these prices might do, and to calculate pricing effects. This however was not Marx's primary concern; he focused rather on the structure and dynamics of the capitalism as a social system. His concern was with the overall results that market activity would lead to in human society.

In what Marx called "vulgar economics", the complexity of the concept of prices is ignored however, because, Marx claimed in Theories of Surplus Value and other writings, the vulgar economists assumed that: Since they all express a quantity of money, all prices belong to the same object class (they are qualitatively the same, and differ only quantitatively, irrespective of the type of transaction with which they are associated, or the valuation principles used).

For theoretical purposes, there is no substantive difference between price idealizations and prices which are actually charged.

"Price" is just another word for "value", i.e., value and price are identical expressions, since the value relationship simply expresses a relationship between a quantity of money and a quantity of some economic good.

Prices are always exact, in the same way that numbers are exact (disregarding price estimation, valuation changes and accounting error).

Price information is always objective (i.e., it is never influenced by how people regard that information).

People always have equal access to information about prices (in which case swindles are merely an aberration from the normal functioning of markets, rather than an integral feature of them, which requires continual policing).

The price for any particular type of good is always determined in exactly the same way everywhere, according to the same economic laws, regardless of the given social set-up.

In his critique of political economy , Marx denied that any of these assumptions were scientifically true (see further real prices and ideal prices ). He distinguished carefully between the values, exchange values, market values, market prices and prices of production of commodities.

[ 137 ] However, he did not analyze all the different forms that prices can take (for example, market-driven prices, administered prices , accounting prices, negotiated and fixed prices, estimated prices, nominal prices, transfer prices or inflation-adjusted prices) focusing mainly on the value proportions he thought to be central to the functioning of the capitalist mode of production as a social system. The effect of this omission was that debates about the relevance of Marx's value theory became confused, and that Marxists repeated the same ideas which Marx himself had rejected as "vulgar economics". In other words, they accepted a vulgar concept of price.

[ 138 ] Koray Çalışkan comments: "A mysterious certainty dominates our lives in late capitalist modernity: the price. Not a single day passes without learning, making, and taking it. Yet despite prices’ widespread presence around us, we do not know much about them." [ 139 ] Fluctuating price signals serve to adjust product-values and labour efforts to each other, in an approximate way; prices are mediators in this sense. But that which mediates should not be confused with what is mediated. Thus, if the observable price-relationships are simply taken at face value, they might at best create a distorted picture, and at worst a totally false picture of the economic activity to which they refer. At the surface, price aggregations might quantitatively express an economic relationship in the simplest way, but in the process of aggregation they might abstract away from other features of the economic relationship that are also very essential to know.

[ 140 ] Indeed, that is another important reason why Marx's analysis of economic value largely disregards the intricacies of price fluctuations; it seeks to discover the real economic movement behind the price fluctuations.

Marx's sources [ edit ] Aristotle and Samuel Bailey [ edit ] Marx borrowed the idea of the form of value from the Greek philosopher Aristotle (circa 384–322 BC), who pondered the nature of exchange value in chapter 5 of Book 5 in his Nicomachean Ethics .

[ 141 ] Aristotle distinguished clearly between the concepts of use-value and exchange-value (a distinction taken over by Adam Smith ). Aristotle also developed a fairly sophisticated theory of money. In chapter 9 of Book 1 of his Politics , he describes the circuits of commodity trade C-M-C' ( oekonomia ) and M-C-M' ( chrematistikon ).

[ 142 ] However, Marx criticized and developed Aristotle's ideas in an original way.

[ 143 ] According to Marx, Aristotle already described the basics of the form of value when he argued [ 144 ] that an expression such as "5 beds = 1 house" does not differ from "5 beds = such and such an amount of money", but according to Marx, Aristotle's analysis "suffered shipwreck" because he lacked a clear concept of value. By this Marx meant that Aristotle was unable to clarify the substance of value, i.e., what exactly was being equated in the value-comparisons when the relative worth of different goods is valued, or what was the common denominator commensurating a plethora of different goods for trading purposes.

[ 145 ] Aristotle thought the common factor must simply be the demand or need for goods, since without demand for goods that could satisfy some need or want, they would not be exchanged. Aristotle reaches the conclusion that: "... in truth it is impossible that things differing so much should become commensurate, but with reference to demand they may become so sufficiently. There must, then, be a unit, and that fixed by agreement (for which reason it is called nomisma ); for it is this that makes all things commensurate, since all things are measured by money." [ 146 ] At first sight, Aristotle’s monetary theory of value seems eminently plausible. However, it leaves a puzzle: if the value of goods is the money they will exchange for, and if the value of money is the goods it will exchange for, what then is the original source or substance of value? Either value must originate from the exchange process itself (it exists, simply because there is exchange and trade), or, the source of the value of both money and goods is something else that they have in common. The first answer entails that value is created by supply and demand, the second answer is that value exists because money and goods are both creations of social labour (i.e. value is the expression of socially necessary labour-time, via exchange-value). For Marx, this puzzle can be resolved only if "value" and "exchange-value" are clearly distinguished as different things.

Marx was also influenced by, and responding to, the "classical" political economy discourse about the economic laws governing commodity values and money, [ 147 ] in Europe beginning (in Marx's view) with William Petty 's Quantulumcunque Concerning Money (1682), [ 148 ] reaching a high point in Adam Smith 's An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (1776) and culminating with David Ricardo 's Principles of Political Economy and Taxation (1817).

[ 149 ] For most of the classical political economists, the stability and structure of relative prices for goods was explained by the relative quantities of labour that it normally took to supply the goods: as a general rule, the higher the labour costs, the higher the prices, and the lower the labour costs, the lower the prices (the exceptions would be unusual scarcity driving up prices, and market gluts lowering prices).

In particular, Marx's ideas about the forms of value were influenced by Samuel Bailey 's criticism of Ricardo's theory of value.

[ 150 ] In Capital, Volume I , Marx stated that Bailey was one of the few political economists who had concerned themselves with the analysis of the form of value.

[ 151 ] Yet, Marx said, none of the political economists had understood its meaning, because they confused "the form of value" with "value itself", and because they only paid attention to the quantitative side of the phenomenon, not to the qualitative side.

[ 152 ] In Capital, Volume II , Marx criticizes Bailey again for "his general misunderstanding, according to which exchange-value equals value, the form of value is value itself", leading to the mistaken belief that "commodity values cease to be comparable once they no longer actively function as exchange-values, and cannot actually be exchanged for one another".

[ 153 ] According to Marx, the substance and regulator of relative product-values is human labour-time in general, labour-in-the-abstract or " abstract labour ". This value (an average current replacement cost in labour-time, based on the normal productivity of producers existing at the time) exists as an attribute of the products of human labour quite independently of the particular forms that exchange may take, though obviously value is always expressed in some form or other. It is perhaps not a very interesting insight if we consider only one commodity, but it is of much more interest when we face a huge variety of commodities which are all being traded, at the same time.

[ 154 ] Preparatory writings [ edit ] Marx's value-form idea can be traced back to his 1857 Grundrisse manuscript, [ 155 ] where he contrasted communal production with production for exchange.

[ 156 ] Some humanist Marxists think the origin of the idea really goes further back in time, [ 157 ] to Marx's 1844 Paris manuscripts , specifically the section on "the power of money" [ 158 ] where Marx analyzes excerpts on money in Goethe 's play Faust and Shakespeare 's play Timon of Athens .

[ 159 ] Marx felt that the playwrights had expressed the social meaning of money very well, and he discusses the magical power of money: why money can create a "topsy-turvy world" ( verkehrte Welt ) which unites opposites, fools people, or turns things into their contrary. However this textual interpretation is rejected by Althusserian Marxist-Leninists, because of their separation of the stage of the "unscientific Young Marx" (1818–1845, from birth to age 27) from the stage of the "scientific Mature Marx" (1846–1883, from age 28 to age 65). According to Althusserian Marxism-Leninism, these playwrights have nothing to do with value theory, because they belong only to the unscientific stage, and not to socialist realism or scientific socialism .

The form of value is also mentioned in Marx's 1859 book A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy . It is clearly evident in his manuscript of Theories of Surplus Value (1861–63). In correspondence with Friedrich Engels in June 1867, Marx provided a first outline of his text on the form of value.

[ 160 ] Marx first explicitly described the concept in an appendix to the first (1867) edition of Capital, Volume I , [ 161 ] but this appendix was dropped in a second edition, where the first chapter was rewritten (rather hurriedly) to include a special section on the form of value at the end. There also exists a 55-page manuscript by Marx for planned revisions in the new 2nd German edition of Capital, Volume 1 (1873). He wrote it in December 1871-January 1872. It deals mostly with Section 3 of Chapter 1 of Capital, Volume 1 , and was first published in the Marx-Engels Gesamtausgabe (MEGA2), Volume II/6.

[ 162 ] Engels, Dühring, and the Soviet Union [ edit ] The first "value-form theorist" who interpreted the significance of Marx's idea was his friend Friedrich Engels , who argued in his Anti-Dühring polemic of 1878 (when Marx was still alive) that "The value form of products... already contains in embryo the whole capitalist form of production, the antagonism between capitalists and wage-workers, the industrial reserve army , crises..." [ 163 ] Discussing the concept, origin and development of the form of value, Engels intended to demonstrate that real socialism involved the abolition of commodity production and the law of value , rather than their conscious integration in the economic system of a socialist commune, as Eugen Dühring proposed.

[ 164 ] In the first few years of the Russian Revolution , the Bolsheviks and their theoreticians took that idea very literally.

[ 165 ] It was shelved during Lenin's New Economic Policy , but subsequently the CPSU set about eliminating almost all private enterprise and bringing almost all trade under state control. In a moral sense, commercial activity came to be seen as intrinsically bad, alienating, exploitative and oppressive, because it enabled some people to get rich from other people's work. The idea was, that once commerce was got rid of, this whole problem would no longer exist; the state would prevent all private accumulation, or at least it would be tolerated only on a very modest scale.

State-directed production seemed efficient and effective to the communist modernizers, especially in backward Russia. If infrastructure needed to be built, the state ordered it to be built, whether it made a profit or not. Business would never have built it, unless it made a sufficient profit at the end of a year. The central problem for the communists then was, that they had to get workers to cooperate and make sacrifices, to get things built, with promises of a better life in the future. The Party conceptualized this primarily as a matter of authority, education, ideological staunchness, [ 166 ] exemplary practice, incentives, [ 167 ] and penalties.

If workers did not cooperate, because they thought it was against their self-interest (for whatever reason), they were forced to do so, in peace-time as well as in war-time.

[ 168 ] Since workers resented this, producing things often became much less efficient, and output quality suffered. This caused endless management problems, and massive "policing" was required to ensure that things got done (as documented by Western historians like R. W. Davies and Donald A. Filtzer). Despite never-ending reforms and policy changes, the cooperation problem was never truly solved. There was a lot of cynicism about that in Soviet society, [ 169 ] even when life gradually got better and living standards improved.

[ 170 ] On 30 October 2007, Russian President Vladimir Putin paid his respects to all the people killed under Stalin's dictatorship in the days of the Great Terror . Putin stated: "Hundreds of thousands, millions of people were killed and sent to camps, shot and tortured. These were people with their own ideas, which they were unafraid to speak out about. They were the cream of the nation." [ 171 ] The theoretical conflict between Engels and Dühring about the role of value in socialism resurfaced in the Soviet Union in the 1940s and 1950s. Until the 1930s, the Russian communists had generally expected that the categories of value and the law of value would disappear under socialism. Given that Joseph Stalin declared in 1936 that, with full state control over the whole economy, socialism had been achieved, [ 172 ] it was logical to think that commodity production and the law of value no longer existed either. However, from 1941 this idea was in dispute.

[ 173 ] Some Russian economists denied the existence of the law of value in the Soviet socialist republics, others affirmed its existence, and yet others said that the law existed in a "transformed" way.  In 1951, Stalin settled the matter by affirming officially that commodity production and the law of value did exist under socialism, with the implication, that the planning authorities should account properly for true labour costs, as the basis for correct pricing of products, assets and salaries.

[ 174 ] In that sense, Stalin in the end implicitly sided with Dühring against Engels (although many public services and facilities continued to be provided for free or at very low cost, alongside consumer goods and services for sale).

Issues of interpretation [ edit ] Common difficulties [ edit ] Marxist academics have often had difficulties with Marx's own texts about the concept of value. One important reason is that "value" can refer to many different things: The concept of value, like the concept of money prices, can be applied or linked to anything and everything, [ 175 ] from the most abstract to the most specific phenomena, and so the talk about "value" can go anywhere, with an unlimited range, depending on what one has in mind. What Marx had in mind, were the thinkers he was arguing with ( Aristotle , Smith , Ricardo , Bailey , Proudhon , Hegel etc.), but the 21st century reader is often not familiar with those.

[ 176 ] Value has both quantitative and qualitative dimensions, which can be discussed separately, or combined in a measure.

[ 177 ] It often happens, that one knows definitely that something has a value, without being able to verify how much value it is.

The quantitative dimensions of value can be stated according to both absolute criteria ("the quantity of units of a quality X") and relative criteria ("the quantity of X which is equal to a quantity of Y"). Many different types of measures and measurement methodologies are possible; what the correct or relevant measures are, is often in dispute.

Value itself can be expressed as (1) a subjective orientation, priority or preference (2) a relationship, ratio or proportional magnitude (3) a characteristic attributed to an object or subject, (4) an object or subject in its own right, or (5) a movement in a temporal sequence or in a space (the value of a good that exists at point A can change, if it is transferred to point B).

[ 178 ] The value of something can exist simultaneously as an objective and subjective phenomenon, and value can change quickly in changing circumstances (for example, the use-value of an umbrella increases when it starts raining, and typically its average price-level is higher through the monsoon season).

The concept of value assumes principles which define or explain how we know that there exists (i) value equivalence, (ii) comparable value, (iii) value increase, (iv) value decrease, (v) transferred value, (vi) conserved value, (vii) negative value, (viii) positive value, (ix) value destroyed, and (x) newly created value.

[ 179 ] For economists all this may be "self-evident", but for statisticians, accountants, valuers and auditors it certainly is not. The value of the same object can be measured or estimated in different ways, with different methods and/or assumptions.

Value can refer to an actual value manifested in a real transaction, property right or transfer, or it can refer to an ideal value (a derived measure or a theoretical construct which is perhaps extrapolated from observations about the actual values of assets and transactions). It could refer to the actual value realized in a transaction, or to the value that could be realized under certain conditions or circumstances.

Values and prices, as actual or theoretical magnitudes, may not be so easy to distinguish from each other. For example, an ordinary accounting category such as " value -added" in fact consists of a sum of prices calculated according to assumed standard conditions (a uniform valuation).

[ 180 ] If goods are said to be "overvalued" or "undervalued", this assumes that one can reliably and accurately identify what the "true value" is. Yet the true value may only be hypothetical, since its definition is influenced by changeable production and market conditions, and on the particular vantage point (or assumptions) adopted. Often the calculated cost-structure of a product is only an estimate within a certain time-frame.

The concept of value, like the concept of prices, is often used in a rather "loose" sense – referring to a cost or expense, a compensation, a yield or return, or a valuation (of a product, an asset, a service, a lease etc.). The language of trade often does not make the social, legal and economic relations involved in trade very explicit.

In the course of Marx's dialectical story, the meaning of the category of value itself evolves and develops, with increasingly finer distinctions, and the concept is used in somewhat different senses in different places. Since Marx did not finish a large part of his manuscript for publication, it is not always exactly clear from the text what he intends. The English translations may not get it exactly right.

So from the use of the expression "value" it may therefore not be immediately obvious what kind of valuation or expression is being referred to, it depends on the theoretical context.

[ 181 ] Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz , the originator of the famous " transformation problem " controversy, claimed confidently that in Marx's text, "the context always reveals clearly which value is meant".

[ 182 ] Nevertheless, there have been very lengthy academic debates about what Marx really did mean in particular passages.

[ 183 ] Rigorously investigated, the concept of "value" turns out not to be a "neat-and-tidy accounting concept" that can be manipulated with mathematical precision; it can be manipulated with mathematical precision only if a series of definitions are already fixed and assumed (it is a fuzzy concept ).

At the end of his life, David Ricardo had to "conclude, rather sadly, that 'there is no such thing in nature as a perfect measure of value'... there is no such thing as an invariable standard of value".

[ 184 ] In Marx's Capital , it is understood from the start that there cannot be an invariable standard of value even in principle (this logically follows from the analysis of the form of value). Although there are absolute limits to the formation of value, value is in essence a relative magnitude, which has no absolute constant in time and space. If a standard of value such as gold is adopted (which Marx does), this is done only for the sake of argument, and for the sake of simplicity of exposition or reckoning (in the era in which Marx lived, there was very little price inflation).

Orthodox economics typically takes it for granted, that the exchange processes on which markets are based already exist and will occur, and that prices already exist , or can be imputed. This is often called the "gross substitution axiom" by economists: the implication of this theorem is that all products are, in principle, mutually interchangeable with all other products, and therefore the "price mechanism" can allocate resources in such a way, that market equilibria are assured by the laws of supply and demand.

[ 185 ] This assumption is overturned only in special cases, where markets still must be brought into being and a process of " price discovery " takes place. In modern economics, the "value" of something is defined either as a money-price, or as a personal (subjective) valuation, and the exchangeability of products as such presents no special problem and does not merit any special inquiry. In the real world, of course, it is not strictly true that any good can be traded for any other good, for legal, logistic and technical reasons.

In conventional economics, money serves as a medium of exchange to minimize the transaction costs of barter among utility-maximizing individuals. Such an approach is very different from Marx's historical interpretation of the formation of value. In Marx's theory, the "value" of a product is something separate and distinct from the "price" it happens to fetch (goods can sell for more or less than they are worth, i.e., they are not necessarily worth what they happen to sell for).

[ 186 ] Problematic [ edit ] Marx's value-form analysis intends to answer the question of how the value-relationships of products are expressed in ways that acquire an objective existence in their own right (ultimately as relationships between quantities of money, or money-prices), [ 187 ] what the modalities of these relationships are, and how these product-values can change, independently of the valuers who trade in them.

[ 188 ] Marx argued that neither the classical political economists nor the vulgar economists who succeeded them were able to explain satisfactorily how that worked, resulting in serious theoretical errors.

[ 189 ] The political economists sought in vain for an invariable standard of value, and proposed theories of money which were hardly plausible. The reason behind the errors was — according to Marx — that, as market trade developed, the economic relationship between commodity-values and money increasingly appeared in an inverted, reified way. In reality, economic value symbolizes a social relationship between human subjects, as reflected by a thing or expressed by the relationship between things. Yet it often seems more like value is the thing which creates the social relationship.

[ 190 ] To understand the real causal relationships, not just economic calculation, but also a historical and sociological understanding of the subject was needed.

[ 191 ] In vulgar Marxist economics, the commodity is simply a combination of use-value and exchange-value . That is not Marx's own argument.

[ 192 ] As he explains in Capital, Volume III , in an overall sense business competition among producers centres precisely on the discrepancies between the socially established values of commodities in production and their particular exchange-values manifested in the marketplace.

[ 193 ] Goods could be traded above or below their value, and that mattered for profits.

[ 194 ] Marx believed that correctly distinguishing between the form and content of value was essential for the logical coherence of a labour theory of product-value, [ 195 ] and he criticized Adam Smith specifically because Smith: confuses the measure of value as the immanent measure which at the same time forms the substance of value [i.e., labour-time], with the measure of value in the sense that money is called a measure of value.

[ 196 ] Smith had affirmed that labour is "the real measure of the exchangeable value of all commodities", but, as David Ricardo subsequently argued, Smith's definition confused the labour embodied in a commodity when it was produced, with the labour commanded by the commodity when it was exchanged.

[ 197 ] Marx believed that Smith and Ricardo were certainly right to identify labour as the substance of commodity value, but Marx realized early on that the definitions of both these political economists could not be correct. The fundamental reason for that was, that both economists mixed up "value" with "exchange value" and with "price" (and also mixed up actual prices with theoretical prices). That is, they mixed up the forms and substance of value, because they failed to distinguish correctly between them as qualitatively different things.

The labour theory of product-value could, Marx argued, be made coherent and consistent, only when it was understood that product-values, prices of production and the market prices of commodities could vary independently of each other.

[ 198 ] Product-values did not necessarily have anything to do in a direct way with the relationship between cost-prices and sale-prices determining the actual profitability of enterprises, because both inputs and outputs could be profitably traded at prices above or below their value, depending on the amount of sales turnover and the state of the market in a given time interval. It was more that the normal labour requirements for supplying products in the end set limits to the price-range and the terms on which the products could be commercially traded.

Althusserian interpretation [ edit ] The form of value is often regarded as a difficult, obscure or even esoteric idea by scholars (the " holy grail " of Marxism [ 199 ] ).

Simon Clarke commented in 1989 that "the value debates of the last few years have become ever-more esoteric." [ 200 ] John Weeks likewise referred in 2010 to the "essentially esoteric nature of Marx's scientific investigation of value", meaning talk about unobservables.

[ 201 ] Following Hans-Georg Backhaus , [ 202 ] Robert Kurz distinguished between an "exoteric Marx" concerned with capitalist economic growth and an "esoteric Marx" concerned with the categorical critique of capitalism.

[ 203 ] There has been considerable debate about the real theoretical significance of the value-form concept.

[ 204 ] Marx himself started off the controversy when he emphasized that Capital, Volume I was not difficult to understand, "with the exception of the section on the form of value." [ 205 ] In his "Preface to Capital Vol. 1, " the French philosopher Louis Althusser mimicked Marx, and pronounced that: The greatest difficulties, theoretical or otherwise, which are obstacles to an easy reading of Capital Volume One are unfortunately (or fortunately) concentrated at the very beginning of Volume One, to be precise, in its first Part, which deals with 'Commodities and Money'. I therefore give the following advice: put the whole of Part One aside for the time being and begin your reading with Part Two...

[ 206 ] Althusser's suggestions were taken up by many New Left Marxists, which meant that Marx's theory of the form of value and its significance was rarely taught.

[ 207 ] Paresh Chattopadhyay states that "very few writers in the Anglo-American tradition of Marx studies have paid attention to Marx's crucial analysis of value form".

[ 208 ] However, Marx very deliberately and explicitly made an effort to state his interpretation of commodity trade with absolute clarity in his first chapters. Marx aims to demonstrate that the "labour theory of value" that guided the classical political economists in interpreting the economy cannot be correct, because the concept of economic value itself was misconstrued.

[ 209 ] Marx never referred to his own theory of value as a "labour theory of value" even once, [ 210 ] knowing very well (as indicated by his analysis of bank credit) that the value of many assets is not determined by labour-time, at least not directly.

[ 211 ] The ideas of the political economists had to be modified very considerably, before the theory of value could truly make sense. However, when the modifications were carried out, the previous understanding of capitalist economic life was also overturned. Hence Marx's own theory showed at the same time both continuities with the classical tradition, and radical discontinuities. This has been the cause of numerous controversies about the extent to which Marx broke with, or accepted, the previous theories of the political economists about economic value.

[ 212 ] Fetishism [ edit ] Main article: Commodity fetishism The theory of the forms of value is the basis for Marx's concept of commercial fetishism or economic reification .

[ 213 ] This is about how the independent powers acquired by the value of tradeable objects (and by market relationships) are reflected back into human thought, and more specifically into the theories of the political economists about the market economy.

[ 214 ] Marx himself never used the expression "commodity fetishism" as a general category ( Warenfetishismus ), rather he referred to the fetish(-ism) of commodities, money and capital.

[ 215 ] All kinds of objects of value could be "fetishized".

In Althusserian theory, however, this meaning is unknown, because Althusserian theory detaches the concept of "fetishism" from the concept of the form of value.

[ 216 ] In the Marxist–Leninist tradition of positivist science, Althusser regarded Marx's dramatic, theatrical and theological metaphors as "unscientific" coquetry, lacking objectivity. Almost none of the New Left discussions of commodity fetishism refer to Marx's value-form analysis in any analytical depth.

[ 217 ] In the reified perception of the political economists and the vulgar Marxists, products have value because they are expressible in money-prices, but Marx argues [ 218 ] that in reality it is just the other way round: because commodities have value, i.e. because they are all products with an average current replacement cost of social labour, [ 219 ] their values can be expressed by generally accepted money-prices, accurately or not.

The true relationship can, according to Marx, be traced out only when the historical evolution of economic exchange is considered from its most simple beginnings to its most developed forms. The end-result of market development is a fully monetized economy (a "cash economy", although bankcards nowadays replace banknotes and coins), but how its workings appear to the individual at the micro-level, is often different or the inverse of its causal dynamic at the macro-level. According to Marx, this creates a lot of confusions in economic theorizing.

[ 220 ] One aim of Marx's theory is to explain how the nature of the market economy itself shapes the way that people will perceive it. The secret of the form of value is, that the form in which the value of products is expressed (as a relationship between traded objects), simultaneously obscures and hides the substance of the value of products. It obscures how the value of products is formed, and the social relations between people that exist behind the relationship between things.

Knowing what the social substance of value is, in fact, completely unnecessary for the purpose of trade. All that is required to navigate the market, is knowledge of cost prices, sale prices, price averages and whether prices are going up or down. The conflation of value with exchange value, with price and with money grows spontaneously out of the relations of commodity trade themselves.

In Capital, Volume 1 , Marx remarked that "In bourgeois society the legal fiction prevails that each person, as a buyer, has an encyclopedic knowledge of commodities".

[ 221 ] From 2017 onward, however, the world's consumers can use the Google Lens app on their mobile phone, to scan any object in order to find out information and prices for that object (or a very similar object). According to a survey by financial services firm Empower , Americans nowadays spend an average of 2.5 hours a day, or 873 hours per year, on "dreamscrolling" (i.e digital window shopping and gazing at dream purchases).

[ 222 ] Criticism [ edit ] Main article: Criticism of value-form theory Ecology [ edit ] The ecological Marxist Paul Burkett has tried to create a "value-form approach" to understanding the relationship between capitalism and nature. He argues that: "In short, the value form qualitatively and quantitatively abstracts from nature's useful and life-giving characteristics, even though value is a particular social form of wealth — a particular social objectification of both nature and labor… [ 223 ] By contrast, Elmar Altvater argued that an ecological critique of political economy "hinges on an analysis of use-value".

[ 224 ] Focusing on the human metabolism with nature, Kohei Saito argued in 2017 that: "Marx's ecological critique shows that a certain use value of nature is deeply modified under capitalism in favor of valorization , and that this elasticity of nature is the reason for capital's intensive and extensive exploitation of nature".

[ 225 ] John Bellamy Foster stated in 2018 that: "It is the opposition between the natural form and the value form, inherent to capitalist production, that generates the economic and ecological contradictions associated with capitalist development".

[ 226 ] Harry Rothman stated in his 1972 book Murderous Providence that: " Engels discussed the undialectical attitude to nature of industrialists, whose actions often had unforeseen consequences, such as soil erosion and pollution, adding that nature always takes its revenge if we ignore its laws. However, Engels certainly did not think that we should subordinate ourselves to nature, though we should recognise the fact that we do not ‘rule over nature like a conqueror over a foreign people, like someone standing outside nature – but that we, with flesh, blood and brain, belong to nature, and exist in its midst, and that all our mastery of it consists in the fact that we have the advantage over all other creatures of being able to know and correctly apply its laws.’" [ 227 ] Women's studies [ edit ] In chapter 8 of her radical 1977 critique of Freudian theory, This sex which is not one , [ 228 ] Luce Irigaray examined in some detail the relationship between Marx's story about the form of value of commodities, phallocracy and kinship systems. She argued that "Marx's analysis of commodities as the elementary form of capitalist wealth can... [also] be understood as an interpretation of the status of woman in so-called patriarchal societies." [ 229 ] Specifically, "all the systems of exchange that organize patriarchal societies and all the modalities of productive work that are recognized, valued, and rewarded in these societies are men's business." [ 230 ] When women are managed, farmed out and traded by men, women's bodies can become a manipulable abstraction.

[ 231 ] As commodities, Irigaray argued, women become "utilitarian objects and bearers of value". A mother becomes a use value; a virgin becomes an exchange value; and a prostitute becomes both a use-value and exchange value. The issues are about freedom, human dignity, social valuations, exploitation and oppression.

[ 232 ] Irigaray did not necessarily mean that all women literally are commodities, but that (1) they are often de facto treated "as if" they are tradeable wares, (2) women are frequently subjected to all kinds of informal trade-offs, to obtain what they need, (3) the commodity form sinks deeply into the human psyche and intimate relations, creating a transactional mentality which is oppressive. Irigaray raised the question, of what would become of the social order, without the exploitation of women. People would be "socializing in a different way in relation to nature, matter, the body, language, and desire".

[ 233 ] Though Irigaray's story had impact when it was first published, its appeal did not last. Among other things, her story is too grim and somber.  The psychoanalytic model of human nature is no longer widely accepted. Women generally are not regarded just as commodities or victims, they have legal rights, and they have considerable power and control, individually and collectively. Although a "battle of the sexes" continues (competition), men and women also need each other and depend on each other (cooperation). So, in the real world (in contrast to the academic imaginary), "male domination" has definite limits, and women do fight back.

[ 234 ] Most of all, it was rather unclear from Irigaray's story, what exactly would be the most effective methods to create better human relations, and how men and women could successfully work together to put them into practice. Often Irigaray seemed to be writing more at a spiritual level, and readers could take out of it what they liked. A postmodern Marxist reading of the form of value is offered by Katja Diefenbach.

[ 235 ] In her critical analysis of Islamic hijab in Iran, Professor Rebecca Ruth Gould claims that "The exchange value dimension to the commodity form crucially structures the hijab-as-commodity".

[ 236 ] Marxist women and men have often argued that women's housework, shopping work, child-raising and volunteer work is neither highly valued economically nor very visible in bourgeois ideology, precisely because it is itself not paid and charged for , as a job.

[ 237 ] The so-called " non-market " activity of women does not even register in national accounts, although its imputed market value (estimated from time-use surveys and occupational data) is very large.

[ 238 ] The values and valuations involved in women's "non-market" work are often quite different from commercial values. So capitalist market value and women's own valuations can clash, in various settings.

Kathi Weeks and Kristin Ghodsee provide an overview of the modern debates.

[ 239 ] The general implication is, that if a lot of what women do is not very highly valued (because it does not really make money, etc.), then women's social status also suffers – they aren't equals with men in the real world. In principle or in theory, capitalism is quite compatible with complete equality between men and women, with acknowledgement of essential differences between women and men. Indeed, formally speaking, all citizens in the West have the same rights in the marketplace, and equal status under the justice system. But in practice, capitalist society is a class society, structured by a market competition between unequally-positioned market actors. Faced by competitors, people will focus on where they are strongest themselves, and they will attack rivals precisely where rivals are the weakest and most vulnerable.

The usual overall effect is, that those who are already in the weakest position, will lose out the most; those in the strongest position can use their strength, to get even stronger. This general result is mitigated only by love and desire (including mimetic desire ), charity , philanthropy , government provisions, trade unions , credit unions , and social justice advocacy groups (or political parties). Individual cases can contradict the statistical patterns of inequality, but the statistical patterns of inequality for whole populations are quite persistent.

[ 240 ] This is very important to women, not just because they want to have the same civil rights as men, but because socio-economic inequality has very bad effects on bearing and raising children.

[ 241 ] Erosion of the value-form and energy [ edit ] After the 2008 financial crisis , more Western Marxist theorists and post-Marxists are discussing the spectre of the break-up and supersession of the value-form.

[ 242 ] Peter Kennedy claims that a "transition in social labour" and an "erosion of the value form" is occurring.

[ 243 ] Simply put, the theory [ 244 ] of the "breaking up of the forms of value" means that: The new digital capitalism, [ 245 ] artificial intelligence , the network society , cryptocurrencies and platform trading , [ 246 ] which are gradually replacing or displacing traditional forms of market organization, involve entirely new business models, earning models, transaction concepts, [ 247 ] payment systems, [ 248 ] work techniques and work relations. Pricing digital services is often unrelated to labour costs.

[ 249 ] Once they have been designed and are ready for use, digital products can often be reproduced, transmitted and sold quickly on a huge scale, at near-zero cost – earning a lot of revenue and profit and defying conventional economic theories of scarcity and value.

All kinds of traditional markets can no longer function as they should (they become dysfunctional, inefficient and ineffective from the point of view of supplying what people need or want).

[ 250 ] Therefore, they give rise to non-market methods to obtain resources.

In practice, the terms on which market trade can take place, are more and more strongly shaped by non-market influences at work in business competition, gaining access to resources, and deal-making. If you are an "insider", you can be a winner. If you are an "outsider" you are likely to be a loser. This tends to erode market freedoms.

Pricing goods, services and assets no longer reflects true supply costs in money terms – exchanges of products, services and assets begin to occur more and more on all kinds of different terms, and not simply cash value. Therefore, monetary valuations no longer express the real valuations being made; non-monetary considerations are involved as well. A discrepancy is created, between the formal appearance of a transaction, and what really occurs informally.

The general result would be, that the market allocation of resources by standardized prices is displaced, combined, or replaced with non-market allocation principles – all kinds of "deals" can be organized, in which money is only one consideration, among many.

[ 251 ] Gaining access to resources is, in that case, no longer simply a matter of having sufficient money in one's pocket to buy them. Money alone can no longer guarantee access to resources. It all depends on what kind of cooperation one can get, to clinch some kind of deal. If, for any reason, people do not cooperate, there is no deal. Successful trading then depends more and more on what kind of human (or political) relations there are between people who want to obtain something, and people who offer to supply something.

In the history of trade, markets have of course broken down plenty of times. So this phenomenon is not at all new.

[ 252 ] But the argument is, that the phenomenon is inevitably happening globally on a larger and larger scale in the long term, so that the whole functioning of capitalism is altered in a structural way. Economists might compute all kinds of complex price calculations for their econometric models, but, it is argued, those calculations can no longer adequately explain the way in which resources are really allocated in the economy. Money-prices may have less and less to do with that.

Ten broad trends can be mentioned that point in the direction of an erosion of the forms of value.

Market corrosion [ edit ] The British post-Marxist journalist Paul Mason claimed in The Guardian that "Without us noticing, we are entering the postcapitalist era".

[ 253 ] Part of that shift, he claimed, is that "information is corroding the market's ability to form prices correctly… because markets are based on scarcity while information is abundant. (…) whole swaths of economic life are beginning to move to a different rhythm." [ 253 ] Dave Elder-Vass states that "...vast swathes of the economy, including the gift, collaborative and hybrid forms... coexist with more conventional capitalism in the new digital economy." [ 254 ] Jeremy Rifkin states that the internet of things can facilitate an economic shift from markets to a collaborative commons, with near-zero marginal costs of production.

[ 255 ] There is a lot of "free stuff" available these days that people can get hold of very fast – if they know their way around information. They can often share it very quickly too, all around the world – bypassing markets, money and laws. When information is shared, givers and receivers both have the information, [ 256 ] unlike the ownership transfer of an alienable commodity. If people can get a lot of goods for free, it is going to be more difficult to sell things to them. In turn, that disturbs ordinary commercial trading, pricing and market functioning, so that "information corrodes value." [ 257 ] By contrast, however, the Hayekian Viktor Mayer-Schönberger is optimistic about the potential for "information-rich" markets.

[ 258 ] Not only can the internet of things link people and commodities very accurately and quickly.

[ 259 ] The new technology can also police people's property rights, and their market behaviour, creating the possibility of responding to it in real time.

[ 260 ] New rules, such as the Directive on Copyright in the Digital Single Market in the European Union, could block the "free stuff". Businessmen can also protect their private ownership of information to a considerable extent, by not disclosing it except in a specific lockable form and only to paying customers.

Harvard philosopher Michael Sandel stated that "Without being fully aware of the shift, Americans have drifted from having a market economy to becoming a market society ... where almost everything is up for sale ... a way of life where market values seep into almost every sphere of life and sometimes crowd out or corrode important values, nonmarket values." [ 261 ] In this case, market values are not corroded by non-market values, but non-market values are corroded by market values.

The economist Kenneth Arrow explained, that markets require human trust to operate effectively, but that this trust may not be spontaneously generated by market activity itself: "In a rational type of analysis it will be said that it is profitable to be trustworthy. So I will be trustworthy because it is profitable to me. But you can't very easily establish trust on a basis like that. If your basis is rational decision and your underlying motive is self-interest, then you can betray your trust at any point when it is profitable and in your interest to do so. Therefore other people can't trust you. For there to be trust, there has to be a social structure which is based on motives different from immediate opportunism." [ 262 ] If it is accepted, that non-market values are corroded by market values, as Sandel claims, then a "social structure" inspired by healthy moral virtues and just laws [ 263 ] is also corroded. In turn, that would then increase the scope of opportunism and corruption in trading activity, thereby reducing the trust that is vital for efficient market trade. International trust levels are nowadays surveyed by StrategyOne 's Edelman Trust Barometer.

[ 264 ] John Authers, a senior investment columnist and editor with the Financial Times and Bloomberg News , stated in 2018 that: "…without trust, finance collapses. (…) And that is a problem. Trust has broken down throughout society. From angry lynch mobs on social media to the fracturing of the western world's political establishment, this is an accepted fact of life, and it is not merely true of politics. Over the past three decades, trust in markets has evaporated. (...) trust broke down... in financial institutions, in the markets and, most painfully for me, in the financial media." [ 265 ] The counterargument is, that trade on the basis of some deceit or dishonesty creates reputational risk . Dubious deals can mean that people go elsewhere to buy and sell stuff (if they have that choice), leaving shady traders without customers or suppliers. Honest trade and dishonest trade have always co-existed, despite policing by the state, but the gloomy point is, that it has become uncertain which of the two is likely to prevail in the future.

Loss of value [ edit ] Since the 2008 financial crisis , there is growing concern about whether there are any types of assets left in the world, which can reliably hold their value. A gold standard for currencies is gone. Currency exchange rates can fluctuate very considerably, altering local prices.

[ 266 ] Global indebtedness continues to grow at a much faster rate than global value-added, accompanied by a sequence of financial bubbles that cause economic havoc and devalue assets when they burst. For the period 1970–2011, IMF researchers identified 147 systemic banking crises, 211 currency crises and 55 sovereign debt crises.

[ 267 ] At the Cato Institute , Steve H. Hanke leads a special research project on "troubled currencies".

[ 268 ] Very low interest rates hurt bank profits; but at interest rates below the rate of price inflation , bank clients lose money just by keeping it in the bank. In the US, Robinhood co-CEO Baiju Bhatt stated: "It's more expensive to have less money in this country. We think that's wrong." [ 269 ] Although people become reluctant to do anything with their savings, from a financial point of view they should keep trading, to maintain value, or increase it.

In mid-2016, Fitch Ratings estimated that, although the global economy had recovered, there were now $11.7 trillion worth of investments in bonds carrying negative interest rates in real terms, the equivalent of almost half of all sovereign bonds issued in developed countries.

[ 270 ] In November 2018, Bloomberg News commented about a "brutal global market": "Gather a basket of the world's biggest assets. Strip out the volatility. Calculate the returns. Then find a nice corner where you can weep, and wish you'd put everything in T-bills. (…) Almost everything is going to lose this year. By one simple measure, this is the worst cross-asset performance in more than a century." [ 271 ] The financial press spoke of a "credit rout": credit markets had scored "the worst year since the global financial crisis" with yields on stocks, bonds and commodities all in retreat, often turning negative.

[ 272 ] High-yield and investment-grade notes were headed "for losses in both euros and dollars", the first time all four asset classes "posted negative total returns since 2008, based on Bloomberg Barclays indexes ". U.S. investment-grade bonds "posted negative total returns of 3.71 percent in 2018".

[ 273 ] Morgan Stanley calculated that, for the first time since the 1970s, the yields for 21 major asset classes were negative for 2018 across the world, in real terms.

[ 274 ] Morgan Stanley judged that cash (meaning bank deposits and very short term bonds) was the best-performing asset class in 2018.

[ 275 ] Michael Hudson noted that in mid-2018 US Treasury notes [ 276 ] were approaching an inverted yield curve – the yields for short-term US Treasury bills almost outstripped long-term ones.

[ 277 ] Hudson said, that investors increasingly had no confidence in the economy, and just wanted "to park their money safely". The real economy wasn't growing, the only thing that was growing was debts.

[ 278 ] JP Morgan data showed that the global yield curve for bonds had already inverted (the difference in yields for bonds with 1 to 3 year maturities and those with 7 to 10 year maturities reduced to zero).

[ 279 ] The Financial Times stated that "global quantitative easing has created a seemingly insatiable demand for five- to 10-year Treasuries, pushing down yields".

[ 280 ] Others argued that the yield curve was not yet inverted, just flat.

[ 281 ] Morgan Stanley data showed that, in 2018, foreign institutions were putting US$100 billion into Chinese government bonds.

[ 282 ] The first true inversion in the US was observed in December 2018, when the yield on five-year US Treasury notes fell below that on two-year ones.

[ 283 ] A short time later, the difference in yield between 2-year and 10-year Treasury notes (the definitive indicator) dropped below ten basis points .

[ 284 ] The Wall Street Journal advised investors explicitly not to panic, because the phenomenon could just be a "temporary kink" which had "no predictive power" [ 285 ] The broader question which Michael Hudson raised, was about why this weird thing could happen at all, and what it says about the condition that the major part of US business is in, the mentality of investors, etc. In the US, recessions and depressions since World War II (so far 11 downturns in total, on average occurring every 6.6 years) [ 286 ] are usually preceded by an inverted yield curve for Treasury notes (within an average time-frame of 21 months). Billionaire investor Stan Druckenmiller stated, in September 2018, that the next financial crisis would likely be worse than the last one, because of skyrocketing debt loads. "We have this massive debt problem. We tripled down on what caused the [last] crisis. And we tripled down on it globally." [ 287 ] Following this type of expectation, many investors put their money into government bonds, even if the real yield on the bonds was close to zero, or negative. According to a mid-2024 estimate, "About 25-30 percent of all investment grade debt in the world now trades at negative rates".

[ 288 ] In the crash of 2007–2009, the property values of US homes dropped by about 30% on average, and around one in every five mortgaged homes was suddenly "under water" (where the loaned amount was at least 25% higher, than the estimated market value of the home – in the "normal" situation, at most 1 out of 50 mortgaged homes would be "underwater"). Between 2007 and 2016 there were 7.8 million foreclosures of mortgaged homes in the US, where households under financial pressure were forced out.

[ 289 ] This was equivalent to around one quarter of all mortgaged homes. Subsequently, the housing market recovered. Yet ten years later, more than 5 million American mortgaged homes (around one in ten owner-occupied mortgaged homes) were still seriously "underwater".

[ 290 ] New School researchers found that, between the spring of 2009 and the fall of 2011, about 45 percent of the US workers they studied saw their retirement account-balances decrease by thousands of dollars. For many workers, renewed gains in pension funds after the 2008 financial crisis could only partly offset the losses.

[ 291 ] In the old capitalism, working people were rewarded for saving money, but in the new financialized capitalism, they are often punished for saving.

[ 292 ] There is no certainty anymore what exactly their savings will be worth, when they retire. What is certain is that the current generation of US pensioners is the first one since World War II which is financially worse off than the preceding generation.

[ 293 ] The situation in Europe and Japan is much the same.

[ 294 ] Larry Fink , the CEO and Chairman of the giant BlackRock corporation, summarized the US and global retirement situation as follows: “More than half the assets BlackRock manages are for retirement. We help about 35 million Americans invest for life after work, which amounts to about a quarter of the country’s workers – including roughly half of U.S. public school teachers. At the same time, nearly half of Americans aged 55 to 65 report not having a single dollar saved in personal retirement accounts. Nothing in a pension. Zero in an IRA or 401(k) . This predicament — which exists across the globe — leads us to conclude: It’s time to rethink retirement. (...) Living longer should be a blessing. And yet we know one of Americans’ top fears is outliving their savings. That’s because the shift from defined benefit to defined contribution has been, for most people, a shift from financial certainty to financial uncertainty.” [ 295 ] A 2024 report by US senator Bernie Sanders provides more details on the finances of US seniors.

[ 296 ] In August 2025, Newsweek magazine reported [ 297 ] that according to a survey by the Transamerica Center for Retirement Studies ( TCRS ), the top two retirement fears of Americans are “declining health that would require long-term care” (39%) and “Social Security being reduced or ceasing to exist in the future” (37%). The latest Social Security Trustees report had stated that if the OASI Trust Fund and the DI Trust Fund projections were combined, the resulting projected fund (designated OASDI ) would be able to pay out full benefits only until 2034, when continuing total fund income would be sufficient to pay only 81% of scheduled benefits.

[ 298 ] Price volatility [ edit ] Price volatility can be a boon to speculators (if the trend goes their way), but to many business people it is a pain, as became clear for example in the Brexit controversy. Much of global production is now subject to intellectual property rights (IPRs), yet the commercial value of knowledge, data and information can be volatile. IPRs are often difficult to defend against raiders, when people's privacy is destroyed. Knowledge and information can not only spike in value, but also quickly become worthless. Many financial products now exist, such as level 3 assets [ 299 ] and cryptocurrencies , of which the exact value is unknown or highly variable. Global market volatility can rapidly wipe out trillions of dollars of value.

[ 300 ] Financial Times editor Gillian Tett reported that: "… the real danger in finance is the not one that tends to be discussed: that banks will topple over (as they did in 2008). It is, rather, the threat that investors and investment groups will be wiped out by wild price swings from an unexpected political shock, be that central bank policy swings, trade bans, election results or Brexit . 'Investors have been driven into investments where they have very little capability for dealing with what is on their plate,' Mr Weber observed. 'You can nowadays see the entire return that you expect for a year being wiped out for a single day move in the market. And that is an unprecedented situation.' " [ 301 ] Stock market volatility is measured by the VIX (the CBOE Volatility Index), colloquially known as the "fear index" or the "fear gauge". The financial community and the political class try to do their best to maintain the stability of society, but they cannot fully control what all the people and all the markets are going to do. For example, a majority of Brits unexpectedly voted for a Brexit , throwing a spanner in the works. After 28 January 2018, about $4 trillion worth of stock value in stock markets disappeared in little more than a week, although the stock markets subsequently recovered.

[ 302 ] In 2025, financial journalist Rana Foroohar [ 303 ] highlighted concerns that in the future a severe cryptocurrency crash could both trigger and worsen a new credit crisis, prompting a new depression - because a fast-growing mass of volatile crypto assets is used as collateral for credit, part of it backed with government safety guarantees (in economic jargon, crypto gradually becomes “embedded” in the ordinary financial system). Many crypto trades lack transparency, making them ideal tools for money laundering while also prompting calls for greater government supervision.

[ 304 ] For well-insured rich people, it may not be so devastating if they lose part of their capital (they can often recover it within a few years, using the capital they still have), [ 305 ] but the worry is what sudden, very large losses can do to the world economy. If there are no sales, there is no market; if there is no market, there is no income; if there is no income, the value of assets and property falls and debts cannot be repaid. The magnitude and negative impact of price volatility on trade (including foreign exchange rates) is usually greater in less developed (poorer) countries, because they lack a sophisticated financial system, hedging facilities to reduce currency risks, and financial buffers to cope with sudden, major changes in prices.

[ 306 ] Thomas Hobbes , writing his Leviathan in the 17th century, remarked that: "The value, or worth of a man, is, as of all other things, his price, that is to say, so much as would be given for the use of his power: and therefore is not absolute; but a thing dependent on the need and judgement of another." [ 307 ] In a digitalized, globalized 21st century world, buzzing with possibilities to connect or disconnect, people may start to regard themselves – seriously or surrealistically – as a kind of "stock" in the social marketplace, with a rather volatile value, which goes up and down all the time – whether they like that, or not. Depending on the public or private perceptions of what they do or don't do with themselves, their value goes up, or it goes down, and it can do so more or less instantly.

[ 308 ] The value of a person who is an outlier could go up and down like a yoyo , because the process of price discovery is difficult. This can become a challenge, causing uncertainty, discomfort or ambivalence, if it is difficult to control or evade.

[ 309 ] It creates pressures to "manage" the impressions that other people have (see also impression management ). It could affect the way people dress, where they go, who they connect with, and so on, all of which could influence perceptions of their "worth", and consequently whether they get endorsements or rejections.

[ 310 ] All these forms of "price volatility" suggest, that there is a dimension of "value" now gaining prominence, which is to an important extent unpredictable, capricious, uncontrollable and elusive, tricking even the most powerful government institutions at times. The sociologist Zygmunt Bauman refers to a new era of " liquid modernity ", which alters the whole way in which individuals see themselves, and their relationship with others and the world.

[ 311 ] Unreliable valuations [ edit ] To defeat competitors, dodge taxes and please investors, businesses increasingly fiddle their accounts and hide parts of their operations. Aided by multiple subsidiary or associated companies – often sited in different countries – company holdings, earnings and operations can be "tweaked": liabilities can be turned into assets, assets into liabilities; incomes can be turned into costs, and costs into incomes; and operating cash flows can be altered – according to the kind of accounting method that is most favourable for the business group (see also creative accounting ). In 2004, Trevor S. Harris , a chief accounting analyst at Morgan Stanley stated that "The financial reporting system is completely broken." [ 312 ] This begins to upset the traditional economic rationality of costs and benefits in market activity (in particular, it becomes legally possible to get rich through debt leverage which indebts other people).

If the value of a company to investors is defined as the present value of future cash flows, it is not primarily what the company has achieved financially in the present that is important, but what that achievement is "likely" to be worth in the future . This motivates companies to present attractive numbers to investors. In Australia , the Financial Review reported in 2016 that 40% of ASX top-500 companies use "non-standard" financial measures such as "underlying profit" and "underlying earnings", calling into question the very purpose of having uniform accounting standards.

[ 313 ] KPMG researchers found that many ASX200 companies were not fully complying with government guidelines for reporting financial data to investors.

[ 314 ] Similar stories can be found in most other countries. The Financial Times quoted a boardmember of an auditing firm as saying that "The problem with fair value accounting is that it's very hard to differentiate between mark-to-market , mark-to-model and mark-to-myth." [ 315 ] Through stock buybacks a company can drive up its share price, and deliver earnings to shareholders without any change in company performance – if corporate officers get paid in stocks and stock options, they get a pay rise every time the stock's value rises.

[ 316 ] In February 2018, the US Senate Democrats released a special report which stated that a sample of just 33 corporations were planning $209 billion worth of buybacks in 2018, while at the same time laying off large numbers of workers.

[ 317 ] According to Goldman Sachs , US companies authorized $1 trillion worth of stock buybacks in 2018, [ 318 ] while Europe, Canada, Japan and industrialized East Asian countries also got into the act with a combined $248 billion of buyouts in the first half of 2018.

[ 319 ] The global equity market was "shrinking at the fastest pace in at least two decades" although its total value was still increasing, partly due to buybacks pushing up stock prices.

[ 320 ] The Financial Times raised the spectre of the "slow death of public stock markets"': "The basic agreement around public markets for most of the 20th century was this: owners had to open the books, quarter after quarter, and in return they got access to the private savings of ordinary citizens. What we're seeing now is that corporations have access to enough private savings of wealthy citizens that they're walking away from the deal... We know less about what companies are doing." [ 321 ] The general effect is, that the true economic value or benefit of what business does, becomes more difficult to know; transparency is lacking. Shareholders are encouraged to have faith in a company, although there may in truth exist no reliable valuation of company operations. In October 2010, the EU dropped the idea of a financial transactions tax (a Tobin tax or Robin Hood tax ), citing among its reasons the bewildering complexity of international transactions, which makes implementing and enforcing the tax far too difficult and costly.

[ 322 ] The commons [ edit ] The ordinary capitalist logic fails to provide any agreed standard valuation, or property right, for new kinds of "semi-public" goods that are considered to have a lot of economic value, such as social networks, collective intellectual and cultural assets,  eco-systems, and stocks of non-renewable natural resources. These resources are often called "the commons " (nobody owns them, or everybody owns them, so therefore somebody can take them).

[ 323 ] Realistic pricing by business presumes that things can be privately owned and sold (or leased, rented, hired etc.). If resources can be obtained and used without cost (because they are "free goods") or accessible at near-zero cost, they are more likely to be plundered or wasted.

[ 324 ] For example, in the Pacific Ocean , there are a lot of fish in the open sea, nobody owns them, and they are harvested using industrial fishing techniques with giant dragnets. The result is, that fish stocks are decreasing very fast (see also Fishing down the food web ).

[ 325 ] The feasibility of generating new fish populations depends on whether the food chain on which the fish depend is still there.

The invention of an ingenious system of global carbon emissions trading , which priced carbon emissions, and promoted trade in pollution allowances to reduce pollution in the air that we breathe, failed to reach its goal.

[ 326 ] For the year 2015, health experts estimated conservatively that 9 million premature deaths in the world (that is 16% of all the deaths that occur in the world per year, i.e. 4 deaths out of every 25 deaths per year) were attributable to pollution, with air pollution being the biggest killer. The biggest numbers of pollution deaths occur in Africa, China, India, Pakistan and Bangladesh. Only around 155,000 Americans die from pollution per year (out of 2.7 million deaths per year, i.e. about 1 pollution death in every 17 deaths per year) – in the West, the pollution problem "dropped off the radar", as the focus was on global warming.

[ 327 ] Network sites such as Facebook and LinkedIn do not make their money directly from having access to other people's friendships, but from selling information, advertising, broadcasting, games, sponsorships and access privileges. The Facebook–Cambridge Analytica data scandal indicated that the for-profit, legalized robbery and exploitation of information about people's known personal networks – amongst other things to dupe them into voting for right-wing politicians – has become a big business internationally. Gigantic data thefts nowadays occur every year, but the victims may never know that their data and work was stolen, or who stole it.

[ 328 ] In 2016, it was reported that an estimated 4 billion data records were stolen by hackers.

[ 329 ] However, when people sign up for accounts with Google, Amazon, Facebook, Microsoft etc. they have no idea of what their personal data (trillions of records) are going to be used for. People often don't even know how to protect their own data or their own privacy, other than not to use their computer. Corporations can legally "scrape" gigantic amounts of personal information, and do with it what they like – people will probably never know what happened, and they cannot find out what happened, even if they tried.

[ 330 ] Misvaluation of work [ edit ] The rewards and valuations for work effort, trade unionists complain, have gone way out of proportion, so that many people work extremely hard for long hours, just to earn a few dollars, while others get paid gigantic sums of money just to have a chat, to be present, or to give a bit of attention.

[ 331 ] A US study published in May 2018 by Minnesota 's Democratic US congressman Keith Ellison found that the average CEO-to-worker pay ratio had reached 339 to 1, with the highest pay gap approaching 5,000 to 1 (for every dollar an ordinary worker earns, a CEO on average gets $339 and can earn close to $5,000).

[ 332 ] According to Martin A. Sullivan, chief economist with Tax Analysts , "The way you get rich in this world is not by working hard. It's by owning large amounts of assets and having those things appreciate in value." [ 333 ] The argument is here not that CEO's "do not work hard", but that they and other wealthy people could never accumulate all the wealth that they do, simply from their own salary. The wealth accumulates faster, through wealth managers leveraging and trading personal assets for profit and capital gain. "Little of Jeff Bezos ’ and Bill Gates 's wealth, for instance, came from wages, salaries, and benefits... It came from owning stock".

[ 334 ] Martin Wolf stated in 2018 that "If the natural tendency of our economies is towards ever-rising rent extraction and inequality, with all its dire social and political results, we need to respond in a thoughtful and determined way. That is the great challenge." [ 335 ] Kevin Bales reports that "for the first time in human history, there is an absolute glut of potential slaves... with so many possible slaves, their value has plummeted. Slaves are now so cheap, that they have become cost-effective in many new kinds of work. (...) Slaveholders get all the work they can out of their slaves, and then throw them away." [ 336 ] In 2017, the ILO estimated conservatively that across 2011–2016, 89 million people (roughly equal to the population of Germany or the Democratic Republic of Congo ) were enslaved worldwide for shorter or longer intervals of time, 25 million were permanently subject to forced labour, 15 million females were enslaved in a forced marriage, and 152 million children aged between 5 and 17 were subjected to child labour. There are estimated to be about 400,000 slaves in the United States . Of all slaves, two out of three are female (see also Global Slavery Index ).

[ 337 ] James Crotty argues that top executives in the financial world nowadays get richly rewarded regardless of whether there is a crash or a boom. Since they just keep getting huge bonus payments, even when their own company suffers very large losses, they are "perversely incentivized" to continue the high-risk and high-leverage investment strategies which destabilize the financial system as a whole.

[ 338 ] Yet even if CEO's would take a drastic pay cut, the fact remains that total debt levels are escalating regardless, and require more and more earnings from any source, to pay more and more interest on loans – which pits private investors against central banks when the banks try to raise rates.

The argument then is, that if the financial incentives and disincentives for work effort have gone totally out of kilter, markets cannot deliver a fair and efficient allocation of resources anymore.

Market failure [ edit ] Governments are involved more and more in sorting out market failure (and pick up the tab for it – see also lemon socialism ).

[ 339 ] An editor of the Financial Times , Martin Wolf , remarked famously about the financial sector that "No [other] industry has a comparable talent for privatising gains and socialising losses." [ 340 ] Some years later, he explained that "Today's banks represent the incarnation of profit-seeking behaviour taken to its logical limits, in which the only question asked by senior staff is not what is their duty or their responsibility, but what can they get away with." [ 341 ] Yet the role of bank services is crucial to operate gigantic transaction volumes, while governments have fewer and fewer resources available to repair business damage, because of privatization, state corruption, and the looting of state funds or tax-dodging by private interests ( kickbacks , privatization , pork barrel politics, lobby group power, corporatization , securitization , rent-seeking , arbitrary budget cuts, financial bailouts , regressive tax , tax evasion etc.).

[ 342 ] People across the world are now literally being priced out of markets, not just in poor countries, [ 343 ] but also in rich countries.

[ 344 ] According to a McKinsey Global report, "In the United States, 40 percent of adults surveyed by the Federal Reserve System said they would struggle to cover an unexpected expense of $400. One-quarter of nonretired adults have no pension or retirement savings. Outstanding student loans now top $1.4 trillion, exceeding credit-card debt—and unlike nearly all other forms of debt, they cannot be discharged in bankruptcy." [ 345 ] In San Francisco , well-paid teachers are living in dorms, because they cannot afford to buy a home in the city anymore – house prices have gone beyond their reach.

[ 346 ] This is the reverse situation of what happened in the property boom up to 2007. At that time, quite a few Californian teachers found they could make more money from rising property values, than from their job. In 2017, only half of the households in California owned their homes, but one out of every three renters – roughly six million people – paid more than half of their total income to their landlord.

[ 347 ] In Los Angeles , tenants staged a rent strike in protest.

[ 348 ] Richard Florida reported in 2017 that "An acre of central land in New York City is worth approximately 72 times more than an acre of central Atlanta or Pittsburgh , and almost 1,400 times more than the same in many small Rust Belt and Sunbelt metros." [ 349 ] On behalf of many of the world's large cities, the mayor of Barcelona called on the United Nations to do something to help stop real estate speculators from driving up the cost of housing.

[ 350 ] The Cities for Adequate Housing statement signed by mayors of eight big cities calls for more powers for local authorities, to better regulate the real estate market; more funds to improve public housing stock; more tools to co-produce alternative public-private and community-driven housing solutions; urban planning schemes that combine adequate housing and quality neighborhoods that are both inclusive and sustainable; and city council cooperation in residential strategies.

[ 351 ] Although on average people are now living longer than they did before, the 2017 Global Medical Trends Survey Report by Willis Towers Watson states that "The cost of medical care continues to rise across the globe with no light at the end of the tunnel." [ 352 ] Americans like to see themselves as the most advanced nation on earth, but to get the same medical care and cover as Europeans, Americans spend 2.5 times more money; Americans have the highest medical bills on earth.

[ 353 ] At the same time, American baby mortality rates were higher than in Europe, and American average life expectancy was 4 years lower than in Europe.

[ 354 ] In 2024, Americans were carrying at least $220 billion in medical debts.

[ 355 ] In 2016, New Zealand researchers reported that during 2013, at least one in every 100 New Zealanders was de facto homeless, compared with 1 in 120 in 2006, and 1 in 130 in 2001.

[ 356 ] They sleep at a friend's place or with relatives, in motels, garages, sheds, cars, stations etc. At that time, in 2016, the country was at the top of Knight Frank 's global ranking of countries for property price-rises, and for the first time, the average house price in Auckland hit NZ$1 million (=US$715,000, €585,000, £513,000).

[ 357 ] The median NZ salary was at US$35,000, meaning that the average Auckland house price was around 20x the median annual salary or around 10x median household income.

[ 358 ] Average Auckland house prices are expected to increase 300% in twenty years, and reach NZ$3 million by 2036.

[ 359 ] The warped price structures of financialized capitalism increasingly cause large social dislocations and technical change across the world, because it is no longer economically possible for large masses of people to live and work in the normal way, within large geographic areas. They have to change their lifestyle drastically, or are forced out.

[ 360 ] The rich buy up the beautiful areas, and the poor have to live in the ugly, derelict and polluted areas.

[ 361 ] As rich people cause the largest amount of pollution, [ 362 ] many poor people take a dim view of bourgeois environmentalism aiming to protect nature.

[ 363 ] Yet great poverty can also be destructive for the environment. Suffering hyperinflation of the Zimbabwean dollar and absolute poverty, [ 364 ] masses of people in Zimbabwe took to cutting down forest, wildlife poaching [ 365 ] and gold or diamond mining on own initiative, to make a living and survive (See also Marange diamond fields ). It is estimated that between 1990 and 2005, Zimbabwe lost 21 percent (one-fifth) of its forest cover (i.e. 4.7 million hectares), and currently 313,000 hectares of forest disappear every year.

[ 366 ] In 2013, 15% of the deforestation concerned land-clearing for tobacco-farming, and getting firewood for tobacco-curing.

[ 367 ] According to a Zimbabwe Conservation Task Force report in June 2007, more than half of all Zimbabwe's wildlife had died since 2000, due to poaching and deforestation.

[ 368 ] Land degradation is expected to cause major soil erosion, plus flooding and groundwater-pollution problems, significantly reducing the habitable farmland area.

[ 369 ] According to its Environmental Management Authority, for several years Zimbabwe lost an average of one million hectares of forest and grassland per year to veld fires , mainly due to anthropogenic causes: landclearing, wildlife hunters, conflicts/arson and negligence (according to FAO , the total land area of Zimbabwe is about 39 million hectares, including 33.3 million hectares of designated farmland and 6 million hectares of designated national parks).

[ 370 ] Rich people are increasingly on the move too, trying to escape from high taxes, unsafe conditions, environmental hazards and socio-political instability. According to the Global Wealth Migration Review 2018 , some 95,000 millionaires ( HNWIs ) migrated in 2017, top destinations being North America, Australasia, United Arab Emirates, Israel, Switzerland and Singapore. The exit of wealthy people affected mainly China, India, Turkey, United Kingdom, France, Russia, Brazil, Indonesia, Saudi Arabia, Nigeria and Venezuela.

[ 371 ] According to 2024 data, the long-run trend is for the annual number of millionaires who emigrate to increase, although there was a drop during the coronavirus pandemic in 2020-2022.

[ 372 ] Organizational instability [ edit ] The management of both business and government organizations has become permanently unstable, and restructuring is nowadays a never-ending process, [ 373 ] so that staff is constantly being replaced or shifted around, while work systems are being redesigned all the time – giving rise to complaints that nothing works anymore like it should and that there is no job security anymore.

[ 374 ] If job security is gone, workers have less freedom, because they have less control over what will or might happen to their lives in the future; it becomes more difficult for them to make good life-choices and plans, if they don't even have reasonably good information about what is likely to happen, financially or otherwise. If things are in flux, or in a chaos, it gets hard to know what can be concluded from the experience of what happens and judge things well. Sufficient order and predictability are needed, to be able to learn and adapt constructively to new situations.

[ 375 ] According to the Dutch central bank, half the fall of the Dutch wage-share in the country's net value-added across 1996–2015 was attributable to "labour market flexibilization".

[ 376 ] Throwing more money at the problems however may not solve very much organizationally, although employees are grateful for extra cash. Repeatedly the money just disappears down a hole.

[ 377 ] When some of America's most powerful and well-resourced corporations were paid billions of dollars to rebuild Iraq , it turned out that they couldn't even organize basic things properly, like getting the power, water and gas connected again.

[ 378 ] There is much uncertainty and unease about what the future might bring, because nobody really knows for sure what will happen, except that new crises are likely.

The Global Risks Report 2018 of the elite World Economic Forum group envisages the scenario of "the death of trade", or "the end of trade as we know it".

[ 379 ] This would involve escalating trade wars , currency wars , and geopolitical turmoil that spreads quickly around the globe, with weak regulatory bodies powerless to resolve anything. International laws, agreements and conventions would no longer be heeded; commercial trade would be governed by the law of the jungle and military power.

Similarly, in April 2018, IMF managing director Christine Lagarde referred to anxieties about global trade and tariff wars, a few years into the future. She said that national protectionist policies could tear apart the institutional and legal frameworks governing global trade.

[ 380 ] The informal circuit [ edit ] Globally, the shadow economy , the informal sector , the scope of criminal activity, [ 381 ] corruption, [ 382 ] and the unemployed " surplus population " [ 383 ] all remain very large.

[ 384 ] A lot of petty crime is no longer reported or recorded, since the police does not have the resources to cope with it, and victims do not bother to report it anymore.

[ 385 ] Kiki Seokhee Yoon states that "To the best of our knowledge, the probability that a crime will be reported is about 50 percent or less." [ 386 ] Buonanno et al. (2017) say that "measuring crime is a challenging issue for social scientists".

[ 387 ] According to CNN Money , top executives at the so-called too big to fail banks "avoided any criminal charges, even as their banks paid tens of billions of dollars in fines to settle charges of wrongdoing leading up to the financial crisis ." [ 388 ] Friedrich Schneider however claims the shadow economy is decreasing in the long run.

[ 389 ] The Corruption Perceptions Index is only an indicator of corruption in the public sector of the economy, and not of corruption in the private sector, even although the private sector is much larger than the public sector. This index cannot show whether the total amount of corruption globally is increasing, constant, or decreasing. A more comprehensive measure is the Global Corruption Barometer .

In the world's expanding slums [ 390 ] and mega-slums, [ 391 ] the informal sector dominates, and it is typically riddled with conflicts that have to be managed somehow.

[ 392 ] In ‘failed communities’ and lawless zones, gangs incubate, and they evolve into organized armed groups. The gangs can gain influence, because instruments of social control are weak or absent. As a force among people marginalized by neoliberal globalization , gangs are a significant and growing global phenomenon, with millions of members.

[ 393 ] The longterm evolution of gangs is characterized by growing sophistication in their operations, networks and cells, by politicization and by internationalization. "Third-generation gangs" evolve political aims, operate internationally and gain power through mercenary and political activity, including the infiltration of law enforcement and other government agencies. In the long run, they become "more than a crime problem".

[ 394 ] According to Robert and Pamela Bunker, "During epochal transitions, the boundaries between crime and war break down, old economies subside, and new and more profitable ones arise, social class patterns are rearranged (along with other aspects of the earlier epoch) due to societal conventions, and state institutions become obsolete and dysfunctional." [ 395 ] Ernest Mandel argued that in a criminalized capitalism, where the state and the private sector increasingly work together to rob, intimidate and exploit the people, crime does pay. The decay of bourgeois values may not automatically prompt a struggle for better values. It could also lead to a long-term degeneration of all human values, the destruction of humanism , and the disappearance of belief in the sanctity of human life and in the defense of human dignity.

[ 396 ] Alternatives [ edit ] More and more alternatives are developing to the capitalist mode of production, for the purpose of making a life, for allocating resources, for work and for organizing production (see also Sharing economy ).

[ 397 ] There is growing interest again in producer and consumer cooperatives.

[ 398 ] There are proposals for "platform socialism".

[ 399 ] If people share instead of competing, they can often reduce their costs. This insight is especially important to people when they have become impoverished.

A simple principle of mutualism and insurance is that if many or all people contribute a relatively small part of their income to a common fund, each of them can be protected against financial losses which not all of them experience at the same time (for example, unemployment, illness, accidents, disability etc.). A critique of the idea of Creating shared value is provided by Paolo Ricci et al.

[ 400 ] Many systems of alternative currency have been invented (see Complementary currency ).

There are also proposals for an economy without money.

[ 401 ] There are now many companies such as Robinhood Markets which offer digital apps for small savers to trade stocks fast, at a very low cost (not everybody thinks that this is an alternative to capitalism, never mind a socialist alternative, although Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels both traded in stocks.

[ 402 ] According to leftist degrowth theory, people should steadily learn to do more with less, more efficiently. They should not own or use more resources and assets than they really need. And they should wean themselves off consumer habits which are harmful, polluting and/or unsustainable . This would enable a reallocation of resources, so that all people can have a good life, but in an environmentally friendly way. However, according to liberal theorists Ezra Klein and Derek Thompson , the focus should not be on austerity, but on creating abundance through building affordable housing and better infrastructure.

[ 403 ] The abundance theory has also been criticized.

[ 404 ] Employee-owned and managed enterprises remain quite popular [ 405 ] (see also Employee Stock Ownership Plan , Workers' self-management and associated articles).

[ 406 ] There is renewed interest in understanding how real socialist economies actually worked in the 20th century, although (1) libraries deleted a lot of scientific literature about this subject, (2) it is not taught anymore, and (3) Western Marxists deny that socialism ever existed.

There exist many proposals for a market socialism with multiple forms of property (see also Criticism of value-form theory ).

There are many different groups across the world who are working on systems for sustainable production, trade, distribution and consumption, and creating systems for recycling producer and consumer waste.

Prospects [ edit ] The overall economic importance of these ten trends for capitalist value relations is disputed, among other things because they have always existed to some or other extent. It isn't clear, in what sense quantitative changes also imply qualitative changes in the functioning of capitalist society, or to what extent qualitative changes are quantitatively significant.

Critics of capitalism argue that there are problems for capitalism today that cannot be solved at all, within the framework of capitalist value relations.

[ 407 ] Supporters of capitalism argue that ways will be found to get round the problems, and that capitalism is flexible or resilient enough to overcome all crises.

[ 408 ] The supporters of Henryk Grossman are firmly focused on the collapse of capitalism, when total surplus value shrinks and class struggle intensifies.

[ 409 ] Another position says that the problems can be solved within capitalism in some piecemeal or ad hoc way, but that this occurs at the expense of a gradual degeneration of capitalism.

[ 410 ] Some argue that capitalism is evolving or mutating into a digital capitalism , post-capitalism , cognitive capitalism, managerial capitalism, hypercapitalism, cybercapitalism, semiocapitalism or "habitation society" – with different kinds of property rights and work organization.

[ 411 ] The term late capitalism has made a comeback in the United States, as an ironic expression referring to absurd, hypocritical, unjust and fake aspects of contemporary business civilization.

[ 412 ] Paul Krugman stated in 2018 that "I’ve had several interviews lately in which I was asked whether capitalism had reached a dead end, and needed to be replaced with something else. I'm never sure what the interviewers have in mind; neither, I suspect, do they." [ 413 ] There are also intellectuals on the Left and the Right who argue that, if present trends continue, we are headed for a mediocre, dumbed down capitalism, where expectations are low, economic growth is lacklustre and nothing works properly anymore.

[ 414 ] According to David Brooks , "Progressives, who believe in using government to do good things, have built a system that renders government incompetent".

[ 415 ] There is no evidence of broad agreement about the future of capitalism, the prognoses are difficult to prove, and all kinds of things could contingently happen, depending on what people will or will not do.

[ 416 ] All the different perspectives may have part of the truth.

Hillel Ticktin , the editor of the socialist journal Critique , describes the global situation as "an intermediate period in a transitional world." [ 417 ] Mark Blaug argued that "the central weakness of modern economics" is "the reluctance to produce the theories that yield unambiguously refutable implications, followed by a general unwillingness to confront those implications with the facts." [ 418 ] These days accurate and comprehensive forecasts are worth gigantic amounts of money, and so, such forecasts often become a well-guarded secret. A lot of research is no longer being done, because if it is done, it is immediately stolen without trace (by hackers, brainpickers and burglars who want to cream off and head off the most advanced ideas at their point of production, in real time). In 2018, The Economist Intelligence Unit ranked a severe cyber attack crippling corporate and government activities among the top 10 risks to the global economy.

[ 419 ] At the micro-level, Dutch researchers studied a sample of 1,058 youths aged 12 to 18 years in 2018, and found that 5.1% of youths said they had sometimes hacked without permission into email accounts, 15,2% into mobile phones, and 5,4% into networks. Around 12% said they hadn't done it, but could do it. 54.6% said they would "never hack", but 45.4% said they might give it a try.

[ 420 ] In the wake of each big capitalist crisis, both Marxists [ 421 ] and non-Marxists [ 422 ] have prophesied the end of capitalism.

[ 423 ] Critics of breakdown theories, by contrast, argue that systemic crises, though hardly pleasant, are precisely the way through which the developmental problems and growing pains of capitalist business are resolved.

[ 424 ] Each crisis can also be approached not as a cause of misery, but as an opportunity to do things differently, or to realize the things that powerful people wanted to get done for a long time already.

[ 425 ] Things "get to the crunch" and when they do, business leaders and politicians have to do something about them.

[ 426 ] Through terrible ordeals, new techniques for managing, controlling,  exploiting and killing people are evolved, which later go mainstream.

[ 427 ] And, after a fierce competition (or a war) involving capitalists, workers, states and nations, a new era of economic growth usually opens up. In the new era, typically a completely new group of capitalists takes the driving seat.

[ 428 ] So although it might "seem like" the end of capitalism is nigh, it could also be merely a transition to a new kind of capitalism – a new capitalist regime, which evolved out of what was there before, but which few people had thought of, before it emerged.

[ 429 ] As an allocation principle, the forms of value could possibly be much more persistent and long-lasting than Marxists and socialists think, even if they mutate into new configurations.

It is also possible that a new scientific understanding of socialism and communism will still emerge in the future, that sheds new light on the role of value in human society.

[ 430 ] So far, this understanding is actively blocked and suppressed by Western Marxist academics, among other things because they believe that socialism never existed and/or cannot exist, and that value, markets and money are basically the same things. Some argue, that socialism should not exist, only full communism should exist [ 431 ] – with many nice clothes, houses, Ferraris, [ 432 ] yachts, [ 433 ] etc.

Ernest Mandel states that, for the top communist functionaries in the Stalinist era, there was a sense in which communism already existed. Firstly, whenever these communist leaders withdrew funds from their Gosbank account to buy things, their debit was automatically cancelled out with a new credit to the same amount. Secondly, they could go to special shops not accessible to the general public, where they could buy almost anything they wanted. The elite banking practice was stopped by Nikita Khrushchev 's government.

[ 434 ] Thermodynamics [ edit ] John Bellamy Foster and Paul Burkett (2018) state that "...we are seeing today numerous attempts to conceptualize commodity value as the product not just of human labor, but of animal labor in general and, beyond that, of energy in general".

[ 226 ] Since 2016, the post-Keynesian economist Steve Keen has argued that any credible theory of value, whether classical, neo-classical or heterodox, must be consistent with the physical laws of thermodynamics . He claims that "every school of thought from the Neoclassicals to the Marxists" had been wrong on this issue, and all previous theories of economic value are flawed for that reason. This is not a new idea (it was raised by Elmar Altvater in 1991, [ 435 ] Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen in 1971, [ 436 ] and Frederick Soddy in 1921) [ 437 ] but Keen proposes a new type of production function , in which energy plays an essential role.

[ 438 ] The economist Anwar Shaikh however rejects the neo-classical concept of the production function as kind of sudoku game, [ 439 ] preferring a reconstructed classical economics solidly based on the econometric evidence about capitalist markets and business operations.

[ 440 ] See also [ edit ] Commodity (Marxism) criticism of value-form theory Critique of political economy Exchange value Monetary theory of value Neue Marx-Lektüre Silent barter Socialist market economy Types of socialism Use value References [ edit ] ^ In English, one would normally say "the form of value", "the form that value takes" or "the form in which value is expressed" but the expression "value-form" is often used, because of the specific concept that Marx had in mind.

^ Samezō Kuruma , Marx’s Theory of the Genesis of Money.

Leiden: Brill, 2018.

^ Helmut Brentel, Soziale Form und ökonomisches Objekt. Studien zum Gegenstands- und Methodenverständnis der Kritik der politischen Ökonomie . Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien, 1989. Hoon Hong, "Marx's value forms and Hayek's rules: a reinterpretation in the light of the dichotomy between physis and nomos ." Cambridge Review of Economics , Vol. 26, No. 5, September 2002, pp. 613-635.

^ "What I proceed from is the simplest social form in which the product of labour presents itself in contemporary society, and this is the "commodity." This I analyse, initially in the form in which it appears.  Here I find that on the one hand in its natural form it is a thing for use, alias a use-value; on the other hand, a bearer of exchange-value, and from this point of view it is itself an "exchange-value." Further analysis of the latter shows me that exchange-value is merely a "form of appearance," an independent way of presenting the value contained in the commodity, and then I start on the analysis of the latter...  the concrete social form of the product of labour, the "commodity," is on the one hand, use-value and on the other, "value," not exchange value, since the mere form of appearance is not its own content." — Karl Marx, Notes on Adolph Wagner's "Lehrbuch der politischen Ökonomie , 1879.

[1] ^ "A commodity appears at first sight an extremely obvious, trivial thing. But its analysis brings out that it is a very strange thing, abounding in metaphysical subtleties and theological niceties." – Marx, Capital, Vol. 1 , Penguin edition 1976, p. 163. Marx's way of storytelling is aimed at getting people to think about the topic, and to overcome problem-blindness, i.e. overcome the inability to understand that there is something to be explained, or  how it can be explained.

^ "The individual commodity viewed as the product, the actual elementary component of capital that has been generated and reproduced, differs then from the individual commodity with which we began, and which we regarded as an autonomous article, as the precondition [ Voraussetzung ] of capital formation." – Karl Marx, "Results of the immediate process of production", in: Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I , Penguin 1976, p. 966 (translation corrected).

^ "Capital cannot come into being except on the foundation of the circulation of commodities (including money), i.e. where trade has already grown to a certain given degree. For their part, however, the production and circulation of commodities do not at all imply the existence of the capitalist mode of production... they may be found even in 'pre-bourgeois modes of production'. They constitute the historical premiss of the capitalist mode of production." – Marx, "Results of the immediate process of production", appendix in Capital, Volume 1 . Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1976, p. 1005.

[2] ^ Jan Hoff, Marx Worldwide; on the development of the international discourse on Marx since 1965 . Leiden: Brill, 2017; Pichit Likitkijsomboon, "Marxian Theories of Value-Form".

Review of Radical Political Economics , vol. 27 no. 2, June 1995, pp. 73-105.

^ Helmut Reichelt , "From the Frankfurt School to Value-Form Analysis".

Thesis Eleven , No. 4, 1982, pp. 166–169; Marx200 webpage, Form-analytical and value-theoretical readings of Marx (from the mid-1960s) [n.d.] [3] ; Roberto Fineschi, "Dialectic of the Commodity and Its Exposition: The German Debate in the 1970s — A Personal Survey". In: Riccardo Bellofiore & Roberto Fineschi, Re-reading Marx: new perspectives after the critical edition . Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009, pp. 50-70.

^ Isaak Illich Rubin , Essays on Marx's theory of value . Detroit: Black & Red, 1973.

^ For example, Ian Steedman & Paul Sweezy (eds.), The value controversy . London: Verso, 1981; Derek Sayer, Marx's method – ideology, science and critique in Capital , 2nd edition. Sussex: Harvester Press, 1983; Simon Mohun, "Value, Value Form and Money", in Simon Mohun (ed.), Debates in Value Theory . Macmillan: London, 1994; Alfredo Saad-Filho , The value of Marx . London: Routledge, 2002, section 2.2; Costas Lapavitsas , Social foundations of money, markets and credit . London: Routledge, 2003; Michael Heinrich , Die Wissenschaft vom Wert . Münster: Verlag Westfälisches Dampfboot, 2001; Michael Heinrich , How to read Marx's Capital: commentary and explanations on the beginning chapters . New York: Monthly Review Press, 2021; Fred Moseley , Marx’s Theory of Value in Chapter 1 of Capital. A Critique of Heinrich’s Value-Form Interpretation . Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan/Springer, 2023; Guido Starosta et al., Value, Money and Capital. The Critique of Political Economy and Contemporary Capitalism . London: Routledge, 2024.

^ Hans-Georg Backhaus , Dialektik der Wertform , 2nd. edition. Freiburg: ça ira Verlag, 2011. Riccardo Bellofiore and Tommaso Redolfi Riva, "Hans-Georg Backhaus: the critique of premonetary theories of value and the perverted forms of economic reality. In: Beverly Best et al. (eds.), The Sage handbook of Frankfurt School Critical Theory . London: Sage, 2018, pp. 386-401.

^ Neil Larsen, Mathias Nilges, Josh Robinson, and Nicholas Brown (eds.), Marxism and the Critique of Value . Chicago: MCM Publishing, 2014.

[4] [5] ^ Kei Ehara, "The Japanese history of Marxian value-form analysis: Focusing on the Unoist approach." In: The Japanese Political Economy , Vol. 50, issue 1, 2023; Samezō Kuruma , Marx’s Theory of the Genesis of Money . Leiden: Brill, 2018; Kiyoshi Nagatani, "Value-form and the mystery of money".

Capital & Class , Volume 44, Issue 1, January 2019; Makoto Itoh , "The evolution of the concept of value and its historical ground: from Marx's dialogue with Aristotle".

World Review of Political Economy , Vol. 2, No. 2, Summer 2011, pp. 193-204.

^ Anwar M. Shaikh , Capitalism: competition, conflict, crises . New York: Oxford University Press, 2016, chapter 5; Makoto Itoh & Costas Lapavitsas , Political economy of money and finance . New York: Macmillan Press, 1999, chapters 1 and 2; Isaak Illich Rubin , Essays on Marx's theory of value . Detroit: Black & Red, 1973; Geoffrey Ingham , The nature of money . Cambridge: Polity Press, 2004.

^ Karl Marx , Capital, Volume I , chapter 1, section 3.

^ There exists a large international literature which documents how, alongside the growth of mercantile trade, the technology of weights and measures developed, as well as the standardization of measurement. See, for example, G.J.C. Nipper, Meten en wegen in de Lage Landen ["Measuring and weighing in the Low Countries"]. Zutphen: Walburg Pers, 2004. In practical life, physical measurement has always been an essential dimension of value, not just for the transport, handling, installation and storage of goods, but because it is required to assess and account for the value of traded objects. This was already known for millenia before the modern science of econometrics was invented.

^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I , Pelican edition, pp. 141–142.

^ When, at the beginning.. we said... that a commodity is both a use-value and an exchange-value, this was, strictly speaking, wrong. A commodity is a use-value or object of utility, and a 'value'. It appears as the twofold thing it really is as soon as its value possesses its own particular form of manifestation, which is distinct from its natural form. This form of manifestation is exchange-value, and the commodity never has this form when looked at in isolation, but only when it is in a value-relation or an exchange relation with a second commodity of a different kind." – Marx, Capital, Volume 1 , Penguin edition 1976, p. 152.

^ Hans G. Ehrbar, "Critical realist arguments in Marx's Capital ", pp. 43–56 in: Andrew Brown, Steve Fleetwood and John Michael Roberts (eds.), Critical Realism and Marxism . London: Routledge, 2002.

^ Anwar M. Shaikh & E. Ahmet Tonak, Measuring the wealth of nations: the political economy of national accounts . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.

^ Capital, Volume I , Penguin ed., pp. 89–90.

^ Marx, Capital, Volume I , Penguin ed. 1976, p. 273.

^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I , Penguin 1976, p. 139.

^ Wolfgang Streeck , "The Fourth Power?".

New Left Review #110, March–April 2018, p. 141.

[6] ^ David Marantz, African friends and money matters: observations from Africa . Dallas (TX): SIL International/International museum of cultures, 2001.

^ Capital, Volume I , Penguin ed., p. 90.

^ Capital, Volume I , Penguin ed., p. 94.

^ The original version is translated in: Karl Marx, "The Value Form", Capital and Class , No.4, Spring 1978, pp. 130–150.

[7] , or Albert Dragstedt (ed.), Value: studies by Marx . London:  New Park Publications, 1976.

^ The original 1867 value-form text in chapter 1 section 3 is available in German, in: Karl Marx, Das Kapital. Kritik der Politischen Ökonomie. Erster Band , Hamburg: Otto Meissner Verlag, 1867.

Marx-Engels Gesamtausgabe (MEGA2), Part II/5, 1983 ISBN 9783050033778. The complete 1867 text of section 3 is however not yet translated into English, but some passages are translated in Terrell F. Carver, Karl Marx: Texts on Method . Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1975.

^ Hans-Georg Backhaus, "The Dialectics of the Value-Form".

Thesis Eleven , Vol. 1, Issue 1, 1980, pp. 99-120, at p. 100.

^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I , Penguin, 1976, p. 90. Marx also uses the expressions "elementary form" [ Elementarform ] and "germinal form" [ Keimform ]. See further: Bob Jessop, “‘Every beginning is difficult, holds in all sciences’: Marx on the economic cell form in capital and the analysis of capitalist social formations”, in: Marcello Musto et al. (eds.), Marx’s Capital after 150 years . Abingdon: Routledge, 2019, pp. 54-82.

^ Richard H. Britnell, The Commercialisation of English Society, 1000-1500 . Manchester University Press, 1997.

^ The distinction between partial commodity production (alongside subsistence production) and generalized (or universalized) commodity production is referred to by Marx in chapter 2 (“The process of exchange”) and chapter 3 (“Money, or the circulation of commodities”) of Capital, Vol. 1 ; in the 1864 manuscript "Results of the immediate process of production", included as appendix in: Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. 1 , Penguin edition 1976; also available in Marx Engels Collected Works (MECW), Vol. 34, 1994.

[8] ; and in Capital Vol. 3 , chapter 20 (“Historical material on merchant’s capital”) and chapter 36 (“Pre-capitalist relations”). Marx makes it very clear that various forms of commodities, money and capital already exist for a very long time before the emergence of the capitalist mode of production, alongside subsistence production, slave production and other sorts of production.

^ Marx describes capitalist society as "a society where the commodity-form is the universal form of the product of labour, hence the dominant social relation is the relation between people as possessors of commodities".  He argues that "The capitalist epoch is... characterized by the fact that labour-power, in the eyes of the worker himself, takes on the form of a commodity which is his property; his labour consequently takes on the form of wage-labour... it is only from this moment that the commodity-form of the products of labour becomes universal." Thus, "...from the moment there is a free sale, by the worker himself, of labour power as a commodity... from then onwards... commodity production is generalized and becomes the typical form of production." – Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I , Penguin edition 1976, resp. p. 152, p. 274, p. 733.

^ Marx, Grundrisse , Penguin 1973, p. 881; Grundrisse der Kritik der politischen Ökonomie (Rohentwurf) 1857-1858, Anhang 1850-1859 (Frankfurt: Europäische Verlagsanstalt, 1970 paperback reprint), p. 763; MECW 29, p. 252.

^ Adam Smith , The wealth of nations (1776), David Ricardo , On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation (1817).

^ Isaak Illich Rubin , Essays on Marx's theory of value . Detroit: Black & Red, 1972, p. 37ff and p. 137ff.

^ Guido Starosta, "The Commodity-Form and the Dialectical Method: On the Structure of Marx's Exposition in chapter 1 of 'Capital'." Science & Society , Vol. 72, No. 3, July 2008, pp. 295–318.

^ The German term for transformation is Verwandlung , which also means metamorphosis . In the evolution from one form to another, part of its content is preserved, while part of it is changed. Marx details numerous "transformations" in methods of working and trading, which results in transformations of the meaning of the economic categories which are used to understand them. See Jindřich Zelený, The Logic of Marx . Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1980.

^ Roman Rosdolsky , The Making of Marx's Capital . London: Pluto, 1977.

^ Jindřich Zelený, The Logic of Marx . Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1980.

^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume III , Penguin 1981, p. 956.

^ Andre Gunder Frank,  "Equating Economic Forecasting with Astrology is an Insult – to Astrologers". In: Contemporary Crisis (Amsterdam), Vol. 4, No. 4, 1978, pp. 97–102 and Andre Gunder Frank "On Losing Sight of the Forest for Looking at the Trees". In: Development & Change (The Hague), Vol. 15, No. 3, July 1984, pp. 457–463; Philippe Rich, "Economic forecasting: any better than astrology?" The Bull & Bear , 1 February 2015.

[9] ^ Karl Marx, A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (1859), ^ Currently the best English translation is published by Penguin Books and Vintage Books.

^ Christopher J. Arthur, "Hegel's Theory of the Value Form" [1988]. Reprinted in: Christopher J. Arthur, The new dialectic and Marx's Capital . Leiden: Brill, 2004, pp. 175–199; Christopher J. Arthur, "Marx, Hegel and the Value-Form". In: Fred Moseley and Tony Smith (eds.), Marx's Capital and Hegel's Logic: A Reexamination . Leiden: Brill, 2014, pp. 269–291. Arthur bases himself on: György Lukács , The Young Hegel : studies in the relations between dialectics and economics . London: Merlin Press, 1975.

^ Ronald L. Meek, "Karl Marx's economic method", in: Ronald L. Meek, Studies in the labour theory of value , 2nd edition. New York: Monthly Review Press, 1976, p. 302f; Jindřich Zelený, The Logic of Marx . Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1980, p. 50.

^ See Tino Heim, Metamorphosen des Kapitals: kapitalistische Vergesellschaftung und Perspektiven einer kritischen Sozialwissenschaft nach Marx, Foucault und Bourdieu . Bielefeld: transcript Verlag, 2013.

^ Bertell Ollman , Alienation , 2nd ed. Cambridge University Press, 1976, p. 187-194; Andrea Ricci, "Metamorphoses of Value. The Concept of a Commodity in Marx's Capital".

Quaderni di economia, matematica e statistica , Vol. 27, Issue 9, 2017, pp. 1–23.

^ Bertell Ollman , Alienation: Marx's conception of man in capitalist society , 2nd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976, p. 191f.

^ Thomas T. Sekine, "The necessity of the law of value".

Science & Society , Vol. 44, No. 3, Fall 1980, pp. 289–304.

^ "...the value of a commodity is determined not by the quantity of labour actually objectified in it, but by the quantity of living labour necessary to produce it." — Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I , Penguin 1976, p. 676-677. "...the value of commodities is determined not by the labour-time originally taken by their production, but rather by the labour-time that their reproduction takes, and this steadily decreases as the social productivity of labour develops." — Marx, Capital, Volume III , Penguin 1981, p. 522.

^ Nasser Saber, Speculative capital: the invisible hand of global finance . London: Pearson Education Ltd, 1999, p. 39f.

^ Some classic texts on primitive and ancient trade are: Marshall Sahlins, Stone age economics . London: Tavistock Publications, 1974; Karl Polanyi et al., Trade and markets in the ancient empires . Glencoe: The Free Press, 1957; J.A. Sabloff & C.C. Lamberg-Karlovsky (eds.), Ancient civilization and trade . Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1975. Peter Garnsey et al., Trade in the Ancient Economy . University of California Press, 1983; Philip D. Curtin, Cross-Cultural Trade in World History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984; Cynthia Clark Northrup and Jerry H. Bentley (eds.), Encyclopedia of World Trade: From Ancient Times to the Present . Routledge, 2004; A. Hingston Quiggin, A survey of primitive money; the beginnings of currency . London: Methuen & Co., 1949; Paul Einzig, Primitive money in its ethnological, historical and economic aspects . Pergamon, 1966; Richard L. Smith, Premodern trade in World History . Milton Park: Routledge, 2009.

^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I , Pelican edition, p. 182.

^ Hans-Georg Backhaus , Dialektik der Wertform , 2nd. edition. Freiburg: ça ira Verlag, 2011, pp. 93–128.

^ Letter of Friedrich Engels to Werner Sombart , 11 March 1895.

[10] ^ Marshall Sahlins , Stone age economics . London: Tavistock Publications, 1974, p. 289.

^ Jean-Michel Servet, "Primitive order and archaic trade, Part II". In: Economy & Society , Vol. 11, No. 1, February 1982, p. 22-58, at p. 22.

^ See Wolfgang Fritz Haug , Critique of Commodity Aesthetics: Appearance, Sexuality and Advertising in Capitalist Society.

Introduced by Stuart Hall. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1986, chapter 1; Alfred Sohn-Rethel, Intellectual and manual labour: a critique of epistemology . London: Macmillan, 1978; Craig Pritchard, "Value: an inquiry into relations, forms and struggles". In: Raza Mir et al., The Routledge Companion to Philosophy in Organization Studies . Milton Park: Routledge, 2016, pp. 575 – 583.

^ Capital, Volume I , Penguin ed., pp. 179–180.

^ Mario Bunge , "A model for processes combining competition with cooperation".

Applied Mathematical Modelling , Vol. 1, Issue 1, June 1976, pp. 21–23.

[11] ^ Marx, Capital Vol 1 , Penguin 1976, p. 178ff.

^ Penguin ed., p. 241ff.

^ Alfred Sohn-Rethel, Intellectual and manual labour: a critique of epistemology . London: Macmillan, 1978; Zoe Sherman, "Opening Value Theory to the Brand".

Rethinking Marxism , Vol. 29, No. 4, 2017, pp. 592–609.

^ Thomas Seelig et al., Trade: commodities, communication and consciousness . Zürich: Scalo Publishers/Fotomuseum Winterhur, 2001.

^ Alfred Sohn-Rethel, Intellectual and manual labour: a critique of epistemology . London: Macmillan, 1978; Helmut Brentel, Soziale Form und ökonomisches Objekt. Studien zum Gegenstands- und Methodenverständnis der Kritik der politischen Ökonomie . Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien, 1989, pp. 285, 309–310, 321.

^ Derek Sayer, Marx's method . Hassocks, Sussex: The Harvester Press, 1979, chapter 2: "The language of commodities".

^ Julius O. Sensat, "Marx’s Inverted World".

Topoi , Vol. 15, Issue 2, 1996, pp. 177-188. By topsy-turvy world, Marx means mainly that objects become subjects and vice versa, or that means become ends, or vice versa, with the effect that the true relationship between cause and effect is inverted and that things are no longer what they seem to be. Another translation is "a looking-glass world", after Lewis Carroll , defined by the OED as "An imaginary place conceived of as being visible in the image shown in a looking-glass, especially one in which the principles which underpin the real world (as the rules of logic, the laws of physics, etc.) operate differently, or in reverse." [12] ^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I , Penguin 1976, pp. 143–144 (sexist translation by Ben Fowkes corrected).

^ Friedrich Hayek recognized that market participation does not require complete understanding of markets and prices. See F. A. Hayek, "Coping With Ignorance".

Imprimis , Volume 7, Number 7, July 1978.

[13] ^ Most Central Banks nowadays have mathematical models which can predict the total pattern of purchases and sales in their country with considerable accuracy.

^ W. Stanley Jevons, Money and the Mechanism of Exchange . New York: D. Appleton & Co., 1896, chapter 1.

[14] ^ Costas Lapavitsas , "Money as 'universal equivalent' and its origin in commodity exchange". Working Paper, SOAS, University of London, May 2003.

[15] ^ For example, Ernest Mandel , Karl Marx , Part 4: "For Marx, labour is value." [16] Bertell Ollman Alienation: Marx's conception of man in capitalist society . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1975, chapter 26, p. 176 (2nd ed. p. 175). Guglielmo Carchedi, Frontiers of political economy . London: Verso, 1991, p. 102.

^ Karl Marx , Capital, Volume I , Penguin ed., p. 146.

^ Michel Aglietta , Money: 5,000 years of debt and power . London: Verso, 2018, part 1: "Money as a relation of social belonging", pp. 11-16.

^ Eric Rutkow, American Canopy: Trees, Forests, and the Making of a Nation . Scribner, 2012.

^ A. Hingston Quiggin, A survey of primitive money; the beginnings of currency . London: Methuen & Co., 1949. Paul Einzig, Primitive money in its ethnological, historical and economic aspects . Pergamon, 1966.

^ Robert K. Englund, [17] "Proto-cuneiform account-books and journals", in: Michael Hudson and Cornelia Wunsch [18] , Creating Economic Order: Recordkeeping, standardization and the development of accounting in the ancient Near East . Bethesda: CDL, 2004, pp. 23-46.

^ Karl Marx , Capital, Volume I , Penguin ed., p. 183.

^ Marx, Capital, Vol. 1 , Penguin edition 1976, p. 188.

^ Marx, Capital, Volume 1 , Penguin edition 1976, pp. 186 and 187.

^ Karl Marx, Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 , in Marx-Engels Collected Works , Vol. 3. Moscow: Progress, 1975, p. 312. Karl Marx, Capital, Volume II , chapter 4.

[19] .

^ Bruce G. Trigger , Understanding Ancient Civilizations . Cambridge University Press, 2003, p. 343.

^ "In the eurozone, for example, currency in circulation is just 9 per cent of broad money (M3)" – Martin Wolf, "Intolerable choices for the eurozone".

Financial Times , 31 May 2011. In the US, it is about 7%; in 1960 according to Federal Reserve data series, it was about 50%.

^ “As [Marx] himself stressed in volume 3 of Capital… capitalism was intimately linked to the development of new forms of credit money… Why did Marx seemingly erase the politics of money from at least the surface of Capital?... The effect of the omission has been confounding and deeply unfortunate. (…) In fact, Marx’s account of capital emerged out of a close study of the history of money and monetary theory, as well as the emergence of credit markets.” - Stefan Eich, The currency of politics. The political theory of money from Aristotle to Keynes . Princeton University Press, 2022, pp. 107-108.

[20] ^ Henry C. K. Liu, "The London Gold Market", Asia Times , 27 January 2011.

^ See Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I , chapter 3 section 3C.

[21] ^ Jan Toporowski, "How the Global Crisis Is Transmitted to Developing Countries", Development Viewpoint , No. 24, February 2009.

[22] ^ There is a long-running academic dispute about whether the development of the form of value presented by Marx describes an historical sequence, whether it is only a logical exposition, or whether it is both. According to Jindřich Zelený, "Marx and Engels formulate the origin of money at different times in different ways, depending on whether they want to express the dialectical-logical derivation (genesis) in the form of the 'ideal expression' of the reality under investigation or whether they have in mind the 'historical' genesis" – Jindřich Zelený, The Logic of Marx . Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1980, p. 54.

^ Jacques Nagels, Laissez faire, laissez troquer . Brussels: University of Brussels, 1986.

^ Bertram Schefold, "Die Bedeutung des Problems der Wertformlehre und der Transformation von Werten in Preise für das Kapital." In: Marx-Engels Jahrbuch 2007 . Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 2008, p. 39.

^ The causal mechanism of price discovery is however not altogether clear, since it could be that the interaction of traders necessary for price discovery determines prices, or that inversely prices determine the interaction of traders.

^ US Bureau of Labor Statistics , Overview of BLS Wage Data by Area and Occupation [23] ^ See for example the Internet app called Google Lens .

^ Ernest Mandel , Marxist Economic Theory . London: Merlin press, 1968, Vol. 1, pp. 88-127. Michael Hudson & Marc van de Mieroop (eds.), Debt and economic renewal in the ancient Near East . Bethesda, Maryland: CDL Press, 2002.

^ "Interest-bearing capital, or, to describe it in its archaic form, usurer's capital, belongs together with its twin brother, merchant's capital, to the antediluvian forms of capital which long precede the capitalist mode of production and are to be found in the most diverse socio-economic formations." – Karl Marx, Capital, Volume III , Penguin 1981, ch. 36, p. 728.

^ "The production and circulation of commodities can still take place even though the great mass of the objects produced are intended for the immediate requirements of their producers, and are not turned into commodities, so that the process of social production is as yet by no means dominated in its length and breadth by exchange-value." – Marx, Capital, Volume 1 , Penguin edition 1976, p. 273.

^ Marx describes capitalist society as "a society where the commodity-form is the universal form of the product of labour, hence the dominant social relation is the relation between people as possessors of commodities". He argues that "The capitalist epoch is... characterized by the fact that labour-power, in the eyes of the worker himself, takes on the form of a commodity which is his property; his labour consequently takes on the form of wage-labour... it is only from this moment that the commodity-form of the products of labour becomes universal." Thus, "...from the moment there is a free sale, by the worker himself, of labour power as a commodity... from then onwards... commodity production is generalized and becomes the typical form of production." – Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I , Penguin edition 1976, resp. p. 152, p. 274, p. 733. The concept of generalized commodity production is explained clearly in Marx, "Results of the immediate process of production", appendix in Capital, Volume 1 . Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1976, pp. 949-950 et seq .

^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume III , Penguin ed., p. 182 and p. 278. Some archaeologists and scholars of ancient trade reject the idea that primitive trade occurred initially only in the periphery of economic communities. "The earliest phases of cross-cultural trade are lost beyond any possibility of historical reconstruction. (…) But it is possible to imagine that the earliest cross-cultural trade took place during random encounters of hunting bands, or that it was mixed with phases of warfare. One can also imagine that the earliest trade between different communities took place at the border between them." – Philip D. Curtin, Cross-Cultural Trade in World History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984, pp. 1–2.

^ Richard Britnell, "Commerce and Capitalism in Late Medieval England: Problems of Description and Theory".

Journal of Historical Sociology , Vol. 6, No. 4, December 1993, pp. 359–376.

^ Samezō Kuruma, Marx's Theory of the Genesis of Money . Leiden: Brill, 2017.

^ See: Richard Sennett, The Craftsman . Yale University Press, 2009.

^ Alessandro Gerosa, The Hipster Economy: Taste and Authenticity in Late Modern Capitalism . London: UCL Press, 2024.

^ Viktor Mayer-Schönberger and Thomas Ramge , Reinventing capitalism in the age of big data . London: John Murray, 2018, p. 52f.

^ Oskar Morgenstern , On the accuracy of economic observations , 2nd ed. Princeton University Press, 1963; Michael Ward, Quantifying the world. UN ideas and statistics . Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2004; John Irvine, Ian Miles & Jeff Evans (eds), Demystifying Social Statistics , Pluto, London, 1979; Radical Statistics Group website [24] ^ For example, during the 2024 US election, many liberals were baffled about why voters rejected the Democratic Party candidates. After all, wasn't it true that the GDP number was rising, and the inflation number was coming down? See: Martin Wolf , “Biden has to find a way to convince Americans on the economy”, Financial Times 7 May 2024; Eugene Ludwig , "Voters Were Right About the Economy. The Data Was Wrong".

Politico.com , 11 February 2025.

[25] .

^ Philip D. Curtin, Cross-cultural trade in world history . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984.

^ See the articles on 20th century conflicts per year Category:20th-century conflicts by year .

^ Kelsey D. Atherton, "Is War Really In Decline?".

Popular Science ,5 September 2013.

[26] ^ See Cuban Missile Crisis .

^ Rosa Luxemburg, "Peace Utopias" [6–8 May 1911], in:  Richard B. Day and Daniel Gaido (eds.)., Discovering Imperialism; Social Democracy to World War I . Leiden: Brill, 2011, pp 441–457.

[27] ^ "Throughout this work I assume that gold is the money commodity, for the sake of simplicity." – Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I , Penguin edition, chapter 3, p. 188.

^ Makoto Itoh and Costas Lapavitsas, Political economy of money and finance . London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002, p.6.

^ Dick Bryan & Michael Rafferty, Capitalism with derivatives. A political economy of financial derivatives, capital and class . Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006, pp. 1–2.

^ The U.S.

Financial Accounting Standards Board states that valuing "level 3 assets"  (complex financial products) requires "assumptions about the assumptions market participants would use in pricing the asset" ( Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 157, 2010, A25, p. 24.

^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume III , Penguin 1982, chapter 30, p. 607f.

^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume III , Penguin 1982, chapter 25, p. 525f.

^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I , Penguin 1976, p. 197. Cédric Durand, Fictitious capital. How finance is appropriating our future . London: Verso, 2017.

^ Marx, Capital, Volume I , Pelican Books, p. 174, note 34.

^ Patrick Murray, Marx's theory of scientific knowledge. Atlantic Highlands, N.J.: Humanities Press, 1988, p. 163f.

^ For Marx's discussion of the price form in the Grundrisse , see: Adalbert G. Lallier, The economics of the Grundrisse: an annotated summary . New York: St, Martins Press, 1989, chapter 11. See also Karl Marx, Grundrisse , Penguin edition 1973, pp. 136-147.

^ "Exchange value posited in terms of money is price"- Karl Marx & Frederick Engels , Collected Works , Vol. 28, p. 124.

^ Viktor Mayer-Schönberger and Thomas Ramge, Reinventing capitalism in the age of big data.

London: John Murray, 2018, p. 52.

^ Frank A. Fetter, "The definition of price".

The American Economic Review , Vol. 2, No. 4, December 1912, pp. 783–813.

^ See any comprehensive Latin dictionary, e.g. Charlton T. Lewis & Charles Short, A Latin Dictionary . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1879.

[28] Or see wordhippo.com [29] ^ Stephen Gudeman, Economy's Tension: The Dialectics of Community and Market.

New York:  Berghahn Books, 2008, p. 64.

^ See: Karl Marx & Frederick Engels, Letters on Capital . London: New Park Publications, 1983, p. 108. In the final text, the simplest price form is expressed as "X quantity of use-value = Y quantity of money", contrasting with the value of commodities.

^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I , Penguin 1976, p. 197.

^ Peter M. Lichtenstein, An introduction to Post-Keynesian and Marxian theories of value and price . London: Routledge, 1983, chapter 11 ff.

^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume III , Penguin edition, 1981, p. 308.

^ Makoto Itoh and Costas Lapavitsas, Political economy of money and finance . London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002, p. 6. See also Howard Nicholas, Marx's theory of price and its modern rivals . London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011; Adalbert G. Lallier, The economics of the Grundrisse: an annotated summary . New York: St, Martins Press, 1989, chapter 11.

^ For more information, see e.g. Olav Velthuis, "An Interpretive Approach to Meanings of Prices".

The Review of Austrian Economics , Vol. 17, Issue 4, 2004, pp. 371–386.

[30] ; Akash Miharia et al., "The Symbolic Work of Prices". In: Review of Austrian Economics , July 2022.

[31] ; J. Beckert, "Where do prices come from? Sociological approaches to price formation".

Socio-Economic Review , Vol. 9, No. 4, 2011, pp. 757–86.
In a surreal desert scene from the movie The Mexican , Jerry Welbach (played by Brad Pitt ) approaches a solitary traffic light positioned at a desolate road crossing in the middle of nowhere. The light turns red, although there is no traffic anywhere in sight. After hesitating and looking around, Jerry decides to cross the road. At that very moment, a vehicle unexpectedly appears.

^ "Modern economic theory tends to view prices and quantities as the fundamental objects of scientific explanation, and value merely as a way of summing the prices of commodities. The classical economists and Marx, on the other hand, viewed value itself as a fundamental object of investigation, with its own laws and determinants that were prior to the determination of price." – Duncan Foley , Money, accumulation and crisis . Abingdon: Routledge, 2001, p. 4.

^ Francisco Paulo Cipolla, "The concept of market value: a critical note on Itoh's theory".

Review of Radical Political Economics , Vol. 40, Issue 4, 2008.

^ See further: Juan Iñigo Carrera, "The reason for being of value or price according to political economy", translation of chapter 1 by Leonardo Kosloff in Carrera, Conocer el capital hoy. Usar crísticamente El Capital. Volumen I. La mercancía, o la conciencia libre como forma de la conciencia enajenada . Buenos Aires: Imago Mundi, 2007.

[32] Archived 25 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ Koray Çalışkan, "Price as a Market Device: Cotton Trading in Izmir Mercantile Exchange". In M. Callon, Y. Millo and F. Muniesa (eds.) Market Devices . London: Blackwell Publishing, 2007, p. 241.

^ Viktor Mayer-Schönberger and Thomas Ramge, Reinventing capitalism in the age of big data . London: John Murray, 2018, p. 52.

^ See further Scott Meikle, Aristotle's economic thought . Oxford: Clarendon, 1995; Mark Blaug (ed.), Aristotle (384–322 BC) . Aldershot: Elgar, 1991; Cosimo Perrotta, "Economic Value and Moral Value in Aristotle", in: Tony Aspromourgos and John Lodewijks (eds.), History and Political Economy. Essays in Honour of P.D. Groenewegen . London: Routledge, 2004; Spencer J. Pack, Aristotle, Adam Smith and Karl Marx. On Some Fundamental Issues in 21st Century Political Economy . Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2010, Part 1; Makoto Itoh , "The evolution of the concept of value and its historical ground: from Marx's dialogue with Aritotle".

World Review of Political Economy , Vol. 2, No. 2, Summer 2011, pp. 193-204.

^ This is explained by Marx in his book A contribution to the critique of political economy (1859).

^ Cornelius Castoriadis , "Value, equality, justice, politics: from Marx to Aristotle and from Aristotle to ourselves", in: Cornelius Castoriadis, Crossroads in the labyrinth . Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1984, pp. 260–339.

^ "Nicomachean Ethics" .

www.virtuescience.com .

^ Evald Ilyenkov, The Dialectics of the Abstract and the Concrete in Marx's Capital , Moscow: Progress, 1982, p. 93.

^ Aristotle, Ethica Nicomachea , Book V, Part V: 1133b5–20, in M. D. Ross (ed.) The Works of Aristotle , vol. IX, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1949. Cited in: Sasan Fayazmanesh, Money and Exchange: Folktales and reality . New York: Routledge, 2006, p. 22.

^ Karl Marx , Capital, Volume I , Penguin ed. 1976, pp. 174–175.

^ A. Anikin, A science in its youth: pre-Marxian political economy . Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1975, p. 80. Marx was probably not aware of Ibn Khaldun , a Tunesian who wrote his 1377 treatise on political economy (the Muqaddimah ) in Algeria .

^ The history of the "classical" tradition is discussed quite well in: Ronald L. Meek , Studies in the labor theory of value . New York: Monthly Review Press, 2nd ed. 1975.

Isaac Ilyich Rubin , A history of economic thought . London: Ink Links, 1979. Isaak Il'ich Rubin, "Towards a history of the text of the first chapter of Marx's Capital (1929)", pp. 583–618, in: Richard B. Day & Daniel F. Gaido (eds.), Responses to Marx's Capital: from Rudolf Hilferding to Isaak Illich Rubin . Leiden: Bril, 2018.

[33] ^ Isaac I. Rubin, Essays of Marx's theory of value . New York: Black Rose Books, 1973, chapter 12; Derek Sayer, Marx's method . Hassocks, Sussex: The Harvester Press, 1979, pp. 37–41; Ulrich Krause, Money & abstract labour; on the analytical foundations of political economy . London: NLB, 1982, p. 161-162 note 1; Helmut Brentel, Soziale Form und ökonomisches Objekt. Studien zum Gegenstands- und Methodenverständnis der Kritik der politischen Ökonomie . Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien, 1989, chapter 3; Patrick Murray, "The Grammar of Value: A Close Look at Marx's Critique of Samuel Bailey", in: Patrick Murray, The mismeasure of wealth: Essays on Marx and Social Form . Leiden: Brill Publishers, 2016, pp. 189–219; Samuel Bailey, A critical dissertation on the nature, measures, and causes of value; chiefly in reference to Mr Ricardo and his followers . London: R. Hunter, 1825; Samuel Bailey, Money and Its Vicissitudes in Value; as They Affect National Industry and Pecuniary Contracts : with a Postscript on Joint Stock Banks . London, 1837; See Karl Marx, Theories of Surplus Value . Moscow: Progress Publishers, 1978, Part III, pp.139–168, or Marx Engels Collected Works , Vol. 32 (New York: International Publishers, 1989), pp. 313–353. Robert M. Rauner, Samuel Bailey and the Classical Theory of Value . London: LSE, 1961.

^ Patrick Murray, "Avoiding Bad Abstractions A Defense of Co-constitutive Value-Form Theory." In: Critique of political economy , Vol. 1 No. 1, September 2011, pp. 217–248, at p. 219.

[34] ^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I , Penguin 1976, p. 141 note 17.

^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume II , Penguin 1978, p. 186.

^ Thomas Seelig et al., Trade: commodities, communication and consciousness . Zürich: Scalo Publishers/Fotomuseum Winterhur, 2001.

^ Roman Rosdolsky , The Making of Marx's Capital . London: Pluto, 1977, chapter 5.

^ See Karl Marx, Grundrisse , Pelican edition 1973, pp. 171–172.

^ Anitra Nelson, Marx's concept of money: the god of commodities . London: Routledge, 1999, chapter 2.

^ Marx Engels Collected Works , Vol. 3, pp 322–326.

^ Christian A. Smith, "‘Verdammt Metall’: Marx's use of Shakespeare in his Critique of Exchange-value".

Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Volume 45, Issue 1–2, pp. 101–116, 2017; Joe Luna, "Money, die Ware , and Marx's Shakespeare".

Textual Practice , 30 April 2015, pp. 1–21; Anne Paolucci, "Marx, Money, and Shakespeare: The Hegelian Core in Marxist Shakespeare-Criticism." Mosaic: A Journal for the Interdisciplinary Study of Literature , Vol.10, No. 3, April 1977, pp. 139–156.

^ Karl Marx & Friedrich Engels, Letters on Capital . London: New Park, 1983, pp. 107–108.

^ Karl Marx, "The Value Form", Capital and Class , No.4, Spring 1978, pp. 130–150, at p. 134.

[35] , or Albert Dragstedt, Value: studies by Marx . London: New Park Publications, 1976, p. 49.

^ Marx-Engels Gesamtausgabe II/6 (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1987). See: Barbara Lietz, "Zur Entwicklung der Werttheorie in den "Ergänzungen und Veränderungen zum ersten Band des 'Kapitals' (Dezember 1871-,Januar 1872)". In: Beiträge zur Marx-Engels-Forschung , Heft 23, 1987, pp. 26-33 [36] ; Fred Moseley , Marx’s Theory of Value in Chapter 1 of Capital. A Critique of Heinrich’s Value-Form Interpretation . Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan/Springer, 2023, chapter 3; and Michael Heinrich, How to Read Marx’s Capital . Monthly Review Press 2021, appendix 4, pp. 375-381.

^ Friedrich Engels , Anti-Dühring – Herr Eugen Dühring's Revolution in Science (1878), Part III, chapter 4. In: Marx Engels Collected Works , Vol. 25, p. 295.

^ These facts are not palatable to the modern "value-form Marxists", almost all of whom are "anti-Engels". None of them mention Engels as the precursor of the Marxist  "value-form school".

^ Nikolai Bukharin and Evgeny Preobrazhensky , The ABC of communism (introd.

Edward H. Carr ). Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1969; Victor Serge , Year One of the Russian Revolution . Chicago: Haymarket, 2015, p. 254f.

^ Zinaida Krylova, Fostering ideological staunchness.

Moscow: Novosti Press Agency, 1978.

^ J. Wilczynski, Profit, Risk and Incentives under Socialist Economic Planning . Barnes & Noble, 1973., ^ Thomas F. Remington, Building socialism in Bolshevik Russia: ideology and industrial organization 1917–1921 . Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1984.

^ Anton Antonov-Ovseyenko, The Time of Stalin: Portrait of a Tyranny . New York: Harper & Row, 1981.

^ Robert C. Allen, Farm to Factory: A Reinterpretation of the Soviet Industrial Revolution . Princeton University Press, 2009.

^ Oleg Shchedrov, "Putin honours Stalin victims 70 years after terror." Reuters, 30 October 2007.

[37] ^ J. V. Stalin , "On the Draft Constitution of the U.S.S.R. Report Delivered at the Extraordinary Eighth Congress of Soviets of the U.S.S.R. 25 November 1936." In: Joseph Stalin, Works . London: Red Star Press Ltd, 1978.

[38] ^ Michael Kaser , "The Debate on the Law of Value in the USSR, 1941–53".In: Vincent Barnett & Joachim Zweynert (ed.), Economics in Russia: studies in intellectual history . Aldershot: Ashgate, 2008, pp. 141–156.

^ Joseph V. Stalin , Economics problems in the USSR (1951). Peking: Foreign Languages Press, 1972, chapter 3.

[39] ^ This point was elaborated in: John Bellamy Foster with Paul Burkett, "Value Isn't Everything", Monthly Review , Vol 70, Issue 6, November 2018.

[40] ^ See: Allen Oakley, Marx's critique of political economy . London: Routledge, 1985.

^ Jacques Bidet , Exploring Marx's Capital: philosophical, economic and political dimensions . Leiden: Brill, 2007, chapters 2 & 3.

^ Gilles Dostaler, [41] Marx, la valeur et économie politique . Paris: Editions Anthropos, 1978, p. 44.

^ Utz-Peter Reich, National Accounts and Economic Value: A Study in Concepts . New York: Palgrave, 2001.

^ "Modern economic theory tends to view prices and quantities as the fundamental objects of scientific explanation, and value merely as a way of summing the prices of commodities." – Duncan Foley , Money, accumulation and crisis . Abingdon: Routledge, 2001, p. 4.

^ Howard Engelskirchen, Capital as a Social Kind: Definitions and Transformations in the Critique of Political Economy.

London: Routledge, 2011.

^ Ladislaus von Bortkiewicz, "Value and Price in the Marxian System", International Economic Papers, no. 2, 1952, p. 6, note 2.

[42] ^ Michael Heinrich, How to Read Marx’s Capital . Monthly Review Press 2021; Fred Moseley , Marx’s Theory of Value in Chapter 1 of Capital. A Critique of Heinrich’s Value-Form Interpretation . Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan/Springer, 2023.

^ John Eatwell, "absolute and exchangeable value". In: Steven N. Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume (ed.), The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , Second Edition, 2008.

^ Arne Heise, "'When the facts change, I change my mind...'Some developments in the economic scientific community and the situation in Germany." Real World Economics Review , issue 62, December 2012. Paul Davidson, Financial markets, money and the real world . Cheltenham: Edward Elgar, 2002, p. 43.

^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume III , chapter 45 [43] .

^ Karl Marx , Capital, Volume I , Penguin ed. 1976, p. 186.

^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume I , Penguin 1976, p. 167.

^ Roman Rosdolsky , The Making of Marx's Capital . London: Pluto, 1977, p. 118ff.

^ Roman Rosdolsky , The Making of Marx's Capital . London: Pluto, 1977. I.I. Rubin, Essays on Marx's theory of value . Detroit: Black & Red, 1972.

^ Ronald L. Meek, "Marx's economic method", in: Studies in the labour theory of value . New York: Monthly Review Press, 2nd. ed. 1973, p. 148f.

^ See the first part of the first chapter of Capital, Volume I ; Marx distinguishes between "use-value" and "value", and then considers successively the substance of value, the magnitude of value and the form of value. The point is made very explicit in Marx, Capital, Volume I , Penguin 1976, pp. 149–152.

^ Capital, Volume III , chapter 1.

^ Prices below value can create extra profit per accounting interval through faster sales, while prices above value can create extra profit per product unit sold.

^ Makoto Itoh , The basic theory of capitalism: the forms and substance of the capitalist economy.

London: Macmillan, 1988.

^ "Economic Manuscripts: Theories of Surplus-Value, Chapter 3" .

www.marxists.org .

^ Makoto Itoh and Costas Lapavitsas, Political economy of money and finance . London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002, p.5 & 12).

^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume III , Penguin 1981, p. 892.

^ Robert Paul Wolff, Moneybags Must be So Lucky: On the Literary Structure of Capital . Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 1988, p. 48.

^ Simon Clarke , "The Basic Theory of Capitalism:  A Critical Review of Itoh and the Uno School".

Capital and Class , #37, 1989, pp. 133–150 at p. 139.

^ John Weeks , Capital, Exploitation and Economic Crisis . London: Routledge, 2010, p. 4.

^ Roberto Fineschi, "Dialectic of the Commodity and Its Exposition: The German Debate in the 1970s — A Personal Survey". In: Riccardo Bellofiore & Roberto Fineschi, Re-reading Marx: new perspectives after the critical edition . Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009, pp. 50-70, at p.51.

^ Robert Kurz , Einführung zum Marx lesen: Die wichtigsten Texte von Karl Marx für das 21. Jahrhundert , 4e Auflage. Frankfurt: Eichborn Verlag, 2010.

[44] ^ Pichit Likitkijsomboon, "Marxian Theories of Value-Form".

Review of Radical Political Economics , vol. 27 no. 2, June 1995, pp. 73–105.

^ Karl Marx , Capital, Volume I , Penguin ed., 1976, p. 90.

^ Louis Althusser, "Preface to Capital Vol. 1" (1969), in Lenin and Philosophy and Other Essays . London: New Left Books, 1971.

[45] ^ Ulrich Krause, Money & abstract labour; on the analytical foundations of political economy . London: NLB, 1982, p. 162;  Scott Hamilton, "Necessity and contingency: the return of Althusser", Labor Tribune July 2006 [46] .

^ Paresh Chattopadhyay, Socialism and commodity production; essay in Marx revival . Leiden: Brill, 2018, p. 79.

^ Helmut Reichelt, Zur logischen Struktur des Kapitalbegriffs bei Karl Marx . Frankfurt: Europäische Verlagsanstalt, rev. ed. 1973.

^ Mike Beggs, "Zombie Marx and Modern Economics, or How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Forget the Transformation Problem." Journal of Australian Political Economy , issue 70, Summer 2012/13, p. 16 [47] Archived 1 July 2016 at the Wayback Machine ; Gary Mongiovi, "Vulgar economy in Marxian garb: a critique of Temporal Single System Marxism." In: Review of Radical Political Economics , Vol. 34, Issue 4, December 2002, pp. 393–416, at p. 398.

^ cf. Marx, Capital, Volume I , Penguin edition 1976, p. 174, note 34.

^ Allen Oakley, Marx's critique of political economy . London: Routledge, 1985.

^ Peter Stallybrass, "Marx's coat". In: Patricia Spyer (ed.), Border fetishisms: material objects in unstable spaces . New York: Routledge, 1998, pp. 183–207.

^ Marx himself never even once used the word " commodity fetishism " ( Warenfetischismus ) – this was a Marxist invention – he refers only to the "fetish" of labour products when they become commodities, or to the "fetish character" of commodities, money and capital.

^ Biene Baumeister, Die Marxsche Kritik des Fetishismus . Stuttgart: Atelier Unsichtbar, September 2006.

[48] ^ Althusser, Reading Capital , p. 314; Ernest Mandel , "Althusser corrects Marx", in: Ernest Mandel, Hope and Marxism: historical and theoretical essays . London: Resistance Books/IIRE, 2022, pp. 17-33, at p. 27; Norman Geras , "Essence and Appearance: Aspects of Fetishism in Marx's 'Capital'".

New Left Review , #65, January–February 1971, pp. 69–85. Reprinted as Norman Geras, "Marx and the critique of political economy". In: Robin Blackburn (ed.), Ideology in social science . London: Fontana/Collins, pp. 284–305. "Structuralist Marxists, like Louis Althusser, were intent on reading Left Hegelianism out of the Marxist canon. They therefore treated Marx's references to fetishes and gods as ironic figures of speech, even as they attempted to enlist the text on commodity fetishism in the service of opposition to Marxist humanism." — Andrew Levine , "Commodity Fetishism", in: The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , Second Edition, 2008; John Milios , " Capital after Louis Althusser. Focusing on Value-Form Analysis." Paper presented at the Conference "Rileggere Il Capitale: La lezione di Louis Althusser", Department of Historical Studies, University Ca' Foscari (Venice), 9–11 November 2006, 15 pp.

^ One notable exception is the journal Capital & Class , which published a translation by Mike Roth and Wal Suchting of Marx's original text on the value-form as it appears in the first edition of Capital, Volume I . See "The value-form", in: Capital and Class , No.4 Spring 1978, pp. 130–150. Two other journals referring to the value-form discussion are Thesis Eleven [49] and Telos .

[50] ^ Marx, Capital, Vol. 1 , Penguin edition 1976, p. 188.

^ By "social labour" is meant "cooperative labour to produce things which are used by others".

^ This is discussed by Marx especially in Part 7 (the last part) of Capital, Volume III , chapters 48 to 52.

^ Karl Marx, Capital, Volume 1 . Penguin edition, 1976, p. 126, note 5.

^ Chris Taylor, "Are you dreamscrolling? Three ways to avoid overspending".

Reuters , 19 June 2024 [51] ; Betty Lin-Fisher, "Know what dreamscrolling is? You're probably doing it".

USA Today , 31 May 2024.

[52] ^ "Capitalism and Nature: A Value-Form Approach". Chapter 7 in: Paul Burkett, Marx and Nature: A Red and Green Perspective . New York: St Martin's Press, 1999.p. 80.

^ Elmar Altvater , The future of the market [German original 1991]. London, Verso, 1993, p. 192.

^ Kohei Saito, Karl Marx's ecosocialism: capitalism, nature, and the unfinished critique of political economy . New York: Monthly Review Press, 2017, p.87.

^ a b John Bellamy Foster with Paul Burkett, "Value Isn't Everything", Monthly Review , Vol 70, Issue 6, November 2018.

[53] ^ Harry Rothman, Murderous Providence. A study of pollution in industrial societies . London: Granada, 1972, pp. 21–22.

^ Luce Irigaray , This sex which is not one (1977). Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1985.

[54] Archived 19 February 2018 at the Wayback Machine The title of Irigaray's book supposedly "plays on the two senses of 'one': women are not a sex because they are demoted to being nothing more than inferior men and do not exist in their own right, and their sex is not one because it is not reducible to one organ." – David Macey, The Penguin dictionary of critical theory . London: Penguin Books, 2000, p. 205. It could also be a play on a woman being in the company of a girlfriend, or a reference to Simone de Beauvoir 's book The Second Sex .

^ Iragaray, p. 172.

^ Iragaray,  p. 171.

^ The Greek sociologist Prof. Grigoris Lazos from Panteion University , who has studied the sex market in Greece for many years, estimated that after the Wende , from 1990 to 2000, the total money spent in Greece on trafficked women active in prostitution (originating mainly from Eastern Europe, and the former Soviet republics) was €5.5 billion (€550 million per year), compared to €1.5 billion euro's for voluntary sex workers (mainly indigenous Greeks, €150 million per year). See: Andrew Cockburn, 21st Century slaves .

National Geographic , September 2003, p. 10 (Dutch edition). See also: Gregoris Lazos & Maria Zanni, Trafficking in Greece in 2002 . Athens: StopNow-KEDE, April 2003.

[55] In 2012–2015, the total income from the trade in Greece was said to be €600 to €620 million, or circa €200 million per year, with a total of 18,500 prostitutes, of whom 13,000 to 14,000 (nearly three-quarters) were trafficked, while 4,500 to 5,500 were voluntary sex workers. Most female prostitutes were getting paid between 5 and 30 euros, earning an average income of perhaps €11,000 per year, with at least 2 customers per day. This suggests a total of 13.5 million clients per year. See: Ioanna Zikakou, "Prostitution Thrives During Greek Crisis".

Greek Reporter , 5 May 2015.

[56] ^ See also: Roy F. Baumeister and Kathleen D. Vohs, “Sexual Economics: Sex as Female Resource for Social Exchange in Heterosexual Interactions”.

Personality and Social Psychology Review , Volume 8, Issue 4, November 2004, pp. 339-363.

^ . Iragaray, p. 191.

^ Marlene Dixon, Women in class struggle . San Francisco:  Synthesis Publications, 1980.

^ Katja Diefenbach, "The Spectral Form of Value: Ghost-Things and Relations of Forces". In: Simon Sheikh (ed.), Capital (It Fails Us Now) . Berlin: b_books, 2006.

[57] ^ Rebecca Ruth Gould, "Hijab as commodity form: veiling, unveiling, and misveiling in contemporary Iran". In: Feminist theory , Vol. 15 No. 3, 2014, pp. 221–240, at p. 232.

^ Bonnie Fox (ed.), Hidden in the household . Toronto:  Women's Educational Press, 1980; Meg Luxton, "More Than a Labour of Love: Three Generations of Women's Work in the Home" [1980]. Toronto: Women's Press, 2009 reprint.

^ "The Facts", New Internationalist , 5 March 1988 ; Meg Luxton, "The UN, women, and household labour: Measuring and valuing unpaid work." Women's Studies International Forum , Vol. 20 Issue 3, May–June 1997, pp. 431–439.

^ Kathi Weeks, The problem with work: feminism, Marxism, antiwork politics, and postwork imaginaries . Durham: Duke University Press, 2011. Kristen R. Ghodsee, Why Women Have Better Sex Under Socialism: And Other Arguments for Economic Independence . New York: Nation Books, 2018.

^ See World Inequality Database [58] .

^ Richard Wilkinson and Kate Pickett, The spirit level: why equality is better for everyone.

Penguin books, 2010. Michel Bosquet (pseud.

Andre Gorz ), "Unequal schooling." In: Michel Bosquet, Capitalism in crisis and everyday life.

Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press, 1977, pp. 81–83.

^ David Harvey , Seventeen contradictions and the end of capitalism . London: Profile Books, 2013, pp. 44–7.

Wolfgang Streeck , How will capitalism end?

London: Verso, 2016.

Slavoj Žižek , Living in the End Times . London: Verso, 2018.

^ Peter Kennedy, "Marxism, Capital and Capitalism: From Hegel Back to Marx".

Critique: A Journal of Socialist Theory , Vol. 45, No. 4, 2017, pp. 443–466 at p. 443.

^ Elmar Altvater & Birgit Mahnkopf, Globaliserung der Unsicherheit . Münster: Westfälisches Dampfboot, 2002.

^ Dan Schiller, Digital capitalism: networking the global market systems . Cambridge (Mass.): MIT Press, 1999.

^ Nick Srnicek , Platform Capitalism . Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 2016; James Muldoon, Platform capitalism . London: Pluto Press, 2022.

[59] Devika Narayan, “The political economy of digital platforms: Key directions”.

Platforms & Society . Volume 1, January-December, 2024.

[60] ^ Kelsie Nabben, “Value from data? A decentralized approach”.

Platforms & Society , Volume 2, January-December, 2025.

</ ^ Jyothish R, “How AI Is Transforming Pricing Management: A Comprehensive Guide.” Forbes Magazine , 13 May 2025.

[61] ^ Michael Perelman , "The puzzle of software pricing", in: Perelman, Information, social relations and the economics of high technology . New York: St Martin's Press, 1991, pp. 190-198; George Slover, “The Issue With AI-Powered Pricing”.

Time Magazine , 6 August 2025.

[62] ^ Stephen Miran , A user's guide to restructuring the global trading system . New York: Hudson Bay Capital, November 2024.

[63] ^ Gillian Tett , "What a Mar-a-Lago accord could look like".

Financial Times , 7 March 2025.

^ Martin Jay , "Trump, Scorsese, and the Frankfurt School’s Theory of Racket Society." Los Angeles review of books , 5 April 2020.

[64] ^ a b Paul Mason, "The end of capitalism has begun".

The Guardian , 17 July 2015.

^ Dave Elder-Vass, Profit and gift in the digital economy . Cambridge University Press, 2016, p. 2.

^ Jeremy Rifkin , "Capitalism is making way for the age of free." The Guardian , 31 March 2014.

[65] ^ Jens Uhlig et al. (eds.), Mein Wissen – unser Wissen!? Das Individuum zwischen Kooperation und Konkurrenz in der Informationsgesellschaft . Berlin: Lit Verlag, 2007.

^ Paul Mason, Postcapitalism: a guide to our future . Penguin, 2015, p. 153.

^ Viktor Mayer-Schönberger and Thomas Ramge, Reinventing capitalism in the age of big data . London: John Murray, 2018.

^ Chris Baraniuk, "How algorithms run Amazon's warehouses".

BBC News , 18 August 2015.

[66] ^ Evgeny Morozov , To Save Everything, Click Here: The Folly of Technological Solutionism.

Penguin Books, 2014.

^ Paul B. Farrell, "Capitalism is killing America's morals, our future".

Marketwatch.com , 26 May 2016.

[67] ^ Richard Swedberg, interview with Kenneth Arrow, in: Richard Swedberg, Economics and Sociology. Redefining their boundaries: conversations with economists and sociologists . Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990, p. 137.

^ Francis Fukuyama, Trust: The Social Virtues and The Creation of Prosperity . New York: Free Press, 1996.

^ Edelman Trust Barometer [68] . The site provides an archive of previous surveys.

[69] ^ John Authers, "Finance, the media and a catastrophic breakdown in trust".

Financial Times , 4 October 2018.

^ Sean Ross, "What It Would Take for the U.S. Dollar To Collapse".

Investopedia , June 17, 2024 [70] ^ Luc Laeven & Fabian Valencia, "Systemic Banking Crises Database".

IMF Economic Review , Vol. 61, Issue. 2, June 2013, pp. 225–270, at p. 226. See also: Carola Frydman & Chenzi Xu, "Banking crises in historical perspective".

NBER working paper 31092, June 2023.

[71] ^ Cato Institute , Troubled Currencies Project [72] ^ Anna Irrera, "Trading startup Robinhood branches out into U.S. checking and savings accounts". Reuters, 13 December 2018.

[73] ^ Gillian Tett, "The Weird New Normal of Negative Interest Rates." Foreign policy , 7 September 2016.

^ Samuel Potter & Sid Verma, "A brutal global market in 2018 has just one champion".

Bloomberg News , 24 November 2018.

^ Akane Otani and Michael Wursthorn, "No Refuge for Investors as 2018 Rout Sends Stocks, Bonds, Oil Lower".

Wall Street Journal , 25 November 2018.

^ Tasos Vossos, "Credit Set for Worst Year Since 2008 as Crashes Roil Market".

Bloomberg News , 20 November 2018.

^ Claer Barrett, "Where to invest in 2019".

Financial Times , 21 December 2018.

^ Lisa Shalett, "Markets send a message of caution".

Morgan Stanley Wealth Management , 26 November 2018.

[74] ^ A Treasury bill matures in a year or less. A Treasury note has a maturity of 2 to 10 years. A Treasury bond has a maturity of more than 10 years.

Treasury Inflation Protected Securities (TIPS) carry a maturity of 5, 10 or 30 years, with a fixed interest rate and indexation for inflation.

^ Matt Phillips, "What's the Yield Curve? ‘A Powerful Signal of Recessions’ Has Wall Street's Attention".

New York Times , 25 June 2018.

[75] ^ Michael Hudson, "The "Next" Financial Crisis and Public Banking as the Response." LeftOut/The Hudson Report , 1 August 2018.

[76] See:  Brian Chappatta, "Fed Could Avert an Inverted Yield Curve. But It Won't".

Bloomberg News , 11 July 2018.

[77] Brian Chappatta, "Thanks to Fed, an Inverted Yield Curve Is Imminent".

Bloomberg News , 13 July 2018.

[78] ^ Robin Wigglesworth, "Flat yield curve sends a grim message for investors in 2019".

Financial Times , 20 June 2018.

^ Megan Greene , "How central banks distort the predictive power of the yield curve." Financial Times , 3 September 2018.

^ Tim Duy, "The Flat Yield Curve Is Flagging a Strong U.S. Economy".

Bloomberg News , 1 August 2018.

[79] ^ "Foreign institutions pile into Chinese government bonds," Newshunters , 11 December 2018.

[80] ^ Katherine Greifeld, "The Flattening Yield Curve Just Produced Its First Inversions".

Bloomberg News , 4 December 2018.

[81] ^ Joe Rennison and Robin Wigglesworth "What is the yield curve and why has it spooked investors?".

Financial Times , 6 December 2018.

^ Jon Sindreu, "Inverted Yield Curves Aren't a Crystal Ball ".

Wall Street Journal , 4 December 2018.

^ In the US, the recession years were 1945, 1949, 1953, 1957, 1960, 1970, 1973–75, 1980–1982, 1990–1991, 2001, and 2008–2009.

[82] ^ Krista Gmelich, "Druckenmiller Sees ‘Massive’ Debt Fueling Next Financial Crisis." Bloomberg News , 28 September 2018.

^ Dan Buckley , "Negative interest rates: can they continue?". Daytrading.com, 29 July 2024.

[83] ^ Mark Vandevelde et al., "The story of a house: how private equity swooped in after the subprime crisis." Financial Times , 5 September 2018.

^ Michael Gerrity, "Seriously Negative Equity Homes in U.S. Down to 5.2 Million Units".

World Property Journal , 3 May 2018.

[84] According to the American Community Survey 2016, there were 27.7m (37%) owner-occupied US housing units without a mortgage (i.e. freehold), and 47.3m (63%) with a mortgage (giving a total of 75m owner-occupied houses).

[85] ^ Teresa Chilarducci, "The Recession Hurt Americans' Retirement Accounts More Than Anybody Knew".

The Atlantic , 16 October 2015.

[86] ^ Jason Kirby, "What's the use of saving money?" Macleans , 27 September 2011.

[87] ^ Heather Gillers, Anne Tergesen and Leslie Scism, "A generation of Americans is entering old age the least prepared in decades." Wall Street Journal , 22 June 2018.

^ EU pension adequacy report 2018 , Vol 1 [88] and Vol 2 [89] John Mauldin, "Europe's Pension Funds Are Running Low As Boomers Retire".

Forbes Magazine , 2 July 2018.

[90] Anthony Faiola, "The Face of Poverty Ages In Rapidly Graying Japan".

Washington Post , 28 July 2006.

[91] ^ Larry Fink , “Rethinking retirement”. New York: Blackrock.com, October 2024.

[92] ^ Bernie Sanders , A secure retirement for all .

Majority staff report of the US Senate Health, Education, Labor and Pensions Committee , 28 February 2024.

^ Aliss Higham, “Americans Fear End of Social Security as They Know It”.

Newsweek , 17 August 2025.

[93] ^ Social Security and Medicare Boards of Trustees, Status of the Social Security and Medicare Programs. A summary of the 2025 annual reports , 2025.

[94] ^ Level 3 assets are defined by the rules of the U.S.

Financial Accounting Standards Board within the framework of GAAP "current-cost" and "fair-value" accounting (namely, Statement of Financial Accounting Standards No. 157 (2010) , also known as FAS 157, and Topic 820: Fair Value Measurements and Disclosures 2010.

). Valuing such assets requires making "assumptions about the assumptions market participants would use in pricing the asset" (as stated in FAS 157, A25, p. 24). Included are e.g. mortgage-backed securities, untraded private equities, unlisted shares and debentures, complex derivatives, domestically held foreign stocks, various kinds of bad debts, etc. At level 3, there do not exist relevant transaction data or observables (such as historic cost, or acquisition cost) for the assets themselves, from which their current value could be reliably deduced.

^ Carl Bialik, "Global Market Cap: trillions in losses, but no firm tally".

Wall Street Journal , 13 August 2011.

^ Gillian Tett , Investors are ill equipped for our unfathomable future.

Financial Times , 134 October 2016.

^ Marc Jones, "Rolling world stock sell-off runs to $4 trillion".

Reuters , 6 February 2018.

^ Rana Foroohar , “The coming crypto crisis”.

Financial Times , 27 July 2025.

^ Kenneth Rogoff , “A curse worse than cash”.

Project Syndicate , 4 June 2021.

[95] ^ Jennifer Rankin, "US super-rich hit new wealth record five years after financial crisis".

The Guardian , 16 September 2013.

[96] Juliette Garside, "Recession rich: Britain's wealthiest double net worth since crisis".

The Guardian , 26 April 2015.

[97] Les Leopold, "The Rich Have Gained $5.6 Trillion in the ‘Recovery,’ While the Rest of Us Have Lost $669 Billion".

Huffington Post , 6 December 2017.

[98] Nin-Hai Tseng, "The rich got a lot richer since the financial crisis".

Fortune , 11 September 2013.

[99] ^ Patrick Bond , Extreme Uneven Development: Financial Volatility, Deep Capitalist Crisis and Super-Exploitation in South Africa and the World . Routledge, 2026.

^ Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan . Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 1968, p. 151-152. Reading this book was prohibited at Oxford in 1663.

^ Adrianne Jeffries, "New crowdfunding platforms let you sell stock in yourself".

The Verge , 26 February 2013.

[100] ^ Judith Kas, Trust and reputation in the peer-to-peer platform economy . Phd dissertation, University of Utrecht, 2020.

[101] ^ Michael Fertik & David C. Thompson, The Reputation Economy: How to Optimize Your Digital Footprint in a World Where Your Reputation Is Your Most Valuable Asset . New York: Crown Publishing Inc., 2015.

^ Zygmunt Bauman, Liquid Modernity . Polity Press, 2000.

^ David Henry, "Fuzzy Numbers", Bloomberg Businessweek , 3 October 2004.

[102] ^ Edmund Tadros, "Listed firms prefer to use their own measure of success", Australian Financial Review (Sydney), 29 November 2016.

[103] ^ Patrick Durkin, "Accounting skulduggery hides $26b in losses", Australian Financial Review , 18 September 2016.

^ Jonathan Ford and Madison Marriage, "The big flaw: auditing in crisis." Financial Times , 1 August 2018.

^ William Lazonick, "Profits without prosperity".

Harvard Business Review , September 2014.

[104] Alex Edmans, "The Case for Stock Buybacks".

Harvard Business Review , 15 September 2017.

[105] Robert Reich, "The buyback boondoggle is beggaring America".

Robert Reich blog , 19 March 2018.

[106] Tim Mullaney, "A stock ploy undermining the US economy." CNBC News , 8 September 2015.

[107] Stephen Gandel, "Add Stock Buybacks to the Causes of the Market Downturn – Stock repurchases turbocharge the low-volatility trade".

Bloomberg News , 16 February 2018. William Lazonick, "The curse of stock buybacks".

The American Prospect , 25 June 2018.

[108] ^ Special Report: the GOP tax scam . US Senate Democrats, 28 February 2018.

[109] ^ Jeff Cox, "Companies set to buy back $1 trillion".

CNBC News , 6 August 2018.

[110] Jamie Condliffe, "The Stock Market's Next $1 Trillion Milestone: Buybacks".

New York Times , 6 August 2018 [111] ^ Justina Lee, "Europe Finally Gets Its Share of Mega Buybacks".

Bloomberg News , 13 August 2018.

[112] Robin Wigglesworth, "Global equity market shrinks as buybacks surge".

Financial Times , 17 August 2018.

^ Robin Wigglesworth, "Global equity market shrinks as buybacks surge".

Financial Times , 17 August 2018.

^ Colby Smith and Brendan Greeley, "The slow death of public markets." Financial Times , 13 August 2018. See also: Dan Barak et al., The rise and rise of private markets. McKinsey Global Private Markets Review 2018 .

[113] ^ Antony Seely, The Tobin Tax: recent developments . Research note for Parliament, House of Commons Library, London, 11 September 2013.

^ "On the Commons: A Public Interview with Massimo De Angelis and Stavros Stavrides".

e-flux , Journal #17, June 2010.

[114] ^ Ernest Mandel, "La dialectique de la croissance. A propos du rapport Mansholt", in: Mai (Brussels), November–December 1972.

^ Mart Rosenblum, "'Free-for-all' decimates fish stocks in the southern Pacific".

The Center for Public Integrity , 19 May 2014.

[115] ^ Tamra Gilbertson and Oscar Reyes, Carbon trading: how it works and why it fails . Uppsala: Dag Hammarskjöld Foundation occasional paper no. 7, November 2009.

[116] ^ Alexandra Sifferlin, "Here's How Many People Die from Pollution Around the World".

Time Magazine , 19 October 2017.

[117] ^ Techworld Staff, The most infamous data breaches .

Techworld , 3 April 2018.

[118] ^ Herb Weisbaum, "More than 4 billion data records were stolen globally in 2016".

NBC News , 30 January 2017.

^ Rana Foroohar, "Facebook has put growth ahead of governance for too long." Financial Times , 23 December 2018.

^ "The Most Expensive Speeches".

Forbes Magazine , 18 March 2008 [119] ; Dina Gerdeman, "If The CEO's high salary isn't justified to employees, firm performance may suffer." Forbes magazine , 22 January 2018.

[120] ^ Rewarding or hoarding? An Examination of Pay Ratios Revealed by Dodd-Frank . Minneapolis: Keith Ellison Congressional Office, 2018.

[121] Archived 16 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine ^ Steven Mufson and Jia Lynn Yang, "Capital gains tax rates benefiting wealthy are protected by both parties".

Washington Post , 11 September 2011.

^ Steve Roth, "Capital's Share of Income Is Way Higher than You Think".

Evonomics.com , 18 May 2018.

[122] ^ Martin Wolf, "Work in the age of intelligent machines", Financial Times , 26 June 2018.

^ Kevin Bales, Disposable people: new slavery in the global economy.

(revised edition). Berkeley: University of California Press, 2012. p. 14.

^ Forced Labour and Forced Marriage, International Labor Organization, 19 September 2017.

^ James Crotty, "Structural causes of the global financial crisis", Cambridge Journal of Economics , Vol. 33, Issue 4, July 2009, pp. 563–580.

^ David A. Moss, When all else fails: government as the ultimate risk manager . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2002; Warwick Funnell et al., In government we trust: market failure and the delusions of privatisation . London: Pluto Press, 2009;  Andrew Ross Sorkin, Too Big to Fail . Penguin books, 2nd edition 2010; Riccardo Bellofiore, "The Socialization of Investment, from Keynes to Minsky and Beyond". Levy Economics Institute Working Paper No. 822, December 2014.

[123] ^ Martin Wolf , "Regulators should intervene in bankers’ pay". In: Financial Times (London), 16 January 2008.

^ Martin Wolf , "Banking reforms after the Libor scandal." Financial Times , 2 July 2012.

^ Nicola Bartlett, "Jeremy Corbyn calls on governments to tackle 'global scandal' of tax avoidance in powerful UN speech." Daily Mirror , 8 December 2017.

Francis Fukuyama , "America: the failed state." Prospect , January 2017.

[124] ^ Brandi Gomez, "The Impact of Market Prices on Poor Countries".

The Borgen Project Blog , 22 July 2017. "How High Food Prices Affect The World's Poor".

World Food Programme , 4 September 2012.

[125] Archived 24 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine ^ Gemma Tetlow, "Middle-income millennials priced out of housing market, says IFS." Financial Times , 16 January 2018.

[126] ^ Susan Lund et al., A decade after the global financial crisis: What has (and hasn't) changed?

.

Executive Briefing , McKinsey Global Institute, August 2018.

[127] ^ Matthew Michaels, "The San Francisco housing market is so absurd".

Business Insider , 24 February 2018.

[128] ^ "Don't let California's housing crisis get worse", LA Times editorial , 4 September 2017.

[129] ^ Armando Aparicio and David Zlutnick, "These Tenants Are Leading the Largest Rent Strike in LA History".

The Nation , 20 August 2018.

[130] Archived 23 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine ^ Richard Florida , "The Staggering Value of Urban Land." Citylab , 2 November 2017.

^ "Cities must preserve affordable housing, Barcelona mayor tells UN." News4Europe press release, 17 July 2018.

[131] Archived 18 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine ^ Cities for Adequate Housing: Municipalist Declaration of Local Governments for the Right to Housing and the Right to the City , New York, 16 July 2018.

[132] [133] ^ "Insights" .

Willis Towers Watson .

^ Mark Koba, "Why US Pays More for Health Care Than Other Nations".

CNBC News , 13 September 2011.

[134] ^ Shameek Rakshit and Matthew McGough, "How does U.S. life expectancy compare to other countries?". Peterson-KFF Health System Tracker, 31 January 2025.

[135] ^ Dave Pearson, "Americans carrying at least $220B in medical debts ranging from modest to crushing".

HealthExec.com , 19 February 2024.

[136] ^ "Homelessness accelerates between censuses", University of Otago press release, 3 June 2016.

[137] ^ Patrick Collinson, "New Zealand tops world house price increase." The Guardian , 6 September 2016.

[138] ^ David Chaston, "Median multiples: house-price to income multiple." Interest.co.nz , 18 April 2018.

[139] ^ Phil Vine, "Average Auckland house price predicted to top $3m by 2036." New Zealand Herald , 6 November 2016.

^ Report of the special rapporteur on housing to the Human Rights Council , 34th session, released 18 January 2017.

[140] ^ Mike Davis, Planet of Slums . London: Verso, 2006.

^ The top 10% of global income earners are pro rata responsible for almost as much greenhouse gas emissions as the bottom 90% combined. See: Safa Motesharrei et al., "Modeling sustainability: population, inequality, consumption, and bidirectional coupling of the Earth and Human Systems." National Science Review , Vol. 3, No. 4, December 2016, pp. 470–494, at p. 475.

[141] ^ Vandana Shiva, "Who pollutes: The rich or the poor?" Al Jazeera English , 26 July 2011.

[142] Kaveri Gill, Of Poverty and Plastic: Scavenging and Scrap Trading Entrepreneurs in India's Urban Informal Economy . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009, chapter 7.

^ Philip Haslam and Russell Lamberti, When money destroys nations . Johannesburg: Penguin Books, 2014.

^ Reuters news release, "Poachers blamed for Zimbabwe elephant deaths." Al Jazeera English , 25 September 2013.

[143] ^ "Zimbabwe: Environmental Profile" .

rainforests.mongabay.com . Retrieved 15 January 2019 .

^ Nelson Chenga, "Deforestation now a serious threat." The Financial Gazette , 12 December 2013.

[144] ^ Nick Wadhams, "Zimbabwe's Wildlife Decimated by Economic Crisis".

National Geographic News , 1 August 2007.

[145] ^ Chronicle, The (20 February 2014).

"Land degradation" .

The Chronicle .

^ "What do we know about Zimbabwe’s veld fire problem?", Zimfact website, 17 February 2022 [146] ; "Zimbabwe at a glance", FAO in Zimbabwe website, 2024.

[147] ; Environmental Management Authority of Zimbabwe website [148] ; George Nyamadzawo et al., "Understanding the causes, socio-economic and environmental impacts, and management of veld fires in tropical Zimbabwe".

Fire Science Reviews , Volume 2, Issue 2, 2013.

[149] M. Phiri et al., "Community-Based Fire Management; Experiences from the FAO Funded Project in the Provinces of Manicaland and Matebeleland North, Zimbabwe". In: Integrated Fire Approach: From Global Monitoring to Natural Fire Management. Fire Management Working Paper , FAO FM/27/E, FAO, 2011, pp. 51-60.

^ Global Wealth Migration Review 2018 . Johannesburg, SA: New World Wealth, 2018, pp. 23–24.

[150] Archived 3 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine ^ Henley & Partners, "Global Wealth Migration" , in The Henley private Wealth migration report 2024 .

^ Witold Kowalski, "The Process Of Organisational Restructuring For Large Corporations".

Expert360 , 17 March 2017.

[151] Archived 20 February 2018 at the Wayback Machine ^ Richard Sennett, The corrosion of character: the personal consequences of work in the new capitalism . New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 1998; Tanja de Jong et al. "The impact of restructuring on employee well-being: a systematic review of longitudinal studies".

Work & Stress: An International Journal of Work, Health & Organisations , Volume 30, Issue 1, January 2016, pp. 91–114.

^ Steve French, "Facing the uncertainties and realities of work and migration in the 'Brexit Age'." In: Lindsay Hamilton et al., Contemporary issues in management, second edition . Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2019, pp. 65-90.

^ "Flexibilisering arbeidsmarkt gaat gepaard met daling arbeidsinkomensquote".

DNBulletin , 1 februari 2018.

^ David Pallister, "How the US sent $12bn in cash to Iraq and watched it vanish".

The Guardian , 8 February 2007; Gregory Korte, "$619 billion missed from federal transparency site".

USA Today , 5 August 2014;  Scot J. Paltrow, "U.S. Army fudged its accounts by trillions of dollars, auditor finds".

Reuters , 19 August 2016. Dave Lindorff, "The Pentagon's Massive Accounting Fraud Exposed".

The Nation , 27 November 2018.

[152] Archived 2 December 2018 at the Wayback Machine ^ R. Jeffrey Smith, "The failed reconstruction of Iraq".

The Atlantic , 15 March 2013.

[153] ^ World Economic Forum , The Global Risks Report 2018 , p. 28.

[154] See also: Alex Gray, "Future shocks: 10 emerging risks that threaten our world", World Economic Forum , 17 January 2018.

[155] ^ Chris Giles, "IMF chief warns trade war could rip apart global economy." Financial Times , 11 April 2018.

^ Yelena A. Tuzova, "The illicit and sovereign free international political economies." In: Robert J. Bunker and Pamela Ligouri Bunker (eds.), Global criminal and sovereign free economies and the demise of the Western democracies: dark renaissance.

London: Routledge, 2016, pp. 59-86.

^ Gordon Pearson, "The corruption of business: a statement of a contemporary problem". In: Lindsay Hamilton et al., Contemporary issues in management, second edition . Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2019, pp. 28-46.

^ Henry Bernstein, "Reserve army, ‘surplus’ population, ‘classes of labour’". In: Maurizio Atzeni et al., Handbook of Research on the Global Political Economy of Work . Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2023, pp. 53-63.

^ United Nations surveys on crime trends Elmar Altvater & Birgit Mahnkopf, Globalisierung der Unsicherheit: Arbeit im Schatten, Schmutziges Geld und Informelle Politik.

Münster: Westfälisches Dampfboot, 2002.

^ Kevin Rawlinson, "Low-level crimes to go uninvestigated in Met police spending cuts", The Guardian , 16 October 2017.

^ Seokhee Yoon, Why do victims not report? The influence of police and criminal justice cynicism on the dark figure of crime.

New YorK: CUNY Phd thesis, 2015, p. 4.

[156] ^ Paolo Buonanno et al., "How much should we trust crime statistics? A comparison between EU and US".

European Journal of Law and Economics , February 2017, pp. 1–15.

[157] Archived 13 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine ^ Chris Isidore, "35 bankers were sent to prison for financial crisis crimes", CNN Money , 28 April 2016.

[158] ^ Leandro Medina and Friedrich Schneider, "Shadow Economies around the World: New Results for 158 Countries over 1991–2015".

IMF working paper , 23 February 2017.

^ According to UN Stats , approximately 1.1 billion people currently live in slums or slum-like conditions in cities, with 2 billion more expected in the next 30 years.

^ Habitat for Humanity Great Britain, " The world's biggest slums webpage , n.d.; Rosamund Hutt, These are the world's five biggest slums .

World Economic Forum , 19 October 2016.

^ Mike Davis, Planet of slums . London: Verso, 2006.

^ John M. Hagedorn, "The Global Impact of Gangs", Journal of Contemporary Criminal Justice , vol. 21, no. 2, May 2005, pp. 153-169; Rosario Patalano, "Criminal capitalism: a new socioeconomic formation".

Cambridge Journal of Economics , Vol. 48, issue 2, 2024, pp. 329–361.

^ John P. Sullivan, "Maras Morphing: Revisiting Third Generation Gangs", Global Crime , Vol. 7, Issue 3/4, 2006, pp. 487-504; John P. Sullivan & Robert J. Bunker (eds.), Strategic notes on third generation gangs . Bloomington, Indiana: Xlibris Publishing, 2020.

^ Robert J. Bunker & Pamela Ligouri Bunker, "The modern state in epochal transition: The significance of irregular warfare, state deconstruction, and the rise of new warfighting entities beyond neo-medievalism".

Small wars & insurgencies ,  Vol. 27, issue 2, 2016, p.325-344, at p. 303.

^ Ernest Mandel, Delightful murder: a social history of the crime story . London: Pluto Press, 1984, p. 134.

^ Manuel Castells , Another Economy is Possible: Culture and Economy in a Time of Crisis . Cambridge: Polity Press, 2017.

^ John Curl, "The cooperative movement in century 21". In: Affinities: a journal of radical theory, culture and action , Vol. 4, issue 1, Summer 2010, pp. 12–29.

[159] ; Chris Wright, Worker Cooperatives and Revolution: History and Possibilities in the United States . St Petersburg, FL: Booklocker.com, Inc., 2014; Mauro Boianovsky and Denis Melnik, "Between capitalism and socialism: Tugan-Baranovsky on cooperatives".

Cambridge Journal of Economics , Vol. 48, issue 4, 2024, pp. 589–615.

^ James Muldoon, Platform Socialism: How to Reclaim our Digital Futures . London: Pluto Press, 2022.

^ Paolo Ricci et al., The meaning of shared value: new perspectives on creating shared value . New York: Routledge, 2023.

^ Anitra Nelson, Life without money: building fair and sustainable economies . London: Pluto Press, 2011; Anitra Nelson, Beyond Money: A Postcapitalist Strategy . London: Pluto Press, 2022.

^ In 1864, Marx wrote in a letter to Lion Philips that he had invested some inheritance money in stocks, and earned £400 with it (MECW 41, p. 543). When Engels died, the probate declaration of his estate included a stockholding valued at £22,600 (approximately £2.2 million in today’s money).

Tristram Hunt , The Frock-Coated Communist . Penguin Books, 2009, p. 575-576.

^ Ezra Klein and Derek Thompson , Abundance . New York: Simon & Schuster, 2025.

^ David Schleicher, “What left-wing critics don’t get about abundance”. Niskanen Center, 20 March 2025.

[160] ^ John Abrams, Companies We Keep: Employee Ownership and the Business of Community and Place , 2nd Edition. White River Junction, Vermont: Chelsea Green Publishing, 2008. John Logue & Jacquelyn Yates, The Real World of Employee Ownership . Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press, 2001.

^ See also the appraisal by Bruno Jossa, Labour Managed Firms and Post-Capitalism . Milton Park: Routledge, 2020.

^ David Harvey, seventeen contradictions and the end of capitalism . London: Profile Books, 2013, pp. 44–7. Wolfgang Streeck, How will capitalism end?

London: Verso, 2016.

^ Jem Bendell, "Does capitalism need some Marxism to survive the Fourth Industrial Revolution?".

World Economic Forum , 22 June 2016.

[161] ^ Rick Kuhn, Henryk Grossman and the recovery of Marxism . Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2007.

^ István Mészáros , Socialism or Barbarism:  From the "American Century" to the Crossroads . New York: Monthly Review Press, 2001.

^ Christian Fuchs , Digital capitalism . London: Routledge, 2022; Paul Mason , Postcapitalism: a guide to our future . Penguin books, 2015; Yann Moulier-Boutang , Cognitive Capitalism . Oxford: John Wiley and Sons Ltd, 2012; Gérard Duménil & Dominique Lévy, Managerial capitalism: ownership, management and the coming new mode of production . London: Pluto Press, 2018; Phil Graham, Hypercapitalism: New Media, Language, and Social Perceptions of Value . Bern: Peter Lang, 2005; Dave Elder-Vass, Profit and gift in the digital economy . Cambridge University Press, 2016; Franco "Bifo" Berardi, And: Phenomenology of the End . South Pasadena: Semiotext(e), 2015; Fred Block , The habitation society . Columbia University Press, 2025; Richard Westra, The Political Economy of Post-Capitalism.

Financialization, Globalization and Neofeudalism . Routledge, 2024.

^ Annie Lowrey, "Why the Phrase 'Late Capitalism' Is Suddenly Everywhere." The Atlantic , 1 May 2017.

; See also: Kimberley Amadeo, "What is Late Stage Capitalism?".

The Balance (New York), 17 June 2024.

[162] ; David Aviles, "We live in a time of ‘late capitalism’. But what does that mean? And what’s so late about it?" The Conversation ,  December 7, 2022.

[163] ; Youtube late capitalism video .

^ Krugman, Paul (22 December 2018).

"Opinion – The Case for a Mixed Economy" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 20 January 2019 .

^ Alain Deneault , Mediocracy. The Politics of the Extreme Centre . Toronto: Between the lines, 2018. Robin Wigglesworth, "Bridgewater warns Fed could turn 'hot' economy to 'mediocre'." Financial Times , 4 October 2018.

David Brooks , "What the working class is still trying to tell us." New York Times , 8 November 2018.

[164] Moisés Naím, "The Lagarde Consensus".

The Atlantic , 12 April 2015; [165] Marc J. Dunkelman , Why nothing works: who killed progress—and how to bring it back . New York: PublicAffairs, 2025.

^ David Brooks , "We Can Achieve Great Things." New York Times , 27 February 2025.

^ Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen, "Mathematical proofs of the breakdown of capitalism". In: Econometrica , Vol. 28, Issue 2, April 1960, pp. 225–243. Reprinted in: Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen, Analytical Economics . Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1966, pp. 398–415. When people "make history" instead of being made by history, it means that what they do now, helps to bring the future into being.

^ Hillel Ticktin , "Editorial: an intermediate period in transitional world." Critique , Vol. 46, No. 2, 2018, pp. 171–183, at p. 171.

^ Mark Blaug , The methodology of economics, or how economists explain.

Second edition, Cambridge University Press, 1992, p. 238.

^ " Cause for concern? The top 10 risks to the global economy . A report by The Economist Intelligence Unit. London: The Economist Intelligence Unit Limited., 2018" (PDF) .

eiu.com . Retrieved 20 January 2019 .

^ InformatieSamenleving, ECP-Platform voor de.

"Bijna de helft van de jongeren die nog nooit heeft gehackt zou dit willen doen" .

veiliginternetten.nl . Archived from the original on 25 May 2019 . Retrieved 15 January 2019 .

^ F. R. Hansen, The breakdown of capitalism: A history of the idea in Western Marxism, 1883–1983 . London: Routledge, 1984.

^ Joseph Schumpeter, Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy . New York: Harper & Brothers, 1942; Philip Armstrong, Andrew Glyn and John Harrison, Capitalism since world war 2 . London: Fontana, 1984; Daniele Besomi, (ed.), Crises and cycles in economic dictionaries and encyclopedias . Routledge: London, 2012.

^ Half a century ago, sociologists like Daniel Bell and Alain Touraine claimed that a new industrial or post-industrial society was emerging, replacing traditional capitalism and dissolving the old class system. See: Daniel Bell , The Coming of Post-Industrial Society: A Venture in Social Forecasting . New York: Basic Books, 1973; Alain Touraine , The Post-Industrial Society. Tomorrow's Social History: Classes, Conflicts and Culture in the Programmed Society . New York: Random House, 1971. See also: Wolfgang Streeck , How Will Capitalism End? Essays on a Failing System . London: Verso, 2017.

^ Naomi Klein , The shock doctrine: the rise of disaster capitalism ; Penguin Books, 2008; Philip Mirowski , Never let a serious crisis go to waste. How neoliberalism survived the financial meltdown . London: Verso, 2014; Antony Loewenstein , Disaster Capitalism: Making a Killing Out of Catastrophe . London: Verso, 2017; Greta R. Krippner, Capitalizing on crisis: the political origins of the rise of finance . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2011.

^ Andrew Macintyre, T. J. Pempel, and John Ravenhill, Crisis as Catalyst: Asia's dynamic political economy . Cornell University Press, 2008.

^ Ernest Mandel , Long waves of capitalist development, 2nd edition.

London: Verso, 1995.

^ Yaakov Katz & Amir Bohbot, The Weapon Wizards: How Israel Became a High-Tech Military Superpower.

New York: St Martins Press, 2017. Yuval Abraham, ‘A mass assassination factory’: Inside Israel’s calculated bombing of Gaza".

+972 magazine (Tel Aviv), November 30, 2023.

[166] ; Yuval Abraham , "‘Lavender’: The AI machine directing Israel’s bombing spree in Gaza".

+972 Magazine (Tel Aviv), 3 April 2024.

[167] ; Derek Sayer, "All the perfumes of Arabia: Israel’s human targeting software and the banality of evil".

Canadian Dimension , April 18, 2024.

[168] ; Elizabeth Dwoskin, "Israel built an ‘AI factory’ for war. It unleashed it in Gaza".

Washington Post , December 29, 2024; Derek Sayer, “End games in Gaza?”, in: Canadian Dimension , 29 July 2025.

[169] ^ Henri Pirenne , "The stages in the social history of capitalism", The American Historical Review , Vol. XIX, No. 3, April 1914, pp. 494–515.

[170] ^ Luc Boltanski and Eve Chiapello, The New Spirit of Capitalism , 2nd edition. London: Verso, 2017. Gérard Duménil & Dominique Lévy, Managerial Capitalism: Ownership, Management and the Coming New Mode of Production.

London: Pluto Press, 2018.

^ Henryk Flakierski & Thomas T. Sekine, Socialist dilemmas, East and West . Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 1990. Dušan Pokorný, Efficiency and Justice in the Industrial World (Vol. 1: The Failure of the Soviet Experiment, Vol. 2: The Uneasy Success of Postwar Europe). Milton Park: Routledge, 1993, 1996.

^ Aaron Bastani , Fully Automated Luxury Communism: A Manifesto . London: Verso, 2019.

^ Daniel Ben-Ami , Ferraris for all: in defence of economic progress . Bristol University Press, 2012.

^ Arielle Gordeon, "All aboard  NYC's Communist Yacht Club", Hell Gate News , 1 July 2023.

[171] ^ Ernest Mandel , "What is the bureaucracy?". In: Tariq Ali (ed.), The Stalinist Legacy . Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1984, pp. 60–94, at p. 65. Mandel's article was based on two educational lectures he gave in French, in April 1965 and May 1967, and numerous editions were subsequently published in different languages. See also: Mervyn Matthews , Privilege in the Soviet Union: A Study of Elite Life-Styles under Communism . London: George Allen & Unwin, 1978.

Michael Voslensky , Nomenklatura . Anatomy of the Soviet Ruling Class . Toronto: The Bodley Head, 1984.Maria Hirszowicz, Coercion and Control in Communist Society: The Visible Hand in a Command Economy . London: St Martin's Press, 1986.

^ Elmar Altvater , The future of the market [German original 1991]. London, Verso, 1993, p. 191.

^ Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen , The Entropy Law and the Economic Process [1971] . Cambridge, Mass : Harvard University Press, 2013', chapters 9 and 10. See also: Michael Perelman, "Time, Constant Capital, Accumulation, Sustainability, and Marx's Economic Theory".  Annual Meeting, American Economic Association , 6 January 2017.

[172] ^ Frederick Soddy , Cartesian Economics: The Bearing of Physical Science upon State Stewardship . London, 1922.

[173] ^ Steve Keen, "Incorporating energy into production functions".

Steve Keen's Debtwatch , 19 August 2016. See also Steve Keen, "The role of Energy In Production", Youtube video [174] ^ Anwar Shaikh, "Laws of Production and Laws of Algebra: The Humbug Production Function", in The Review of Economics and Statistics , Volume 56(1), February 1974, p. 115-120.

[175] Anwar Shaikh, "Laws of Production and Laws of Algebra—Humbug II", in Growth, Profits and Property ed. by Edward J. Nell. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1980.

[176] Anwar Shaikh, "Humbug production function", in: John Eatwell, Murray Milgate, and Peter Newman (eds.), The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economic Theory and Doctrine . London: Macmillan Press, 1986, Vol. 2, pp. 191–194. Youtube "The humbug production function" [177] The journal Global & Local Economic Review , Vol. 17 No. 1, 2013 is devoted to this topic.

[178] Jesus Felipe & J.S.L. McCombie, "How sound are the foundations of the aggregate production function?".

Eastern Economic Journal , Vol. 31, No. 3, Summer 2005, pp. 467–488.

[179] ^ Anwar Shaikh , Capitalism: competition, conflict, crises.

Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016.

v t e Critique of political economy 18th–19th-century Friedrich Engels Karl Marx Thomas Carlyle John Ruskin Paul Lafargue Erik Johan Stagnelius 20th–21st-century Jean Baudrillard Guy Debord Mahatma Gandhi André Gorz Moishe Postone Étienne Balibar Neue Marx-Lektüre Helmut Reichelt Hans-Georg Backhaus Robert Kurz Michael Heinrich Mark Fisher Roman Rosdolsky Claus Peter Ortlieb Georges Bataille Katrine Marçal Concepts Abstract labour and concrete labour Capitalist mode of production Commodity Chrematistics Dismal Science Illth Law of value Socially necessary labour time Valorisation Value-form Written works Unto This Last Sarvodaya The Right to Be Lazy Das Kapital Grundrisse Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Mirror of Production A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Critique of Economic Reason Discourse on Inequality The Accursed Share Who Cooked Adam Smith's Dinner?

Related Assume a can opener Classical economics Chrematistics Criticism of capitalism Critique of work Economic anthropology Economics Mainstream economics Occam's razor Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Value-form&oldid=1306390180 " Categories : Marxian critique of political economy Marxian economics Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2024 Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 13:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Value-form 8 languages Add topic

