Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Writings 3 English translations 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Ammonius Hermiae 26 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 5th-century Greek philosopher Ammonius Hermiae Born c.

440 [ 1 ] AD Alexandria Died 517–526 AD Family Hermias (father) Aedesia (mother) Heliodorus of Alexandria (brother) Philosophical work School Neoplatonism Ammonius Hermiae ( / ə ˈ m oʊ n i ə s / ; Ancient Greek : Ἀμμώνιος ὁ Ἑρμείου , romanized : Ammōnios ho Hermeiou , lit.

'Ammonius, son of Hermias'; c.

440 [ 1 ] – between 517 and 526) [ 2 ] was a Greek philosopher from Alexandria in the eastern Roman empire during Late Antiquity . A Neoplatonist , he was the son of the philosophers Hermias and Aedesia , the brother of Heliodorus of Alexandria and the grandson of Syrianus .

[ 2 ] Ammonius was a pupil of Proclus in Roman Athens , and taught at Alexandria for most of his life, having obtained a public chair in the 470s.

According to Olympiodorus of Thebes's Commentaries on Plato's Gorgias and Phaedo texts, Ammonius gave lectures on the works of Plato, Aristotle, and Porphyry of Tyre , [ 2 ] and wrote commentaries on Aristotelian works and three lost commentaries on Platonic texts .

[ 2 ] He is also the author of a text on the astrolabe published in the Catalogus Codicum Astrologorum Graecorum , and lectured on astronomy and geometry .

[ 2 ] Ammonius taught numerous Neoplatonists , including Damascius , Olympiodorus of Thebes , John Philoponus , Simplicius of Cilicia , and Asclepius of Tralles .

[ 2 ] Also among his pupils were the physician Gessius of Petra and the ecclesiastical historian Zacharias Rhetor , who became the bishop of Mytilene .

[ 2 ] As part of the persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire , the Alexandrian school was investigated by the Roman imperial authorities; Ammonius made a compromise with the Patriarch of Alexandria , Peter III , voluntarily limiting his teaching in return for keeping his own position.

[ 2 ] This alienated a number of his colleagues and pupils, including Damascius, who nonetheless called him "the greatest commentator who ever lived" in his own Life of Isidore of Alexandria .

[ 2 ] Life [ edit ] Part of a series on Neoplatonism Reconstructed bust believed to represent Plotinus, the founder of Neoplatonism Concepts Emanationism Hypostasis Porphyrian tree Demiurge Anima mundi Henology Henosis Theurgy Okhema Kenoma Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Works Chaldean Oracles Enneads Isagoge On the Cave of the Nymphs On the Mysteries Elements of Theology De Coelesti Hierarchia Commentarii in Somnium Scipionis The Consolation of Philosophy Theology of Aristotle Book of Causes De divisione naturae People Plotinus ( students ) Porphyry Iamblichus Julian the Apostate Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius of Cilicia Olympiodorus the Younger Asclepius of Tralles Pseudo-Dionysius Martianus Capella Macrobius Boethius Maximus the Confessor Al-Kindi Johannes Scotus Eriugena Related topics Platonic Academy Platonism Middle Platonism Neopythagoreanism Commentaries on Plato Commentaries on Aristotle Neoplatonism and Christianity / Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Isma'ilism Druze Kabbalah School of Chartres Platonism in the Renaissance Cambridge Platonists Philosophy portal v t e Ammonius' father Hermias died when he was a child, and his mother Aedesia raised him and his brother Heliodorus in Alexandria. When they reached adulthood, Aedesia accompanied her sons to Athens where they studied under Proclus . Eventually, they returned to Alexandria where Ammonius, as head of the Neoplatonist school in the city, lectured on Plato and Aristotle for the rest of his life. According to Damascius, during the persecution of the pagans at Alexandria in the late 480s, Ammonius made concessions to the Christian authorities so that he could continue his lectures.

[ 3 ] Damascius, who scolds Ammonius for the agreement that he made, does not say what the concessions were, but they may have involved limitations on the doctrines he could teach or promote. He was still teaching in 515; Olympiodorus heard him lecture on Plato's Gorgias in that year.

[ 4 ] He was also an accomplished astronomer; he lectured on Ptolemy and is known to have written a treatise on the astrolabe .

Writings [ edit ] First page of the first edition of the Isagoge commentary, Venice 1500 Of his reputedly numerous writings, only his commentary on Aristotle's De Interpretatione survives intact. A commentary on Porphyry 's Isagoge may also be his, but it is somewhat corrupt and contains later interpolations.

In De Interpretatione , Ammonius contends that divine foreknowledge makes void the contingent. Like Boethius in his second Commentary and in The Consolation of Philosophy , this argument maintains the effectiveness of prayer. Ammonius cites Iamblichus , who said "knowledge is intermediate between the knower and the known, since it is the activity of the knower concerning the known." [ 5 ] [ 6 ] In addition, there are some notes of Ammonius' lectures written by various students which also survive: On Aristotle's Categories (anonymous writer) On Aristotle's Prior Analytics I (anonymous writer) On Aristotle's Metaphysics 1–7 (written by Asclepius ) On Nicomachus ' Introduction to Arithmetic (written by Asclepius) On Aristotle's Prior Analytics (written by John Philoponus ) On Aristotle's Posterior Analytics (written by John Philoponus) On Aristotle's On Generation and Corruption (written by John Philoponus) On Aristotle's On the Soul (written by John Philoponus) There is Greek-language work called Life of Aristotle , which is usually ascribed to Ammonius, but "is more probable that it is the work of Joannes Philoponus , the pupil of Ammonius, to whom it is ascribed in some MSS ." [ 7 ] English translations [ edit ] Ammonius: On Aristotle Categories , translated by S. M. Cohen and G. B. Matthews. London and Ithaca 1992.

Ammonius: On Aristotle's On Interpretation 1–8 , translated by D. Blank. London and Ithaca 1996.

Ammonius: On Aristotle's On Interpretation 9, with Boethius: On Aristotle's On Interpretation 9 , translated by D. Blank (Ammonius) and N. Kretzmann (Boethius). London and Ithaca 1998 John Philoponus: On Aristotle On Coming-to-be and Perishing 1.1–5 , translated by C. J. F. Williams. London and Ithaca 1999 John Philoponus: On Aristotle On Coming-to-be and Perishing 1.6–2.4 , translated by C. J. F. Williams. London and Ithaca 1999.

John Philoponus: On Aristotle On the Soul 2.1–6 , translated by W. Charlton. London and Ithaca 2005 John Philoponus: On Aristotle On the Soul 2.7–12 , translated by W. Charlton. London and Ithaca 2005 John Philoponus: On Aristotle On the Soul 3.1–8 , translated by W. Charlton. London and Ithaca 2000 John Philoponus: On Aristotle On the Intellect (de Anima 3.4–8) , translated by W. Charlton. London and Ithaca 1991.

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Jackson, Robin; Lycos, Kimon; Tarrant, Harold (1998).

Olympiodorus: Commentary on Plato's Gorgias . Leidon, The Netherlands: Brill. p. 2.

ISBN 90-04-10972-2 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Watts, Edward J. (2018), Nicholson, Oliver (ed.), "Ammonius" , The Oxford Dictionary of Late Antiquity , Oxford University Press, doi : 10.1093/acref/9780198662778.001.0001 , ISBN 978-0-19-866277-8 , retrieved 2020-10-15 ^ Damascius, Philosophos Historia , 118B, Athanassiadi ^ Olympiodorus, in Gorgias , 199, 8–10 ^ Medieval Philosophy and the Classical Tradition , Curzon Press, John Inglis, 2002, pg. 128.

^ Tempelis, Elias (1997).

"Iamblichus and the School of Ammonius, Son of Hermias, On Divine Omniscience" .

Syllecta Classica .

8 (1): 207– 217.

doi : 10.1353/syl.1997.0005 .

ISSN 2160-5157 .

^ Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge , The biographical dictionary of the Society for the diffusion of useful knowledge , Volume 2, Part 2 , Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans, 1843, p. 487.

References [ edit ] Andron, Cosmin. "Ammonios of Alexandria", The Routledge Encyclopedia of Ancient Natural Scientists , eds. Georgia Irby-Massie and Paul T. Keyser, New York: Routledge, 2008.

Jones, A., Martindale, J., Morris, J.

The Prosopography of the Later Roman Empire , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992, pages 71–72.

Karamanolis, George E.

Plato and Aristotle in agreement? : Platonists on Aristotle from Antiochus to Porphyry , New York: Oxford University Press, 2006.

Merlan, Phillip (1970). "Ammonius, Son of Hermias".

Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Vol. 1. New York: CharlesScribner's Sons. p. 137.

ISBN 0-684-10114-9 .

Seel, Gerhard (ed.), Ammonius and the Seabattle. Texts, Commentary, and Essays , in collaboration with Jean-Pierre Schneider and Daniel Schulthess; Ammonius on Aristotle: De interpretatione 9 (and 7, 1–17) Greek text established by A. Busse, philosophical commentary by Gerhard Seel; essays by Mario Mignucci and Gerhard Seel, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 2001.

Sorabji, Richard.

The Philosophy of the Commentators, 200–600 AD. A Sourcebook , Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2005.

Verrycken, Koenraad.

The Metaphysics of Ammonius son of Hermias , in Richard Sorabji (ed.), Aristotle Transformed. The Ancient Commentators and their Influence , Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1990, p. 199-231.

External links [ edit ] Blank, David.

"Ammonius" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca , Vol. 4 parts 2–6 , Akademie der Wissenschaften, Berlin, Edita consilio et auctoritate Academiae litterarum regiae borussicae (1882).

v t e Platonists Ancient Academics Old Plato Aristotle Eudoxus Philip of Opus Aristonymus Coriscus and Erastus of Scepsis Demetrius of Amphipolis Euaeon of Lampsacus Heraclides and Python of Aenus Hestiaeus of Perinthus Lastheneia of Mantinea Timolaus of Cyzicus Speusippus Axiothea of Phlius Heraclides Ponticus Menedemus of Pyrrha Xenocrates Crantor Polemon Crates of Athens Skeptics Middle Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus New Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Dio of Alexandria Middle Platonists Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Anonymous Theaetetus Commentator Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Justin Martyr Gaius Albinus Alcinous Alexander Peloplaton Apuleius Atticus Maximus of Tyre Numenius of Apamea Ammonius Saccas Longinus Clement of Alexandria Origen Origen the Pagan Calcidius Neoplatonists Plotinus Students Amelius Porphyry of Tyre Iamblichus Sopater Eustathius of Cappadocia Sosipatra Aedesius Dexippus Chrysanthius Theodorus of Asine Julian Salutius Maximus of Ephesus Eusebius of Myndus Priscus of Epirus Antoninus Hypatia Gaius Marius Victorinus Augustine Macrobius Boethius Academy Plutarch of Athens Asclepigenia Hierocles Syrianus Hermias Aedesia Proclus Marinus Isidore Ammonius Hermiae Asclepiodotus Hegias Zenodotus Agapius Damascius Simplicius Priscian John Philoponus Olympiodorus David the Invincible Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Medieval John Scotus Eriugena Al-Farabi Anselm Peter Abelard Bernard Gilbert Thierry Henry of Ghent Bonaventure Theodoric of Freiberg Meister Eckhart Berthold of Moosburg Paul of Venice Modern Renaissance Florentine Academy Plethon Marsilio Ficino Cristoforo Landino Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Giordano Bruno Blaise Pascal Cambridge Ralph Cudworth Henry More Anne Conway Thomas Taylor Emanuel Swedenborg Josiah Royce Aleksei Losev Contemporary Analytic Gottlob Frege Bertrand Russell Kurt Gödel Roderick Chisholm W. V. O. Quine Jan Łukasiewicz Crispin Wright Edward N. Zalta Continental Edmund Husserl Leo Strauss Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands 2 Norway Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ammonius_Hermiae&oldid=1292284630 " Categories : 5th-century Greek philosophers 6th-century Greek philosophers Greek-language commentators on Aristotle Greek-language commentators on Plato Roman-era students in Athens Neoplatonists in Alexandria 440s births 520s deaths 5th-century Byzantine writers 6th-century Byzantine writers 5th-century astronomers 6th-century astronomers 5th-century Byzantine scientists 6th-century Byzantine scientists 5th-century mathematicians 6th-century mathematicians 6th-century Greek scientists Byzantine astronomers Philosophers in ancient Alexandria Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 05:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ammonius Hermiae 26 languages Add topic

