Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Structure 3 Teams 4 General Managers 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents United Women's Lacrosse League Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Defunct American women's lacrosse league (2015–2018) This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( August 2019 ) United Women's Lacrosse League Sport lacrosse Founded 2015 ( 2015 ) First season 2016 Ceased c.

2018 ( 2018 ) Replaced by Women's Professional Lacrosse League Owner(s) United Women's Sports Commissioner Kristan Ash (2016–2018) Michele DeJuliis (2015–2016) No. of teams 4 Last champion(s) Philadelphia Force Most titles Long Island Sound (2 titles) Sponsor(s) STX Nike Official website unitedwomenslacrosse.com The United Women’s Lacrosse League (UWLX) was a women's lacrosse league in the United States . It was co-founded in Boston, Massachusetts , by Digit Murphy and Aronda Kirby of the Play It Forward Sports Foundation, under the ownership of United Women's Sports LLC in a strategic partnership with STX .

[ 1 ] Penn State women's lacrosse alum and former United States national team player Michele DeJuliis was appointed as the league’s first commissioner.

[ 2 ] DeJuliis left after the 2016 season to found the Women's Professional Lacrosse League (WPLL); Kristan Ash served as the second and final league commissioner.

[ 3 ] The league comprised four teams: the Baltimore Ride , Boston Storm , Long Island Sound and Philadelphia Force . Long Island won the first two championships and Philadelphia won the third and final championship.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] UWLX was the first opportunity in the form of a nationally competitive league afforded to women looking to continue playing lacrosse after their collegiate playing days conclude. Among the league's efforts, its inaugural season has allowed for over 100 opportunities for women in post-collegiate sport play in lacrosse.

“Our Play It Forward platform was started to grow opportunities for women in professional sports,” and the inaugural season features games that will be played at or in close proximity to major lacrosse tournaments in the Northeast, allowing the league to connect with and inspire younger players.

[ 1 ] During the month of March 2016, the league unveiled the club names and logos, while also announcing the hiring of head coaches. The first four head coaches in league history include Jen Adams (Baltimore), Amy Patton (Boston), Missy Doherty (Philadelphia), and Shannon Smith (Long Island).

[ 5 ] In late November 2016, it was announced that UWLX engaged in a partnership with Gillette Stadium which would see the league serve as a promotional partner of the 2017 NCAA Division I Women’s Lacrosse Championship. The event was held on Memorial Day Weekend 2017.

Structure [ edit ] League play started on May 28, 2016 and a draft took place on April 13 to fill the four team rosters. In the inaugural draft, Maryland Terrapins alumnus and former US national team player Katie Schwarzmann would be the first player ever selected, taken by the Baltimore Ride with the top pick.

[ 6 ] Other players selected in the first round of the inaugural draft were also current or former members of the US national team. Said players included Liz Hogan (Boston), Michelle Tumolo (Philly), and Devon Wills (Long Island). The inaugural regular season champions were the Long Island Sound, while Dana Dobbie captured the scoring title.

The four teams in the UWLX do not have their own home venues. Instead, all teams travel to large youth lacrosse tournaments to participate in regular season play. During the inaugural season, it was announced that the construction of a new sports complex in Attleboro, Massachusetts, known as the New England Sports Village, would serve as the eventual headquarters for UWLX.

[ 7 ] The league also believes in having a positive impact in the female sporting community. Of note, players in UWLX conduct lacrosse clinics for young players. In addition, the league has partnered with Jazmine Smith , the founder and CEO of Eyekonz, which provides sporting opportunities for African American girls in Philadelphia through participation in field hockey and lacrosse.

[ 8 ] Smith brought the Strawberry Mansion High School girls’ lacrosse team to the inaugural UWLX weekend at Lehigh University.

Teams [ edit ] Baltimore Boston Philadelphia Long Island class=notpageimage| Locations of teams for the 2018 UWLX season.

Club Metro area Coach Baltimore Ride Baltimore Jen Adams Boston Storm Boston Abbey Capobianco Long Island Sound New York Shannon Smith Philadelphia Force Philadelphia Mike Bedford General Managers [ edit ] General Manager Term Michele DeJuliis 2015–2016 Gary Gait 2017, Interim [ 9 ] Kristan Ash 2017 See also [ edit ] Major League Lacrosse , the professional men's field lacrosse league in North America National Lacrosse League , the professional men's box lacrosse league in North America Women's Professional Lacrosse League , a professional women's field lacrosse league in North America List of professional sports teams in the United States and Canada Women's sports References [ edit ] ^ a b "UWLX Draft Inaugural Season More" . insidelacrosse.com . Retrieved February 8, 2016 .

^ "Michele DeJuliis continues life's work as UWLX Commissioner" .

Lacrosse Magazine . Archived from the original on January 2, 2016.

^ "UWLX General Manager" . UWLX . Retrieved November 14, 2017 .

^ DaSilva, Matt (August 2, 2017).

"Long Island Sound Repeat as UWLX Champions" .

US Lacrosse Magazine . Archived from the original on November 15, 2017 . Retrieved November 14, 2017 .

^ "WLAX: Smith To Also Coach United Women's Lacrosse League's Long Island Team" . March 18, 2016 . Retrieved August 15, 2024 .

^ "United Women Lacrosse League Draft" . baltimoresun.com. 2016-04-14 . Retrieved 2016-04-20 .

^ "Attleboro sports complex project partnering with new women's lacrosse league" . The Sun Chronicle. n.d . Retrieved 2016-07-18 .

^ "UWLX Plays It Forward with Eyekonz Lacrosse League" . UWLX. 2016-06-20 . Retrieved 2016-07-18 .

^ "UWLX Appoints Gary Gait as Interim Commissioner" . UWLX. 2017-01-24. Archived from the original on 2017-02-02 . Retrieved 2017-01-24 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e United Women's Lacrosse League Active teams Baltimore Ride Boston Storm Long Island Sound Philadelphia Force Seasons 2016 2017 v t e Women's lacrosse leagues Professional Athletes Unlimited Lacrosse Women's Professional Lacrosse League United Women's Lacrosse League College NCAA Division I Division II Division III Women's Collegiate Lacrosse Associates (non-varsity women) NJCAA Ontario University Athletics v t e Major women's sport leagues in North America Leagues by sport Basketball WNBA Unrivaled WABA WBDA Athletes Unlimited American League ( defunct ) WABA (1984) ( defunct ) WBA ( defunct ) NWBL ( defunct ) WBL ( defunct ) NCAA Division I NCAA Division II NCAA Division III NAIA U Sports Ice hockey PWHL NCAA Division I NCAA Division III U Sports CWHL ( defunct ) WWHL ( defunct ) PHF ( defunct ) Soccer NWSL USL Super League WPSL UWS Liga MX LIMEFFE NCAA Division I NAIA U Sports WPS ( defunct ) WUSA ( defunct ) WLS ( defunct ) WPSL Elite ( defunct ) USL USL (1995) ( defunct ) Northern Super League (beginning play in 2025) Softball AUSL WPF NCAA Division I ( WCWS ) NAIA NPF ( defunct ) AFP ( defunct ) Gridiron football WNFC WFA USWFL MWFL WWCFL X League AFWL ( defunct ) IWFL ( defunct ) LFL ( defunct ) LFL Canada ( defunct ) NWFA ( defunct ) WAFL ( defunct ) WFA ( defunct ) WFL ( defunct ) WPFL ( defunct ) Rugby union WER WPL Lacrosse UWLX ( defunct ) WPLL ( defunct ) Athletes Unlimited ( defunct ) WLL Volleyball Athletes Unlimited LOVB Pro MLV MLV (1987–89) ( defunct ) Other sports Baseball Golf Ringette Roller derby Ultimate disc Leagues by association NCAA Beach volleyball Bowling Cross country Field hockey Golf Gymnastics Lacrosse Rowing Swimming and diving Tennis Indoor track and field Outdoor track and field Volleyball Water polo Wrestling (starting in 2025–26) NAIA Cross country Golf Swimming and diving Tennis Indoor track and field Outdoor track and field Volleyball Lacrosse v t e Top-level professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada Men's Majors Major League Baseball National Basketball Association National Football League National Hockey League Major League Soccer Canadian Football League Other top-flight leagues Canadian Premier League Major League Cricket Arena football AF1 IFL National Lacrosse League Premier Lacrosse League USA Rugby League Major League Rugby Premier Rugby Sevens Major Arena Soccer League Ultimate Frisbee Association National Volleyball Association Women's Majors Women's National Basketball Association National Women's Soccer League Professional Women's Hockey League Other top-flight leagues Women's Pro Baseball League Women's Football Alliance Women's Lacrosse League National Ringette League Women's Elite Rugby Premier Rugby Sevens Soccer USLS NSL Softball AUSL WPF Ultimate PUL WUL Volleyball LOVB Pro Major League Volleyball Others Individual Bowling PBA PWBA Bull riding PBR WPRA Golf PGA Tour LPGA Tennis ATP WTA Motorsports IndyCar Series NASCAR Cup Series Other Major League Eating USA Canada Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_Women%27s_Lacrosse_League&oldid=1304571633 " Categories : United Women's Lacrosse League Women's lacrosse in the United States Lacrosse leagues in the United States Professional sports leagues in the United States Sports leagues established in 2015 2015 establishments in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2019 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 21:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents United Women's Lacrosse League Add languages Add topic

