Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions Toggle Definitions subsection 1.1 Etymology of "canon" 2 Sources of canon law 3 Legal history and codification Toggle Legal history and codification subsection 3.1 Ius antiquum 3.2 Ius novum 3.3 Ius novissimum 3.4 Ius codicis 3.4.1 Pio-Benedictine law 3.4.2 Johanno-Pauline law 3.5 Eastern Catholic canon law 3.5.1 Nomocanons 3.5.2 Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches 4 Jurisprudence of canon law 5 Philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law 6 Canonistics, faculties, and institutes Toggle Canonistics, faculties, and institutes subsection 6.1 Canon law and Church office 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Citations 8.2 Sources 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle External links subsection 10.1 Texts and translations of post-1917 canonical codifications 10.2 Historical canon law texts Toggle the table of contents Canon law of the Catholic Church 26 languages العربية Беларуская Català Čeština Esperanto فارسی Gaeilge Galego Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe Українська 中文 Jaku Iban Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Catholic religious laws and principles For a topical guide, see Outline of Catholic canon law .

Part of a series on the Canon law of the Catholic Church Ius vigens (current law) 1983 Code of Canon Law Omnium in mentem Magnum principium Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Ad tuendam fidem Ex corde Ecclesiae Indulgentiarum Doctrina Praedicate evangelium Veritatis gaudium Custom Matrimonial nullity trial reforms of Pope Francis Documents of the Second Vatican Council Christus Dominus Lumen gentium Optatam totius Orientalium ecclesiarum Presbyterorum ordinis Sacrosanctum concilium Precepts of the Church Legal history Jus antiquum ( c.

33 –1140) Ancient Church Orders Didache The Apostolic Constitutions Canons of the Apostles Collections of ancient canons Collectiones canonum Dionysianae Collectio canonum quadripartita Collectio canonum Quesnelliana Collectio canonum Wigorniensis Gelasian Decree Symmachian forgeries Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals Donation of Constantine Gregorian Reform Lay investiture controversy Dictatus papae Libertas ecclesiae Plenitudo potestatis Jus novum ( c.

1140 –1563) Corpus Juris Canonici Decretum Gratiani Decretist Canon Episcopi Margaritae Jus commune Decretals of Gregory IX Decretalist Regulæ Juris Extravagantes Liber Septimus Jus novissimum ( c.

1563 –1918) Council of Trent Benedictus Deus Tametsi Apostolicae Sedis moderationi Jus codicis (1918-present) 1917 Code of Canon Law Ecclesiae Sanctae 1983 Code of Canon Law Other Contractum trinius Papal judge-delegate Right of option Eastern law Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Eastern Canonical Reforms of Pius XII Nomocanon Eparchy Exarchate Ordinariate for Eastern Catholic faithful Protosyncellus Liturgical law Latin Church General Roman Calendar Ranking of liturgical days in the Roman Rite General Instruction of the Roman Missal Code of Rubrics Sacrosanctum Concilium Mysterii Paschalis Musicam sacram Scripturarum thesaurus Liturgiam authenticam Quattuor abhinc annos Ecclesia Dei Summorum Pontificum Magnum principium Traditionis custodes Red Mass Holy day of obligation Sacramental law Communicatio in sacris Ex opere operato Omnium in mentem Validity and liceity Sacraments Holy Orders Impediment (Catholic canon law) Abstemius Defect of birth Obligation of celibacy Nullity of Sacred Ordination Apostolicae curae Dimissorial letters Episcopal consecrators Approbation (Catholic canon law) Confession Penitential canons Paenitentiale Theodori Seal of the Confessional Internal and external forum Note on the importance of the internal forum and the inviolability of the Sacramental Seal Apostolic Penitentiary Canon penitentiary Complicit absolution Sacramentum Poenitentiae Eucharist Eucharistic discipline Canon 915 Celebret Mass stipend Sacramentals Indulgence Indulgentiarum doctrina Sacred places Altars Major basilica Minor basilica Oratory (chapel) Sacred times Feast days Fast days and abstinence Paenitemini Holy day of obligation Matrimonial law Canonical form (Latin Church) Tametsi Ne Temere Banns of marriage Declaration of Nullity Dignitas connubii Matrimonial Nullity Trial Reforms of Pope Francis Vetitum Defender of the Bond Impediments to Marriage Affinity Clandestinity Impediment of crime Disparity of cult Ligamen Public propriety Matrimonial dispensation Ratum sed non consummatum Sanatio in radice Natural marriage Pauline privilege Petrine privilege Supreme authority, particular churches , and canonical structures Supreme authority of the Church Roman Pontiff Papal conclave College of Bishops Supra-diocesan/eparchal structures College of Cardinals Conference of bishops Synod of Bishops Particular churches Churches sui juris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Local particular churches Appointment of bishops Abbacy nullius Apostolic vicariate Apostolic vicar Apostolic administration Apostolic administrator Diocese/Archdiocese Aeque principaliter Cathedraticum In persona episcopi Diocesan Curia Moderator of the Curia Chancery Deanery Vicar forane Eparchy Eparchal curia Military ordinariate Mission sui juris Personal ordinariate Anglicanorum Coetibus Juridic persons Parish Team of priests in solidum Collegiate church Parish register Lay trusteeism Roman Curia Dicastery Congregation Pontifical council Personal prelature Types of membership of Opus Dei Association of the Christian faithful Vicar general Quinquennial visit ad limina Jurisprudence Canonical coronation Canonically crowned images Computation of time Custom Delegata potestas non potest delegari Derogation Dispensation Taxa Innocentiana Faculty Indult Impediment Donation Interpretation Pontifical Council for Legislative Texts Jurisdiction Peritus Obreption & subreption Obrogation Promulgation Resignation of the Roman Pontiff Sede vacante Simony Vacatio legis Validity and liceity Visitation Apostolic visitor Philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law Theology Ecclesiology Treatise on Law Determinatio Temporal goods (property) Benefice Cathedraticum Contract law Mass stipend Stole fee Temporalities Law of persons Person (Catholic canon law) Formal act of defection from the Catholic Church Canonical age Emancipation Exemption Heresy Clerics Secular clergy Regular clergy Obligation of celibacy Clerics and public office Incardination and excardination Laicization (dispensation) Canonical faculties Office Canonical provision Canonical election Juridic and physical persons Jus patronatus Associations of the faithful Consecrated life Canonical documents Acta Apostolicae Sedis Acta Sanctae Sedis Censor librorum Imprimatur Imprimi potest Notary Protonotary apostolic Apostolic constitution Canon Concordat Decree Decretal Encyclical Motu proprio Ordinance Papal brief Papal bull Penitential Positive law Rescript Parish register Ecclesiastical Latin Penal law Canon 1324 Canon 1397 §2 Censure (Catholic canon law) De delictis gravioribus Complicit absolution Crimen sollicitationis Excommunication List of excommunicable offences in the Catholic Church List of people excommunicated by the Catholic Church List of cardinals excommunicated by the Catholic Church Interdict Laicization (penal) Latae sententiae and ferendae sententiae Lifetime of prayer and penance Canonical admonitions Ecclesiastical prison Procedural law Pars statica (tribunals & ministers/parties) Tribunals Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura Tribunal of the Roman Rota Apostolic Penitentiary Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith Ministers of Justice Judicial Vicar / Officialis Auditor Parties Defender of the Bond Procurator Pars dynamica (trial procedure) Dignitas connubii (matrimonial causes) Appeal as from an abuse Presumption Penal procedure Vos estis lux mundi Canonization Congregation for the Causes of Saints Maiorem hac dilectionem Advocatus Diaboli Oblatio vitae Positio Beatification and canonization process in 1914 Election of the Roman Pontiff Current law Universi Dominici gregis Papal renunciation Reforms of Pope Benedict XVI Historical Cum proxime Jus exclusivae Papal appointment Aeterni Patris Filius Romano Pontifici eligendo Ingravescentem aetatem Ubi periculum Quia propter Legal practice and scholarship List of legal abbreviations Academic degrees Licentiate of Canon Law Doctor of Canon Law Doctor of both laws Journals and Professional Societies Canon Law Society of America The Jurist Faculties of canon law Catholic University of America School of Canon Law Canonists Medieval Gratian Hostiensis Jean Lemoine Raymond of Penyafort Rufinus Johannes Teutonicus Geoffrey of Trani Burchard of Worms Brocard Modern & Contemporary Eugenio Corecco John D. Faris Pietro Gasparri Ladislas Orsy Edward N. Peters Law of consecrated life Solemn vow Exclaustration Manifestation of Conscience Canonical erection of a house of religious Pontifical right Diocesan right Congregation for Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life Institute of consecrated life Religious institute Congregation Order Monasticism Canons regular Mendicant orders Clerics regular Secular institute Cum Sanctissimus Primo Feliciter Provida Mater Ecclesia Society of apostolic life Decretum laudis Catholicism portal v t e The canon law of the Catholic Church (from Latin ius canonicum [ 1 ] ) is "how the Church organizes and governs herself".

[ 2 ] It is the system of religious laws and ecclesiastical legal principles made and enforced by the hierarchical authorities of the Catholic Church to regulate its external organization and government and to order and direct the activities of Catholics toward the mission of the Church.

[ 3 ] It was the first modern Western legal system [ 4 ] and is the oldest continuously functioning legal system in the West, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] while the unique traditions of Eastern Catholic canon law govern the 23 Eastern Catholic particular churches sui iuris .

Positive ecclesiastical laws, based directly or indirectly upon immutable divine law or natural law , derive formal authority in the case of universal laws from promulgation by the supreme legislator—the supreme pontiff , who possesses the totality of legislative, executive, and judicial power in his person, [ 7 ] or by the College of Bishops acting in communion with the pope. In contrast, particular laws derive formal authority from promulgation by a legislator inferior to the supreme legislator, whether an ordinary or a delegated legislator. The actual subject material of the canons is not just doctrinal or moral in nature, but all-encompassing of the human condition.

The canon law of the Catholic Church has all the ordinary elements of a mature legal system: laws, courts , lawyers , judges.

[ 8 ] The canon law of the Catholic Church is articulated in the legal code for the Latin Church [ 9 ] as well as a code for the Eastern Catholic Churches.

[ 9 ] This canon law has principles of legal interpretation , [ 10 ] and coercive penalties.

[ 11 ] It lacks civilly-binding force in most secular jurisdictions. Those who are versed and skilled in canon law, and professors of canon law, are called canonists [ 12 ] [ 13 ] (or colloquially, canon lawyers [ 12 ] [ 14 ] ). Canon law as a sacred science is called canonistics .

The jurisprudence of canon law is the complex of legal principles and traditions within which canon law operates, while the philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law are the areas of philosophical, theological, and legal scholarship dedicated to providing a theoretical basis for canon law as a legal system and as true law.

Definitions [ edit ] The Corpus Juris Canonici , the fundamental collection of Catholic canon law for over 750 years The term "canon law" ( ius canonicum ) was only regularly used from the twelfth century onwards.

[ 15 ] The term ius ecclesiasticum , by contrast, referred to the secular law, whether imperial, royal, or feudal, that dealt with relations between the state and the Catholic Church.

[ 15 ] The term corpus iuris canonici was used to denote canon law as legal system beginning in the thirteenth century.

[ 16 ] Other terms sometimes used synonymously with ius canonicum include ius sacrum , ius ecclesiasticum , ius divinum , and ius pontificium , [ 17 ] as well as sacri canones [ 18 ] (sacred canons).

Ecclesiastical positive law is the positive law that emanates from the legislative power of the Catholic Church in its effort to govern its members in accordance with the Gospel of Jesus Christ .

[ 19 ] Fernando della Rocca used the term "ecclesiastical-positive law" in contradistinction to civil -positive law, in order to differentiate between the human legislators of church and state, all of which issue "positive law" in the normal sense.

[ 20 ] Examples of ecclesiastical positive law are fasting during the liturgical season of Lent , and religious workers (monks, nuns, etc.) requiring permission from their superiors to publish a book.

[ 19 ] [ 21 ] Etymology of "canon" [ edit ] Main article: Canon (canon law) The word "canon" comes from the Greek kanon , which in its original usage denoted a straight rod, was later used for a measuring stick, and eventually came to mean a rule or norm.

[ 22 ] In 325, when the first ecumenical council, Nicaea I , was held, kanon started to obtain the restricted juridical denotation of a law promulgated by a synod or ecumenical council , as well as that of an individual bishop.

[ 22 ] Sources of canon law [ edit ] Main article: Jurisprudence of Catholic canon law § Sources of law The term source or fountain of canon law ( fons iuris canonici ) may be taken in a twofold sense: a) as the formal cause of the existence of a law, and in this sense of the fontes essendi ( Latin : "sources of being") of canon law or lawgivers; b) as the material channel through which laws are handed down and made known, and in this sense the sources are styled fontes cognoscendi ( Latin : "sources of knowing"), or depositaries, like sources of history.

[ 23 ] Legal history and codification [ edit ] Main article: Legal history of the Catholic Church See also: Latin Church The Catholic Church has the oldest continuously functioning legal system in the West, [ 5 ] much later than Roman law but predating the evolution of modern European civil law traditions. What began with rules (" canons ") said to have been adopted by the Apostles at the Council of Jerusalem in the first century has developed into a highly complex legal system encapsulating not just norms of the New Testament , but some elements of the Hebrew ( Old Testament ), Roman , Visigothic , Saxon , and Celtic legal traditions . As many as 36 collections of canon law are known to have been brought into existence before 1150.

[ 24 ] The history of Latin canon law can be divided into four periods: the ius antiquum , the ius novum , the ius novissimum and the Codex Iuris Canonici .

[ 25 ] In relation to the Code, history can be divided into the ius vetus (all law before the 1917 Code ) and the ius novum (the law of the code, or ius codicis ).

[ 25 ] The Eastern Catholic canon law of the Eastern Catholic Churches , which had developed some different disciplines and practices, underwent its own process of codification , resulting in the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches promulgated in 1990 by Pope John Paul II .

[ 26 ] St. Raymond of Penyafort (1175–1275), a Spanish Dominican priest, is the patron saint of canonists, [ 27 ] [ 5 ] due to his important contributions to canon law in codifying the Decretales Gregorii IX . Other saintly patrons include St. Ivo of Chartres and the Jesuit St. Robert Bellarmine .

[ citation needed ] Ius antiquum [ edit ] Main article: Ius antiquum See also: Ancient Church Orders and Collections of ancient canons Image of pages from the Decretum of Burchard of Worms , the 11th-century book of canon law The period of canonical history known as the ius antiquum ("ancient law") extends from the foundation of the Church to the time of Gratian (mid-12th century).

[ 25 ] [ 28 ] This period can be further divided into three periods: the time of the apostles to the death of Pope Gelasius I (A.D. 496), the end of the 5th century to the spurious collection of the 9th century, and the last up to the time of Gratian (mid-12th century).

[ 29 ] In the Early Church , the first canons were decreed by bishops united in " Ecumenical " councils (the Emperor summoning all of the known world's bishops to attend with at least the acknowledgement of the Bishop of Rome ) or "local" councils (bishops of a region or territory). Over time, these canons were supplemented with decretals of the Bishops of Rome, which were responses to doubts or problems according to the maxim, " Roma locuta est, causa finita est " ("Rome has spoken, the case is closed"). A common misconception, the Catholic Encyclopedia links this saying to St Augustine who actually said something quite different: " jam enim de hac causa duo concilia missa sunt ad sedem apostolicam; inde etiam rescripta venerunt; causa finita est " (which roughly translate to: "there are two councils, for now, this matter as brought to the Apostolic See, whence also letters are come to pass, the case was finished") in response to the heretical Pelagianism of the time.

[ citation needed ] In the first millennium of the Latin Church , the canons of various ecumenical and local councils were supplemented with decretals of the popes ; these were gathered together into collections.

[ citation needed ] Ius novum [ edit ] Main article: Corpus Iuris Canonici Gratian, the "Father of Canon Law" The period of canonical history known as the Ius novum ("new law") or middle period covers the time from Gratian to the Council of Trent (mid-12th century–16th century).

[ 25 ] [ 28 ] The spurious conciliar canons and papal decrees were gathered together into collections, both unofficial and official. In the year 1000, there was no book that had attempted to summarize the whole body of canon law, to systematize it in whole or in part.

[ 30 ] The first truly systematic collection was assembled by the Camaldolese monk Gratian in the 11th century, commonly known as the Decretum Gratiani ("Gratian's Decree") but originally called The Concordance of Discordant Canons [ 31 ] ( Concordantia Discordantium Canonum ). Before Gratian there was no "jurisprudence of canon law" (system of legal interpretation and principles). Gratian is the founder of canonical jurisprudence, which merits him the title "Father of Canon Law".

[ 32 ] Gratian also had an enormous influence on the history of natural law in his transmission of the ancient doctrines of natural law to Scholasticism .

[ 33 ] Canon law greatly increased from 1140 to 1234. After that, it slowed down, except for the laws of local councils (an area of canon law in need of scholarship), and secular laws supplemented.

[ 34 ] In 1234 Pope Gregory IX promulgated the first official collection of canons , called the Decretalia Gregorii Noni or Liber Extra . This was followed by the Liber Sextus (1298) of Boniface VIII , the Clementines (1317) of Clement V , the Extravagantes Joannis XXII and the Extravagantes Communes , all of which followed the same structure as the Liber Extra . All these collections, with the Decretum Gratiani , are together referred to as the Corpus Iuris Canonici . After the completion of the Corpus Iuris Canonici , subsequent papal legislation was published in periodic volumes called Bullaria .

In the thirteenth century, the Roman Church began to collect and organize its canon law, which after a millennium of development had become a complex and difficult system of interpretation and cross-referencing. The official collections were the Liber Extra (1234) of Pope Gregory IX , the Liber Sextus (1298) of Boniface VIII and the Clementines (1317), prepared for Clement V but published by John XXII . These were addressed to the universities by papal letters at the beginning of each collection, and these texts became textbooks for aspiring canon lawyers. In 1582 a compilation was made of the Decretum, Extra, the Sext, the Clementines, and the Extravagantes (that is, the decretals of the popes from Pope John XXII to Pope Sixtus IV ).

Ius novissimum [ edit ] The third canonical period, known as the ius novissimum ("newest law"), stretches from the Council of Trent [ 28 ] to the promulgation of the 1917 Code of Canon Law which took legal effect in 1918.

[ 25 ] The start of the ius novissimum is not universally agreed upon, however.

Edward N. Peters argues that the ius novissimum actually started with the Liber Extra of Gregory IX in 1234.

[ 35 ] Ius codicis [ edit ] Cardinal Pietro Gasparri , architect of the 1917 Code of Canon Law The fourth period of canonical history is that of the present day, initiated by the promulgation of the 1917 Code of Canon Law [ 25 ] on 27 May 1917.

[ 36 ] Benedict XV, in his bull of promulgation, refers to the motu proprio Arduum sane , which was issued by Pius X, March 17, 1904, and gave rise to the 1917 Code.

[ 23 ] In that pronouncement, the Pontiff stated the reasons which prompted him as the supreme Pastor of souls, who has the care of all the churches, to provide for a new codification of ecclesiastic laws, with a view "to put together with order and clearness all the laws of the Church thus far issued, removing all those that would be recognized as abrogated or obsolete, adapting others to the necessities of the times, and enacting new ones in conformity with the present needs." [ 23 ] It is sometimes referred to as the ius codicis ("law of the code") or, in comparison with all law before it, the ius novum ("new law").

[ 25 ] From time to time, the Pontifical Council for Legislative Texts issues authentic interpretations regarding the code. The pope occasionally amends the text of the codes.

Pio-Benedictine law [ edit ] Main article: 1917 Code of Canon Law By the 19th century, the body of canonical legislation included some 10,000 norms. Many of these were difficult to reconcile with one another due to changes in circumstances and practice. The situation impelled Pope Pius X to order the creation of the first Code of Canon Law , a single volume of clearly stated laws. Under the aegis of the Cardinal Pietro Gasparri , the Commission for the Codification of Canon Law was completed under Benedict XV , who promulgated the Code on 27 May 1917, [ 37 ] effective on 29 May 1918.

[ 37 ] The work having been begun by Pius X , it was sometimes called the "Pio-Benedictine Code" but more often the 1917 Code to distinguish it from the later 1983 Code which replaced it. In its preparation, centuries of material was examined, scrutinized for authenticity by leading experts, and harmonized as much as possible with opposing canons and even other codes, from the Code of Justinian to the Napoleonic Code .

Johanno-Pauline law [ edit ] Main article: 1983 Code of Canon Law In the succeeding decades, some parts of the 1917 Code were retouched, especially under Pope Pius XII . In 1959, Pope John XXIII announced, together with his intention to call the Second Vatican Council , that the 1917 Code would be completely revised.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] In 1963, the commission appointed to undertake the task decided to delay the project until the council had been concluded. After Vatican II closed in 1965, it became apparent that the 1917 Code would need to be revised in light of the documents and theology of Vatican II. When work finally began, almost two decades of study and discussion on drafts of the various sections were needed before Pope John Paul II could promulgate the revised edition, which came into force on 27 November 1983, [ 40 ] having been promulgated via the apostolic constitution Sacrae Disciplinae Leges of 25 January 1983. Containing 1752 canons, [ 41 ] it is the law currently binding on the Latin Church .

This codification is referred to as the 1983 Code of Canon Law to distinguish it from the 1917 Code . Like the preceding codification, it applies to Roman Catholics of the Latin Church .

[ 42 ] As the currently-in-force law for the Latin Church, it constitutes a major part of the Ius vigens ( Latin : "active law").

Eastern Catholic canon law [ edit ] Main article: Eastern Catholic canon law Eastern Catholic canon law is the law of the 23 Catholic sui iuris particular churches of the Eastern Catholic tradition. Oriental canon law includes both the common tradition among all Eastern Catholic Churches, now chiefly contained in the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches , as well as the particular law proper to each individual sui iuris particular Eastern Catholic Church. Originating with the canons of particular councils and the writings of the Eastern Church Fathers, oriental canon law developed in concert with Byzantine Roman laws , leading to the compilation of nomocanons. Oriental canon law is distinguished from Latin canon law, which developed along a separate line in the remnants of the Western Roman Empire under the direct influence of the Roman Pontiff, and is now chiefly codified in the 1983 Code of Canon Law .

Nomocanons [ edit ] Main article: Nomocanon A nomocanon (nomokanon) is a collection of ecclesiastical law , consisting of the elements from both the civil law (nomoi) and the canon law (kanones). Collections of this kind were found only in Eastern law. The Greek Church has two principal nomocanonical collections, the "Nomocanon of John Scholasticus" of the sixth century and the "Nomocanon in 14 titles", which dates from the reign of the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius ( r.

610–641 ), made by fusion of the Collectio tripartita (collection of Justinian's imperial law) and "Canonic syntagma" (ecclesiastical canons). The latter was long held in esteem and passed into the Russian Church, but it was by degrees supplanted by the "Nomocanon of Photios " in 883. Photius compiled systematically the canons of the East which amount to a counterpart of Gratian in the West. His 2-part collection, a chronological collection of synodal canons and his nomocanon revision with updated civil laws, became a classical source of ancient canon law for the Greek Church.

[ 43 ] Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches [ edit ] Main article: Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches See also: Eastern canonical reforms of Pius XII For Eastern Catholics, two sections of Eastern Catholic canon law had already, under Pope Pius XII , been put in the form of short canons. These parts were revised as part of the application of Pope John XXIII 's decision to carry out a general revision of the Church's canon law; as a result, a distinct Code for members of the Eastern Catholic Churches came into effect for the first time on 1 October 1991 ( Apostolic Constitution Sacri Canones of 18 October 1990). The Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches , as it is called, differs from the Latin 1983 Code of Canon Law in matters where Eastern and Latin traditions diverge, such as terminology, discipline concerning hierarchical offices, and administration of the sacraments.

Jurisprudence of canon law [ edit ] Main article: Jurisprudence of Catholic canon law Portrayal of a meeting of the Roman Rota The institutions and practices of canon law paralleled the legal development of much of Europe, and consequently both modern civil law and common law [ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] bear the influences of canon law.

From the days of Ethelbert onwards [say, from the year 600], English law was under the influence of so much of Roman law as had worked itself into the traditions of the Catholic Church.

[ 47 ] Much of the legislative style was adapted from that of Roman Law [ 48 ] especially the Justinianic Corpus Iuris Civilis .

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] After the 'fall' of the Roman Empire and up until the revival of Roman Law in the 11th century canon law served as the most important unifying force among the local systems in the Civil Law tradition.

[ 51 ] The Catholic Church developed the inquisitorial system in the Middle Ages.

[ 52 ] The canonists introduced into post-Roman Europe the concept of a higher law of ultimate justice , over and above the momentary law of the state.

[ 53 ] In one of his elaborate orations in the United States Senate Mr. Charles Sumner spoke of "the generous presumption of the common law in favor of the innocence of an accused person"; yet it must be admitted that such a presumption cannot be found in Anglo-Saxon law, where sometimes the presumption seems to have been the other way. And in a very recent case in the Supreme Court of the United States, the case of Coffin, 156 U. S. 432, it is pointed out that this presumption was fully established in the Roman law, and was preserved in the canon law.

[ 54 ] The primary canonical sources of law are the 1983 Code of Canon Law , [ 19 ] [ 55 ] the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches , [ 55 ] and Pastor Bonus .

[ 56 ] Other sources include apostolic constitutions , motibus propriis , particular law, and—with the approbation of the competent legislator— custom . A law must be promulgated for it to have legal effect.

[ 57 ] A later and contrary law obrogates an earlier law .

Canonists have formulated interpretive rules of law for the magisterial (non-legislatorial) interpretation of canon laws . An authentic interpretation is an official interpretation of a law issued by the law's legislator , and has the force of law.

[ 58 ] Philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law [ edit ] Main article: Philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law Summa theologica , Pars secunda, prima pars (copy by Peter Schöffer, 1471) Although canonical jurisprudential theory generally follows the principles of Aristotelian - Thomistic legal philosophy , [ 5 ] Thomas Aquinas never explicitly discusses the place of canon law in his Treatise on Law [ 59 ] However, Aquinas himself was influenced by canon law.

[ 60 ] While many canonists apply the Thomistic definition of law ( lex ) to canon law without objection, some authors dispute the applicability of the Thomistic definition to canon law, arguing that its application would impoverish ecclesiology and corrupt the very supernatural end of canon law.

[ 61 ] In the decades following the Second Vatican Council , many canonists called for a more theological, rather than philosophical, conception of canon law, [ 62 ] acknowledging the "triple relationship between theology, philosophy, and canon law".

[ 63 ] Some authors conceive of canon law as essentially theological and the discipline of canon law as a theological subdiscipline, [ 62 ] but Msgr. Carlos José Errázuriz contends that "in a certain sense, all postconciliar canonical scholarship has shown a theological concern in the widest sense, that is, a tendency to determine more clearly the place of the juridical in the mystery of the Church." [ 62 ] The fundamental theory of canon law is a discipline covering the basis of canon law in the very nature of the church.

[ 64 ] Fundamental theory is a newer discipline that takes as is object "the existence and nature of what is juridical in the Church of Jesus Christ ." [ 65 ] The discipline seeks to better explain the nature of law in the church and engages in theological discussions in post- conciliar Catholicism [ 66 ] and seeks to combat "postconciliar antijuridicism".

[ 67 ] Canonistics, faculties, and institutes [ edit ] The academic degrees in canon law are the J.C.B. ( Iuris Canonici Baccalaureatus , Bachelor of Canon Law, normally taken as a graduate degree), J.C.L. ( Iuris Canonici Licentiatus , Licentiate of Canon Law ) and the J.C.D. ( Iuris Canonici Doctor , Doctor of Canon Law ), and those with a J.C.L. or higher are usually called "canonists" or "canon lawyers". Because of its specialized nature, advanced degrees in civil law or theology are normal prerequisites for the study of canon law. Canon law as a field is called canonistics.

Canon law and Church office [ edit ] Under the 1983 Code of Canon Law , all seminary students are required to take courses in canon law.

[ 68 ] Some ecclesiastical officials are required to have the doctorate ( JCD ) or at least the licentiate ( JCL ) in canon law in order to fulfill their functions: judicial vicars; [ 69 ] judges; [ 70 ] promoters of justice; [ 71 ] defenders of the bond ; [ 71 ] canonical advocates.

[ 72 ] In addition, vicars general and episcopal vicars are to be doctors, or at least licensed in canon law or theology.

[ 73 ] Ordinarily, bishops are to have an advanced degree (doctorate or at least licentiate) in scripture, theology, or canon law.

[ 74 ] See also [ edit ] See also: Glossary of the Catholic Church Apostolic Administrator Canon Episcopi Canonical Acts Canonical admonitions Confirmation of bishops Devil's advocate Ecclesiastical court Funeral dues Integralism Particular church Privilege (canon law) Privilege of competency Rector (ecclesiastical) Prohibited degree of kinship Secular clergy Sede vacante Simony Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura Team of priests in solidum Territorial abbot References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Black's Law Dictionary, 5th Edition, p. 771: "Ius canonicum" ^ Father James Goodwin (4 June 2021).

"Church Teaching. Introduction to Canon Law" .

Simply Catholic .

Archived from the original on 16 February 2022 . Retrieved 16 February 2022 .

^ Della Rocca, Manual of Canon Law , p. 3 ^ Berman, Harold J.

Law and Revolution , pp. 86, 115 ^ a b c d Edward N. Peters , CanonLaw.info Home Page Archived 2011-09-28 at the Wayback Machine , accessed June-11-2013 ^ Raymond Wacks, Law: A Very Short Introduction, 2nd Ed.

(Oxford University Press, 2015) p. 13.

^ Canon 331 Archived 2007-04-02 at the Wayback Machine , 1983 Code of Canon Law ^ Edward N. Peters , "A Catechist's Introduction to Canon Law" Archived 2017-08-02 at the Wayback Machine , CanonLaw.info, accessed June-11-2013 ^ a b Manual of Canon Law, p. 49 ^ "Code of Canon Law: text - IntraText CT" .

www.intratext.com .

Archived from the original on 2020-12-11 . Retrieved 2020-10-24 .

^ St. Joseph Foundation newsletter, Vol. 30 No. 7 Archived 2020-07-27 at the Wayback Machine , p. 3 ^ a b Vere & Trueman, Surprised by Canon Law [volume 1], 2004, p. 3 ^ Black's Law Dictionary, 5th Edition, p. 187: "Canonist" ^ Berman, Law and Revolution , p. 288 ^ a b Berman, Law and Revolution , p. 202.

^ Berman, Law and Revolution , p. 253 ^ Smith, Elements of Ecclesiastical Law , Vol. I (9th ed.), p. 9 . Internet Archive, accessed 28 March 2016.

^ Phillimore, Walter George Frank (1911).

"Canon Law" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 5 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 193.

^ a b c Rev. James Socias (gen. edit.), Our Moral Life in Christ . (Chicago: Midwest Theological Forum, 2003), 84.

^ Della Rocca, Fernando, Manual of Canon Law (Milwaukee: The Bruce Publishing Company, 1959) trans. The Rev. Anselm Thatcher, O.S.B., p. 9.

^ Canon 832 as found in https://www.vatican.va/archive/ENG1104/__P2Q.HTM Archived 2015-02-28 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Berman, Law and Revolution , p. 199 ^ a b c A Commentary on the New Code of Canon Law by the Rev. P. Chas. Augustine O.S.B., D.D., Volume I: Introduction and General Rules (can. 1–86), SECOND EDITION (St. Louis: B. HERDER BOOK CO., 1918).

^ Mylne, The Canon Law , p. 22.

^ a b c d e f g Manual of Canon Law, p. 13, #8 ^ Saint John Paul II, Ap. Const.

Sacri Canones ^ Vere & Trueman, Surprised by Canon Law , p. 2.

^ a b c Wigmore, Panorama , p. 951 ^ Manual of Canon Law, p. 14 ^ Law and Revolution, p. 116 ^ Law and Revolution, p. 240 ^ Kenneth J. Pennington, Ph.D., CL701, CUA School of Canon Law, "History of Canon Law, Day 1" Archived 2015-07-09 at the Wayback Machine , around 0:25:30, accessed 8-15-2014 ^ Rommen, Natural Law , pp. 38–39 ^ The New York Times, Neighbors and Wives book review Archived 2016-04-22 at the Wayback Machine of Nov-13-1988, accessed 27 June 2013 ^ Edward N. Peters, A suggestion for reordering the major divisions of canonical history Archived 2013-08-31 at the Wayback Machine , accessed 16 May 2013 ^ CanonLaw.info Archived 2013-06-06 at the Wayback Machine , accessed Jan-19-2013 ^ a b De Meester, Compendium Tomus Primus, p. 52 ^ John XXIII, allocution Questa festiva (25 Jan. 1959), AAS 51 (1959) pp. 68–69 ^ CanonLaw.info, "Legislative History of the 1983 Code of Canon Law" Archived 2013-05-26 at the Wayback Machine ; accessed June-7-2013 ^ The New York Times, " New Canon Law Code in Effect for Catholics Archived 2017-09-19 at the Wayback Machine ", 27-Nov-1983, accessed June-25-2013 ^ Britannica "Canon Law" Archived 2014-11-04 at the Wayback Machine , accessed 6-24-2013 ^ Can. 1, 1983 CIC ("The Canons of this code regard only the Latin Church .") ^ Taylor 1990 , p. 61.

^ Rommen, Heinrich A., Natural Law , p. 114 ^ Friedman, Lawrence M., American Law , p. 70 ^ Epstein et al.

, Contracts: Making and Doing Deals, 3rd Ed.

, p. 13 .

^ Studies in the Civil Law , p. 43—citing Professor Maitland, "Social England".

^ The National Encyclopedia: Volume 2, p. 416 ^ The New York Times, "Pope to Codify Canon Law" Archived 2021-10-07 at the Wayback Machine , 1-Apr-1904, accessed 25-June-2013 ^ McCormick, Anne O'Hare.

Vatican Journal , p. 44 ^ Comparative Legal Traditions, p. 43 ^ Lehman, Jeffrey; Phelps, Shirelle (2005).

West's Encyclopedia of American Law, Vol. 5 (2 ed.). Detroit: Thomson/Gale. p. 483.

ISBN 978-0787663742 .

^ Wormser, The Story of the LAW , p. 189 ^ Studies in the Civil Law, p. 51 ^ a b Edward Peters, CanonLaw.info Archived 2013-05-17 at the Wayback Machine , accessed June-9-2013 ^ Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches, Latin-English Edition, New English Translation (Canon Law Society of America, 2001), page xxv Cf.

Pastor Bonus n. 2 ^ 1983 Code, canon 7.

^ Catholic Encyclopedia 1913, "Words (In Canon Law)" ^ J. Budziszewski, The Architecture of Law According to Thomas Aquinas Archived 2016-03-14 at the Wayback Machine ; accessed 14 March 2016 ^ Blackfriars Summa Theologiæ Vol. 28, p. 16 [notes by Thomas Gilby O.P. on Summa Ia-IIæ, q. 90, a. 4] ^ Exegetical Commentary on the Code of Canon Law, Vol. I, pp. 261–262 (commentary on 1983 CIC, Book I, Title I) ^ a b c Errázuriz, "Justice in the Church", p. 71 ^ Ladislas Orsy, "Towards a Theological Conception of Canon Law" (published in Jordan Hite, T.O.R., & Daniel J. Ward, O.S.B., "Readings, Cases, Materials in Canon Law: A Textbook for Ministerial Students, Revised Edition" (Collegeville, MN: The Liturgical Press, 1990), p. 11 ^ Errázuriz M., Fundamental Theory , 3 ^ Errázuriz M., Fundamental Theory , xvii.

^ Errázuriz M., Fundamental Theory , 59 et seq.

^ Errázuriz M., Fundamental Theory , 62 ^ 1983 CIC, can. 252 §3 ^ 1983 CIC, can. 1420 §4 ^ 1983 CIC, can. 1421 §3 ^ a b 1983 CIC, can. 1435 ^ 1983 CIC, can. 1483 ^ 1983 CIC, can. 478 §1 ^ 1983 CIC, can. 378 §1 °5 Sources [ edit ] Arranged alphabetically by author: Aquinas, Thomas . "St. Thomas Aquinas: Summa Theologiæ , Volume 28: Law and Political Theory (Ia2æ. 90–97); Latin text. English translation, Introduction, Notes, Appendices & Glossary [by] Thomas Gilby O.P.", Blackfriars (Cambridge: Eyre and Spottiswoode Limited, 1966).

Berman, Harold J.

, Law and Revolution: The Formation of the Western Legal Tradition (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1983).

Benedict XVI, Pope .

Address of His Holiness Benedict XVI for the Inauguration of the Judicial Year of the Tribunal of the Roman Rota , Clementine Hall, 21 January 2012.

https://w2.vatican.va/content/benedict-xvi/en/speeches/2012/january/documents/hf_ben-xvi_spe_20120121_rota-romana.html Archived 2016-04-04 at the Wayback Machine Accessed 29 March 2016.

Caparros, Ernest.

Exegetical Commentary on the Code of Canon Law, Volume I: Prepared under the Responsibility of the Martín de Azpilcueta Institute, Faculty of Canon Law, University of Navarre (Chicago, Illinois: Midwest Theological Forum, 2004) Edited by Ángel Marzoa, Jorge Miras and Rafael Rodríguez-Ocaña (English language edition General editor: Ernest Caparros; Review coordinator: Patrick Lagges).

Della Rocca, Fernando, Manual of Canon Law (Milwaukee: The Bruce Publishing Company, 1959) translated by Rev. Anselm Thatcher, O.S.B.

De Meester, A., D.J.C., Iuris Canonici et Iuris Canonico-Civilis Compendium: Nova Editio ad normam Codicis Iuris Canonici Tomus Primus (Brugis: Societatis Sancti Augustini, 1921).

Epstein, David G., Bruce A. Markell, & Lawrence Panoroff, Cases and Materials on Contracts: Making and Doing Deals: Third Edition (St. Paul, MN: West/Thomson Reuters, 2011).

ISBN 978-0314272386 Errázuriz M., Carlos José.

Justice in the Church: A Fundamental Theory of Canon Law (Montreal: Wilson & Lefleur Ltée, 2009) trans. Jean Gray in collaboration with Michael Dunnigan.

Friedman, Lawrence M.

American Law: An Introduction (New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 1984).

Glendon, Mary Anne , Michael Wallace Gordon, Christopher Osakwe, Comparative Legal Traditions: Text, Materials and Cases (American Casebook Series) (St. Paul, MN: West Publishing Co., 1985).

Howe, William Wirt.

Studies in the Civil Law, and its Relation to the Law of England and America . (Boston: Little, Brown, and Company, 1896).

Jordan, William Chester.

The Penguin History of Europe: Europe in the High Middle Ages (London: Penguin Books, 2002).

McCormick, Anne O'Hare.

Vatican Journal: 1921–1954 (New York: Farrar, Straus and Cudahy, 1957).

Mylne, Robert Scott.

The Canon Law (Published by Forgotten Books 2013; originally published 1912). PIBN 1000197046.

Orsy, Ladislas.

Towards a Theological Conception of Canon Law (essay published in Jordan Hite, T.O.R., & Daniel J. Ward, O.S.B., Readings, Cases, Materials in Canon Law: A Textbook for Ministerial Students, Revised Edition (Collegeville, MN: The Liturgical Press, 1990).

Peters, Edward N.

, translator, The 1917 or Pio-Benedictine Code of Canon Law: in English Translation with Extensive Scholarly Apparatus (Ignatius Press, 2001) Peters, Edward N.

, JD, JCD , Ref. Sig. Ap., CanonLaw.info Archived 2013-05-15 at the Wayback Machine Rommen, Heinrich A.

The Natural Law : A Study in Legal and Social History and Philosophy (St Louis: B. Herder Book Co., 1947 [1959]) translated by Thomas R. Hanley, O.S.B.

Suzzallo, Henry, Ph.D., Sc.D., LL.D., Editor in Chief, The National Encyclopedia : Volume 2 (New York, P. F. Collier & Son Corporation, 1935).

Taylor, Justin (1990). "Canon Law in the Age of the Fathers". In Hite, Jordan; Ward, Daniel J. (eds.).

Readings, cases, materials in Canon Law: a textbook for ministerial students (Revised ed.). Collegeville, MN: Liturgical Press.

ISBN 978-0814610817 .

Vere, Pete, & Michael Trueman, Surprised by Canon Law: 150 Questions Catholics Ask About Canon Law (Cincinnati, Ohio: St. Anthony Messenger Press, 2004).

Wigmore, John Henry, A Panorama of the World's Legal Systems Library Edition (Washington, D.C.: Washington Law Book Company, 1936).

Wormser, René A., The Story of the LAW and the Men Who Made It – From the Earliest Times to the Present: Revised and Updated Edition of The Law (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1962).

Black's Law Dictionary, 5th Edition (St. Paul, MN: West Publishing Co., 1979).

Catechism of the Catholic Church Archived 2012-02-06 at the Wayback Machine at Vatican.va 1983 Code of Canon Law (1983 CIC) at Vatican.va. Publication details: Latin-English Edition, New English Translation; Prepared under the auspices of the Canon Law Society of America , Washington, DC.

Further reading [ edit ] Cicognani, Amleto Giovanni (1935).

Canon Law: I. Introduction to the Study of Canon Law; II. History of the Sources of Canon Law; III. A Commentary on Book I of the Code . Translated by O'Hara, Joseph M.; Brennan, Francis. Internet Archive (2nd revised ed.). Philadelphia: Dolphin Press.

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia article Canon Law .

Sacrea Disciplinae Leges (Document establishing the 1983 Code of Canon Law) Norms of current canon law (Table of canonical norms which are currently in force) Canon Law Wiki (Notes, Commentary, Discussion, Papers & Bibliography on Canon Law) Texts and translations of post-1917 canonical codifications [ edit ] With referenced concordances Codex Iuris Canonici (1983) (in Latin) Code of Canon Law (1983) (Translation by Canon Law Society of America – via vatican.va . Includes 1998 modification of canons 750 and 1371.) Code of Canon Law (1983) (Translation by the Canon Law Society of Great Britain and Ireland, assisted by the Canon Law Society of Australia and New Zealand and the Canadian Canon Law Society) Codex canonum ecclesiarum orientalium (1990) (in Latin) Code of canons of Oriental Churchs (1990) (Translation by Canon Law Society of America) Codex Iuris Canonici (1917) (in Latin) (Abrogated by 1983 Code of Canon Law ) Without concordances 1983 Code of Canon Law Archived 2021-07-09 at the Wayback Machine (English, updated with post-promulgation legislative revisions.) 1983 Codex Iuris Canonici Archived 2021-05-13 at the Wayback Machine (Latin, updated with post-promulgation legislative revisions.) Historical canon law texts [ edit ] The Medieval Canon Law Virtual Library Decretum Gratiani (Friedbourg edition) Corpus Iuris Canonici (1582) Code de 1917 (in French) (Abrogated by the 1983 Code of Canon Law ) v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e Investiture Controversy People Atto (archbishop of Milan) Pope Callixtus II Antipope Clement III Erlembald Gotofredo da Castiglione Pope Gregory VII Guido da Velate Henry I of England Henry IV, Holy Roman Emperor Henry V, Holy Roman Emperor Matilda of Tuscany Pope Paschal II Rudolf of Rheinfelden Documents and events Concordat of Worms Dictatus papae Donation of Constantine Excommunication First Battle of Langensalza First Council of the Lateran In nomine Domini Saxon revolt of 1077–1088 Gregorian Reform Norman conquest of southern Italy Sack of Rome Walk to Canossa Concepts Canon law Church and state in medieval Europe Clerical celibacy College of Cardinals Divine right of kings Dominium mundi Holy Roman Empire Investiture Papacy Papal States Donation of Pepin Separation of church and state Simony See also Libellus de imperatoria potestate in urbe Roma Catholicism portal v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐kdwmc
Cached time: 20250814215108
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.893 seconds
Real time usage: 1.114 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4750/1000000
Revision size: 46058/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 194892/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6941/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 25/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 103597/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.445/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17577945/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  791.664      1 -total
 17.15%  135.744      1 Template:Reflist
 11.79%   93.330      1 Template:Canon_Law
 11.29%   89.384      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.11%   80.053      3 Template:Lang
 10.01%   79.263      2 Template:Cite_web
  8.07%   63.854      1 Template:Short_description
  7.82%   61.907      2 Template:Navbox
  7.46%   59.058      1 Template:Law
  5.24%   41.515      3 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5131532:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215108 and revision id 1303762541. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Canon_law_of_the_Catholic_Church&oldid=1303762541 " Categories : Canon law of the Catholic Church Investiture Controversy Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 Articles with Latin-language sources (la) Articles with French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 23:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Canon law of the Catholic Church 26 languages Add topic

