Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Continentalists vs. Globalists Toggle Continentalists vs. Globalists subsection 1.1 Moltman and Hillgruber 1.2 Jochen Thies 1.3 Fritz Fischer 2 Other views Toggle Other views subsection 2.1 Martin Broszat 2.2 A. J. P. Taylor 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Nazi foreign policy debate 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Aspect of the history of Nazi Germany This article is about academic debate of the Nazi foreign policy goals. For relations between the Third Reich and other countries, see Foreign relations of Nazi Germany .

The foreign policy and war aims of the Nazis have been the subject of debate among historians. The Nazis governed Germany between 1933 and 1945. There has been disagreement over whether Adolf Hitler aimed solely at European expansion and domination, or whether he planned for a long-term global empire.

Continentalists vs. Globalists [ edit ] Moltman and Hillgruber [ edit ] The argument for what these aims meant in literal terms originates from the 1960s by historians Gunter Moltman and Andreas Hillgruber [ 1 ] who, in their respective works, claim that it was Hitler's dream to create "Eutopia" and eventually challenge the United States . This thesis puts these two historians in the "Globalists" category, with opposition labelled "Continentalists". Evidence for these claims comes from Germany's preparation for war in the years 1933–39 with increased interest in naval building, and Hitler's decision to declare war on the United States after the attack on Pearl Harbor , which shows Hitler's determination. The Globalists use this as an argument for how Hitler's ideology was shaped; i.e., the US could only be defeated if Germany conquered Europe and allied with Britain. It is said with general agreement that this viewpoint expressed by Hitler was written with the mindset that the US was of little interest to Germany, and did not pose a threat to her existence. However, noted through speeches and recorded conversations, after 1930, Hitler viewed the United States as a "mongrel state", incapable of unleashing war and competing economically with Germany due to the extreme effects of the Great Depression . Even in the late 1930s, as Continentalists argue against world conquest, Hitler seems to still disregard US power in the world, and believes that only through German-American citizens can the US revive and prosper. This may shed light as to why Hitler made the decision to declare war on the US after Pearl Harbor, and continued to focus on European expansion in the late 1930s.

However, while Hildebrand believes Hitler had a carefully premeditated Stufenplan (step-by-step) for Lebensraum , Hillgruber claims he intended intercontinental conquest afterwards.

[ 2 ] Likewise, Noakes and Pridham [ 3 ] believe that taking Mein Kampf and the Zweites Buch together, Hitler had a five-stage plan; rearmament and Rhineland re-militarisation, Austria , Czechoslovakia , and Poland to become German satellites, defeat France or neutralise her through a British alliance, Lebensraum in Russia and finally world domination. Goda [ 4 ] agrees, believing that his ultimate aim was the defeat and overthrow of the United States, against whose threat he would guarantee the British Empire in return for a free hand to pursue Lebensraum in the East. Hitler had long-term plans for French North Africa and in 1941 began to prepare a base [ where?

] for a transatlantic attack on the United States.

[ citation needed ] Donald Cameron Watt , who in 1990 believed that Hitler had no long-term plans, [ 5 ] now agrees with Goda and believes that Hitler refused to make concessions to Spanish and Italian leaders Francisco Franco and Benito Mussolini in order to conciliate a defeated France so that such preparations could proceed.

[ 6 ] Jochen Thies [ edit ] There are other arguments for the case of the Globalists; Jochen Thies has been noted to say that plans for world domination can be seen in Hitler's ideology of displaying power. The creation of magnificent buildings and the use of propaganda to demonstrate German strength, along with the message to create a Reich to last a thousand years, clearly show Hitler's aspirations for the future. Although this seems a weak argument to make; clearly these messages are a result of Nazi Ideology intent on creating followers and boosting morale, what stems from this is the idea of 'global character' in reference to war. There is no doubt that Hitler dreamed about the future of his Homeland, and in preparations for war, must have thought about the consequences of victory over the Soviet Union . His struggle, as he would reference in his book Mein Kampf , would and eventually did take on a global character, as he found his country fighting wars on many fronts across the world. The Globalist mindset for Hitler's foreign policy can be supported by the spiraling events of World War II , along with his second book and the debatable meaning of Lebensraum ; although the Continentalists can use Lebensraum as evidence to counter.

Fritz Fischer [ edit ] Fritz Fischer , a Continentalist historian who has done extensive work on German history, claims in his book From Kaiserreich to Third Reich: Elements of Continuity in German History, 1871-1945 [ 7 ] that foreign policy was just a continuous trend from Otto von Bismarck 's imperialistic policies; that Hitler wanted an empire to protect German interests at a time of economic instability and pressure from competing global empires.

Other views [ edit ] Martin Broszat [ edit ] Martin Broszat , a functionalist historian, has been noted many times to point towards an ideological foreign policy fueled by antisemitism , anti-communism , and Lebensraum . He says that Hitler acted towards these three ideals to inspire popularity in his regime and to carry on the amazing transformation he ignited upon coming to power. In relation to foreign policy, this meant the destruction of the Treaty of Versailles and the reuniting of German territories lost after World War I , along with the eradication of Jews and communists around the world. He provides evidence with preparations made in 1938 to take land in the East of Europe, which fits in with the ideology of colonization, economic independence, and the creation of the Third Reich. Broszat offers a Continentalist case in declaring that Hitler was still dreaming of Eutopia when he did not include Poland in his plans before 1939, and focused upon Czechoslovakia and Austria instead; easily attainable territories. Broszat argues against world conquest in this respect, and notes that the escalating ideological radicalism of the Nazis' anti-Semitic views prevented them from being able to launch a truly serious attempt to take over the world. Germany found itself unwillingly in a world war, not a European one.

A. J. P. Taylor [ edit ] In 1961, A. J. P. Taylor produced a book entitled The Origins of the Second World War , [ 8 ] which paints a completely different picture of how Nazi foreign policy was shaped and executed. Taylor's thesis was that Hitler was not the demoniacal figure of popular imagination but in foreign affairs a normal German leader, and compared the foreign policy of the Weimar Republic to that of Hitler, i.e., wanting the destruction of the Treaty of Versailles and wanting her former territories back but by peaceful means, not aggressive. His argument was that Hitler wished to make Germany the strongest power in Europe but he did not want or plan war. The outbreak of war in 1939 was an unfortunate accident caused by mistakes on everyone's part. In addition, Taylor portrayed Hitler as a grasping opportunist with no beliefs other than the pursuit of power and to rid himself of the Jewish question . He argued that Hitler did not possess any sort of long-term plan and his foreign policy was one of drift and seizing chances as they offered themselves. He assigns blame on the harsh restrictions of Versailles, which created animosity amongst Germans, and when Hitler preached of a greater Germany, the public believed in his words and was ready to accept. Taylor's point on this debate sparked uproar and widespread rebuttal, but the whole argument on the nature of Nazi foreign policy was created from his work.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Geopolitik Functionalism versus intentionalism Bottom-up approach of the Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Historiography of Germany Historikerstreit Sonderweg Vergangenheitsbewältigung Victim theory , a theory that Austria was a victim of Nazism following the Anschluss References [ edit ] ^ Hillgruber; A, F. 'Hitlers Strategie: Politik und Kriegführung, 1940-1941' Bernard & Graefe Verlag für Wehrwesen, 1965 ^ McDonough, F., (2002), Hitler, Chamberlain and Appeasement , p.77, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press ^ Noakes, J., and Pridham, G., (1997), 'Nazism 1919-1945. Volume 3: Foreign Policy, War and Racial Extermination', p.8, Exeter, University of Exeter Press.

^ Tomorrow the World: Hitler, Northwest Africa, and the Path toward America by Norman J. W. Goda , 1999 ^ Watt, D. C., (1990), 'How War Came', p.32, London, Mandarin ^ "Shorter notice. Tomorrow the World: Hitler, Northwest Africa, and the Path Towards America. Norman J W Goda" .

ehr.oxfordjournals.org . Archived from the original on 9 June 2015 . Retrieved 17 January 2022 .

^ Fischer; F. From Kaiserreich to Third Reich: Elements of Continuity in German History, 1871-1945	Allen & Unwin, 1986 ^ Taylor, A. J. P.

Origins of the Second World War Simon & Schuster 1961 v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nazi_foreign_policy_debate&oldid=1228964342 " Categories : Historiography of Nazi Germany Germany in World War II Historiography of World War II Foreign relations of Nazi Germany Historical controversies Foreign policy of Nazi Germany Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Vague or ambiguous geographic scope from October 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2021 This page was last edited on 14 June 2024, at 03:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nazi foreign policy debate 1 language Add topic

