Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Western United States Toggle Western United States subsection 1.1 Channel Islands 2 Southern United States 3 Central United States 4 Eastern United States 5 Hawaiian Islands 6 Alaska Toggle Alaska subsection 6.1 Aleutian Islands 7 Territories Toggle Territories subsection 7.1 American Samoa 7.2 Guam 7.3 Northern Mariana Islands 7.4 Puerto Rico 7.5 Virgin Islands 8 List of species in the United States Toggle List of species in the United States subsection 8.1 Mammals 9 Articles by area Toggle Articles by area subsection 9.1 Insular areas 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References Toggle the table of contents Fauna of the United States 9 languages Azərbaycanca Español فارسی Føroyskt Français Italiano עברית Simple English Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Fauna of Guam ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Fauna of the United States" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The bald eagle is the national bird of the United States and appears on its Great Seal . The bald eagle's range includes all of the contiguous United States and Alaska .

The fauna of the United States of America is all the animals living in the contiguous United States and its surrounding seas and islands, the Hawaiian Archipelago , Alaska in the Arctic, and several island-territories in the Pacific and in the Caribbean. The U.S. has many endemic species found nowhere else on Earth. With most of the North American continent, the U.S. lies in the Nearctic , Neotropic , and Oceanic faunistic realms, and shares a great deal of its flora and fauna with the rest of the American supercontinent .

[ 1 ] An estimated 432 mammal species comprise the fauna of the continental U.S. There are more than 800 species of bird [ 2 ] and more than 100,000 known species of insect . There are 311 known reptiles , 295 amphibians and 1154 known fish species in the U.S.

[ 3 ] Known animals that exist in all of the lower 48 states include white-tailed deer , bobcat , raccoon , muskrat , striped skunk , barn owl , American mink , American beaver , North American river otter and red fox . The red-tailed hawk is one of the most widely distributed hawks not only in the U.S., but in the Americas.

Huge parts of the country with the most distinctive indigenous wildlife are protected as national parks. In 2013, the U.S. had more than 6770 national parks or protected areas, all together more than 1,006,619 sq. miles (2,607,131 km 2 ).

[ 4 ] The first national park was Yellowstone National Park in the state of Wyoming, established in 1872. Yellowstone National Park is widely considered to be the finest megafauna wildlife habitat in the U.S. There are 67 species of mammals in the park, including the gray wolf , the threatened lynx , and the grizzly bear .

[ 5 ] Western United States [ edit ] The raccoon is widespread throughout the lower 48 states.

Mountain lions live throughout the western U.S.

The ecoregions and ecology found in the Western United States are extremely varied. For instance, large areas of land are made up of everything from sand dunes in the Central Basin and Range ecoregion , which makes up much of the State of Nevada , to the ecology of the North Cascades in Washington state , which has the largest concentration of active alpine glaciers in the lower 48 . The densely forested areas found in Northern California , Oregon , Washington, Idaho , and Montana have mostly species adapted to living in temperate climates , while Southern California , Nevada , Arizona , southern Utah , and New Mexico have a fauna resembling its position in the dry deserts with temperature extremes.

The western continental coast of the U.S. varies from a colder climate in the north to a warmer climate in the south. While few species live throughout the entire West Coast , there are some, such as the bald eagle , that inhabit both the Alaskan Aleutian Islands and the California Channel Islands . In most of the contiguous Western U.S., mule deer , white-tailed antelope squirrels , cougars , American badgers , coyotes , hawks and several species of snake and lizard are common.

While the American black bear lives throughout the U.S., brown bears and grizzly bears are more common in the northwest and in Alaska . Along the West Coast there are several species of whales, sea otters , California sea lions , eared seals and northern elephant seals . In the dry, inland desert areas of states such as California, Nevada, Arizona and New Mexico there are some of the world's most venomous lizards, snakes and scorpions. The most notorious might be the Gila monster and Mohave rattlesnake , both found in deserts in the Southwest . The Sonoran Desert has eleven species of rattlesnakes - more than anywhere else in the world.

[ 6 ] Along the southwestern border there are jaguars and ocelots . Other mammals include the Virginia opossum , which occurs throughout California and coastal areas in Oregon and Washington. The North American beaver and mountain beaver live in forested areas of Washington, Oregon and Northern California. The kit fox lives throughout Arizona, New Mexico and Utah, while the gray fox occurs throughout the Western U.S.

The red fox occurs mostly in Oregon and Washington, while the island fox is a native to six of the eight Channel Islands in Southern California. These islands are also famous for their marine life and endemic species such as the Channel Islands spotted skunk , Garibaldi , island fence lizard , island scrub jay , bald eagle , and their non-native Catalina Island bison herd . The raccoon and spotted skunk occur throughout the Western U.S., while the ring-tailed cat occurs throughout Arizona, New Mexico, Western Texas, Utah, Colorado, and most of California. The American black bear occurs in most western states, including Washington, Oregon, California, Arizona and Colorado.

Channel Islands [ edit ] The Channel Islands National Park consists of five of the eight California Channel Islands . The Channel Islands are part of one of the richest marine biospheres of the world.

[ vague ] Many unique species of plants and animals are endemic to the Channel Islands, including fauna such as the island fox , Channel Islands spotted skunk , island scrub jay , ashy storm-petrel , island fence lizard , island night lizard , Channel Islands slender salamander , Santa Cruz sheep , San Clemente loggerhead shrike and San Clemente sage sparrow .

[ 7 ] Other animals in the islands include the California sea lion , California moray , bald eagle , Channel Islands spotted skunk and the non-native Catalina Island bison herd .

Southern United States [ edit ] The South has a large variety of habitats that range from the Mississippi River basin in Arkansas and Mississippi to the Southern Appalachian Mountains . As far north as the hills of Tennessee and Virginia , all the way down to the Everglades in the southern end of Florida . From the eastern-most point on the Outer Banks of North Carolina , as far west as the deserts and prairies of West Texas and Oklahoma . The warmer climate allows for rich biodiversity ranging from cypress swamps in Louisiana to the thick bays and the longleaf pine biome of the South Carolina Lowcountry . It is riddled along the way with countless salt marshes in every coastal state from the Carolinas , through Georgia to Texas , including the Mobile Delta that lies in the borders of Alabama .

The American alligator is endemic to eight states in the Southeast, and is the official state reptile of Florida , Louisiana and Mississippi .

The Southern United States is home to a multitude of reptiles and amphibians. 
The American alligator lives in much of the South - including every coastal state from North Carolina to Texas, along with the inland states of Arkansas and Tennessee- while the less widespread American crocodile is only found in southern Florida. The Alligator snapping turtle and more than forty other species of turtle are found in the southern U.S. including the eastern box turtle , red-eared slider , and the softshell turtle . Snakes in the region include the eastern copperhead , eastern diamondback rattlesnake , timber rattlesnake , pigmy rattlesnake , cottonmouth , and eastern coral snake , all of which are venomous. Some of the other reptiles and amphibians thriving in the South include the Carolina anole , razor-backed musk turtle , broad-headed skink , American bullfrog , southern toad , spring peeper and the coal skink .

Mammals of the region include the elk , the largest of which that was wiped out in the 1800s, but has been reintroduced and is making promising recoveries in Virginia, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Arkansas. There still remain resident populations in parts of Texas and Oklahoma. The American black bear is native to much of the South, but are prevalent in Virginia, the Carolinas, Tennessee, Georgia, Florida, Arkansas, and Oklahoma. The Florida panther is the largest feline in the South and is exclusive to the wetlands of South Florida.

White-tailed deer , bobcat , coyote , wild boar , red and grey fox are other mammals that inhabit parts of every state in the region. Wild horses roam parts of the South in small groups, which are remnants of horses brought by settlers in the 1400s and 1500s. These are mostly in coastal habitats.

Many water-dwelling mammals inhabit the South including the American beaver , muskrat , river otter , and nutria , which is an invasive species and has decimated plant life in the swamps of Louisiana.

Weasels and mink also prefer being near water. Rabbits are common in the South; the eastern cottontail is found throughout the region, while the desert cottontail and black-tailed jackrabbit is primarily found in Texas, and Oklahoma. The swamp rabbit is found in wetlands of states like Mississippi, Alabama, Louisiana and Arkansas, while the marsh rabbit resides along the coastal regions of the Carolinas, Georgia, Florida, and Alabama. Squirrels are also abundant. The eastern grey squirrel and eastern fox squirrel can both be found in every southern state. The southern range of the American red squirrel dips into the higher elevations of Virginia and North Carolina. Other common mammals are the Virginia opossum , raccoon , striped and spotted skunk , groundhog and in parts of the South, the nine-banded armadillo .

There are over 1,100 species of bird in the Southern U.S. ranging from upland birds, to waterfowl. The South is home to many coastal birds including gulls , rails , gallinules , skimmers , grebes , sandpipers , cranes , and herons . Upland birds include wild turkey and ruffed grouse . Various game bird species such as the bobwhite quail and the woodcock . The eastern whip-poor-will and the Chuck-will's-widow belong to the nighthawk family and are found in  every southern state. Songbirds make up the largest portion of birds found in this region.

Central United States [ edit ] The pronghorn is the fastest land mammal in the Western Hemisphere and can reach speeds up to 55 mph.

[ 8 ] In the prairie in the Central United States live mostly animals adapted for living in grasslands. Indigenous mammals include the American bison , eastern cottontail , black-tailed jackrabbit , plains coyote , black-tailed prairie dog , muskrat , opossum , raccoon , prairie chicken , wild turkey , white-tailed deer , swift foxes , pronghorn antelope , the Franklin's ground squirrel and several other species of ground squirrels.

Reptiles include bullsnakes , common collared lizard , common snapping turtle , musk turtles , yellow mud turtle , painted turtle , western diamondback rattlesnake and the prairie rattlesnake . Some of the typical amphibians found in the region are the three-toed amphiuma , green toad, Oklahoma salamander , lesser siren and the plains spadefoot toad . In the Rocky Mountains and other mountainous areas of the inland is where the bald eagle is most observed, even though its habitat includes all of the Lower 48 , as well as Alaska.

Rabbits live throughout the Great Plains and neighboring areas; the black-tailed jackrabbit is found in Texas, Oklahoma, Nebraska and Kansas, the white-tailed jackrabbit in the Dakotas, Minnesota and Wisconsin, the swamp rabbit in swampland in Texas, and the eastern cottontail is found in Texas, Oklahoma, Kansas, Nebraska, the Dakotas, and every state in the Eastern U.S.

The groundhog is a common species in Iowa, Missouri, and eastern portions of Kansas, Nebraska and Oklahoma.

The groundhog is widespread throughout Illinois, Iowa, Missouri, and Minnesota.

Virginia opossum is found in states such as Missouri, Indiana, Iowa, Oklahoma, Nebraska and Kansas.

The nine-banded armadillo is found throughout the South and states such as Missouri, Kansas and Oklahoma. The muskrat is found throughout the Central U.S., excluding Texas, while the American beaver is found in every central state.

The American bison is the heaviest land animal in North America and can be as tall as 6.5 feet (2.0 m) and weigh over a ton.

[ 9 ] Maybe the most iconic animal of the American prairie, the American buffalo , once roamed throughout the central plains. Bison once covered the Great Plains and were critically important to Native-American societies in the Central U.S. They became nearly extinct in the 19th century, but have made a recent resurgence in the Great Plains. Today, bison numbers have rebounded to about 200,000; these bison live on preserves and ranches.

[ 9 ] Some of the species that occupy every central state include the red fox , bobcat , white-tailed deer , raccoon , eastern spotted skunk , striped skunk , long-tailed weasel , and the American badger and beaver . The invasive wild boar is common in the South, while the American mink lives in every central state with the exception of Texas. The least weasel is found around the Great Lakes as well as states such as Nebraska, the Dakotas, Minnesota, Iowa, Illinois, Michigan, and Wisconsin.

The gray fox is found in Iowa, Missouri, Oklahoma, Texas and also around the Great Lakes region. The ring-tailed cat is found in the southern region, including in Texas, Missouri, and Oklahoma. There are many species of squirrels in the central parts of the U.S., including the fox squirrel , eastern gray squirrel , Franklin's ground squirrel , southern flying squirrel , and the thirteen-lined ground squirrel . Voles include the prairie vole , woodland vole and the meadow vole . The plains pocket gopher lives throughout the Great Plains. Shrews include the cinereus shrew , southeastern shrew , North American least shrew , and the Elliot's short-tailed shrew .

Eastern United States [ edit ] The white-tailed deer is common in all eastern states.

In the Appalachian Mountains and the Eastern United States are many animals that live in forested habitats. They include deer , rabbits , rodents , squirrels , hares , woodpeckers , owls , foxes and bears . The New England region is particularly famous for its crab and the American lobster living along most of the Atlantic Coast. The bobcat , raccoon and striped skunk live in every eastern state, while the American alligator lives in every coastal state between North Carolina and Texas.

Some species of mammals found throughout the Eastern U.S. includes the red fox and gray fox , the North American beaver , North American porcupine , Virginia opossum , eastern mole , coyote , white-tailed deer , American mink , North American river otter , and long-tailed weasel . The American black bear lives throughout most of New England, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Maryland, the Virginias, and parts of the Carolinas and Florida.

The American beaver is found throughout the U.S., except for Florida, Nevada and Hawaii.

Shrews are common: the cinereus shrew , long-tailed shrew and American water shrew are widespread in the New England region, while the North American least shrew and southeastern shrew are common in the southeastern states. The American pygmy shrew , smoky shrew , and northern short-tailed shrew are found from the Appalachian Mountains to New England. The star-nosed mole lives throughout the Eastern U.S., while the hairy-tailed mole is more common from the Appalachians to New England in the north.

Hares are also common: the snowshoe hare thrives from the Appalachians to New England, the Appalachian cottontail is only found in the Appalachians, the New England cottontail is only found in New England, while the eastern cottontail is widespread throughout the east. While the white-footed mouse and muskrat are common throughout the east, with the exception of Florida, the meadow vole is found from the Appalachians to New England and the southern red-backed vole is found in New England.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The striped skunk lives throughout the contiguous United States .

The brown rat and the house mouse were both introduced and their habitat range throughout the Eastern U.S. Weasels such as the fisher and short-tailed weasel are found in the northeast. The eastern chipmunk , fox squirrel , eastern gray squirrel and the woodchuck are found throughout the region, while the southern flying squirrel and northern flying squirrel are more common in the southeast, the American red squirrel is more common in the northeast. The least weasel is native to the Appalachian Mountains.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The wild boar is the wild ancestor of the domestic pig and has spread through much of the southeastern region as an invasive species. The Canada lynx is found in parts of New England. Species of bats found throughout the east includes the eastern pipistrelle , silver-haired bat , eastern red bat , hoary bat , big brown bat , little brown bat , northern long-eared myotis , and in most regions the eastern small-footed myotis , gray bat and Indiana bat .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Of the marine life, the harbor seal is the most widely distributed species of seal and found along the east coast, while the hooded seal , bearded seal , grey seal , ringed seal , and harp seal are found in the northwest. Whales are common along the Atlantic coastline. Whale species found along the entire coastline includes the Gervais' beaked whale , common minke whale , fin whale , sei whale , blue whale , humpback whale , sperm whale , dwarf sperm whale , pygmy sperm whale , killer whale , Cuvier's beaked whale , True's beaked whale , and the Blainville's beaked whale .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The northern bottlenose whale and the long-finned pilot whale are also common along the New England coast. Dolphins are common; species found along the entire coastline includes the Risso's dolphin , short-beaked common dolphin , striped dolphin , Atlantic spotted dolphin and the common bottlenose dolphin . Dolphin species found in New England include white-beaked dolphin and Atlantic white-sided dolphin , while species roaming the southeastern parts of the coastline include the Fraser's dolphin , pantropical spotted dolphin , Clymene dolphin , spinner dolphin , and the rough-toothed dolphin .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Several sea turtles live along the Atlantic coast, including the hawksbill sea turtle , Kemp's ridley sea turtle , and loggerhead sea turtle . The green sea turtle and leatherback sea turtle are more common species along the southeastern coastline. Land turtles and tortoises found throughout most of the Eastern United States are the common snapping turtle , painted turtle , spotted turtle , diamondback terrapin , spiny softshell turtle , eastern mud turtle , northern red-bellied cooter , common musk turtle , eastern box turtle , and the yellow - and red-eared slider . While common species in the northeast include Blanding's turtle , wood turtle , and bog turtle , common species in the southeastern U.S. include gopher tortoise , pond slider , Escambia map turtle , Barbour's map turtle , eastern river cooter , striped mud turtle , loggerhead musk turtle , and the Florida softshell turtle . The smooth softshell turtle is for instance found in the Ohio River and the Allegheny River in Pennsylvania.

The American black bear occurs in most states.

Some of the snake species found in much of the Eastern U.S. includes the eastern racer , De Kay's snake , northern copperhead , ringneck snake , timber rattlesnake , eastern hog-nosed snake , milk snake , northern water snake , western rat snake , northern redbelly snake , plainbelly water snake , midland water snake , scarlet kingsnake , common kingsnake , queen snake , smooth earth snake , ribbon snake , and the common garter snake . Snake species mostly found in the northeast includes the smooth green snake , northern ribbon snake , and the eastern worm snake .

Snakes limited to the southeast includes the southeastern crown snake , pinesnake , eastern diamondback rattlesnake , coral snake , pygmy rattlesnake , southern copperhead , water moccasin , eastern coral snake , eastern indigo snake , southern hognose snake , coachwhip snake , banded water snake , brown water snake , green water snake , Nerodia clarkii clarkii , salt marsh snake , mole kingsnake , pine woods snake , glossy crayfish snake , striped crayfish snake , short-tailed snake , swamp snake , rim rock crown snake , rough earth snake , southern black racer , rough green snake , western rat snake , eel moccasin , and the mud and corn snakes . The eastern fence lizard is common throughout the Eastern United States, with the exception of New York and New England.

The gray wolf once roamed the Eastern U.S., but is now extinct from this region. The eastern cougar as well was once as widespread as the cougar in the western parts of the country, but was deemed extinct by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in 2011.

[ 12 ] Eastern elk once lived throughout the east, but was extirpated in the 19th century and declared as extinct by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in 1880.

[ 13 ] Moose as well once roamed throughout the east, but is currently only found in northern New England. Due to its highly prized fur, the sea mink was hunted to extinction in 1903.

[ 14 ] Hawaiian Islands [ edit ] A green sea turtle ( honu in Hawaiian) swimming by coral reefs in Kona .

Much of the fauna in Hawaii has developed special adaptations to their home and evolved into new species. Today, nearly 90% percent of the fauna in Hawaii are endemic , meaning that they exist nowhere else on Earth.

[ 15 ] Kauaʻi is home to the largest number of tropical birds, as it is the only island free of mongooses . The invasive Javan mongoose is widespread throughout the archipelago, except on the islands of Lanaʻi and Kauaʻi .

Famous birds include ʻiʻiwi , nukupuʻu , Kauaʻi ʻamakihi and ʻōʻū . Most of these birds are extinct.  The hoary bat is found in the Kōkeʻe State Park on Kauaʻi, feral horses live in the Waipio Valley , feral cattle by the Mauna Kea , and the Australian brush-tailed rock-wallaby live by the Kalihi Valley on Oʻahu. The Hawaiian monk seal , feral goats , feral sheep, and feral pigs live throughout most of the archipelago.

In Hawaii , three species of sea turtles are considered native: honu , honu’ea and the leatherback sea turtle . Two other species, the loggerhead sea turtle and the olive ridley sea turtle , are sometimes observed in Hawaiian waters.

[ 16 ] The Hawaiian green sea turtle is the most common sea turtle in Hawaiian waters. As well as turtles, the sea life consist of more than forty species of shark [ 15 ] and the Hawaiian spinner dolphin is widespread.

Hawaii 's coral reefs are home to over 5000 species, and 25 percent of these are found nowhere else in the world.

[ 17 ] Alaska [ edit ] Main article: Fauna of Alaska Grizzly bears are found throughout Alaska , parts of Montana and on the Canada–US border in Idaho . They are also found in Yellowstone National Park .

The wildlife of Alaska is abundant, extremely diverse and includes for instance polar bears , puffins , moose , bald eagles , Arctic foxes , wolves , Canadian lynx , muskox , snowshoe hare , mountain goats, walrus and caribou . Life zones in Alaska range from grasslands, mountains, tundra to thick forests, which leads to a huge diversity in terrain and geology throughout the state.

Alaska has also over 430 species of birds and the largest population of bald eagles in the nation. From pygmy shrews that weigh less than a penny to gray whales that weigh 45 tons, Alaska is the "Last Frontier" for animals as well as people. Many species endangered elsewhere are still abundant in Alaska.

Aleutian Islands [ edit ] The Aleutian Islands are home to an abundance of large bird colonies ; more than 240 bird species inhabit Alaska's Aleutian Archipelago .

[ 18 ] Large seabird colonies are present on islands like Buldir Island , which has 21 breeding seabird species, including the Bering Sea-endemic red-legged kittiwake .

[ 19 ] Large seabird colonies are also present on Kiska Island , Gareloi Island , Semisopochnoi Island , Bogoslof Island , and several others.

[ 20 ] The islands are also frequented by vagrant Asiatic birds, including the common rosefinch , Siberian rubythroat , bluethroat , lanceolated warbler , and the first North American record of the intermediate egret . Other animals in the Aleutian Chain include the Arctic fox , American mink , Porcupine caribou , northern sea otter , horned puffin , tufted puffin , Steller sea lion , spotted seal , ringed seal , northern fur seal and many more.

[ 20 ] Territories [ edit ] American Samoa [ edit ] The blue-crowned lorikeet is a parrot found throughout the Samoan islands.

Because of its remote location, diversity among the terrestrial species is low. The archipelago has a huge variety in animals and more than 9,000 acres is a national park: National Park of American Samoa . The park stretches over three of the six islands in the archipelago: Tutuila , Ofu-Olosega and Ta‘ū . Eight mammal species have been recorded at American Samoa, of which none of them are critically endangered.

[ a ] The mammals include three species of native bats, namely the Samoa flying fox , the insular flying fox and the Pacific sheath-tailed bat . The avifauna includes 65 species of bird [ 21 ] where the more unusual distinctive ones are the blue-crowned lorikeet , the spotless crake , the many-colored fruit dove , the wattled honeyeater , tropical pigeons, the samoan starling , white tern , black noddy and the red-tailed tropicbird .

[ 22 ] There are many reptiles in the islands, including five species of geckos, eight species of skinks and two species of snakes: the Pacific boa and the Australoasian blindsnake .

[ 23 ] The marine life is magnificent and much concentrated around the colorful coral reefs. The Samoan ocean is a home to sea turtles as hawksbill sea turtle , olive ridley sea turtle , leatherback sea turtle and the green sea turtle . Five species of dolphins live in the area: spinner dolphin , rough-toothed dolphin , bottlenose dolphin , pantropical spotted dolphin and striped dolphin .

[ 23 ] Guam [ edit ] Shortly after World War II, the brown tree snake was introduced to the island of Guam and caused much of the endemic wildlife to become extinct. Due to an abundance of prey species and lack of predators, the brown tree snake's population exploded and reached nearly 13,000 snakes per square mile at most.

[ 24 ] Ten out of twelve endemic bird species, ten lizards and two bats all became extinct as a result of the introduction of the brown tree snake. In recent years, a lot has been done by the U.S. government to decrease the number of brown tree snakes on the island. For instance in 2013, a $1 million program by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service dropped more than 2000 mice filled with poison on the island.

[ 25 ] In 2013, more than two million brown tree snakes were estimated to be on the island.

[ 25 ] Other introduced species include the Philippine deer ,  the Asiatic water buffalo , the marine toad and the giant African land snail .

[ 24 ] Several native species of skinks, geckos and a monitor lizard are still found on the island.

Northern Mariana Islands [ edit ] The Commonwealth of Northern Mariana Islands is home to 40 indigenous and introduced bird species. Some endemic bird species are the Mariana fruit dove , the Mariana swiftlet , the Rota white-eye , the Tinian monarch , the bridled white-eye and the golden white-eye . Other common, but introduced species, include the collared kingfisher , the rufous fantail , the fairy tern and the uniform swiftlet . The Mariana fruit bat is endemic to both Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands. The sambar deer is the largest mammal and lives on several of the islands. The Mariana monitor , ranging up to 3 feet long, is also present on the island of Rota. The oceans are home to more than a thousand species of marine life, [ 26 ] including for instance the coconut crabs , the mahi-mahi , the barracuda , tridacna , marlin and tuna .

Puerto Rico [ edit ] Main article: Fauna of Puerto Rico The Mona ground iguana is the largest native terrestrial lizard in Puerto Rico and is an endangered species.

Puerto Rico has 349 bird species, 83 mammals, 25 amphibians, 61 reptiles and 677 species of fish. Birds found nowhere else on earth include for instance the Puerto Rican owl , the Puerto Rican woodpecker , the Puerto Rican tody , the green mango , the Puerto Rican emerald , the Puerto Rican lizard cuckoo , the Puerto Rican nightjar and many more. All current endemic 13 land mammals are bats, which includes for instance the greater bulldog bat , the Antillean ghost-faced bat and the Parnell's mustached bat . Extinct native mammals include the plate-toothed giant hutia and the Puerto Rican cave rat . Reptiles unique to Puerto Rico include the Puerto Rican boa , the guanica blindsnake, the Mona Island iguana , the Puerto Rican worm lizard , the Puerto Rican galliwasp and the Nichols’ dwarf gecko. Amphibians native to the island include the Puerto Rican crested toad , the common coqui , the locust coqui , the wrinkled coqui, the forest coqui, the elfin coqui and the bronze coqui . Endemic fish include the Puerto Rican snake eel and the Puerto Rico coralbrotula.

[ 27 ] Virgin Islands [ edit ] Main article: Fauna of the United States Virgin Islands The Virgin Islands National Park covers approximately 60% of the Island of St. John and nearly all of Hassel Island . The national park has more than 140 species of birds, 302 species of fish, 7 species of amphibians and 22 species of mammals.

[ 28 ] The tropical Virgin Islands are home to a huge variety of wildlife, including many unique species endemic to the archipelago . There are three species of sea turtles in the USVI that inhabit the local waters and utilize beaches for nesting: the green sea turtle, the hawksbill sea turtle and the leatherback sea turtle.

[ 29 ] Several species of sharks, manatees and dolphins roam the seas.

List of species in the United States [ edit ] Mammals [ edit ] Common name Binomial name Family Image Distribution area Notes ABC Islands bear Ursus arctos sitkensis Ursidae ABC Islands Abert's squirrel Sciurus aberti Sciuridae Western United States Agile kangaroo rat Dipodomys agilis Heteromyidae South California Alaska marmot Marmota broweri Sciuridae Alaska Alaska Peninsula brown bear Ursus arctos gyas Ursidae Alaska Peninsula Alaska tiny shrew Sorex yukonicus Soricinae Alaska Alaskan hare Lepus othus Leporidae Alaska Alaskan tundra wolf Canis lupus tundrarum Canidae Arctic Alaska Allen's big-eared bat Idionycteris phyllotis Vespertilionidae mainly in Arizona ; has been spotted in California , Colorado , Nevada , New Mexico , Utah American badger Taxidea taxus Mustelidae Across the country except Alaska , Hawaii , New England Puerto Rico , Southern United States (excluding Texas ) and the U.S. Virgin Islands The Wisconsin state mammal American bison Bison bison Bovidae Alaska , Arizona and Montana The Kansas , Oklahoma and Wyoming state mammal ; the US national mammal American black bear Ursus americanus Ursidae Across the country except Hawaii , Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands The Alabama , Louisiana , New Mexico and West Virginia state mammal American ermine Mustela richardsonii Mustelidae Northeastern and Western United States American marten Martes americana Mustelidae Across the country except Hawaii , Puerto Rico , Southwestern United States , Texas and the U.S. Virgin Islands American mink Neogale vison Mustelidae Alaska , Michigan , New England , New York , Wisconsin American pika Ochotona princeps Ochotonidae Western United States American pygmy shrew Sorex hoyi Soricinae Alaska , the Appalachians , the Great Lakes , New England , the Rockies American red fox Vulpes vulpen fulva Canidae Eastern United States American red squirrel Tamiasciurus hudsonicus Sciuridae Alaska , Northeastern United States and the Rockies American shrew mole Neurotrichus gibbsii Talpinae Pacific Coast The smallest species of mole American water shrew Sorex palustris Soricinae Alaska , the Appalachians , Illinois , Michigan , Minnesota , New England , Western United States The smallest mammalian diver Antelope jackrabbit Lepus alleni Leporidae Southern Arizona Antillean fruit-eating bat Brachyphylla cavernarum Mormoopidae Puerto Rico , U.S. Virgin Islands Antillean ghost-faced bat Mormoops blainvillei Phyllostomidae Puerto Rico Antillean manatee Trichechus manatus manatus Trichechidae Puerto Rico The largest sea cow species Appalachian cottontail Sylvilagus obscurus Leporidae The Appalachians Arctic fox Vulpes lagopus Canidae Alaska Arctic ringed seal Pusa hispida hispida Phocidae Alaska , New England The most abundant and wide-ranging seal in the Northern Hemisphere Arctic shrew Sorex arcticus Soricinae Northern United States Arizona gray squirrel Sciurus arizonensis Sciuridae Arizona Arizona myotis Myotis occultus Vespertilionidae Southwestern United States Arizona pocket mouse Perognathus amplus Heteromyidae Sonoran Desert Arizona shrew Sorex arizonae Soricinae Arizona , New Mexico Atlantic white-sided dolphin Lagenorhynchus acutus Delphinidae New England Attwater's pocket gopher Geomys attwateri Geomyidae Texas Coastal Bend Avery Island white-tailed deer Odocoileus virginianus mcilhennyi Cervidae Louisiana and South Texas Atlantic spotted dolphin Stenella frontalis Delphinidae East Coast Bailey's pocket mouse Chaetodipus baileyi Heteromyidae Arizona , California , New Mexico Baird's beaked whale Berardius bairdii Ziphiidae West Coast Baird's pocket gopher Geomys breviceps Geomyidae Arkansas , East Texas , Louisiana , Oklahoma Baird's shrew Sorex bairdi Soricinae Oregon Baja pocket mouse Chaetodipus rudinoris Heteromyidae Southern California and the Channel Islands Banner-tailed kangaroo rat Dipodomys spectabilis Heteromyidae Southwestern United States Barren ground shrew Sorex ugyunak Soricinae Alaska Bearded seal Erignathus barbatus Phocidae Alaska Beech marten Martes foina Mustelidae Wisconsin (introduced) Beluga whale Delphinapterus leucas Monodontidae Alaska Beringian lemming Lemmus nigripes Cricetidae Alaska Big brown bat Eptesicus fuscus Vespertilionidae Contiguous United States The District of Columbia state mammal Big free-tailed bat Nyctinomops macrotis Molossidae California , Nevada , Texas , Utah Blackbeard Island white-tailed deer Odocoileus virginianus nigribarbis Cervidae Blackbeard Island National Wildlife Refuge Black-footed ferret Mustela nigripes Mustelidae Western United States Black-tailed jackrabbit Lepus californicus Leporidae Great Plains , Western and West North Central states ; introduced in Maryland , New Jersey , and Virginia Black-tailed prairie dog Cynomys ludovicianus Sciuridae Montana , North Dakota , South Dakota , Wyoming , Colorado , Nebraska , Kansas , Oklahoma , Texas , Arizona , and New Mexico Blainville's beaked whale Mesoplodon densirostris Ziphiidae East and West Coast of the United States Blue whale Balaenoptera musculus Balaenopteridae East and West Coast of the United States Bobcat Lynx rufus Felidae Contiguous United States The New Hampshire state wildcat Botta's pocket gopher Thomomys bottae Geomyidae Southwestern United States Bowhead whale Balaena mysticetus Balaenidae Alaska The Alaska state marine mammal British Columbia red fox Vulpes vulpen abietorum Canidae Alaskan Panhandle British Columbia wolf Canis lupus columbianus Canidae Alaskan Panhandle , Alexander Archipelago Brush rabbit Sylvilagus bachmani Leporidae The West Coast Bryde's whale Balaenoptera brydei Balaenopteridae South Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico Bulls Island white-tailed deer Odocoileus virginianus taurinsulae Cervidae Cape Romain National Wildlife Refuge California kangaroo rat Dipodomys californicus Heteromyidae California , Oregon California sea lion Zalophus californianus Otariidae West Coast Camas pocket gopher Thomomys bulbivorus Geomyidae Willamette Valley Canadian lemming Lemmus trimucronatus Cricetidae Alaska Canadian lynx Lynx canadensis Felidae Alaska , Colorado , Idaho , Maine , Minnesota , Montana , Utah , Washington Canyon bat Parastrellus hesperus Vespertilionidae Western United States The smallest bat in the United States Carabao Bubalus bubalis kerabau Bovidae Guam Cave myotis Myotis velifer Vespertilionidae Arizona , Kansas , Oklahoma , Texas Cascade golden-mantled ground squirrel Callospermophilus saturatus Sciuridae The Cascades Cascade red fox Vulpes vulpen cascadensis Canidae Washington California leaf-nosed bat Macrotus californicus Phyllostomidae Sonoran and Mojave deserts California mule deer Odocoileus hemionus californicus Cervidae California California myotis Myotis californicus Vespertilionidae Western United States California pocket mouse Chaetodipus californicus Heteromyidae Southern California California vole Microtus californicus Cricetidae California and Oregon Carmen Mountains white-tailed deer Odocoileus virginianus carminis Cervidae South Texas Central Texas pocket gopher Geomys texensis Geomyidae Central Texas Chihuahuan pocket mouse Chaetodipus eremicus Heteromyidae Southwestern United States Chisel-toothed kangaroo rat Dipodomys microps Heteromyidae Arizona , California , Idaho , Nevada , Oregon , Utah Cinereus shrew Sorex cinereus Soricinae Alaska , Northern United States , Northwestern United States The most widely distributed shrew in North America Clymene dolphin Stenella clymene Delphinidae East Coast Coast mole Scapanus orarius Scalopinae Pacific Northwest Cockrum's gray shrew Notiosorex cockrumi Soricinae Arizona Collared peccary Dicotyles tajacu Tayassuidae Arizona , New Mexico and Texas Collared pika Ochotona collaris Ochotonidae Alaska Columbian black-tailed deer Odocoileus hemionus columbianus Cervidae Kauai , Pacific Northwest Columbian white-tailed deer Odocoileus virginianus leucurus Cervidae Oregon , Washington Common bottlenose dolphin Tursiops truncatus Delphinidae East and California The Florida and South Carolina state salt water mammal Common dolphin Delphinus delphis Delphinidae East and California Common minke whale Balaenoptera acutorostrata Balaenopteridae East and West Coast of the United States Coues' white-tailed deer Odocoileus virginianus couesi Cervidae Arizona Cougar Puma concolor Felidae Western United States The most widely distributed wild, terrestrial mammal in the Western Hemisphere Coyote Canis latrans Canidae Across the country The South Dakota state mammal Crawford's gray shrew Notiosorex crawfordi Soricinae Southwestern United States Creeping vole Microtus oregoni Cricetidae Pacific Northwest Cuvier's beaked whale Ziphius cavirostris Ziphiidae East and West Coast of the United States Dakota white-tailed deer Odocoileus virginianus dacotensis Cervidae Colorado , the Dakotas , Minnesota , Montana , Wyoming Dall Island black bear Ursus americanus pugnax Ursidae Dall Island Dall Island brown bear Ursus arctos dalli Ursidae Dall Island Dall sheep Ovis dalli dalli Bovidae Alaska Dall's porpoise Phocoenoides dalli Phocoenidae West Coast of the United States Dark kangaroo mouse Microdipodops megacephalus Heteromyidae California and Nevada Desert bighorn sheep Ovis canadensis nelsoni Bovidae Southwestern United States The Nevada state mammal Desert cottontail Sylvilagus audubonii Leporidae Western United States Desert kangaroo rat Dipodomys deserti Heteromyidae Southwestern United States Desert mule deer Odocoileus hemionus eremicus Cervidae Southwestern United States Desert pocket gopher Geomys arenarius Geomyidae New Mexico , Texas Desert pocket mouse Chaetodipus penicillatus Heteromyidae Southwestern United States Douglas squirrel Tamiasciurus douglasii Sciuridae Western United States Dugong Dugong dugon Dugongidae The Northern Mariana Islands Dulzura kangaroo rat Dipodomys simulans Heteromyidae California Dwarf shrew Sorex nanus Soricinae Mountain States Dwarf sperm whale Kogia sima Kogiidae East and West Coast of the United States Eastern black bear Ursus americanus americanus Ursidae Across the country except Hawaii , Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands Eastern cottontail Sylvilagus floridanus Leporidae Eastern Midwestern , South-Central and Southwestern United States ; introduced in New England , Oregon and Washington The most common rabbit species in North America Eastern gray squirrel Sciurus carolinensis Sciuridae Eastern United States Eastern meadow vole Microtus pennsylvanicus Cricetidae Northern United States and Mountain States Eastern mole Scalopus aquaticus Scalopinae Eastern United States , Lower Midwest , Southern United States Eastern red bat Lasiurus borealis Vespertilionidae Eastern United States and Midwestern United States Eastern small-footed myotis Myotis leibii Vespertilionidae Eastern United States Eastern wolf Canis lycaon Canidae Great Lakes , New England Elk Cervus canadensis Cervidae Contiguous United States Elliot's short-tailed shrew Blarina hylophaga Soricinae Arkansas , Colorado , Iowa , Kansas , Louisiana , Missouri , Nebraska , Oklahoma , Texas European hare Lepus europaeus Leporidae New York (introduced) European red fox Vulpes vulpen crucigera Canidae Across the country (introduced) Evening bat Nycticeius humeralis Vespertilionidae Midwestern and Southern United States Everglades short-tailed shrew Blarina peninsulae Soricinae Florida False killer whale Pseudorca crassidens Delphinidae East and West Coast of the United States Fin whale Balaenoptera physalus Balaenopteridae East and West Coast of the United States Fisher Pekania pennanti Mustelidae Alaska , the Appalachians , Great Lakes , New England , Pacific Northwest Florida bonneted bat Eumops floridanus Molossidae Florida Florida coastal white-tailed deer Odocoileus virginianus osceola Cervidae Coasts of Alabama , Florida and Mississippi Florida manatee Trichechus manatus latirostris Trichechidae Florida ; has been spotted in New England , the Gulf of Mexico and near the confluence of the Wolf and Mississippi rivers in Memphis The largest sea cow species; The Alabama and Florida state marine mammal Florida panther Puma concolor coryi Felidae Florida The Florida state mammal Florida salt marsh vole Microtus dukecampbelli Cricetidae Florida Florida white-tailed deer Odocoileus virginianus seminolus Cervidae Florida Fog shrew Sorex sonomae Soricinae California , Oregon Fox squirrel Sciurus niger Sciuridae Eastern and Midwestern United States Fraser's dolphin Lagenodelphis hosei Delphinidae Gulf of Mexico and Florida Fresno kangaroo rat Dipodomys nitratoides Heteromyidae San Joaquin Valley Fringed myotis Myotis thysanodes Vespertilionidae Western United States Gervais's beaked whale Mesoplodon europaeus Ziphiidae East Coast Ghost-faced bat Mormoops megalophylla Mormoopidae South Texas Giant kangaroo rat Dipodomys ingens Heteromyidae California Ginkgo-toothed beaked whale Mesoplodon ginkgodens Ziphiidae California Glacier Bay water shrew Sorex alaskanus Soricinae Alaska Golden-mantled ground squirrel Callospermophilus lateralis Sciuridae Western United States Gray bat Myotis grisescens Vespertilionidae East South Central States , Lower Midwest Gray fox Urocyon cinereoargenteus Canidae Across the country The Delaware state mammal Gray seal Halichoerus grypus Phocidae New England Gray-tailed vole Microtus canicaudus Cricetidae Washington and Oregon Gray whale Eschrichtius robustus Eschrichtiidae West Coast The California state marine mammal Great Basin pocket mouse Perognathus parvus Heteromyidae Great Basin Great Plains wolf Canis lupus nubilus Canidae Michigan , Minnesota , North Dakota , Wisconsin Greater bulldog bat Noctilio leporinus Noctilionidae Puerto Rico , U.S. Virgin Islans Greater long-nosed bat Leptonycteris nivalis Phyllostomidae Southern Arizona , south New Mexico , South Texas Grizzly bear Ursus arctos horribilis Ursidae Alaska , Pacific Northwest The Montana state mammal Groundhog Marmota monax Sciuridae Alaska , Eastern United States , Idaho Guadalupe fur seal Arctocephalus townsendi Otariidae Channel Islands Gulf Coast kangaroo rat Dipodomys compactus Heteromyidae Texas Gunnison's prairie dog Cynomys gunnisoni Sciuridae Utah , Colorado , Arizona and New Mexico Haida ermine Mustela haidarum Mustelidae Alexander Archipelago Haida Gwaii black bear Ursus americanus carlottae Ursidae Across the country except Hawaii , Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands Hairy-tailed mole Parascalops breweri Scalopinae Northeastern United States ; extends into the Mid-South Hall's pocket gopher Geomys jugossicularis Geomyidae Colorado , Kansas , and Nebraska Harbor seal Phoca vitulina Phocidae West and East Coast of the United States The Rhode Island state marine mammal Harbour porpoise Phocoena phocoena Phocoenidae The Rhode Island East and West Coast of the United States Harris's antelope squirrel Ammospermophilus harrisii Sciuridae Arizona , New Mexico Hawaiian hoary bat Lasiurus semotus Vespertilionidae Hawaii The Hawaii state land mammal Hawaiian monk seal Neomonachus schauinslandi Phocidae Hawaii The Hawaii state mammal Heermann's kangaroo rat Dipodomys heermanni Heteromyidae California Hilton Head white-tailed deer Odocoileus virginianus hiltonensis Cervidae Hilton Head Island Hispid pocket mouse Chaetodipus hispidus Heteromyidae Great Plains Hoary bat Lasiurus cinereus Vespertilionidae Across the country Hoary marmot Marmota monax Sciuridae Alaska , Montana , Washington Hualapai mexican vole Microtus mexicanus hualapaiensis Cricetidae Hualapai Mountains Hubb's beaked whale Mesoplodon carlhubbsi Ziphiidae West Coast Humboldt's flying squirrel Glaucomys oregonensis Sciuridae California , Nevada , Oregon , and Washington Humpback whale Megaptera novaeangliae Balaenopteridae East and West Coast The Hawaii state marine mammal Hunting Island white-tailed deer Odocoileus virginianus venatorius Cervidae Hunting Island Idaho pocket gopher Thomomys idahoensis Geomyidae Idaho , Montana , Utah , Wyoming Indiana bat Myotis sodalis Vespertilionidae Eastern and Southern United States Insular flying fox Pteropus tonganus Pteropodidae American Samoa Insular myotis Myotis insularum Vespertilionidae American Samoa Insular vole Microtus abbreviatus Cricetidae St. Matthew Island and Hall Island Interior Alaskan wolf Canis lupus pambasileus Canidae Alaska Inyo mule deer Odocoileus hemionus inyoensis Cervidae Central California Inyo shrew Sorex tenellus Soricinae California , Nevada Island fox Urocyon littoralis Canidae Channel Islands Jamaican fruit bat Artibeus jamaicensis Phyllostomidae Puerto Rico , U.S. Virgin Islands Kansas white-tailed deer Odocoileus virginianus macrourus Cervidae Arkansas , Iowa , Kansas , Louisiana , Missouri , Nebraska , South Dakota and Texas The Arkansas state mammal Keen's myotis Myotis keenii Vespertilionidae Alaska , Washington Kenai black bear Ursus americanus perniger Ursidae Kenai Peninsula Kenai red fox Vulpes vulpen kenaiensis Canidae Kenai Peninsula Key deer Odocoileus virginianus clavium Cervidae Florida Keys Kit fox Vulpes macrotis Canidae Southwestern United States Knox Jones's pocket gopher Geomys knoxjonesi Geomyidae New Mexico and Texas Kodiak bear Ursus arctos middendorffi Ursidae Kodiak Islands The second largest species of bear after polar bears Kodiak red fox Vulpes vulpen harrimani Canidae Kodiak Island Leach's single leaf bat Monophyllus redmani Phyllostomidae Puerto Rico Least weasel Mustela nivalis Mustelidae Alaska , Great Plains , Northeastern United States Lesser long-nosed bat Leptonycteris yerbabuenae Phyllostomidae Southern Arizona , South California , South New Mexico , Little brown bat Myotis lucifugus Vespertilionidae Everywhere except Florida , Hawaii , Louisiana , Southwestern United States , Texas Little pocket mouse Perognathus longimembris Heteromyidae Western United States Long-eared myotis Myotis evotis Vespertilionidae Western United States Long-finned pilot whale Globicephala melas Delphinidae East Coast Long-legged myotis Myotis volans Vespertilionidae Western United States Long-tailed pocket mouse Chaetodipus formosus Heteromyidae Arizona , California , Nevada and Utah Long-tailed shrew Sorex dispar Soricinae Northeastern United States Long-tailed vole Microtus longicaudus Cricetidae Western United States Long-tailed weasel Neogale frenata Mustelidae The Contiguous United States Louisiana black bear Ursus americanus luteolus Ursidae East Texas , Louisiana and Mississippi Lower Keys marsh rabbit Sylvilagus palustris hefneri Leporidae Florida Keys Manitoban elk Cervus canadensis manitobensis Cervidae North Carolina , North Dakota Mariana fruit bat Pteropus mariannus Pteropodidae Guam , the Northern Mariana Islands Marsh rabbit Sylvilagus palustris Leporidae Florida ; coasts of the Carolinas Marsh shrew Sorex bendirii Soricinae West Coast Mazama pocket gopher Thomomys mazama Geomyidae Pacific Northwest Melon-headed whale Peponocephala electra Delphinidae Gulf of Mexico Merriam's kangaroo rat Dipodomys merriami Heteromyidae Southwestern United States Merriam's pocket mouse Perognathus merriami Heteromyidae New Mexico , Oklahoma , Texas Merriam's shrew Sorex merriami Soricinae Western United States Mexican fox squirrel Sciurus nayaritensis Sciuridae Arizona Mexican free-tailed bat Tadarida brasiliensis Molossidae Southern United States , Southwestern United States The Oklahoma and Texas state flying mammal Mexican gray squirrel Sciurus aureogaster Sciuridae Florida Keys (introduced) Mexican ground squirrel Ictidomys mexicanus Sciuridae New Mexico and Texas Mexican spiny pocket mouse Heteromys irroratus Heteromyidae South Texas Mexican wolf Canis lupus baileyi Canidae Arizona , New Mexico Miller's long-tongued bat Glossophaga longirostris Phyllostomidae U.S. Virgin Islands Minor red bat Lasiurus minor Vespertilionidae Puerto Rico Montane shrew Sorex monticolus Soricinae Alaska , Western United States Texas state flying mammal Montane vole Microtus montanus Cricetidae Western United States Moose Alces alces Cervidae Alaska , Idaho , New England , New York , North Dakota , Oregon , the Rockies , Upper Peninsula of Michigan , Washington , Wisconsin , Wyoming The tallest, largest and heaviest species of deer and the tallest and second largest mammal in North America; The Alaska state land mammal and the Maine state mammal Mount Graham red squirrel Tamiasciurus fremonti grahamensis Sciuridae Pinaleño Mountains Mount Lyell shrew Sorex lyelli Soricinae Mount Lyell Mountain beaver Aplodontia rufa Aplodontiidae California , Nevada , Oregon and Washington Mountain cottontail Sylvilagus nuttallii Leporidae Western United States Mountain goat Oreamnos americanus Bovidae Alaska , Colorado , Idaho , Montana , Nevada , Oregon , South Dakota , Utah , Washington , Wyoming Mountain pocket gopher Thomomys monticola Geomyidae California and Nevada Mule deer Odocoileus hemionus Cervidae Western United States Muskox Ovibos moschatus Bovidae Alaska Narrow-faced kangaroo rat Dipodomys venustus Heteromyidae California Nelson's collared lemming Dicrostonyx nelsoni Cricetidae Alaska Nelson's pocket mouse Chaetodipus nelsoni Heteromyidae New Mexico and Texas New England cottontail Sylvilagus transitionalis Leporidae New England New Mexico black bear Ursus americanus altifrontalis Ursidae Arizona , Colorado , New Mexico , Utah and West Texas New Mexico shrew Sorex neomexicanus Soricinae New Mexico Nine-banded armadillo Dasypus novemcinctus Dasypodidae Southern United States The only species of armadillo that inhabits the United States; The Texas state small mammal North American beaver Castor canadensis Castoridae Across the contiguous United States The New York and Oregon state mammal North American cougar Puma concolor couguar Felidae Western United States North American least shrew Cryptotis parva Soricinae Central United States , Eastern United States North American porcupine Erethizon dorsatum Erethizontidae Alaska , Contiguous United States except the South North American river otter Lontra canadensis Mustelidae Alaska , Eastern United States , Northern California , Pacific Northwest North American water vole Microtus pinetorum Cricetidae Northwestern United States North Atlantic humpback whale Megaptera novaeangliae novaeangliae Balaenopteridae East Coast North Atlantic minke whale Balaenoptera acutorostrata acutorostrata Balaenopteridae East Coast North Atlantic right whale Eubalaena glacialis Balaenidae East Coast The Georgia and Massachusetts state marine mammal and the South Carolina state migratory marine mammal North Pacific fin whale Balaenoptera physalus velifera Balaenopteridae West Coast North Pacific humpback whale Megaptera novaeangliae kuzira Balaenopteridae West Coast North Pacific minke whale Balaenoptera acutorostrata scammoni Balaenopteridae West Coast North Pacific right whale Eubalaena japonica Balaenidae Alaska Northern Alaskan red fox Vulpes vulpen alascensis Canidae Yukon Delta National Wildlife Refuge Northern blue whale Balaenoptera musculus musculus Balaenopteridae Alaska , New England , West Coast Northern bog lemming Synaptomys borealis Cricetidae Alaska , Idaho , Maine , Montana , New Hampshire , Vermont and Washington Northern bottlenose whale Hyperoodon ampullatus Ziphiidae New England Northern broad-footed mole Scapanus latimanus Scalopinae California , Nevada , Oregon Northern collared lemming Dicrostonyx groenlandicus Cricetidae Alaska Northern elephant seal Mirounga angustirostris Phocidae Alaska , West Coast , Northern Mariana Islands Northern fin whale Balaenoptera physalus physalus Balaenopteridae East Coast and West Coast of the United States Northern flying squirrel Glaucomys sabrinus Sciuridae Alaska , the Appalachians , Great Lakes , New England , and Western United States Northern fur seal Callorhinus ursinus Otariidae Alaska , West Coast Northern long-eared bat Myotis septentrionalis Vespertilionidae Eastern United States Northern plains red fox Vulpes vulpen regalis Canidae Elk River Northern pocket gopher Thomomys monticola Geomyidae Northwestern United States Northern red-backed vole Clethrionomys rutilus Cricetidae Alaska Northern right whale dolphin Lissodelphis borealis Delphinidae West Coast Northern short-tailed shrew Blarina brevicauda Soricinae Central United States , Eastern United States Northern white-tailed deer Odocoileus virginianus borealis Cervidae Northeastern United States The Illinois , New Hampshire , Ohio , Pennsylvania and Wisconsin state mammal and the Michigan state game mammal Northern yellow bat Lasiurus intermedius Vespertilionidae Gulf Coast Northwestern white-tailed deer Odocoileus virginianus ochrourus Cervidae Western United States Northwestern wolf Canis lupus occidentalis Canidae Alaska , Northwestern United States Nutria Myocastor coypus Echimyidae Contiguous United States (introduced) Ocelot Leopardus pardalis Felidae Arizona and Texas Olived-backed pocket mouse Perognathus fasciatus Heteromyidae Great Plains Olympic black bear Ursus americanus altifrontalis Ursidae Pacific Northwest Olympic marmot Marmota olympus Sciuridae Olympic National Park Olympic shrew Sorex rohweri Soricinae Olympic National Park Orca Orcinus orca Delphinidae East and West Coast of the United States The Washington state marine mammal Ord's kangaroo rat Dipodomys ordii Heteromyidae The Great Plains and the Great Basin Oregon pronghorn Antilocapra americana oregona Antilocapridae Oregon Ornate shrew Sorex ornatus Soricinae California Ozark big-eared bat Corynorhinus townsendii ingens Vespertilionidae Arkansas , Missouri and Oklahoma Pacific common seal Phoca vitulina richardii Phocidae West Coast Pacific marten Martes caurina Mustelidae Western United States Pacific sheath-tailed bat Emballonura semicaudata Emballonuridae American Samoa , Guam Pacific shrew Sorex pacificus Soricinae Oregon Pacific white-sided dolphin Lagenorhynchus acutus Delphinidae West Coast Pale kangaroo mouse Microdipodops pallidus Heteromyidae California and Nevada Pallid bat Antrozous pallidus Vespertilionidae Western United States The state bat of California Panamint kangaroo rat Dipodomys panamintus Heteromyidae The Mojave Desert Pantropical spotted dolphin Stenella attenuata Delphinidae East Coast Parnell's moustached bat Pteronotus parnellii portoricensis Mormoopidae Puerto Rico Perrin's beaked whale Mesoplodon perrini Ziphiidae California Philippine deer Rusa marianna Cervidae Guam , the Northern Mariana Islands Plains bison Bison bison bison Bovidae Alaska , Arizona and Montana Plains pocket gopher Geomys bursarius Geomyidae Great Plains Plains pocket mouse Perognathus flavescens Heteromyidae Central and Western United States Pocketed free-tailed bat Nyctinomops femorosaccus Molossidae Arizona , California , New Mexico , Texas Polar bear Ursus maritimus Ursidae Arctic Alaska The largest bear species Porcupine caribou Rangifer arcticus arcticus Cervidae Alaska Prairie shrew Sorex haydeni Soricinae Midwestern United States Prairie vole Microtus ochrogaster Cricetidae Central United States Preble's shrew Sorex preblei Soricinae Great Basin Pribilof Island shrew Sorex hydrodromus / pribilofensis Soricinae Pribilof Islands Pronghorn Antilocapra americana Antilocapridae Arizona , Colorado , Idaho , Kansas , Montana , Nebraska , Nevada , New Mexico , North Dakota , Northern California , Oklahoma , Oregon , South Dakota , Texas , Utah , Washington and Wyoming Τhe fastest land mammal in the Western Hemisphere Pygmy killer whale Feresa attenuata Delphinidae East Coast Pygmy rabbit Brachylagus idahoensis Leporidae Great Basin The world's smallest rabbit Pygmy sperm whale Kogia breviceps Kogiidae East and West Coast of the United States Raccoon Procyon lotor Procyonidae Across the country except Alaska , Hawaii , Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands The Tennessee state mammal and the Oklahoma state furbearer Rafinesque's big-eared bat Corynorhinus rafinesquii Vespertilionidae Southeastern United States Red fox Vulpes vulpen Canidae Across the country except Hawaii , Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands Red fruit bat Stenoderma rufum Phyllostomidae Puerto Rico , U.S. Virgin Islands Red tree vole Arborimus longicaudus Cricetidae California and Oregon Red wolf Canis rufus Canidae Southeastern United States Reindeer Rangifer tarandus Cervidae Alaska , Idaho , Montana and Washington Rhesus macaque Macaca mulatta Cercopithecidae Florida , South Carolina , Puerto Rico Ribbon seal Histriophoca fasciata Phocidae Alaska Rice's whale Balaenoptera ricei Balaenopteridae Gulf of Mexico Ringed seal Pusa hispida Phocidae Alaska , New England Ringtail Bassariscus astutus Procyonidae Southwestern United States , West South Central states The Arizona state mammal Rio Grande ground squirrel Ictidomys parvidens Sciuridae New Mexico and Texas Risso's dolphin Grampus griseus Delphinidae East and West Coast of the United States Robust cottontail Sylvilagus holzneri Leporidae Arizona , New Mexico , West Texas Rock pocket mouse Chaetodipus intermedius Heteromyidae Southwestern United States Rock vole Microtus chrotorrhinus Cricetidae The Appalachians and New England Rocky Mountains bighorn sheep Ovis canadensis canadensis Bovidae The Rockies and Northwestern United States The Colorado state mammal Rocky Mountain elk Cervus canadensis nelsoni Cervidae The Rockies The Utah state mammal Rocky Mountains mule deer Odocoileus hemionus hemionus Cervidae The Rockies Roosevelt elk Cervus canadensis roosevelti Cervidae Kodiak Archipelago , Pacific Northwest Rough-toothed dolphin Steno bredanensis Delphinidae East and West Coast of the United States Sagebrush vole Lemmiscus curtatus Cricetidae Western United States Saint Lawrence Island shrew Sorex jacksoni Soricinae St. Lawrence Island Samoa flying fox Pteropus samoensis Pteropodidae American Samoa San Joaquin antelope squirrel Ammospermophilus nelsoni Sciuridae San Joaquin Valley San Joaquin kit fox Vulpes macrotis mutica Canidae Central California San Joaquin pocket mouse Perognathus inornatus Heteromyidae California Sand Hills pocket gopher Geomys lutescens Geomyidae Colorado , Nebraska , South Dakota , and Wyoming Sea otter Enhydra lutris Mustelidae Alaska , the West Coast Sei whale Balaenoptera borealis Balaenopteridae East and West Coast of the United States Selkirk Mountains caribou Rangifer arcticus montanus Cervidae Idaho , Montana , Washington Seminole bat Lasiurus seminolus Vespertilionidae Southern United States Short-finned pilot whale Globicephala macrorhynchus Delphinidae East and West Coast of the United States Sierra Nevada bighorn sheep Ovis canadensis sierrae Bovidae The Sierra Nevada Sierra Nevada red fox Vulpes vulpen necator Canidae The Cascades and the Sierra Nevada Silky pocket mouse Perognathus flavus Heteromyidae Southwestern United States Silver-haired bat Lasionycteris noctivagans Vespertilionidae Across the country except Hawaii , Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands Singing vole Microtus miurus Cricetidae Alaska Sitka black-tailed deer Odocoileus hemionus sitkensis Cervidae Alaskan Panhandle Smoky shrew Sorex fumeus Soricinae Northeastern United States Snowshoe hare Lepus americanus Leporidae Alaska , the Appalachians , the Cascades , Michigan , Minnesota , New England , the Rockies , the Sierra Nevada , Wisconsin Sonoma tree vole Arborimus pomo Cricetidae Northern California Sonoran pronghorn Antilocapra americana sonoriensis Antilocapridae Sonoran Desert Sooty mustached bat Pteronotus quadridens Mormoopidae Puerto Rico Southeastern myotis Myotis austroriparius Vespertilionidae Gulf Coast , Mid-South (region) Southeastern pocket gopher Geomys pinetis Geomyidae Alabama , Georgia , and Florida Southeastern shrew Sorex longirostris Soricinae Southeastern United States Southern bog lemming Synaptomys cooperi Cricetidae Eastern and Midwestern United States Southern broad-footed mole Scapanus occultus Scalopinae California Southern flying squirrel Glaucomys volans Sciuridae Eastern United States Southern mule deer Odocoileus hemionus fuliginatus Cervidae Southern California Southern pocket gopher Thomomys umbrinus Geomyidae Arizona , New Mexico Southern red-backed vole Clethrionomys gapperi Cricetidae Alaska , Arizona , Colorado , Delaware , Idaho , Kentucky , Maryland , Michigan , Minnesota , Montana , New England , New Jersey , New Mexico , New York , North Carolina , North Dakota , Oregon , Pennsylvania , South Dakota , Tennessee , Utah , Virginia , Washington , West Virginia , Wisconsin and Wyoming Southern short-tailed shrew Blarina carolinensis Soricinae Southern United States , Illinois Southern yellow bat Lasiurus ega Vespertilionidae Lower Rio Grande Valley Southwestern myotis Myotis auriculus Vespertilionidae Arizona , New Mexico Southwestern red squirrel Tamiasciurus fremonti Sciuridae Western United States Sowerby's beaked whale Mesoplodon bidens Ziphiidae New England Sperm whale Physeter macrocephalus Physeteridae East and West Coast of the United States The Connecticut state mammal Spinner dolphin Stenella longistrosis Delphinidae East Coast Spiny pocket mouse Chaetodipus spinatus Heteromyidae Arizona , California and Nevada Spotted bat Euderma maculatum Vespertilionidae Western United States Spotted seal Phoca largha Phocidae Alaska Squirrel monkey Saimiri sciureus Cebidae Florida , Puerto Rico Star-nosed mole Condylura cristata Scalopinae Atlantic Coast , Great Lakes , New England Stejneger's beaked whale Mesoplodon stejnegeri Ziphiidae West Coast of the United States Steller sea lion Eumetopias jubatus Otariidae Alaska , West Coast The largest eared seal Stephen's kangaroo rat Dipodomys stephensi Heteromyidae Southern California Stoat Mustela erminea Mustelidae Alaska , the Dakotas , Great Lakes , New England , Northeastern United States , and the Western United States (excluding Arizona , Nevada , New Mexico and South California ) Stone's caribou Rangifer arcticus stone Cervidae Alaska Strecker's pocket gopher Geomys streckeri Geomyidae Texas Striped dolphin Stenella coeruleoalba Delphinidae East and West Coast of the United States Swamp rabbit Sylvilagus aquaticus Leporidae Southern United States Swift fox Vulpes velox Canidae Colorado , Kansas , Montana , New Mexico , Oklahoma and Texas Taiga vole Microtus xanthognathus Cricetidae Alaska Texas antelope squirrel Ammospermophilus interpres Sciuridae Texas , New Mexico Texas kangaroo rat Dipodomys elator Heteromyidae Oklahoma , Texas Texas pocket gopher Geomys personatus Geomyidae Texas Texas white-tailed deer Odocoileus virginianus texanus Cervidae Colorado , Kansas , Nebraska , New Mexico , Oklahoma , Texas and Wyoming The Nebraska state mammal and Oklahoma state game mammal Thirteen-lined ground squirrel Ictidomys tridecemlineatus Sciuridae Great Plains Townsend's big-eared bat Corynorhinus townsendii Vespertilionidae Western United States Townsend's mole Scapanus townsendii Scalopinae Coastal Pacific Northwest The largest North American mole Townsend's pocket gopher Thomomys townsendii Geomyidae Northwestern United States Townsend's vole Microtus townsendii Cricetidae Oregon and Washington Tricolored bat Perimyotis subflavus Vespertilionidae Midwestern and Southern United States True's beaked whale Mesoplodon mirus Ziphiidae East Coast Trowbridge's shrew Sorex trowbridgii Soricinae Pacific Coast Tule elk Cervus canadensis nannodes Cervidae California Tundra shrew Sorex tundrensis Soricinae Alaska Unalaska collared lemming Dicrostonyx unalascensis Cricetidae Umnak and Unalaska Underwood's bonneted bat Eumops underwoodi Molossidae Arizona Utah prairie dog Cynomys parvidens Sciuridae Utah Vagrant shrew Sorex vagrans Soricinae Western United States Velvety free-tailed bat Molossus molossus Molossidae Florida Keys , Puerto Rico Virginia big-eared bat Corynorhinus townsendii virginianus Vespertilionidae Kentucky , North Carolina , Virginia and West Virginia The Virginia state bat Virginia opossum Didelphis virginiana Didelphidae Eastern United States , Lower Midwest , Pacific Coast (introduced), Southern United States The only marsupial that inhabits the United States; The North Carolina state marsupial Virginia white-tailed deer Odocoileus virginianus virginianus Cervidae Southeastern United States except Florida The Georgia , Mississippi and South Carolina state mammal Walrus Odobenus rosmarus Odobenidae Alaska Wasatch Mountains red fox Vulpes vulpen macroura Canidae Colorado , Idaho , Montana , Utah , Wyoming Western gray squirrel Sciurus griseus Sciuridae Western United States Western heather vole Phenacomys intermedius Cricetidae Western United States Western mastiff bat Eumops perotis Molossidae Southwestern United States Western meadow vole Microtus drummondii Cricetidae Midwestern and Western United States Western red-backed vole Clethrionomys californicus Cricetidae California and Oregon Western red bat Lasiurus frantzii Vespertilionidae Western United States Western small-footed myotis Myotis ciliolabrum Vespertilionidae Great Plains , Western United States Western yellow bat Lasiurus xanthinus Vespertilionidae Southwestern United States White-beaked dolphin Lagenorhynchus albirostris Delphinidae New England White-eared pocket mouse Perognathus alticola Heteromyidae Southern California White-footed vole Arborimus albipes Cricetidae Northwestern United States White-sided jackrabbit Lepus callotis Leporidae New Mexico White-tailed antelope squirrel Ammospermophilus leucurus Sciuridae Southwestern United States White-tailed deer Odocoileus virginianus Cervidae Contiguous United States White-tailed jackrabbit Lepus townsendii Leporidae Upper Midwest and Western United States White-tailed prairie dog Cynomys leucurus Sciuridae Utah , Colorado , Wyoming and Montana Wolf Canis lupus Canidae Across the country except Hawaii , Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands Wolverine Gulo gulo Mustelidae Alaska ; has been in various states of the West The largest mustelid Woodland vole Microtus pinetorum Cricetidae Eastern United States Wyoming pocket gopher Thomomys clusius Geomyidae Wyoming Yellow-bellied marmot Marmota flaviventris Sciuridae Western United States Yellow-faced pocket gopher Cratogeomys castanops Geomyidae Southwestern United States Yuma myotis Myotis yumanensis Vespertilionidae Western United States Articles by area [ edit ] Fauna of Alabama Fauna of Alaska Fauna of Arizona Fauna of Arkansas Fauna of California Fauna of Colorado Fauna of Connecticut Fauna of Delaware Fauna of the District of Columbia Fauna of Florida Fauna of Georgia Fauna of Hawaii Fauna of Idaho Fauna of Illinois Fauna of Indiana Fauna of Iowa Fauna of Kansas Fauna of Kentucky Fauna of Louisiana Fauna of Maine Fauna of Maryland Fauna of Massachusetts Fauna of Michigan Fauna of Minnesota Fauna of Mississippi Fauna of Missouri Fauna of Montana Fauna of Nebraska Fauna of Nevada Fauna of New Hampshire Fauna of New Jersey Fauna of New Mexico Fauna of New York Fauna of North Carolina Fauna of North Dakota Fauna of Ohio Fauna of Oklahoma Fauna of Oregon Fauna of Pennsylvania Fauna of Rhode Island Fauna of South Carolina Fauna of South Dakota Fauna of Tennessee Fauna of Texas Fauna of Utah Fauna of Vermont Fauna of Virginia Fauna of Washington Fauna of West Virginia Fauna of Wisconsin Fauna of Wyoming Insular areas [ edit ] Fauna of American Samoa Fauna of Guam Fauna of the Northern Mariana Islands Fauna of Puerto Rico Fauna of the United States Virgin Islands See also [ edit ] Animal welfare in the United States Flora of the United States Invasive species in the United States Notes [ edit ] ^ This list is derived from the IUCN Red List which lists species of mammals and includes those mammals that have recently been classified as extinct (since 1500 AD). The taxonomy and naming of the individual species is based on those used in existing Wikipedia articles as of 21 May 2007 and supplemented by the common names and taxonomy from the IUCN, Smithsonian Institution, or University of Michigan where no Wikipedia article was available.

References [ edit ] ^ "United States | History, Map, Flag, & Population" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

^ "Birds" .

Audubon .

^ "Number of Native Species in United States - Current Results" .

www.currentresults.com .

^ "NPS.gov Homepage (U.S. National Park Service)" .

www.nps.gov .

^ "Yellowstone Fact Sheet - Yellowstone National Park" . Archived from the original on June 2, 2013.

^ "Rattlesnake facts" . Archived from the original on July 21, 2013 . Retrieved September 16, 2014 .

^ C. Michael Hogan. 2008.

Torrey Pine: Pinus torreyana , Globaltwitcher, ed. Nicklas Stromberg [1] Archived 2012-05-25 at the Wayback Machine ^ Carwardine, Mark (2008).

Animal Records . New York: Sterling. p. 11.

ISBN 9781402756238 .

^ a b "American Bison | National Geographic" .

Animals . May 10, 2011. Archived from the original on April 13, 2021.

^ a b c d e Whitaker, John O. and William John Hamilton. 1998. Mammals of the Eastern United States. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 9780801434754 .

^ a b c d e Feldhamer, George A., Bruce C. Thompson and Joseph A. Chapman. 2003. Wild Mammals of North America: Biology, Management, and Conservation. Baltimore, MD: JHU Press.

ISBN 9780801874161 .

^ "Northeast Region, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service" .

www.fws.gov . Archived from the original on July 28, 2020 . Retrieved May 11, 2021 .

^ "USFWS: Extinct Species" .

www.fws.gov . January 7, 2025.

^ Helgen, K.; Turvey, S.T. (2016).

" Neovison macrodon " .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species .

2016 : e.T40784A45204492.

doi : 10.2305/IUCN.UK.2016-1.RLTS.T40784A45204492.en . Retrieved January 15, 2020 .

^ a b "Hawaii fauna - the Hawaiian animals" .

www.to-hawaii.com .

^ "Turtles in the Hawaiian Islands" . Archived from the original on January 30, 2013 . Retrieved April 7, 2013 .

^ "Hawaii Animals!" .

^ "Travel Alaska - Southwest Alaska - the Aleutian Islands" .

^ "Buldirbirds" . Archived from the original on October 17, 2014 . Retrieved August 27, 2017 .

^ a b "Campaign" .

Oceana .

^ Watling, Dick (2001) A Guide to the Birds of Fiji & Western Polynesia , Environmental Consultants (Fiji), Suva ^ "Marine & Wildlife Topics" (PDF) . Retrieved May 11, 2021 .

^ a b "List" (PDF) . www.nps.gov . Retrieved May 11, 2021 .

^ a b "NOAA CoRIS - Ecosystem Essays: Guam - Terrestrial Fauna of Guam" . Archived from the original on November 11, 2013 . Retrieved July 10, 2013 .

^ a b Brad Lendon (February 28, 2013).

"Deadly mice to rain down on Guam snakes" .

CNN .

^ "Podróże - Kobieta.pl" . Archived from the original on September 12, 2012 . Retrieved July 10, 2013 .

^ "Animals and Plants Unique to Puerto Rico" .

lntreasures.com .

^ "Animals - Virgin Islands National Park (U.S. National Park Service)" .

www.nps.gov .

^ "Sea Turtles of the U.S. Virgin Islands" . Archived from the original on April 9, 2013.

v t e Fauna of the United States States Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Federal district Washington, D.C.

Territories American Samoa Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico U.S. Virgin Islands v t e Fauna of  North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands v t e Fauna of the World Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Djibouti Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Finland France Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kosovo Kuwait Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Korea North Macedonia Norway Oman Pakistan Palestine Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of the Congo Romania Russia Rwanda San Marino Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Somalia South Africa South Korea South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Sweden Switzerland Syria São Tomé and Príncipe Taiwan Tanzania Thailand Togo Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Venezuela Vietnam Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7f95766c99‐499rl
Cached time: 20250813154249
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.411 seconds
Real time usage: 1.956 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5483/1000000
Revision size: 120216/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 81482/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2879/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 214/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 122728/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.364/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7558588/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  668.074      1 -total
 33.45%  223.470      2 Template:Reflist
 23.67%  158.137     22 Template:Cite_web
 22.61%  151.084      1 Template:World_topic
 11.66%   77.873      1 Template:United_States_topic
 10.40%   69.513      1 Template:Short_description
  8.69%   58.028      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.02%   53.548      1 Template:Ambox
  6.04%   40.346      2 Template:Pagetype
  3.12%   20.824      3 Template:Main Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:8853256:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250813154249 and revision id 1305698319. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fauna_of_the_United_States&oldid=1305698319#Guam " Category : Fauna of the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2021 All articles needing additional references Use mdy dates from November 2022 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2025 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 15:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fauna of the United States 9 languages Add topic

