Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early research 2 Discovery of gamma rays 3 Later work 4 Retirement and death 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Paul Ulrich Villard 28 languages العربية تۆرکجه Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Hrvatski Italiano עברית Latina მარგალური مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French chemist and physicist (1860–1934) "Paul Villard" redirects here. For the composer, see Paul Villard (composer) .

Paul Ulrich Villard Villard, c. 1908 Born ( 1860-09-28 ) 28 September 1860 Saint-Germain-au-Mont-d'Or , France Died 13 January 1934 (1934-01-13) (aged 73) Bayonne , France Alma mater École normale supérieure Known for Discovery of gamma rays Villard circuit Scientific career Fields Physics Institutions École normale supérieure Paul Ulrich Villard (28 September 1860 – 13 January 1934) was a French chemist and physicist .  He discovered gamma rays in 1900 while studying the radiation emanating from radium .

Early research [ edit ] Villard was born in Saint-Germain-au-Mont-d'Or , Rhône .  He graduated from the École Normale Supérieure in 1881 and taught in several Lycées, ending with a Lycée in Montpellier. He would maintain a laboratory position at the Ecole Normale Supérieure until his retirement. At the time when he discovered what we now call gamma rays, Villard was working in the chemistry department of the École Normale Supérieure rue d'Ulm, Paris .

Villard is also credited with the discovery of argon hydrate. He spent the early part of his career (1888–1896) focusing on similar compounds at high pressure.

Discovery of gamma rays [ edit ] Villard investigated the radiation emitted by radium salts via a narrow aperture in a shielded container onto a photographic plate, through a thin layer of lead that was known to stop alpha rays . He was able to show that the remaining radiation consisted of a second and third type of rays. One of those was deflected by a magnetic field (as were the familiar " canal rays ") and could be identified with Rutherford's beta rays . The last type was a very penetrating kind of radiation which had not been identified before.

Villard was a modest man and he did not suggest a specific name for the type of radiation he had discovered. In 1903, it was Ernest Rutherford who proposed to call Villard's rays gamma rays because they were far more penetrating than the alpha rays and beta rays which he himself had already differentiated and named (in 1899) on the basis of their respective penetrating powers. The name stuck.

Later work [ edit ] Taking an X-ray image with early Crookes tube apparatus in 1896. The Crookes tube is visible in the centre. The standing man is viewing his hand with a fluoroscope screen. This was a shortcut method for setting up the tube.No precautions against radiation exposure are being taken.

Villard spent much time perfecting safer and more accurate methods of radiation dosimetry , which had been done very crudely up until then (typically by evaluating the quality of the image of the experimenter's hand produced on a photographic plate). In 1908, Villard pioneered the use of an ionization chamber for the dosimetry of ionizing radiation. He defined a unit of kinetic energy released per unit mass which was later renamed the roentgen .

[ 1 ] Retirement and death [ edit ] When Villard retired, he left Paris. He died in Bayonne , France, on January 13, 1934.

References [ edit ] ^ Clarke, R.H.; J. Valentin (2009).

"The History of ICRP and the Evolution of its Policies" (PDF) .

Annals of the ICRP . ICRP Publication 109.

39 (1): 75– 110.

doi : 10.1016/j.icrp.2009.07.009 .

S2CID 71278114 . Retrieved 12 May 2012 .

External links [ edit ] Works by or about Paul Ulrich Villard at the Internet Archive The discovery of gamma rays (fr) Biography Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany France BnF data Portugal Netherlands Academics zbMATH People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paul_Ulrich_Villard&oldid=1278505098 " Categories : 1860 births 1934 deaths People from Lyon Metropolis 19th-century French chemists 19th-century French physicists Members of the French Academy of Sciences 20th-century French chemists 20th-century French physicists Scientists from Lyon Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 2 March 2025, at 21:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paul Ulrich Villard 28 languages Add topic

