Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Publications 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Howard Jerome Keisler 5 languages Deutsch Français Italiano Kreyòl ayisyen Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American mathematician (born 1936) Howard Keisler Born ( 1936-12-03 ) December 3, 1936 (age 88) Seattle , United States Known for Non-standard analysis Scientific career Fields Mathematics Institutions University of Wisconsin-Madison Doctoral advisor Alfred Tarski Doctoral students Frederick Rowbottom Howard Jerome Keisler (born 3 December 1936) is an American mathematician , currently professor emeritus at University of Wisconsin–Madison . His research has included model theory and non-standard analysis .

His Ph.D. advisor was Alfred Tarski at Berkeley ; his dissertation is Ultraproducts and Elementary Classes (1961).

Following Abraham Robinson 's work resolving what had long been thought to be inherent logical contradictions in the literal interpretation of Leibniz's notation that Leibniz himself had proposed, that is, interpreting "dx" as literally representing an infinitesimally small quantity, Keisler published Elementary Calculus: An Infinitesimal Approach , a first-year calculus textbook conceptually centered on the use of infinitesimals, rather than the epsilon, delta approach , for developing the calculus.

He is also known for extending the Henkin construction (of Leon Henkin ) to what are now called Henkin–Keisler models .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] He is also known for the Rudin–Keisler ordering along with Mary Ellen Rudin .

He held the named chair of Vilas Professor of Mathematics at Wisconsin.

Among Keisler's graduate students, several have made notable mathematical contributions, including Frederick Rowbottom who discovered Rowbottom cardinals .  Several others have gone on to careers in computer science research and product development, including: Michael Benedikt, a professor of computer science at the University of Oxford , Kevin J. Compton , a professor of computer science at the University of Michigan , Curtis Tuckey, a developer of software-based collaboration environments; Joseph Sgro , a neurologist and developer of vision processor hardware and software, and Edward L. Wimmers , a database researcher at IBM Almaden Research Center .

In 2012 he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society .

[ 3 ] His son Jeffrey Keisler is a Fulbright Distinguished Chair at the University of Massachusetts, Boston, College of Management.

[ 4 ] Publications [ edit ] Chang, C. C.

; Keisler, H. J.

Continuous Model Theory . Annals of Mathematical Studies, 58, Princeton University Press, 1966. xii+165 pp.

Model Theory for Infinitary Logic , North-Holland, 1971 Chang, C. C.; Keisler, H. J.

Model theory . Third edition . Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, 73. North-Holland Publishing Co., Amsterdam, 1990. xvi+650 pp.

ISBN 0-444-88054-2 ; 1st edition 1973; [ 5 ] 2nd edition 1977 Elementary Calculus: An Infinitesimal Approach.

Prindle, Weber & Schmidt, 1976/1986. Available online at [1] .

An Infinitesimal Approach to Stochastic Analysis , American Mathematical Society Memoirs, 1984 Keisler, H. J.; Robbin, Joel.

Mathematical Logic and Computability , McGraw-Hill, 1996 Fajardo, Sergio ; Keisler, H. J.

Model Theory of Stochastic Processes , Lecture Notes in Logic, Association for Symbolic Logic. 2002 See also [ edit ] Criticism of non-standard analysis Non-standard calculus Elementary Calculus: An Infinitesimal Approach Influence of non-standard analysis References [ edit ] ^ G. Weaver (2001) [1994], "Henkin construction" , Encyclopedia of Mathematics , EMS Press ^ George Weaver (1997).

Henkin-Keisler models . Springer.

ISBN 978-0-7923-4366-0 .

^ List of Fellows of the American Mathematical Society , retrieved 2013-01-27.

^ "Keisler is First UMass Boston Prof to be Named Distinguished Fulbright Chair" .

^ Makkai, M.

(1976).

"Review: Model theory by C. C. Chang and H. J. Keisler" (PDF) .

Bull. Amer. Math. Soc .

82 (3): 433– 446.

doi : 10.1090/s0002-9904-1976-14035-9 .

External links [ edit ] Howard Jerome Keisler at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Keisler's home page Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Israel Academics CiNii ORCID Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH DBLP MathSciNet Other IdRef Yale LUX This article about an American mathematician is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Howard_Jerome_Keisler&oldid=1270623096 " Categories : 20th-century American mathematicians 21st-century American mathematicians Living people Model theorists University of Wisconsin–Madison faculty Fellows of the American Mathematical Society 1936 births American mathematician stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards All stub articles This page was last edited on 20 January 2025, at 12:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Howard Jerome Keisler 5 languages Add topic

