Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Longitude 2 Selenographic colongitude 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Selenographic coordinate system 24 languages العربية বাংলা Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano ქართული Lëtzebuergesch Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Coordinate system used on the Moon Near side of the moon Chart of lunar maria with lines of longitude and latitude.

Chart of the far side of the moon with lines of longitude and latitude.

The selenographic coordinate system is used to refer to locations on the surface of Earth 's moon . Any position on the lunar surface can be referenced by specifying two numerical values, which are comparable to the latitude and longitude of Earth. The longitude gives the position east or west of the Moon's prime meridian, which is the line  passing from the lunar north pole through the point on the lunar surface directly facing Earth to the lunar south pole .  (See also Earth's prime meridian .)  This can be thought of as the midpoint of the visible Moon as seen from the Earth. The latitude gives the position north or south of the lunar equator . Both of these coordinates are given in degrees .

Astronomers defined the fundamental location in the selenographic coordinate system by the small, bowl-shaped satellite crater ' Mösting A ' [ citation needed ] . The coordinates of this crater are defined as: Latitude: 3° 12' 43.2" South Longitude: 5° 12' 39.6" West Later, the coordinate system has become more precisely defined due to the Lunar Laser Ranging Experiment .

Anything past 90°E or 90°W would not be seen from Earth, except for libration , which makes 59% of the Moon visible .

Longitude [ edit ] Longitude on the Moon is measured both east and west from its prime meridian . When no direction is specified, east is positive and west is negative.

[ citation needed ] Roughly speaking, the Moon's prime meridian lies near the center of the Moon's disc as seen from Earth. For precise applications, many coordinate systems have been defined for the Moon, each with a slightly different prime meridian. The IAU recommends the "mean Earth/polar axis" system, [ 1 ] in which the prime meridian is the average direction (from the Moon's center) of the Earth's center.

[ 2 ] Selenographic colongitude [ edit ] The selenographic colongitude is the longitude of the morning terminator on the Moon , as measured in degrees westward from the prime meridian. The morning terminator forms a half-circle across the Moon where the Sun is just starting to rise. As the Moon continues in its orbit, this line advances in longitude. The value of the selenographic colongitude increases from 0° to 359° in the direction of the advancing terminator.

[ citation needed ] Sunrise occurs at the prime meridian when the Lunar phase reaches First Quarter, after one fourth of a lunar day . At this location the selenographic colongitude at sunrise is defined as 0°. Thus, by the time of the Full Moon the colongitude increases to 90°; at Last Quarter it is 180°, and at the New Moon the colongitude reaches 270°.  Note that the Moon is nearly invisible from the Earth at New Moon phase except during a solar eclipse .

[ citation needed ] The low angle of incidence of arriving sunlight tends to pick out features by the sharp shadows they cast, thus the area near the terminator is usually the most favorable for viewing or photographing lunar features through a telescope . The observer will need to know the location of the terminator to plan observations of selected features. The selenographic colongitude is useful for this purpose.

[ citation needed ] The selenographic longitude of the evening terminator is equal to the colongitude plus 180°.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Planetary coordinate system Selenoid References [ edit ] ^ IAU/IAG Working Group on Cartographic Coordinates and Rotational Elements: 2003 ^ A Standardized Lunar Coordinate System for the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter ^ Antonín Rükl : Atlas Měsíce , Aventinum (Praha 1991), chapter Tabulky pro výpočet hodnoty colongitudo, page 212, ISBN 80-85277-10-7 (in Czech) "A Unified Lunar Control Network — The Near Side", Merton E. Davies, Tim R. Colvin, & Donald L. Mayer, RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, 1987.

v t e Moon Outline Physical properties Internal structure Topography Atmosphere Gravity field Hill sphere Magnetic field Sodium tail Moonlight Earthlight Orbit Orbital elements Distance Perigee and apogee Libration Nodes Nodal period Precession Syzygy New moon Full moon Eclipses Lunar eclipse Total penumbral lunar eclipse Tetrad Solar eclipse Solar eclipses on the Moon Eclipse cycle Supermoon Tide Tidal force Tidal locking Tidal acceleration Tidal range Lunar station Surface and features Selenography Terminator Limb Hemispheres Near side Far side Poles North pole South pole Face Maria List Mountains Peak of eternal light Valleys Volcanic features Domes Calderas Lava tubes Craters List Ray systems Permanently shadowed craters South Pole–Aitken basin Regolith swirls Rilles Wrinkle ridges Rocks Lunar basalt 70017 Changesite-(Y) Water Space weathering Micrometeorite Sputtering Quakes Transient lunar phenomenon Selenographic coordinate system Science Observation Libration Lunar theory Origin Giant-impact hypothesis Theia Lunar magma ocean Geology Timescale Late Heavy Bombardment Lunar meteorites KREEP Volcanism Experiments Lunar laser ranging ALSEP Lunar sample displays Apollo 11 Apollo 17 Lunar seismology Exploration Missions Apollo program Explorers Probes Landing Colonization Moonbase Tourism Lunar resources Time-telling and navigation Lunar calendar Lunisolar calendar Month Lunar month Nodal period Fortnight Sennight Lunar station Lunar distance Phases and names New Full Names Crescent Super and micro Blood Blue Black Dark Wet Tetrad Daily phenomena Moonrise Meridian passage Moonset Related Lunar deities Lunar effect Earth phase Moon illusion Pareidolia Man in the Moon Moon rabbit Craters named after people Artificial objects on the Moon Memorials on the Moon Moon in science fiction list Apollo era futuristic exploration Hollow Moon Moon landing conspiracy theories Moon Treaty " Moon is made of green cheese " Natural satellite Double planet Lilith (hypothetical second moon) Splitting of the Moon Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Selenographic_coordinate_system&oldid=1301796574 " Categories : Lunar science Angle Coordinate systems Hidden categories: Articles with Czech-language sources (cs) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 19:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Selenographic coordinate system 24 languages Add topic

