Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Psychology 2 Aristotle's study of judgement Toggle Aristotle's study of judgement subsection 2.1 Judging power or faculty 2.2 Distinction of parts 3 Judgement in religion Toggle Judgement in religion subsection 3.1 Abrahamic Religions 3.2 Christianity 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Judgement 31 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Català Чӑвашла Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Furlan 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Italiano Kabɩyɛ Latviešu मराठी 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English کوردی Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Psychological concept "Judgment" redirects here. For other uses, see Judgment (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards , as it contains many issues, including first-person point of view , poor organization, some instances of non-neutral point of view , a lot of original research and analysis , unencyclopedic language , and many more specific issues.

You can help . The talk page may contain suggestions.

( September 2022 ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Judgement" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Judgement (or judgment ) [ 1 ] is the evaluation of given circumstances to make a decision . Judgement is also the ability to make considered decisions.

[ citation needed ] In an informal context, a judgement is opinion expressed as fact. In logic, judgements assert the truth of statements . In the context of a legal trial , a judgement is a final finding, statement or ruling, based on evidence, rules and precedents, called adjudication (see Judgment (law) ). In the context of psychology , judgment informally references the quality of a person's cognitive faculties and adjudicational capabilities, typically called wisdom . In formal psychology, judgement and decision making (JDM) is a cognitive process by which individuals reason, make decisions, and form opinions and beliefs.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Psychology [ edit ] In cognitive psychology (and related fields like experimental philosophy , social psychology , behavioral economics , or experimental economics ), judgement is part of a set of cognitive processes by which individuals reason, make decisions, and form beliefs and opinions (collectively, judgement and decision making, abbreviated JDM). This involves evaluating information, weighing evidence, making choices, and coming to conclusions. Judgements are often influenced by cognitive biases , heuristics , prior experience, social context, abilities (e.g., numeracy , probabilistic thinking), and psychological traits (e.g., tendency toward analytical reasoning ). In research, the Society for Judgment and Decision Making is an international academic society dedicated to the topic; they publish the peer-reviewed journal Judgment and Decision Making .

Aristotle's study of judgement [ edit ] The power or faculty of judgement may be used to render judgements, in seeking to understand ideas and the things they represent, by means of ratiocination, using good or poor discernment or judgement. Each use of the word judgement has a different sense, corresponding to the triad of mental power, act, and habit.

[ citation needed ] Whether habits can be classified or studied scientifically, and whether there is such a thing as human nature [ relevant?

] , are ongoing controversies.

[ citation needed ] Judging power or faculty [ edit ] Aristotle observed that the ability to judge takes two forms: making assertions and thinking about definitions. He defined these powers in distinctive terms. Making an assertion as a result of judging can affirm or deny something; it must be either true or false. In a judgement, one affirms a given relationship between two things, or one denies a relationship between two things exists. The kinds of definitions that are judgements are those that are the intersection of two or more ideas rather than those indicated only by usual examples — that is, constitutive definitions.

[ citation needed ] Later Aristotelians, like Mortimer Adler , questioned whether "definitions of abstraction" that come from merging examples in one's mind are really analytically distinct from judgements. The mind may automatically tend to form a judgement upon having been given such examples.

[ citation needed ] Distinction of parts [ edit ] In informal use, words like "judgement" are often used imprecisely, even when keeping them separated by the triad of power, act, and habit.

[ citation needed ] Aristotle observed that while propositions can be drawn from judgements and called "true" and "false", the objects that the terms try to represent are only "true" or "false"—with respect to the judging act or communicating that judgement—in the sense of "well-chosen" or "ill-chosen".

[ citation needed ] Judgement in religion [ edit ] Abrahamic Religions [ edit ] The Last Judgement is a significant concept in the Abrahamic religions (Judaism, Christianity, and Islam), and also found in the Frashokereti of Zoroastrianism.

[ citation needed ] Christianity [ edit ] Jesus warned about judging others in the Sermon on the Mount : "Do not judge, so that you may not be judged." (Matthew 7:1–5).

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Judgement .

Philosophy portal Psychology portal Ad hominem – Attacking the person rather than the argument Bias – Inclination for or against Character assassination – Deliberate effort to damage an individual's reputation or credibility Choice – Deciding between multiple options Decree – Edict or proclamation usually issued by a head of state Defamation – Communication causing harm to reputation Discrimination – Prejudicial treatment based on membership in a certain group False accusation – Claim or allegation of wrongdoing that is untrue Gaslighting – Type of psychological manipulation General judgment – Christian theological concept Judgment at Nuremberg – 1961 film by Stanley Kramer Category:Judgment in Christianity Phronesis – Ancient Greek word for a type of wisdom or intelligence Prejudice – Attitudes based on preconceived categories Presumption of guilt – Presumption that a person is guilty of a crime Social undermining – Type of anti-social behavior Smear campaign – Effort to damage someone's reputation Understanding – Ability to think about and use concepts to deal adequately with a subject Value judgment – Philosophical and ethical concept References [ edit ] ^ "judgement" .

The Website of Prof. Paul Brians . 19 May 2016.

^ Keren, Gideon; Wu, George, eds. (2015).

The Wiley Blackwell handbook of judgment and decision making . Chichester, West Sussex, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1-118-46839-5 .

^ Sternberg, Robert J.; Sternberg, Karin (2017).

Cognitive psychology (Seventh ed.). Boston: Cengage Learning.

ISBN 978-1-305-64465-6 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wanga, Zheng; et al. (2014).

"Context effects produced by question orders reveal quantum nature of human judgments" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

111 (26): 9431– 9436.

Bibcode : 2014PNAS..111.9431W .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1407756111 .

PMC 4084470 .

PMID 24979797 .

v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Judgement&oldid=1304456186 " Categories : Concepts in aesthetics Thought Psychological concepts Decision-making Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from September 2022 All articles needing rewrite Articles needing additional references from March 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 04:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Judgement 31 languages Add topic

