Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types Toggle Types subsection 1.1 Riven 1.2 Radially sawn 1.3 Flat-sawn 1.4 Chamferboard 1.5 Finger jointed 2 Wood species 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Clapboard 7 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Français Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Building siding of horizontal boards This article is about the construction material. For the device used in filming, see Clapperboard .

Oak clapboards lean-to attic Ephraim Hawley House Clapboard siding stained dark brown Captain William Smith House at Minute Man National Historical Park , a restored saltbox style house with unpainted clapboard siding Clapboard ( / ˈ k l æ b ə r d / ), also called bevel siding , lap siding , and weatherboard , with regional variation in the definition of those terms, is wooden siding of a building in the form of horizontal boards, often overlapping.

Contemporary use of clapboard/weatherboard and corrugated galvanised iron in Australia Clapboard , in modern American usage, is a word for long, thin boards used to cover walls and (formerly) roofs of buildings.

[ 1 ] Historically, it has also been called clawboard and cloboard .

[ 2 ] In the United Kingdom , Australia and New Zealand , the term weatherboard is always used.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] An older meaning of "clapboard" is small split pieces of oak imported from Germany for use as barrel staves, and the name is a partial translation (from klappen , "to fit") of Middle Dutch klapholt and related to German Klappholz .

[ 1 ] Types [ edit ] Dutch Colonial Revival house built in weatherboard in New London, Connecticut Period weatherboard house in Dunedin , New Zealand Victorian two-storey weatherboard terrace house in the Sydney suburb of Camperdown Riven [ edit ] Clapboards were originally riven radially by hand producing triangular or "feather-edged" sections, attached thin side up and overlapped thick over thin to shed water.

[ 5 ] Radially sawn [ edit ] Later, the boards were radially sawn in a type of sawmill called a clapboard mill , producing vertical-grain clapboards. The more commonly used boards in New England are vertical-grain boards. Depending on the diameter of the log, cuts are made from 4 + 1 ⁄ 2 to 6 + 1 ⁄ 2 inches (110 to 170 mm) deep along the full length of the log. Each time the log turns for the next cut, it is rotated 5 ⁄ 8 inch (16 mm) until it has turned 360°. This gives the radially sawn clapboard its taper and true vertical grain.

Flat-sawn [ edit ] Flat-grain clapboards are cut tangent to the annual growth rings of the tree. As this technique was common in most parts of the British Isles , it was carried by immigrants to their colonies in the Americas and in Australia and New Zealand . Flat-sawn wood cups more and does not hold paint as well as radially sawn wood.

Chamferboard [ edit ] Chamferboards are an Australian form of weatherboarding using tongue-and-groove joints to link the boards together to give a flatter external appearance than regular angled weatherboards.

Finger jointed [ edit ] Some modern clapboards are made up of shorter pieces of wood finger jointed together with an adhesive.

Wood species [ edit ] Weatherboarded Cottage, Petteridge, Borough of Tunbridge Wells , Kent , England. This style of building is very common in rural west Kent.

In North America clapboards were historically made of split oak, pine and spruce. Modern clapboards are available in red cedar and pine.

In some areas, clapboards were traditionally left as raw wood, relying upon good air circulation and the use of 'semi-hardwoods' to keep the boards from rotting. These boards eventually go grey as the tannins are washed out from the wood. More recently clapboard has been tarred or painted—traditionally black or white due to locally occurring minerals or pigments. In modern clapboard these colors remain popular, but with a hugely wider variety due to chemical pigments and stains.

Clapboard houses may be found in most parts of the British Isles, and the style may be part of all types of traditional building, from cottages to windmills, shops to workshops, as well as many others.

Clapboard is always referred to as weatherboard in New Zealand, where that type of cladding dominated in buildings constructed before 1960. After the big earthquakes of 1855 and 1931, wooden buildings were perceived as being less vulnerable to damage, and weatherboard walls with a corrugated iron roof was found to be a cost-effective building style.

Newer, cheaper designs often imitate the form of clapboard construction as siding made of vinyl ( uPVC ), aluminum , fiber cement , or other man-made materials. These materials can provide a lightweight alternative to wooden cladding.

See also [ edit ] Clinker (boat building) Shiplap Siding § Wood siding Tongue and groove References [ edit ] ^ a b "Online Etymology Dictionary" . Retrieved 13 January 2017 .

^ Whitney, William Dwight. "Clapboard" def. 1.

The Century dictionary; an encyclopedic lexicon of the English language ,. New York: The Century Co., 188991. Print.

^ "How to Choose the Right Weatherboard Material for Your Home" .

Houzz . Retrieved 2018-12-07 .

^ "Weatherboard, timber and sheet claddings" . Consumer NZ . Retrieved 2018-12-07 .

^ Heart side of boards .

PopularWoodworking.com .

External links [ edit ] Research report containing photos of a clapboard roof in Virginia, U.S.A.

v t e Wood products Lumber / timber Batten Beam Bressummer CLS Cruck Flitch beam Flooring Joist Lath Log building Log cabin Log house Molding Panelling Plank Plate Post Purlin Rafter Railroad ties Reclaimed Shingle Siding Sill Stud Timber truss Treenail Truss Utility pole Engineered wood Cross-laminated timber Glued laminated timber veneer LVL parallel strand I-joist Fiberboard hardboard Masonite MDF Oriented strand board Oriented structural straw board Particle board Plywood Structural insulated panel Wood–plastic composite lumber Fuelwood Charcoal biochar Firelog Firewood Pellet fuel Wood fuel Fibers Cardboard Corrugated fiberboard Paper Paperboard Pulp Pulpwood Rayon Derivatives Birch-tar Cellulose nano Hemicellulose Cellulosic ethanol Dyes Lignin Liquid smoke Lye Methanol Pyroligneous acid Pine tar Pitch Sandalwood oil Tannin Wood gas By-products Barkdust Black liquor Ramial chipped wood Sawdust Tall oil Wood flour Wood wool Woodchips Historical Axe ties Bavin (wood) Billet (wood) Clapboard Dugout canoe Potash Sawdust brandy Split-rail fence Tanbark Timber framing Wooden masts See also Biomass Certified wood Destructive distillation Dry distillation Engineered bamboo Forestry Green building and wood List of woods Mulch Non-timber forest products Natural building Papermaking Reclaimed lumber Timber recycling Wood drying Wood preservation Wood processing Woodworking Yakisugi Category Commons WikiProject Forestry Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Clapboard&oldid=1276362435 " Categories : Building materials House styles Wood products Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Middle Dutch (ca. 1050-1350)-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 18 February 2025, at 11:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Clapboard 7 languages Add topic

