Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Organizations and prizes Toggle Organizations and prizes subsection 3.1 United Nations 3.2 Police 3.3 National security 3.4 League of Nations 3.5 Olympic Games 3.6 Nobel Peace Prize 3.7 Rhodes, Fulbright and Schwarzman scholarships 3.8 Gandhi Peace Prize 3.9 Student Peace Prize 3.10 Ahmadiyya Muslim Peace Prize 3.11 Culture of Peace News Network 3.12 Sydney Peace Prize 3.13 Museums 4 Religious beliefs Toggle Religious beliefs subsection 4.1 Christianity 4.2 Hinduism 4.3 Buddhism 4.4 Islam 4.5 Judaism 5 Ideological beliefs Toggle Ideological beliefs subsection 5.1 Pacifism 5.2 Inner peace, meditation and prayerfulness 5.3 Non-aggression principle 5.4 Satyagraha 6 Monuments 7 Theories Toggle Theories subsection 7.1 Balance of power 7.2 Appeasement and deterrence 7.3 Speaking truth to power 7.4 Free trade and interdependence 7.5 Democratic peace theory 7.6 Territorial peace theory 7.7 War game 7.8 Socialism and managed capitalism 7.9 International organization and law 7.10 Trans-national solidarity 8 Day 9 Studies, rankings, and periods Toggle Studies, rankings, and periods subsection 9.1 Peace and conflict studies 9.2 Measurement and ranking 9.3 Long periods 10 See also 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Peace 156 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch अंगिका العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Armãneashti অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chamoru ChiShona Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk الدارجة Deitsch Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Galego ગુજરાતી Gungbe 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano עברית Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Ikirundi Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Ladin ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Ripoarisch Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sardu Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro Walon Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia State of harmony in the absence of hostility and violence For other uses, see Peace (disambiguation) .

"Peacetime" redirects here. For the album, see Peacetime (album) . For the film, see Peacetime (film) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Peace" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Peace dove statue in Lomé , Togo , Africa. The dove and the olive branch are the most common symbols associated with peace.

[ 1 ] Statue of Eirene , goddess of peace in ancient Greek religion, with the infant Plutus Peace is a state of harmony in the absence of hostility and violence . In a societal sense, peace is commonly used to mean a lack of conflict (such as war) and freedom from fear of violence between individuals or groups.

[ 2 ] Promotion of peace is a core tenet of many philosophies, religions , and ideologies , many of which consider it a core tenet of their philosophy . Some examples are: religions such as Buddhism and Christianity , important figures like Gandhi , and throughout literature like " Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch " by Immanuel Kant, " The Art of Peace" by Morihei Ueshiba , or ideologies that strictly adhere to it such as Pacifism within a sociopolitical scope. It is a frequent subject of symbolism and features prominently in art and other cultural traditions.

The representation of peace has taken many shapes, with a variety of symbols pertaining to it based on culture, context, and history ; each with their respective symbolism whose nature can be very complex. An example, being during post-violence , in contexts where intense emotions , these symbols can form to evoke unity and cooperation , described as to fill groups of people with pride and connection, yet the symbolism could also possibly form to convey oppression , hatred, or else.

[ 3 ] As such, a universal definition for peace does not concretely exist but gets expanded and defined proactively based on context and culture, in which it can serve many meanings not particularly benevolent in its symbolism.

"Psychological peace" (such as peaceful thinking and emotions) is less relatively well-defined, yet perhaps [ further explanation needed ] a necessary precursor to establishing "behavioural peace". Peaceful behaviour sometimes results from a "peaceful inner disposition". It has been argued by some that inner qualities such as tranquility , patience , respect , compassion , kindness , self-control , courage , moderation , forgiveness , equanimity , and the ability to see the big picture can promote peace within an individual, regardless of the external circumstances of their life.

[ 4 ] Etymology [ edit ] Before the word 'peace' came into English lexicon, Anglo-Saxons used a phrase " friðu sibb " for "pledge of peace".

The term 'peace' originates from the Anglo-French pes , and the Old French pais , meaning "peace, reconciliation, silence, agreement" (11th century).

[ 5 ] The Anglo-French term pes itself comes from the Latin pax , meaning "peace, compact, agreement, treaty of peace, tranquility, absence of hostility, harmony." The English word came into use in various personal greetings from c.

1300 as a translation of the Hebrew word shalom , which, according to Jewish theology, comes from a Hebrew verb meaning 'to be complete, whole'.

[ 6 ] Although "peace" is the usual translation, it is an incomplete one, because shalom , which is also cognate with the Arabic salaam , has multiple other meanings in addition to peace, including justice, good health, safety, well-being, prosperity, equity, security, good fortune, and friendliness, as well as simply the greetings, "hello" and "goodbye".

[ 7 ] On a personal level, peaceful behaviours are kind, considerate, respectful, just, and tolerant of others' beliefs and behaviors – tending to manifest goodwill. This understanding of peace can also pertain to an individual's introspective sense or concept of her/himself, as in being "at peace" in one's own mind, as found in European references from c.

1200 . The early English term is also used in the sense of "quiet", reflecting calm, serene, and meditative approaches to family or group relationships that have an absence of quarreling, disturbances and agitation; but seek clarity of conversation, and tranquility.

In many languages, the word 'peace' is also used as a greeting or a farewell, for example the Hawaiian word aloha , as well as the Arabic word salaam . In English the word peace is occasionally used as a farewell, especially for the dead, as in the phrases " rest in peace " or " peace out ".

History [ edit ] Croeseid coin of Croesus ( c.

550 BCE ), depicting the Lion and Bull — partly symbolizing alliance between Lydia and Greece, respectively Peace was forged through diplomacy in the form of royal marriages, both in the distant past and in modern times. Two early examples of royal marriages being used to establish diplomatic relations are Hermodike I , who married the king of Phrygia around 800 BCE, [ 8 ] and Hermodike II , who married the king of Lydia around 600 BCE.

[ 9 ] Both marriages involved Greek princesses from the house of Agamemnon and kings from what is now Turkey.

[ 10 ] The marriages between the Greek princesses and the kings of Phrygia and Lydia had a significant impact on the region, leading to the transfer of important technological innovations from Anatolia to Greece . In particular, the Phrygians introduced the Greek alphabet, while the Lydians pioneered the use of coinage as a form of currency. Both inventions were rapidly adopted by surrounding nations through further trade and cooperation.

Peace has not always been achieved through peaceful means; in many cases, it has been enforced by the victors of war, often through the use of violence and coercion. In his work Agricola , the Roman historian Tacitus, writes passionately and critically about the greed and arrogance of the Roman Empire, portraying it as a ruthless and self-serving power. One, that Tacitus says is by the Caledonian chieftain Calgacus , ends with: " Auferre trucidare rapere falsis nominibus imperium, atque ubi solitudinem faciunt, pacem appellant.

" ("To ravage, to slaughter, to usurp under false titles, they call empire; and where they make a desert, they call it peace." —Oxford Revised Translation).

Discussion of peace is therefore at the same time an inquiry into its form. Is it simply the absence of mass organized killing (war), or does peace require a particular morality and justice? ( just peace ).

[ 11 ] Societal peace can be seen at least in two forms: A simple silence of arms, absence of war.

Absence of war accompanied by particular requirements for the mutual settlement of relations, which are characterized by justice, mutual respect, respect for law, and good will.

Since 1945, the United Nations and the United Nations Security Council have operated under the aim to resolve conflicts without war. Nonetheless, nations have entered numerous military conflicts since then.

Organizations and prizes [ edit ] United Nations [ edit ] Main article: United Nations See also: List of United Nations peacekeeping missions United Nations peacekeeping missions . Dark blue regions indicate current missions, while light blue regions represent former missions.

The United Nations (UN) is an international organization whose stated aims are to facilitate cooperation in international law, international security, economic development, social progress, human rights, and achieving world peace. The UN was founded in 1945 after World War II to replace the League of Nations, to stop wars between countries, and to provide a platform for dialogue.

After authorization by the Security Council , the UN sends peacekeepers to regions where armed conflict has recently ceased or paused to enforce the terms of peace agreements and to discourage combatants from resuming hostilities. Since the UN does not maintain its own military, peacekeeping forces are voluntarily provided by member states of the UN. The forces, also called the "Blue Helmets", who enforce UN accords are awarded United Nations Medals , which are considered international decorations instead of military decorations. The peacekeeping force as a whole received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1988.

Police [ edit ] Main article: Police The obligation of the state to provide for domestic peace within its borders is usually charged to the police and other general domestic policing activities. The police are a constituted body of persons empowered by a state to enforce the law , to protect the lives, liberty and possessions of citizens, and to prevent crime and civil disorder.

[ 12 ] Their powers include the power of arrest and the legitimized use of force. The term is most commonly associated with the police forces of a sovereign state that are authorized to exercise the police power of that state within a defined legal or territorial area of responsibility. Police forces are often defined as being separate from the military and other organizations involved in the defense of the state against foreign aggressors; however, gendarmerie are military units charged with civil policing.

[ 13 ] Police forces are usually public sector services, funded through taxes.

National security [ edit ] Main article: National security The national security apparatus of a nation is responsible for providing peace and security against foreign threats and aggression. National security can be threatened by a range of factors, including actions by other states (such as military or cyber attacks), violent non-state actors (such as terrorist attacks), organized criminal groups (such as narcotic cartels), and natural disasters (such as floods and earthquakes).

[ 14 ] : v, 1–8 [ 15 ] Systemic drivers of insecurity, which may be transnational, include economic inequality and marginalisation, political exclusion , climate change , and nuclear proliferation .

[ 15 ] In view of the wide range of risks, the preservation of peace and the security of a nation state have several dimensions, including economic security, energy security, physical security, environmental security, food security, border security, and cyber security. These dimensions correlate closely with elements of national power.

League of Nations [ edit ] The principal forerunner of the United Nations was the League of Nations . It was created at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919 , and emerged from the advocacy of Woodrow Wilson and other idealists during World War I. The Covenant of the League of Nations was included in the Treaty of Versailles in 1919, and the League was based in Geneva until its dissolution as a result of World War II and replacement by the United Nations. The high hopes widely held for the League in the 1920s, for example amongst members of the League of Nations Union , gave way to widespread disillusion in the 1930s as the League struggled to respond to challenges from Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy, and Japan.

The prominent scholar, Sir Alfred Eckhard Zimmern , who is widely regarded as one of the most influential intellectuals of the League of Nations, drew inspiration for his studies from the classics, along with other British scholars such as Gilbert Murray and Florence Stawell. This group of scholars is often referred to as the "Greece and peace" set, due to their shared interest in ancient Greek civilization and the promotion of peace.

The creation of the League of Nations, and the hope for informed public opinion on international issues (expressed for example by the Union for Democratic Control during World War I), also saw the creation after World War I of bodies dedicated to understanding international affairs, such as the Council on Foreign Relations in New York and the Royal Institute of International Affairs at Chatham House in London. At the same time, the academic study of international relations started to professionalise, with the creation of the first professorship of international politics, named for Woodrow Wilson, at Aberystwyth , Wales, in 1919.

Olympic Games [ edit ] The late 19th century idealist advocacy of peace which led to the creation of the Nobel Peace Prize , the Rhodes Scholarships , the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace , and ultimately the League of Nations , also saw the re-emergence of the ancient Olympic ideal. Led by Pierre de Coubertin , this culminated in the holding in 1896 of the first of the modern Olympic Games .

Nobel Peace Prize [ edit ] Main article: Nobel Peace Prize Henry Dunant was awarded the first Nobel Peace Prize for his role in founding the International Red Cross .

Since 1901, the Nobel Peace Prize has been the world's most prestigious honor given to individuals or organizations who have made significant contributions to peace. The prize is awarded by the Norwegian Nobel Committee , a group of five individuals chosen by the Norwegian parliament. Nominees for the prize come from around the world, and are often those who have worked to end conflict, protect human rights, or promote humanitarian efforts. It is awarded annually to internationally notable persons following the prize's creation in the will of Alfred Nobel . According to Nobel's will, the Peace Prize shall be awarded to the person who "...shall have done the most or the best work for fraternity between nations, for the abolition or reduction of standing armies, and for the holding and promotion of peace congresses." [ 16 ] Rhodes, Fulbright and Schwarzman scholarships [ edit ] In creating the Rhodes Scholarships for outstanding students from the United States, Germany and much of the British Empire, Cecil Rhodes wrote in 1901 that 'the object is that an understanding between the three great powers will render war impossible and educational relations make the strongest tie'.

[ 17 ] This peace purpose of the Rhodes Scholarships was very prominent in the first half of the 20th century, and became prominent again in recent years under Warden of the Rhodes House Donald Markwell , [ 18 ] a historian of thought about the causes of war and peace.

[ 19 ] This vision greatly influenced Senator J. William Fulbright in the goal of the Fulbright fellowships to promote international understanding and peace, and has guided many other international fellowship programs, [ 20 ] [ 21 ] including the Schwarzman Scholars to China created by Stephen A. Schwarzman in 2013.

[ 22 ] Gandhi Peace Prize [ edit ] Main article: Gandhi Peace Prize Mahatma Gandhi The International Gandhi Peace Prize, named after Mahatma Gandhi , is awarded annually by the Government of India . It was launched as a tribute to the ideals espoused by Gandhi in 1995 on the occasion of the 125th anniversary of his birth. This is an annual award given to individuals and institutions for their contributions towards social, economic and political transformation through non-violence and other Gandhian methods. The award carries Rs. 10 million in cash, convertible in any currency in the world, a plaque and a citation. It is open to all persons regardless of nationality, race, creed or sex.

Student Peace Prize [ edit ] Main article: Student Peace Prize The Student Peace Prize is awarded biennially to a student or a student organization that has made a significant contribution to promoting peace and human rights.

Ahmadiyya Muslim Peace Prize [ edit ] Main article: Ahmadiyya Muslim Peace Prize The Ahmadiyya Muslim Peace Prize , is awarded annually "in recognition of an individual's or an organisation's contribution for the advancement of the cause of peace". The prize was first launched in 2009 by the Ahmadiyya Muslim Peace Prize Committee under the directive of the caliph of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community, Mirza Masroor Ahmad .

Culture of Peace News Network [ edit ] Main article: Culture of Peace News Network The Culture of Peace News Network , otherwise known simply as CPNN , is a UN authorized interactive online news network, committed to supporting the global movement for a culture of peace.

Rainbows are often used as a symbol of harmony and peace.

Sydney Peace Prize [ edit ] Every year in the first week of November, the Sydney Peace Foundation presents the Sydney Peace Prize . The Sydney Peace Prize is awarded to an organization or an individual whose life and work has demonstrated significant contributions to: The achievement of peace with justice locally, nationally or internationally The promotion and attainment of human rights The philosophy, language and practice of non-violence Museums [ edit ] See also: Peace museums A peace museum is a museum that documents historical peace initiatives. Many provide advocacy programs for nonviolent conflict resolution. This may include conflicts at the personal, regional or international level.

Smaller institutions include the Randolph Bourne Institute , the McGill Middle East Program of Civil Society and Peace Building and the International Festival of Peace Poetry .

Religious beliefs [ edit ] See also: World_peace § Religious_views Religious beliefs often seek to identify and address the basic problems of human life, including conflicts between, among, and within persons and societies. In ancient Greek-speaking areas , the virtue of peace was personified as the goddess Eirene , and in Latin-speaking areas as the goddess Pax . Her image was typically represented by ancient sculptors as a full-grown woman, usually with a horn of plenty and scepter and sometimes with a torch or olive leaves .

Christianity [ edit ] Christians , who believe Jesus of Nazareth to be the Jewish Messiah called Christ (meaning Anointed One), [ 23 ] interpret Isaiah 9:6 as a messianic prophecy of Jesus in which he is called the " Prince of Peace ".

[ 24 ] In the Gospel of Luke , Zechariah celebrates his son John : "And you, child, will be called the prophet of the Most High; for you will go before the Lord to prepare his ways, to give knowledge of salvation to his people by the forgiveness of their sins. By the tender mercy of our God, the dawn from on high will break upon us, to give light to those who sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of peace." [ 25 ] As a testimony of peace , Peace Churches in the Anabaptist Christian tradition (such as the Mennonites and Quakers ), as well Holiness Methodist Pacifists (such as the Immanuel Missionary Church ), practice nonresistance and do not participate in warfare.

[ 26 ] In the Catholic Church , numerous pontifical documents on the Holy Rosary document a continuity of views of the Popes to have confidence in the Holy Rosary as a means to foster peace. In the Encyclical Mense maio , 1965, in which he urged the practice of the Holy Rosary, and as reaffirmed in the encyclical Christi Matri , 1966, to implore peace, Pope Paul VI stated in the apostolic Recurrens mensis , October 1969, that the Rosary is a prayer that favors the great gift of peace.

Hinduism [ edit ] Hindu texts contain the following passages: May there be peace in the heavens, peace in the atmosphere, peace on the earth. Let there be coolness in the water, healing in the herbs and peace radiating from the trees. Let there be harmony in the planets and in the stars, and perfection in eternal knowledge. May everything in the universe be at peace. Let peace pervade everywhere, at all times. May I experience that peace within my own heart.

— Yajur Veda 36.17 Let us have concord with our own people, and concord with people who are strangers to us. Ashwins (Celestial Twins) create between us and the strangers a unity of hearts. May we unite in our minds, unite in our purposes, and not fight against the heavenly spirit within us. Let not the battle-cry rise amidst many slain, nor the arrows of the war-god fall with the break of day — Yajur Veda 7.52 A superior being does not render evil for evil. This is a maxim one should observe... One should never harm the wicked or the good or even animals meriting death. A noble soul will exercise compassion even towards those who enjoy injuring others or cruel deeds... Who is without fault?

— Valmiki , Ramayana The chariot that leads to victory is of another kind.

Valour and fortitude are its wheels;
Truthfulness and virtuous conduct are its banner;
Strength, discretion, self-restraint and benevolence are its four horses,
Harnessed with the cords of forgiveness, compassion and equanimity...

Whoever has this righteous chariot, has no enemy to conquer anywhere.

— Valmiki, Ramayana Buddhism [ edit ] Buddhists believe that peace is attained by ending pain and suffering. They regard pain and suffering is stemming from cravings (in the extreme, greed), aversions (fears), and delusions and suffering is attachments to outcomes. To eliminate such pain and suffering and achieve personal peace, followers in the path of the Buddha adhere to a set of teachings called the Four Noble Truths — a central tenet in Buddhist philosophy .

Islam [ edit ] Islam derived from the root word salam which literally means peace.

Quran states "those who believe and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of Allah. Surely in the remembrance of Allah do hearts find comfort." [ 27 ] and stated "O believers! When you are told to make room in gatherings, then do so. Allah will make room for you ˹in His grace˺. And if you are told to rise, then do so. Allah will elevate those of you who are faithful, and ˹raise˺ those gifted with knowledge in rank. And Allah is All-Aware of what you do." [ 28 ] Judaism [ edit ] The Judaic tradition associates God with peace, as evidenced by various principles and laws in Judaism.

Shalom , the biblical and modern Hebrew word for peace, is one of the names for God according to the Judaic law and tradition. For instance, in traditional Jewish law , individuals are prohibited from saying " Shalom " when they are in the bathroom as there is a prohibition on uttering any of God's names in the bathroom, out of respect for the divine name.

Jewish liturgy and prayer is replete with prayers asking God to establish peace in the world. The שמונה עשרה , a key prayer in Judaism that is recited three times each day, concludes with a blessing for peace. The last blessing of the שמונה עשרה , also known as the Amida ("standing" as the prayer is said while standing), is focused on peace, beginning and ending with supplications for peace and blessings.

Peace is central to Judaism's core principle of מָשִׁיחַ ("messiah") which connotes a time of universal peace and abundance, a time where weapons will be turned into plowshares and lions will sleep with lambs. As it is written in the Book of Isaiah : They shall beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks; nation will not lift sword against nation and they will no longer study warfare.

— Isaiah 2:4 The wolf will live with the lamb, the leopard will lie down with the goat, the calf and the lion and the yearling together; and a little child will lead them. The cow will feed with the bear, their young will lie down together, and the lion will eat straw like the ox. The infant will play near the hole of the cobra, and the young child put his hand into the viper's nest. They will neither harm nor destroy on all my holy mountain, for the earth will be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea.

— Isaiah 11:6–9 This last metaphor from Tanakh (Hebrew bible) symbolizes the peace by which a longed-for messianic age will be characterized, a peace in which natural enemies, the strong and the weak, predator and prey, will live in harmony.

Jews pray for the messianic age of peace every day in the מָשִׁיחַ, in addition to faith in the coming of the messianic age constituting one of the thirteen core principles of faith in Judaism, according to Maimonides .

[ citation needed ] Ideological beliefs [ edit ] Pacifism [ edit ] Main article: Pacifism A peace sign, which is widely associated with pacifism Pacifism is the categorical opposition to the behaviors of war or violence as a means of settling disputes or of gaining advantage. Pacifism covers a spectrum of views ranging from the belief that international disputes can and should all be resolved via peaceful behaviors; to calls for the abolition of various organizations which tend to institutionalize aggressive behaviors, such as the military, or arms manufacturers; to opposition to any organization of society that might rely in any way upon governmental force. Groups that sometimes oppose the governmental use of force include anarchists and libertarians . Absolute pacifism opposes violent behavior under all circumstance, including defense of self and others.

Pacifism may be based on moral principles (a deontological view) or pragmatism (a consequentialist view). Principled pacifism holds that all forms of violent behavior are inappropriate responses to conflict, and are morally wrong. Pragmatic pacifism holds that the costs of war and inter-personal violence are so substantial that better ways of resolving disputes must be found.

Inner peace, meditation and prayerfulness [ edit ] Main article: Inner peace Buddhist monk during meditation near Phu Soidao National Park , 2009 Psychological or inner peace (i.e. peace of mind) refers to a state of being internally or spiritually at peace, with sufficient clarity of knowledge and understanding to remain calm in the face of apparent discord, stress and discomfort. Being internally "at peace" is considered to be a healthy playable mental state, a homeostasis of emotions and to be the opposite of feeling stressful, mentally anxious, or emotionally unstable. Within meditative traditions, the achievement of "peace of mind" is often associated with bliss and happiness.

Peace of mind, serenity, and calmness are descriptions of a disposition free from the effects of stress. In some meditative traditions, inner peace is believed to be a state of consciousness or enlightenment that may be cultivated by various types of meditation, prayer, tai chi , yoga, or other various types of mental or physical disciplines. Many such practices refer to this peace as an experience of knowing oneself. An emphasis on finding inner peace is often associated with traditions such as Buddhism , Hinduism , and some traditional Christian contemplative practices such as monasticism , [ 29 ] as well as with the New Age movement.

Non-aggression principle [ edit ] The non-aggression principle asserts that aggression against an individual or an individual's property is always an immoral violation of life, liberty, and property rights.

[ 30 ] Utilizing deceit instead of consent to achieve ends is also a violation of the Non-Aggression Principle. Therefore, under the framework of this principle, rape, murder, deception, involuntary taxation, government regulation, and other behaviors that initiate aggression against otherwise peaceful individuals are considered violations.

[ 31 ] A common elevator pitch for this principle is, "Good ideas don't require force." [ 32 ] Satyagraha [ edit ] Main article: Satyagraha Martin Luther King Jr.

was influenced by Satyagraha Satyagraha is a philosophy and practice of nonviolent resistance developed by Mahatma Gandhi . He deployed satyagraha techniques in campaigns for Indian independence and also during his earlier struggles in South Africa .

The word satyagraha itself was coined through a public contest that Gandhi sponsored through the newspaper he published in South Africa, Indian Opinion , when he realized that neither the common, contemporary Hindu language nor the English language contained a word which fully expressed his own meanings and intentions when he talked about his nonviolent approaches to conflict. According to Gandhi's autobiography, the contest winner was Maganlal Gandhi (presumably no relation), who submitted the entry 'sadagraha', which Gandhi then modified to 'satyagraha'. Etymologically, this Hindic word means 'truth-firmness', and is commonly translated as 'steadfastness in the truth' or 'truth-force'.

Satyagraha theory also influenced Martin Luther King Jr.

, James Bevel , and others during the campaigns they led during the civil rights movement in the United States. The theory of satyagraha sees means and ends as inseparable. Therefore, it is contradictory to try to use violence to obtain peace. As Gandhi wrote: "They say, 'means are, after all, means'. I would say, 'means are, after all, everything'. As the means so the end..." [ 33 ] A quote sometimes attributed to Gandhi, but also to A. J. Muste , sums it up: "There is no way to peace; peace is the way".

[ citation needed ] Monuments [ edit ] The following are monuments to peace: Name Location Organization Meaning Image Twelve Metal Colossi Epang Palace , Xi'an Emperor of China Following the Qin universal conquest and symbolizing the universal pacification , the First Emperor collected all metal weapons of former Warring States as no longer necessary and melted them into twelve statues and bells.

[ 34 ] No illustrations have survived Ara Pacis Rome , Italy Roman Senate The monument of peace was preferred over the traditional triumphal arch as Augustus emphasized the achievement of universal peace over Roman military victory.

[ 35 ] Dirk Willems Peace Garden Steinbach, Manitoba Mennonite Heritage Village A peace garden telling the story of Dirk Willems ; a place for reflection and contemplation on what it means to live a life of radical peacemaking.

Japanese Garden of Peace Fredericksburg, Texas National Museum of the Pacific War A gift from the people of Japan to the people of the United States, presented to honor Chester W. Nimitz and created as a respite from the intensity of violence, destruction, and loss.

Japanese Peace Bell New York City , NY United Nations World peace Fountain of Time Chicago , IL Chicago Park District 100 years of peace between the US and UK Fredensborg Palace Fredensborg , Denmark Frederick IV The peace between Denmark–Norway and Sweden , after Great Northern War which was signed 3 July 1720 on the site of the unfinished palace.

International Peace Garden North Dakota , Manitoba non-profit organization Peace between the US and Canada, World peace Peace Arch border between US and Canada, near Surrey, British Columbia .

non-profit organization Built to honour the first 100 years of peace between Great Britain and the United States resulting from the signing of the Treaty of Ghent in 1814.

Shanti Stupa Pokhara , Nepal Nipponzan-Myōhōji-Daisanga One of eighty Peace Pagodas in the World.

Statue of Europe Brussels European Commission Unity in Peace in Europe Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park Alberta , Montana non-profit organization World Peace Theories [ edit ] See also: Peace and conflict studies § Conceptions of peace Many different theories of "peace" exist in the world of peace studies , which involves the study of de-escalation, conflict transformation, disarmament, and cessation of violence.

[ 36 ] [ better source needed ] The definition of "peace" can vary with religion, culture, or subject of study.

Balance of power [ edit ] Main article: Balance of power (international relations) The classical "realist" position is that the key to promoting order between states, and so of increasing the chances of peace, is the maintenance of a balance of power between states – a situation where no state is so dominant that it can "lay down the law to the rest". Exponents of this view have included Metternich , Bismarck , Hans Morgenthau , and Henry Kissinger . A related approach – more in the tradition of Hugo Grotius than Thomas Hobbes – was articulated by the so-called " English school of international relations theory " such as Martin Wight in his book Power Politics (1946, 1978) and Hedley Bull in The Anarchical Society (1977).

As the maintenance of a balance of power could in some circumstances require a willingness to go to war, some critics saw the idea of a balance of power as promoting war rather than promoting peace. This was a radical critique of those supporters of the Allied and Associated Powers who justified entry into World War I on the grounds that it was necessary to preserve the balance of power in Europe from a German bid for hegemony .

In the second half of the 20th century, and especially during the Cold War , a particular form of balance of power – mutual nuclear deterrence – emerged as a widely held doctrine on the key to peace between the great powers. Critics argued that the development of nuclear stockpiles increased the chances of war rather than peace, and that the "nuclear umbrella" made it "safe" for smaller wars (e.g. the Vietnam War and the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia to end the Prague Spring ), so making such wars more likely.

Appeasement and deterrence [ edit ] Appeasement is a strategy to achieve peace by making political, material, or territorial concessions to an aggressive power .

[ 37 ] Deterrence is a strategy to achieve peace by using threats or limited force to dissuade an actor from escalating conflict, [ 38 ] typically because the prospective attacker believes that the probability of success is low and the costs of attack are high.

[ 39 ] Civil rights leaders (including Martin Luther King Jr.

) meeting with President John F. Kennedy during the 1963 March on Washington is an example of the " speaking truth to power " peace tactic.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] Speaking truth to power [ edit ] Main article: Speaking truth to power Speaking truth to power is a non-violent political tactic, employed by dissidents against the received wisdom or propaganda of governments they regard as oppressive, authoritarian or an ideocracy . Practitioners who have campaigned for a more just and truthful world have included Apollonius of Tyana , Vaclav Havel , [ 42 ] Nelson Mandela , Archbishop Desmond Tutu , Mahatma Gandhi , Bacha Khan , and the Dalai Lama .

[ 43 ] The phrase originated with a pamphlet, Speak Truth to Power: a Quaker Search for an Alternative to Violence , published by the American Friends Service Committee in 1955. A contributor of the pamphlet's contents was civil rights activist Bayard Rustin .

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Free trade and interdependence [ edit ] Main articles: Doux commerce and Peace economics It was a central tenet of classical liberalism , for example among English liberal thinkers of the late 19th and early 20th century, that free trade promoted peace. For example, the Cambridge economist John Maynard Keynes (1883–1946) said that he was "brought up" on this idea and held it unquestioned until at least the 1920s.

[ 46 ] During the economic globalization in the decades leading up to World War I, writers such as Norman Angell argued that the growth of economic interdependence between the great powers made war between them futile and therefore unlikely. He made this argument in 1913. A year later Europe's economically interconnected states were embroiled in what would later become known as the First World War.

[ 47 ] Democratic peace theory [ edit ] Main article: Democratic peace theory The democratic peace theory posits that democracy causes peace (between democracies) because of the accountability, institutions, values, and norms of democratic countries.

[ 48 ] Territorial peace theory [ edit ] Main article: Territorial peace theory The territorial peace theory posits that peace causes democracy because territorial wars between neighbor countries lead to authoritarian attitudes and disregard for democratic values.

[ 49 ] This theory is supported by historical studies showing that countries rarely become democratic until after their borders have been settled by territorial peace with neighbor countries.

[ 50 ] War game [ edit ] Main article: Peace war game The Peace and War Game is an approach in game theory to understand the relationship between peace and conflicts.

The iterated game hypotheses was originally used by academic groups and computer simulations to study possible strategies of cooperation and aggression .

[ 51 ] [ page needed ] As peace makers became richer over time, it became clear that making war had greater costs than initially anticipated. One of the well studied strategies that acquired wealth more rapidly was based on Genghis Khan , i.e. a constant aggressor making war continually to gain resources. This led, in contrast, to the development of what's known as the "provokable nice guy strategy ", a peace-maker until attacked, improved upon merely to win by occasional forgiveness even when attacked. By adding the results of all pairwise games for each player, one sees that multiple players gain wealth cooperating with each other while bleeding a constantly aggressive player.

[ 52 ] Socialism and managed capitalism [ edit ] Socialist, communist, and left-wing liberal writers of the 19th and 20th centuries (e.g., Lenin , J.A. Hobson , John Strachey ) argued that capitalism caused war (e.g. through promoting imperial or other economic rivalries that lead to international conflict). This led some to argue that international socialism was the key to peace.

However, in response to such writers in the 1930s who argued that capitalism caused war, the economist John Maynard Keynes (1883–1946) argued that managed capitalism could promote peace. This involved international coordination of fiscal/monetary policies, an international monetary system that did not pit the interests of countries against each other, and a high degree of freedom of trade. These ideas underlay Keynes's work during World War II that led to the creation of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank at Bretton Woods in 1944, and later of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (subsequently the World Trade Organization ).

[ 53 ] [ page needed ] International organization and law [ edit ] One of the most influential theories of peace, especially since Woodrow Wilson led the creation of the League of Nations at the Paris Peace Conference of 1919, is that peace will be advanced if the intentional anarchy of states is replaced through the growth of international law promoted and enforced through international organizations such as the League of Nations, the United Nations , and other functional international organizations. One of the most important early exponents of this view was Alfred Eckhart Zimmern , for example in his 1936 book The League of Nations and the Rule of Law .

[ 54 ] Trans-national solidarity [ edit ] An anti-war activist with a homemade costume during an event in Colombia , 2020 Many "idealist" thinkers about international relations – e.g. in the traditions of Kant and Karl Marx – have argued that the key to peace is the growth of some form of solidarity between peoples (or classes of people) spanning the lines of cleavage between nations or states that lead to war.

[ 55 ] [ page needed ] One version of this is the idea of promoting international understanding between nations through the international mobility of students – an idea most powerfully advanced by Cecil Rhodes in the creation of the Rhodes Scholarships , and his successors such as J. William Fulbright .

[ 56 ] Another theory is that peace can be developed among countries on the basis of active management of water resources.

[ 57 ] [ better source needed ] Day [ edit ] World Peace Day , celebrated on 21 September, was founded as a day to recognize, honour and promote peace.

[ 58 ] Studies, rankings, and periods [ edit ] Peace and conflict studies [ edit ] Main article: Peace and conflict studies Detail from Peace and Prosperity (1896), Elihu Vedder , Library of Congress Thomas Jefferson Building , Washington, D.C.

Peace and conflict studies is an academic field which identifies and analyses violent and nonviolent behaviours, as well as the structural mechanisms attending violent and non-violent social conflicts .  This is to better understand the processes leading to a more desirable human condition .

[ 59 ] [ full citation needed ] One variation, Peace studies ( irenology ), is an interdisciplinary effort aiming at the prevention, de-escalation , and solution of conflicts. This contrasts with war studies (polemology), directed at the efficient attainment of victory in conflicts. Disciplines involved may include political science , geography , economics , psychology , sociology , international relations , history , anthropology , religious studies , and gender studies , as well as a variety of other disciplines.

Measurement and ranking [ edit ] Although peace is widely perceived as something intangible, various organizations have been making efforts to quantify and measure it.

The Global Peace Index produced by the Institute for Economics and Peace is a known effort to evaluate peacefulness in countries based on 23 indicators of the absence of violence and absence of the fear of violence.

[ 60 ] The 2015 edition of the Index ranked 163 countries on their internal and external levels of peace.

[ 61 ] According to the 2017 Global Peace Index , Iceland is the most peaceful country in the world while Syria is the least peaceful one.

[ 62 ] Fragile States Index (formerly known as the Failed States Index) created by the Fund for Peace focuses on risk for instability or violence in 178 nations. This index measures how fragile a state is by 12 indicators and subindicators that evaluate aspects of politics, social economy, and military facets in countries.

[ 63 ] The 2015 Failed State Index reports that the most fragile nation is South Sudan, and the least fragile one is Finland.

[ 64 ] University of Maryland publishes the Peace and Conflict Instability Ledger in order to measure peace. It grades 163 countries with 5 indicators, and pays the most attention to risk of political instability or armed conflict over a three-year period. The most recent ledger shows that the most peaceful country is Slovenia on the contrary Afghanistan is the most conflicted nation. Besides indicated above reports from the Institute for Economics and Peace , Fund for Peace, and University of Maryland, other organizations including George Mason University release indexes that rank countries in terms of peacefulness.

Long periods [ edit ] See also: List of periods of regional peace The longest continuing period of peace and neutrality among currently existing states is observed in Sweden since 1814 and in Switzerland , which has had an official policy of neutrality since 1815. This was made possible partly by the periods of relative peace in Europe and the world known as Pax Britannica (1815–1914), Pax Europaea / Pax Americana (since 1950s), and Pax Atomica (also since the 1950s).

Other examples of long periods of peace are: the isolationistic Edo period (also known as Tokugawa shogunate ) in Japan 1603 to 1868 (265 years) Pax Khazarica in Khazar Khanate (south-east Turkey) about 700–950 CE (250 years) Pax Romana in the Roman empire (for 190 or 206 years).

See also [ edit ] Anti-war – Social movement opposed to armed conflicts Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Catholic peace traditions Grey-zone (international relations) – State between peace and war Group on International Perspectives on Governmental Aggression and Peace – Peace organization List of anti-war songs List of peace activists List of places named Peace List of peace prizes Moral syncretism Nonkilling – Approach to nonviolence Nonviolence – Principle or practice of not causing harm to others Peace education – Interdisciplinary approach to pedagogy of violent conflict and social injustice Peace in Islamic philosophy – Concept in Islam Peace Journalism – Style and theory of reporting Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Peace makers Peace One Day – Nonprofit organization Peace Palace – International law administrative building in The Hague, Netherlands Peace symbol – Symbols to promote peace Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Prayer for Peace Structural violence – Form of violence Sulh – Arabic term used in Islamic jurisprudence Turn the other cheek – Phrase from the Sermon on the Mount in Christian doctrine Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets War resister – Person who resists war References [ edit ] ^ "UN Logo and Flag" .

United Nations . Archived from the original on 26 December 2020 . Retrieved 10 December 2020 .

"International Day of Peace 2020 Poster" (PDF) .

UN.org . United Nations. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 September 2020 . Retrieved 10 December 2020 .

^ Woodhouse, Tom (27 January 2022).

"A brief history of peace" .

Vision of Humanity . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

^ Moeschberger, Scott L.; DeZalia, Rebekah A. Phillips (14 May 2014).

Symbols that Bind, Symbols that Divide: The Semiotics of Peace and Conflict . Springer.

ISBN 978-3-319-05464-3 .

^ Galtung, Johan (31 July 1996).

Peace by Peaceful Means: Peace and Conflict, Development and Civilization (1st ed.). Los Angeles: SAGE Publications Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-8039-7511-8 .

^ "peace" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Archived from the original on 14 December 2013.

^ Benner, Jeff.

"Ancient Hebrew Word Meanings: Peace ~ shalom" .

Ancient Hebrew Research centre . Archived from the original on 26 April 2014.

^ "Peace Sign" .

Inner Peace Zone . 28 August 2021.

Archived from the original on 20 September 2021 . Retrieved 17 December 2021 .

^ Boederman, John, ed. (1997).

The Cambridge Ancient History . Cambridge University Press. p. 832.

[ volume & issue needed ] ^ Nilsson, Martin P. (1983).

Mycenaean Origin of Greek Mythology . Univ. of California Press. p. 48.

^ Dowler, Amelia.

"Gold coin of Croesus" .

A History of the World .

Archived from the original on 22 January 2010 . Retrieved 12 March 2019 .

^ Šmihula, Daniel (2013).

The Use of Force in International Relations . VEDA, Publishing House of the Slovak Academy of Sciences. p. 129.

ISBN 978-80-224-1341-1 .

^ "The Role and Responsibilities of the Police" (PDF) . Policy Studies Institute. p. xii. Archived from the original on 29 August 2017 . Retrieved 22 December 2009 .

^ Lioe, Kim Eduard (3 December 2010).

Armed Forces in Law Enforcement Operations? – The German and European Perspective (1989 ed.). Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. pp.

52– 57.

ISBN 978-3-642-15433-1 .

^ Romm, Joseph J.

(1993).

Defining national security: the nonmilitary aspects . Pew Project on America's Task in a Changed World (Pew Project Series). Council on Foreign Relations. p. 122.

ISBN 978-0-87609-135-7 . Retrieved 22 September 2010 .

^ a b Rogers, P (2010).

Losing control : global security in the twenty-first century (3rd ed.). London: Pluto Press.

ISBN 9780745329376 .

OCLC 658007519 .

^ "Excerpt from the Will of Alfred Nobel" .

Nobel Foundation . Archived from the original on 26 October 2007 . Retrieved 31 March 2008 .

^ "To 'render war impossible': the Rhodes Scholarships, educational relations between countries, and peace" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 June 2013 . Retrieved 9 June 2013 .

^ Cecil Rhodes's goal of Scholarships promoting peace highlighted – The Rhodes Scholarships Archived 22 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine . Various materials on peace by Warden of the Rhodes House Donald Markwell in Markwell, "Instincts to Lead": On Leadership, Peace, and Education . Connor Court, 2013.

^ E.g., Donald Markwell , John Maynard Keynes and International Relations: Economic Paths to War and Peace . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.

^ "The Decade Ahead: The US Role in the World" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 September 2013.

^ "Honouring J. William Fulbright - the Rhodes Scholarships" . Archived from the original on 22 September 2013 . Retrieved 26 September 2012 .

^ See, e.g., "The Rhodes Scholarships of China" in Donald Markwell , "Instincts to Lead": On Leadership, Peace, and Education , Connor Court, 2013.

^ Benner, Jeff.

"Ancient Hebrew Word Meanings: Messiah ~ meshi'ahh" .

Ancient Hebrew Research Center . Archived from the original on 26 April 2014.

^ "For a child has been born for us, a son given to us; authority rests upon his shoulders; and he is named Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace ." [New Revised Standard Version] ^ Luke 1:76–79 ^ Beaman, Jay; Pipkin, Brian K. (2013).

Pentecostal and Holiness Statements on War and Peace . Wipf and Stock Publishers. pp.

98– 99.

ISBN 9781610979085 .

"Article 22. Peace, Justice, and Nonresistance" .

Mennonite Church USA . 2 March 2015.

Archived from the original on 4 June 2021 . Retrieved 4 June 2021 .

^ Quran 13:28 ^ Quran 58:11 ^ McGinn, Bernard (2006).

Essential Writings of Christian Mysticism . p. 163.

^ Richman, Sheldon (29 March 2015).

"For Libertarians, There Is Only One Fundamental Right" .

Reason .

Archived from the original on 8 March 2022 . Retrieved 24 February 2022 .

Vance, Laurence M. (1 October 2015).

"The Morality of Libertarianism" .

The Future of Freedom Foundation .

Archived from the original on 24 July 2023 . Retrieved 24 July 2023 .

^ Block, Walter.

"The Non-Aggression Axiom of Libertarianism" .

Lew Rockwell .

Archived from the original on 24 July 2023 . Retrieved 22 March 2016 .

^ Popik, Barry (4 July 2021).

" "Good ideas don't require force" " .

The Big Apple .

Archived from the original on 8 March 2022 . Retrieved 24 February 2022 .

^ Prabhu, R.K.; Rao, U.R., eds. (1967), "The Gospel Of Sarvodaya" , The Mind of Mahatma Gandhi (Revised ed.), Ahemadabad, India, archived from the original on 27 September 2011 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Elsner, Jaś (22 October 2020).

Figurines: Figuration and the Sense of Scale . Oxford University Press. pp.

91– 92.

ISBN 978-0-19-886109-6 .

^ "Ara Pacis Augustae" (JPG) .

^ "Peace Studies Program" .

Cornell University . Archived from the original on 22 October 2007.

^ "Appeasement - World War 2 on History" .

www.history.co.uk . Archived from the original on 4 April 2013.

^ Morgan, Patrick M. (1977).

Deterrence: A Conceptual Analysis . SAGE Publications. pp.

26– 30.

ISBN 978-0-8039-0819-2 .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2024 . Retrieved 30 August 2021 .

^ Mearsheimer, John J. (1983).

Conventional Deterrence . Cornell University Press. p. 23.

ISBN 978-1-5017-1325-5 .

JSTOR 10.7591/j.ctt1rv61v2 .

Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 5 September 2021 .

^ Dubrin, Doug.

"The March on Washington and Its Impact" .

www.pbs.org . Archived from the original on 9 January 2013 . Retrieved 29 August 2020 .

^ Jenkins, Alan (28 August 2013).

"An important goal of the 1963 March on Washington remains unfulfilled" .

The Hill . Retrieved 29 August 2020 .

^ Havel, Václav; et al. (1985). Keane, John, ed. The Power of the Powerless: Citizens against the state in central-eastern Europe. Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe.

ISBN 0-87332-761-6 .

^ Nan Richardson (ed), Kerry Kennedy and Eddie Adams , 'Speak Truth to Power', Umbrage, 2003, introduction.

^ Speak truth to power A Quaker search for an alternative to violence . American Friends Service Committee. 1955 . Retrieved 25 April 2024 .

^ According to Fea (2017), 'Rustin and his co-authors expunged Rustin’s name from the pamphlet because of his arrest on charges of committing a homosexual act in 1953.' The History of the Phrase “Speak Truth to Power” ^ Quoted from Donald Markwell , John Maynard Keynes and International Relations: Economic Paths to War and Peace . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006, chapter 2.

^ "NATO Review - the end of the "Great Illusion": Norman Angell and the founding of NATO" . 14 January 2019.

Archived from the original on 10 November 2019 . Retrieved 10 November 2019 .

^ Hegre, Håvard (2014).

"Democracy and armed conflict" .

Journal of Peace Research .

51 (2): 159– 172.

doi : 10.1177/0022343313512852 .

S2CID 146428562 .

^ Gibler, Douglas M.; Hutchison, Marc L.; Miller, Steven V. (2012).

"Individual identity attachments and international conflict: The importance of territorial threat" .

Comparative Political Studies .

45 (12): 1655– 1683.

doi : 10.1177/0010414012463899 .

S2CID 154788507 .

Hutchison, Marc L.; Gibler, Douglas M. (2007).

"Political tolerance and territorial threat: A cross-national study" .

The Journal of Politics .

69 (1): 128– 142.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-2508.2007.00499.x .

S2CID 154653996 .

^ Gibler, Douglas M.; Owsiak, Andrew (2017).

"Democracy and the Settlement of International Borders, 1919-2001" .

Journal of Conflict Resolution .

62 (9): 1847– 1875.

doi : 10.1177/0022002717708599 .

S2CID 158036471 .

Owsiak, Andrew P.; Vasquez, John A. (2021).

"Peaceful dyads: A territorial perspective" .

International Interactions .

47 (6): 1040– 1068.

doi : 10.1080/03050629.2021.1962859 .

S2CID 239103213 .

^ Shy, Oz (1996).

Industrial Organization: Theory and Applications . Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.

^ Miller, Nicholas R. (1985).

"Nice Strategies Finish First: A Review of The Evolution of Cooperation " .

Politics and the Life Sciences .

4 (1).

Association for Politics and the Life Sciences : 86– 91.

doi : 10.1017/S0730938400020852 .

JSTOR 4235437 .

S2CID 151520743 .

^ Markwell, Donald (2006).

John Maynard Keynes and International Relations: Economic Paths to War and Peace . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-829236-4 .

^ Zimmern, Alfred Eckhard (1936).

The League of Nations and the Rule of Law . Macmillan.

^ Hinsley, F.H.

(1962).

Power and the Pursuit of Peace . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-09448-1 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Discussed above. See, e.g., Markwell, Donald (2013).

"Instincts to Lead": On Leadership, Peace, and Education . Australia: Connor Court Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-922168-70-2 .

^ "Publications – Strategic Foresight Group, Think Tank, Global Policy, Global affairs research, Water Conflict studies, global policy strategies, strategic policy group, global future studies" .

strategicforesight.com .

Archived from the original on 1 November 2016 . Retrieved 2 November 2016 .

^ "International Day of Peace" .

United Nations . Retrieved 16 May 2024 .

^ Dugan, 1989: 74 ^ "Vision of Humanity" .

visionofhumanity.org .

Archived from the original on 22 February 2011 . Retrieved 15 December 2013 .

^ Jethro Mullen (25 June 2015).

"Study: Iceland is the most peaceful nation in the world" .

CNN.com .

Archived from the original on 7 August 2015 . Retrieved 6 August 2015 .

^ Edmond, Charlotte (8 June 2017).

"These are the most peaceful countries in the world" .

World Economic Forum .

Archived from the original on 15 July 2017 . Retrieved 14 July 2017 .

^ "Fragile States 2014" .

foreignpolicy.com . Foreign Policy.

Archived from the original on 17 March 2017 . Retrieved 10 March 2017 .

^ Zeitvogel, Karin (19 June 2015).

"South Sudan Tops List of World's Fragile States – Again" .

VOA .

Archived from the original on 13 August 2015 . Retrieved 6 August 2015 .

Further reading [ edit ] Sir Norman Angell .

The Great Illusion . 1909 Raymond Aron , Peace and War . London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1966 Hedley Bull .

The Anarchical Society . Macmillan, 1977 Sir Herbert Butterfield .

Christianity, Diplomacy and War . 1952 Martin Ceadel.

Pacifism in Britain, 1914–1945: The Defining of a Faith . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980 Martin Ceadel.

Semi-Detached Idealists: The British Peace Movement and International Relations, 1854–1945 . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.

Martin Ceadel.

The Origins of War Prevention: The British Peace Movement and International Relations, 1730–1854 . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996 Martin Ceadel.

Thinking about Peace and War . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987 Inis L. Claude , Jr.

Swords into Ploughshares: The Problems and Progress of International Organization . 1971 Michael W. Doyle .

Ways of War and Peace: Realism, Liberalism, and Socialism . W.W. Norton, 1997 Sir Harry Hinsley .

Power and the Pursuit of Peace . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1962 Andrew Hurrell .

On Global Order . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008 Immanuel Kant .

Perpetual Peace . 1795 Martin Luther King Jr.

.

Letter from Birmingham Jail Donald Markwell .

John Maynard Keynes and International Relations: Economic Paths to War and Peace . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.

Donald Markwell .

"Instincts to Lead": On Leadership, Peace, and Education . Connor Court, 2013 Hans Morgenthau .

Politics Among Nations . 1948 Laure Paquette.

The Path to Peace Steven Pinker .

The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined . Viking, 2011 Sir Alfred Eckhard Zimmern .

The League of Nations and the Rule of Law . Macmillan, 1936 Kenneth Waltz .

Man, the State and War . Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978 Michael Walzer .

Just and Unjust War . Basic Books, 1977 Jeni Whalan.

How Peace Operations Work . Oxford University Press, 2013 Martin Wight .

Power Politics . 1946 (2nd edition, 1978) "Pennsylvania, A History of the Commonwealth," esp. pg. 109, edited by Randall M. Miller and William Pencak, The Pennsylvania State University Press, 2002 Peaceful Societies, Alternatives to Violence and War [ usurped ] Short profiles on 25 peaceful societies.

Prefaces to Peace: a Symposium [i.e. anthology] , Consisting of [works by] Wendell L. Willkie, Herbert Hoover and Hugh Gibson, Henry A. Wallace, [and] Sumner Welles. "Cooperatively published by Simon and Schuster; Doubleday, Doran, and Co.; Reynal & Hitchcock; [and] Columbia University Press", [194-]. xii, 437 p.

External links [ edit ] Peace at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Carnegie Endowment for International Peace Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs Research Guide on Peace by the United Nations Library at Geneva Peace Monuments Around the World Working Group on Peace and Development (FriEnt) Ladislav Hejdánek: What do we actually want when we want peace?

v t e War Peace ( list ) Conflicts ( list ) War concept ( lists ) Civil wars ( list ) Attacks ( list ) Terrorism ( list ) Warfare ( list ) Battles ( list ) Wars ( list ) List of ongoing armed conflicts v t e Anti-war and peace movement Peace advocates Anti-nuclear organizations Anti-war movement Anti-war organizations Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions Coalition of Women for Peace Code Pink Conscientious objectors Counterculture Culture of Peace ECOPEACE Party Greenham Common Women's Peace Camp Iraq War resisters in Canada List of pacifist organisations List of peace activists New Socialist Party of Japan Pacifist Socialist Party Peace and conflict studies Peace camp Peace churches Peace commission Peace conference Peace congress Peace education Peace movement Peace psychology Peace treaty Peaceworker React, Include, Recycle Social Democratic Party (Japan) Unity The Women's Peace Crusade War resisters Women's International League for Peace and Freedom Ideologies Ahimsa Anarchism Anarcho-pacifism Anarcho-punks Christian anarchism Anti-imperialism Anti-nuclear movement Antimilitarism Appeasement Christian pacifism Deterrence theory Direct action Finvenkismo Green politics Hippie Isolationism Modern-war pacifism Non-interventionism Nonkilling Nonviolence Pacificism Pacifism Peace Satyagraha Soviet influence on the peace movement Testimony of peace World peace Media and cultural Art Books Concert Yutel for Peace Dances of Universal Peace Festival for Peace Films Imagine Piano Peace Project International Day of Non-Violence International Day of Peace Dialogue Among Civilizations List of peace prizes List of places named Peace Monuments and memorials Mother's Day Proclamation Nobel Peace Prize Concert Museums Peace & Love (festival) Peace journalism Peace News Promoting Enduring Peace Peace One Day Plays Promoting Enduring Peace Show of Peace Concert Songs Symbols The Non-Violence Project University for Peace World Peace Bell Association Japanese Peace Bell Women in Black World March for Peace and Nonviolence Slogans and tactics Bed-in Central Park be-ins Civil disobedience Conflict resolution Counter-recruitment De-escalation Demilitarisation Department of Peace Desertion Draft evasion Die-in Economic sanctions Flower power Global Day of Action on Military Spending Human Be-In Lesson of Munich " Make love, not war " Non-aggression principle Nonviolent resistance Non Violent Resistance (psychological intervention) Peace walk Peacebuilding Refusal to serve in the Israel Defense Forces " Soldiers are murderers " Swords to ploughshares Teach-in " The whole world is watching " Third Party Non-violent Intervention " Turn the other cheek " " Violence begets violence " War tax resisters Opposition to specific wars or their aspects War of 1812 ( UK ; US ) American Civil War Second Boer War World War I World War II Vietnam War list of protests War on Terror Iraq War Criticism Protests Afghanistan War Military action in Iran Sri Lankan Civil War 2011 intervention in Libya Anti-war protests in Russia (2014) 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine in Russia in Russian Far East Gaza War in the U.S.

Calls for a ceasefire Landmines Military taxation Nuclear disarmament International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons Nuclear weapons convention Countries Canada Costa Rica Germany Israel Japan Netherlands Spain Sudan Switzerland United Kingdom United States Peacebuilding in Jammu and Kashmir Category v t e International relations Glossary Organizations Present BRICS Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) International Criminal Court (ICC) Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) United Nations (UN) Past League of Nations Warsaw Pact History 1648–1814 1814–1919 1919–1939 Diplomatic history of World War II Cold War International relations since 1989 Concepts Alliance Entente Coalition Military Appeasement Co-belligerence Collective security Colonialism / Colonization Crisis Deterrence theory Expansionism Grey-zone Hegemony Idealism Imperialism International community Internationalism Internationality Liberal Interventionism Isolationism National interest Neutral country Non-belligerent Non-state actor Peace Power Regionalism Right of conquest Sovereignty Sovereigntism Suzerainty Treaty Bilateral Friendship Multilateral Non-aggression Peace War Whole-of-society Theory Constructivism English school Feminism Liberalism Marxism Postcolonialism Realism Related fields and subfields Comparative politics Counterproliferation Diplomacy Foreign policy analysis Geopolitics International law International political economy International political sociology Peace and conflict studies Security studies v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases National Germany Japan Czech Republic Sweden Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐vsdlx
Cached time: 20250818150638
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.444 seconds
Real time usage: 1.795 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 12336/1000000
Revision size: 74288/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 285506/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12971/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 36/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 264541/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.878/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18172332/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1462.302      1 -total
 34.20%  500.102      1 Template:Reflist
 15.98%  233.631     31 Template:Cite_web
 11.91%  174.158     23 Template:Annotated_link
 10.47%  153.127      5 Template:Multiref2
  8.17%  119.442     19 Template:Cite_book
  7.47%  109.279      9 Template:Lang
  6.73%   98.439     11 Template:Fix
  5.68%   83.021      4 Template:Navbox
  4.94%   72.207      1 Template:War_navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:24702:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818150638 and revision id 1306384867. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peace&oldid=1306384867 " Categories : Peace Ethical principles Fruit of the Holy Spirit Nonviolence Pacifism Political concepts Social concepts Virtue Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2025 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from November 2019 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2024 Articles containing Old English (ca. 450-1100)-language text Articles containing Anglo-Norman-language text Articles containing Old French (842-ca. 1400)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Hawaiian-language text Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from August 2023 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2023 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from August 2023 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 12:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peace 156 languages Add topic

