Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Hunting Toggle Hunting subsection 1.1 Ferreting 1.2 Hunting with hounds 1.3 Spotlighting 2 Trapping methods Toggle Trapping methods subsection 2.1 Spring based traps 2.2 Pit traps 2.3 Long netting 2.4 Purse Nets 3 Historic rabbiting 4 Regulations Toggle Regulations subsection 4.1 United Kingdom 4.2 United States 5 References Toggle the table of contents Rabbiting 4 languages فارسی Français 日本語 Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sport of hunting rabbits "Rabbit hunting" redirects here. For other uses, see Rabbit hunting (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Rabbiting" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Rabbiting Huckleberry Finn , illustration by E. W. Kemble from the original 1884 edition of the book by Mark Twain Nicknames rabbit hunting First played medieval times Rabbiting (also rabbit hunting and cottontail hunting ) is the sport of hunting rabbits . It often involves using ferrets or dogs to track or chase the prey. There are various methods used in capturing the rabbit, including trapping and shooting .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Depending on where the hunting occurs, there may be licenses required and other rules in regards to methods being used.

Hunting [ edit ] The primary environment for hunting rabbits consists of forests. This specific habitat is favored by rabbits because of the elevated and soft grounds that make for effortless burrowing and suitable dens.

[ 3 ] In the United Kingdom, ferrets can be used as hunting companions due to their "natural hunting skills." [ 4 ] Depending on the preferred method of the hunter, ferrets can either be trained to flush out a rabbit from its burrow or to down it. In the United States dogs are used as hunting companions due to their natural hunting abilities, as well as illegality of using ferrets for hunting.

[ 5 ] Alternatively, hunters can use specialized equipment in lieu of hunting companions. This can consist of shotguns, bolting cages, bulldog rabbiting spades, and purse-nets.

[ 6 ] As for other hunting methods, hunters can also hunt in groups. With this method, each group members relies on creating noise to trigger the rabbit's flight response. If successful, the fleeing rabbit is usually killed with shotguns or captured with nets. In other instances, with a small caliber, a hunter can also down a rabbit while it remains in its burrow.

[ 6 ] Ferreting [ edit ] A silverback ferret being used to hunt Ferrets have an extensive history of being used for rabbiting. Preferences can vary for either males (hobs), or females (jills), due to their supposed strengths and weaknesses. Common belief is that jills are more agile and less head-strong, but physically weaker than hobs, which are generally bigger.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Preferences for a jill or hob depend on the likelihood to perform a lay-up. Upon performing a lay-up, the ferret remains in the burrow and consumes the downed rabbit, usually falling asleep. Ultimately, individuals of this belief may view hobs as being more prone to performing a lay-up due to their head-strong nature. Therefore, some may prefer to use jills to decrease this likelihood. On the other hand, others may prefer to use hobs for their increased strength.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Aside from these theorized strengths and weaknesses of the hob or jill, modern-day ferreting involves technological devices. One of these is the locator collar that a ferret wears so its location can be tracked when it is within rabbit burrows. Simultaneously, the hunter uses a locator that is connected to the ferret's collar to locate the proximity of the ferret's location. The more frequent pulse of the beeps, the closer the hunter is to the precise location of the burrowed ferret. If it is discovered that the ferret has successfully caught and downed a rabbit, the hunter commonly uses a spade to dig up the ferret and caught rabbit. Alternatively, ferrets can also chase rabbits out of their burrows into purse nets or long nets .

[ 11 ] Some hunters now rely on firearms or dogs to take the prey, rather than laying down nets.

[ 12 ] Three or four hunters with shotguns will attempt to shoot the rabbit as it bolts from the burrow while being chased by the ferret.

[ 13 ] Hunting with hounds [ edit ] A group of hounds on the hunt When rabbiting, hunting dogs can be useful in a variety of ways; they can be used to track, flush, or retrieve the animal. The use of hounds for hunting can be dated back to ancient Egyptian times.

[ 14 ] The most common breeds used for rabbit hunting include sight hounds, lurchers, scent hounds, retrievers, spaniels, settlers, and pointers.

[ 15 ] Hunting of rabbits involving dogs (usually beagle or basset hounds ) is called beagling . 
In the United Kingdom , hunters are allowed to use dogs as long as they don't use more than two and they have the landowner's permission.

[ 16 ] Spotlighting [ edit ] Spotlighting or lamping can refer to any form of rabbit hunting performed at night with the aid of powerful hand-held, rifle mounted or vehicle mounted search lights. The light is often used in conjunction with a dog such as a sighthound , (or lurcher ) alongside an air rifle , or some other firearm such as a .22LR .17 HMR The rabbit is illuminated by the light and then shot, or a dog will chase and capture it.

[ 17 ] Most often lurchers are used to catch the prey, the most popular crosses involve greyhounds, border collies and salukis.

[ 18 ] Using a vehicle is a very popular method of spotlighting. Pick ups and 4×4 are preferred modes of transport.

ATVS are also popular vehicles for rabbiting. They provide rapid acceleration making it easy to chase down rabbits.

[ 19 ] Trapping methods [ edit ] An old rabbit trap There is a large variety of different traps that are used to capture rabbits and can be divided into categories. A lot of traps are typically used for pest control . When hunting for sport, long netting is the most common method of trapping. Many traps are illegal.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Spring based traps [ edit ] These traps have a high rate of success and are very easy to set up. The springs inside the trap are triggered by the weight of the rabbit, causing them to shorten and the door to shut behind the animal, leaving it safely enclosed. Homemade traps such as these do not have a great success rate, as the effectiveness depends entirely on the trap's quality. The way the traps operate vary, but ultimately the rabbit's movement is what triggers them to close.

[ 20 ] Pit traps [ edit ] These traps are quite advanced because they are able to capture a large number of rabbits and automatically reset themselves. They are buried into the ground and usually have a type of tunnel that lures the animal to a spring-loaded trap, which will then drop the rabbit into an enclosure once it is triggered by weight.

[ 20 ] Long netting [ edit ] Long net rabbiting in Slovenia, 1962 A long net is used (similar to the purse nets used when ferreting) to catch rabbits that have been scared across a field. Long netting was the primary method of catching farmed rabbits in England before they become a major pest. This method is still used today when ferret or shooting isn't an effective method due to hedgerows or large warrens. There are many different types of nets including the trammel, ditch net, and the quick set. It is important to make sure the correct type and length of net is used for the location and that it is set up correctly.

[ 22 ] Typically, long nets are placed around burrows so that a bolting rabbit (that is, one leaving its burrow) will become ensnared, allowing the hunter to dispatch it. The act of scaring rabbits towards the net is called flushing and is done by using hunting animals, lamps, ropes, or noise.

[ 23 ] Purse Nets [ edit ] One of the most commonly used nets is purse nests. These can either be made of nylon or hemp, and range from small to large sizes. Draping the net over the rabbit hole, the hunter then secures the net by pegging its top and bottom loops. Upon dashing into the net, the rabbit triggers its drawstring string mechanism which results in the net pulling together. Afterwards, the hunter usually dispatches the rabbit [ 24 ] Historic rabbiting [ edit ] An 1849 depiction of historic coursing In medieval times, a hawk or falcon would have been used to catch the rabbit as it exited the warren burrow.

[ 25 ] For this type of hunt, an albino ferret would typically be used, allowing the bird-of-prey to more easily recognize it. While this hunting style is still occasionally used, especially in the UK where it remains popular (see Falconry ), the methods above have almost entirely replaced it.

Also around this time, the popularity of hare coursing sport was growing. Back then, two greyhounds would be released at the same time in pursuit of the rabbit and the one that kills it is declared the winner of the game; people typically placed bets on which dog would be the victor.

[ 26 ] In sixteenth-century Britain , hunting rabbits typically involved two hunters either on foot or horseback , a group of hounds, and a horn . The hunter leading the hounds used the horn to encourage them to chase after the rabbit, while the other stayed at the back of the group to motivate any dogs that fell behind. When the rabbit was caught, its death would be marked by a ritual dissection of its body following a blow of the horn.

[ 26 ] After the actual hunt, the meat would be taken home by the hunters, and the leftovers were given to the dogs as a reward. The rabbit's meat was not highly rated during this time period; huntsman still collected the meat, but the hunt was ultimately a form of entertainment.

[ 26 ] Regulations [ edit ] United Kingdom [ edit ] In the United Kingdom it is not required for a hunter to have a game license to kill and take rabbits. The hunting season for rabbits runs through the entire year from January 1 to December 31.

On the Isle of Man , a game license is required to shoot rabbits and a dealer's license is required for dealing any type of game; they can be obtained from the Treasury Office. The hunting season also runs throughout the entire year.

In Jersey , no license is required because there is no hunting season for rabbits.

Guernsey 's laws require a shotgun or firearm certificate rather than a hunting license.

In most of these places, it is considered an offence to kill any type of game on a Sunday.

[ 27 ] United States [ edit ] In the United States , every person wishing to hunt must have a state hunting license (few states have exceptions to this). Some national wildlife refuges may have separate permits required.

[ 28 ] Each state has different hunting seasons for rabbits. In Virginia , the season lasts throughout November, December, and January.

[ 29 ] References [ edit ] ^ Rabbit Hunting: Secrets of a Master Cottontail Hunter , by Dave Fisher (2002) ISBN 0-9707493-6-8 ^ Rabbit Hunting: Stories and Techniques , by Charles Fergus, Paul Jukes (1985) ISBN 0-910042-50-0 ^ "Finding Rabbits: How to Hunt Down your Prey" .

how-to-hunt-rabbits.com .

^ Prasad, Deepika; Blais, Edik; Dunetz, Rick; Petricoin, Emanuel; Pierobon, Mariaelena (2024-05-02).

"Abstract PO5-06-04: EMSY amplification co-occurs with FGF/FGFR axis amplification in Metastatic Breast Cancer" .

Cancer Research .

84 (9_Supplement): PO5–06-04-PO5-06-04.

doi : 10.1158/1538-7445.sabcs23-po5-06-04 .

ISSN 1538-7445 .

^ Gaines, David.

"American Ferret Association, Inc. "Summary of State- And Territory-Level Ferret Regulations" " (PDF) .

America Ferret Association . Retrieved May 6, 2024 .

^ a b Fisher, Dave (2002).

Outdoorsman's Edge guide to rabbit hunting: secrets of a master cottontail hunter . Bellvale, N.Y: Woods N' Water.

ISBN 978-0-9707493-6-9 .

OCLC 50849897 .

^ Varga, Molly; Paterson, Susan (2020), "Dermatologic Diseases of Rabbits" , Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents , Elsevier, pp.

220– 232, doi : 10.1016/b978-0-323-48435-0.00017-4 , ISBN 978-0-323-48435-0 , retrieved 2024-05-06 ^ "How to start ferreting" . 3 February 2017.

^ Varga, Molly; Paterson, Susan (2020), "Dermatologic Diseases of Rabbits" , Ferrets, Rabbits, and Rodents , Elsevier, pp.

220– 232, doi : 10.1016/b978-0-323-48435-0.00017-4 , ISBN 978-0-323-48435-0 , retrieved 2024-05-06 ^ "How to start ferreting" . 3 February 2017.

^ "Hunting Rabbits using Ferrets" .

how-to-hunt-rabbits.com .

^ "All Things Ferreting, Methods, Tips, and Advice" .

how-to-hunt-rabbits.com .

^ "Shooting Rabbits while Hunting with Ferrets" .

how-to-hunt-rabbits.com .

^ "Rabbit Hunting Dogs The Laws, The Breeds and Methods" .

how-to-hunt-rabbits.com .

^ "Hunting Dog Breeds" .

how-to-hunt-rabbits.com .

^ "Shooting With Dogs Legally In the UK" .

how-to-hunt-rabbits.com .

^ "Lamping with Rifles: A Simple Guide" .

how-to-hunt-rabbits.com .

^ "Lamping with Lurchers, A Wonderful Spot" .

how-to-hunt-rabbits.com .

^ Fieldsports Britain.

"Fieldsports Britain : Stalking Castle Greystoke, rabbiting from a quadbike and eel catching" . fieldsportschannel.tv.

Archived from the original on 2021-12-12 . Retrieved 30 October 2012 .

^ a b c "Rabbit Trap Types" .

how-to-hunt-rabbits.com .

^ "Long Netting All you Need to Know" .

how-to-hunt-rabbits.com . Archived from the original on 2012-01-19 . Retrieved 2011-12-10 .

^ "The Different Types of Long Nets and Which is Best" .

how-to-hunt-rabbits.com .

^ "The Methods for Flushing Rabbits Into Long Nets" .

how-to-hunt-rabbits.com .

^ "What is Ferreting?" .

^ "Medieval Hawking" .

medieval-life-and-times.info .

^ a b c Griffin, Emma (2007).

Blood Sport Hunting In Britain Since 1066 .

^ "Quarry Species & Shooting Seasons" .

basc.org.uk .

^ "Hunting" .

fws.gov .

^ Virginia Hunting Guide , Bob Gooch (1985) ISBN 0-8139-1041-2 , Chapter "Small Game Mammals", pp. 151–163.

v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rabbiting&oldid=1301484208 " Category : Hunting by game Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2019 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 03:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rabbiting 4 languages Add topic

