Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Description Toggle Description subsection 2.1 Cellular organization 2.2 Reproduction 2.3 Nutrition and habitat 3 Systematics 4 References Toggle the table of contents Kaonashia 1 language Magyar Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genus of single-celled heterokonts Kaonashia Scientific classification Domain: Eukaryota Clade : Sar Clade : Stramenopiles Family: Kaonashiidae Weston, Eglit & Simpson 2023 Genus: Kaonashia Weston, Eglit & Simpson 2023 Species: K. insperata Binomial name Kaonashia insperata Weston, Eglit & Simpson 2023 Kaonashia insperata is a species of single-celled phagotrophic stramenopiles . Described in 2023 from flagellates found in a soda lake , it is the sole species within the genus Kaonashia and family Kaonashiidae . Cells of this organism have cortical alveoli, extrusomes, a ventral groove, a short anterior flagellum covered in mastigonemes , and a longer posterior flagellum covered in thinner hairs. The cells are most similar to those found in developayellids , but a molecular phylogenetic analysis found no well-supported affinity to any specific stramenopile group.

Etymology [ edit ] The genus Kaonashia is named after the fictional ghost No-Face ( Japanese : 顔無し , Hepburn : Kaonashi ) from the Hayao Miyazaki film Spirited Away . The specific epithet insperata (from Latin insperata ' unexpected ' ) references the unanticipated phylogenetic placement of this organism given its appearance.

[ 1 ] Description [ edit ] Cellular organization [ edit ] Kaonashia insperata is a species of free-living phagotrophic flagellates . The cells are roughly ovoid or bean-shaped, 7–13 μm long, abundant in simple extrusomes and flattened cortical alveoli underlying much of the cell membrane , and with a conspicuous ventral groove. The mitochondria have tubular cristae . The cell shape and size is distorted when containing food vacuoles and prey cells.

[ 1 ] Each cell has two flagella: a long, posterior flagellum (2.5 times the cell length) that lies inside the ventral groove and trails behind when swimming; and a shorter, anterior flagellum (1.5 times the cell length) that points forward in a rapid beating motion. Along the anterior flagellum are long mastigonemes (flagellar "hairs") arranged in two opposing rows. Each mastigoneme has two unequal terminal filaments. The mastigonemes appear near the insertion of the flagellum up until the distal portion where they are absent, not extending to the tip as is usual in other stramenopiles. The posterior flagellum sometimes anchors to the substrate through sparse, thinner hair-like filaments.

[ 1 ] The general morphology of their cells is consistent with stramenopiles , but their cellular structures are also found across other members of the Sar clade and even more distantly related eukaryotes. The extrusomes of K. insperata are smaller and simpler than most extrusomes in Sar species, and are most similar to those observed in telonemids and some rhizarians . The cortical alveoli are the unifying trait of alveolates ; among phagotrophic stramenopiles they have been identified in developayellids , although larger and more limited than those found in K. insperata . The ventral groove is observed in many distantly related eukaryotes such as excavates ; among stramenopiles, the highest similarity corresponds to developayellids. Regarding the flagella, a longer posterior flagellum is also seen in developayellids. The mastigonemes of the anterior flagellum are typical of stramenopiles, particularly placidideans and oomycetes due to the unequal terminal filaments, and the thinner hairs of the posterior one are similar to those used by some oomycetes to adhere to plant matter.

[ 1 ] Reproduction [ edit ] The cells reproduce asexually through binary fission . The flagella are duplicated and positioned at opposite sides of the anterior end of the cell. Throughout the cell division , cells are still capable of movement, and appear two-lobed at the anterior end, frequently with a food vacuole located near the site of cytokinesis .

[ 1 ] Nutrition and habitat [ edit ] Kaonashia insperata is one of the few described heterotrophic protists found in soda lakes . It is a species of eukaryotrophic aerobes , meaning they consume other eukaryotes and breathe oxygen.

[ 2 ] They feed on various species of unicellular algae, particularly those that are larger than 5 μm, such as Guillardia theta .

[ 1 ] Systematics [ edit ] Soap Lake class=notpageimage| Location of Soap Lake, the type locality of Kaonashia insperata in the state of Washington, USA Cells of this species were first obtained from the photic zone of Soap Lake , Washington, USA , initially under the name of isolate SC, together with residual Guillardia theta prey cells and bacteria . The flagellates were cultivated and studied under light and electron microscopy, which unveiled numerous morphological traits associated with the Stramenopiles . A phylogenetic analysis performed with the SSU rDNA gene placed these flagellates within the Stramenopiles clade . Despite the close resemblance with developayellids, there is no well-supported affinity to any particular stramenopile subgroup. As a result, the organism was classified as a new genus and species Kaonashia insperata in a new separate family Kaonashiidae, placed directly in the Stramenopiles. The description was published in 2023 in an article by protistologists Elizabeth J. Weston, Yana Eglit, and Alastair G. B. Simpson.

[ 1 ] Resin-embedded cells of isolate SC were assigned as the hapantotype of Kaonashia insperata and deposited in the Institute of Parasitology of the Czech Academy of Sciences under the code ICPAS_Pro_77.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h Weston, Elizabeth J.; Eglit, Yana; Simpson, Alastair G.B. (2023).

" Kaonashia insperata gen. et sp. nov., a eukaryotrophic flagellate, represents a novel major lineage of heterotrophic stramenopiles" .

Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology .

71 (1): e13003.

doi : 10.1111/jeu.13003 .

PMID 37803921 .

^ Eglit, Yana; Williams, Shelby K.; Roger, Andrew J.; Simpson, Alastair G.B. (3 September 2024).

"Characterization of Skoliomonas gen. nov., a haloalkaliphilic anaerobe related to barthelonids (Metamonada)" .

Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology .

71 (6): e13048.

doi : 10.1111/jeu.13048 .

PMC 11603281 .

PMID 39225178 .

v t e Eukaryote classification Domain Archaea Bacteria Eukaryota (major groups Metamonada Discoba Diaphoretickes Hacrobia Cryptista Rhizaria Alveolata Stramenopiles Plants Amorphea Amoebozoa Opisthokonta Animals Fungi Mesomycetozoea ) Amorphea Amoebozoa Discosea Tubulinea Variosea Archamoebea Cutosea Eumycetozoa (true slime molds) Obazoa Apusomonadida Breviatea Opisthokonta Holomycota Rotosphaerida Fungi ¹ Holozoa Tunicaraptor † Bicellum Ichthyosporea Pluriformea Filozoa Filasterea Choanozoa Choanoflagellata Animalia (animals) ¹ Diaphoretickes Telonemia Haptista Centroplasthelida Haptophytina SAR Rhizaria Cercozoa Endomyxa Retaria Foraminifera Radiolaria * Alveolata Colponemida * Ciliophora (ciliates) Myzozoa Apicomplexa Chrompodellida Dinoflagellata Perkinsozoa Stramenopiles Platysulcus Kaonashia Bigyra * Bicosoecida Placidozoa Sagenista Gyrista Developea Pirsoniales Hyphochytriomycetes Ochrophyta (brown algae, diatoms and relatives) Oomycetes (water molds) Actinophryida CAM Pancryptista Microheliella Cryptista Palpitomonas Katablepharidida Cryptomonada Archaeplastida ( plants sensu lato ) Picozoa Rhodophyta (red algae) Rhodelphidia Glaucophyta Viridiplantae (green plants or plants sensu stricto ) Prasinodermophyta Chlorophyta Streptophyta Mesostigmatophyceae Chlorokybophyceae Spirotaenia Klebsormidiophyceae Charophyceae Coleochaetophyceae Zygnematophyceae Embryophyta (land plants or plants sensu strictissimo ) ¹ " Excavates "* Discoba Jakobea Tsukubamonas Discicristata Heterolobosea Euglenozoa Metamonada * Anaeramoebidae Parabasalia Barthelona Skoliomonas Fornicata Preaxostyla Malawimonadida Malawimonadidae Imasidae Incertae sedis Provora Nebulidia Nibbleridia Hemimastigophora Spironematellidae Paramastigidae Ancyromonadida Ancyromonadidae Planomonadidae Divimonas CRuMs Diphylleida Mantamonadida Rigifilida Glissandrida Genera of uncertain affiliation Acinetactis Actinastrum Berkeleyaesol Kamera Magosphaera Meringosphaera Meteora Parakaryon (?) Quasibodo Tetrahelia Acritarchs and other fossils † Algospongia † Archaeochaeta † Cephalonyx † Changchengia † Cheleutochroa † Chitinozoa † Coryphidium † Cucumiforma † Dictyosphaera † Diskagma (?) † Eosolena † Francevillian biota (?) † Germinosphaera † Grandilingulata † Granomarginata † Grypania † Gunflint microbiota † Horodyskia † Introvertocystis † Korilophyton † Leiosphaeridia † Navifusa † Portalites † Protosterol biota † Pterospermopsimorpha † Qingshania † Quadrisporites † Schizofusa † Shuiyousphaeridium † Simia † Tappania † Tawuia (?) † Tetraporina † Thuchomyces (?) † Tuanshanzia † Valeria † Vernanimalcula ¹non- protist groups *possibly paraphyletic groups bold denotes groups with over 1,000 species Taxonomy of protists Taxon identifiers Kaonashiidae Wikidata : Q130312921 ZooBank : 1CD18728-AFC7-47FA-BC9F-D096C41339B3 Kaonashia Wikidata : Q130312932 ZooBank : B9C7175C-F22E-4FE4-A45E-CF18011B444A Kaonashia insperata Wikidata : Q130312940 ZooBank : 73C22F22-021E-43FF-92C4-4731C1602F5B Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kaonashia&oldid=1288821665 " Categories : Taxa described in 2023 Stramenopile genera Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats Articles containing Japanese-language text Taxonbars with from2 matching article title & QID Taxonbars with multiple manual Wikidata items This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 22:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kaonashia 1 language Add topic

