Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Marxist theory 2 Criticism 3 Examples 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Class consciousness 38 languages العربية Asturianu Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt 文言 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Awareness of one's social class Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e In Marxism , class consciousness is the set of beliefs that persons hold regarding their social class or economic rank in society, the structure of their class, and their common class interests.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] According to Karl Marx , class consciousness is an awareness that is key to sparking a revolution which would "create a dictatorship of the proletariat , transforming it from a wage-earning, propertyless mass into the ruling class".

[ 4 ] Although Marxists tend to focus on class consciousness (or its absence) among the proletariat, the upper classes in society can also think and act in a class-conscious way. As Leonard Fein pointed out, "The very rich have been well aware of their class privilege and have laboured mightily to protect and defend it".

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] For example, Warren Buffett has demonstrated class consciousness: "There's class warfare, all right... but it's my class, the rich class, that's making war, and we're winning." [ 7 ] Marxist theory [ edit ] Early in the 19th century, the labels " working classes " and " middle classes " were coming into common usage in British society. David Cody writes about this time period: "The old hereditary aristocracy, reinforced by the new gentry who owed their success to commerce, industry, and the professions, evolved into an ' upper class ' (its consciousness formed in large part by the public schools and Universities) which tenaciously maintained control over the political system, depriving not only the working classes but the middle classes of a voice in the political process." [ 8 ] As the Industrial Revolution progressed, the sharpening of socioeconomic divisions caused each group to become more acutely conscious of its position in the hierarchy.

[ 8 ] While Karl Marx rarely used the term "class consciousness", he did make the distinction between "class in itself", which is defined as a stratum of society sharing common grievances and a unified perspective; and a "class for itself", which is defined as a stratum organized in active pursuit of its own interests.

[ 9 ] Categorizing a person's social class can be a determinant for their awareness of it. Marxists categorize classes based on their relation to the means of production , especially on whether or not members of the class own capital . Non-Marxists differentiate society's various groups based on social stratification , i.e., income, race, gender, ethnicity, education, occupation, or status.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Whereas Marx believed the working class would gain class consciousness as a result of its experience of exploitation , later orthodox Marxism , in particular as formulated by Vladimir Lenin , argued that the working class, by itself, could only develop "trade union consciousness", which Lenin characterized in What Is to Be Done?

as "the conviction that it is necessary to combine in unions, fight the employers, and strive to compel the government to pass necessary labour legislation." [ 12 ] To overcome this (in Lenin's opinion) limited worldview, a vanguard party of the most politically advanced section of the working class was needed to help replace trade union consciousness with class consciousness.

[ 13 ] Criticism [ edit ] The Polish political philosopher Leszek Kolakowski disputed the notion that class consciousness could be instilled from outside by a vanguard party. In Main Currents of Marxism and his other writings, he stated that in order to achieve a unity of theory and praxis , theory must not only tend toward reality in an attempt to change it; reality must also tend towards theory. Otherwise, the historical process leads a life of its own, while theorists make their own little theories, desperately waiting for some kind of possible influence over the historical process. Henceforth, reality itself must tend toward the theory, making it the "expression of the revolutionary process itself". In turn, a theory which has as its goal helping the proletariat achieve class consciousness must first be an "objective theory of class consciousness". However, theory in itself is insufficient, and ultimately relies on the struggle of humankind and of the proletariat for consciousness: the "objective theory of class consciousness is only the theory of its objective possibility".

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Austrian School economist Ludwig von Mises asserted that "Marx confus[ed] the notions of caste and class". Mises allowed that class consciousness and the associated class struggle were valid concepts in some circumstances where rigid social castes exist, e.g., when slavery is legal and slaves have a common motive for wanting to end their disadvantaged status relative to other castes, but that class is an arbitrary distinction in capitalist society where there is equality before the law. Mises believed that under capitalism, one's wealth does not very much affect how one is treated by legislators, law enforcement, or the courts.

[ 16 ] Examples [ edit ] 1819 Balloon riot Haymarket affair 1934 West Coast waterfront strike Zoot suit riots Major League Baseball collusion World Economic Forum Bilderberg Meeting Occupy Wall Street See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal False consciousness History and Class Consciousness Psychology of social class Class struggle References [ edit ] ^ Erik Olin Wright (2006).

"Class" . In Beckert, Jens; Zafirovski, Milan (eds.).

International Encyclopedia of Economic Sociology . Routledge. p. 62.

ISBN 978-0415286732 .

^ Elizabeth Borland (2008).

"Class consciousness" . In Parrillo, Vincent N. (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Social Problems, Volume 1 . SAGE Publications. p. 134.

ISBN 978-1412941655 .

^ de Felipe-Redondo, Jesus (2015). "Class Consciousness".

International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences (Second Edition) : 739– 744.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-08-097086-8.32017-7 .

ISBN 978-0-08-097087-5 .

^ Laura Desfor Edles; Scott Appelrouth (2020).

Sociological Theory in the Classical Era . SAGE Publications. p. 48.

ISBN 978-1506347820 .

^ Leonard Fein (June 17, 2012).

"Where Is Class Consciousness?" .

Forward .

^ Michael Parenti (1978). "Class Consciousness and Individualized Consciousness".

Power and the Powerless . St. Martin's Press. pp.

94– 113.

ISBN 0-312-63373-4 .

^ Stein, Ben (November 26, 2006).

"In Class Warfare, Guess Which Class Is Winning" .

The New York Times .

^ a b David Cody (August 30, 2021).

"Social Class" .

VictorianWeb .

^ André Munro.

"Class consciousness - Social Stratification, Marxism & Class Conflict" . Britannica.

^ Jon Elster (1986). "Class Consciousness and Class Struggle".

An Introduction to Karl Marx . Cambridge University Press. pp.

122– 140.

^ Ashley Crossman (July 25, 2019).

"Understanding Karl Marx's Class Consciousness and False Consciousness" . ThoughtCo.

^ Vladimir Lenin (1902). "The Spontaneity of the Masses and the Consciousness of the Social-Democrats".

What Is to Be Done?

– via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Vladimir Lenin (1902). "Trade-Unionist Politics And Social-Democratic Politics".

What Is to Be Done?

– via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Leszek Kolakowski, "My Correct Views on Everything", The Socialist Register 1974 , pp. 1–20 ^ 'Marxism, being a scientific theory, could not be a spontaneous product of the working class [according to Lenin], but had to be imported from outside, by intellectuals equipped with scientific knowledge, became the peculiar ideological instrument to justify a new idea of the party of manipulators. Since the working class is in principle incapable of articulating theoretically its consciousness, it is possible and even necessary that the "genuine" theoretical consciousness of the working class should be incarnated in a political organism that could consider itself the carrier of this consciousness regardless of what the "empirical" working class thought about it, given that the "empirical" consciousness of this class is irrelevant in defining who in a given moment represents its interest. This is why the theory of class consciousness instilled from outside and the whole idea of scientific socialism so conceived served to justify the fact that in all kinds of political activity and later in the exercise of political power, the working class may be and must be replaced by the political apparatus which is the vehicle of its consciousness at the highest level. The whole Leninist and then Stalinist principle of dictatorship which the proletariat exercises through the intermediary of its self-appointed representatives, is only a development of the idea of "scientific socialism" so conceived.' Leszek Kolakowski, "Althusser's Marx", The Socialist Register 1971 , pp. 111–128 ^ Ludwig von Mises (2007) [1957].

Theory and History: An Interpretation of Social and Economic Evolution . Auburn, Alabama: Ludwig von Mises Institute . p. 113.

ISBN 978-1933550190 .

External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Class consciousness at Wikiquote v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Class_consciousness&oldid=1304318000 " Categories : Marxist theory Social concepts Identity politics Social classes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 08:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Class consciousness 38 languages Add topic

