Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Birth and education 1.2 Religious life 1.3 The Brethren of the Common Life 1.4 Devotio Moderna 2 Legacy 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Geert Groote 22 languages العربية Беларуская Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Français Frysk 한국어 Italiano Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands Nedersaksies Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dutch Renaissance humanist and mystic (1340–1384) The beginning of the Book of the Hours of Geert Groote Gerard Groote (October 1340 – 20 August 1384), otherwise Gerrit or Gerhard Groet , in Latin Gerardus Magnus , was a Dutch Catholic deacon , who was a popular preacher and the founder of the Brethren of the Common Life . He was a key figure in the Devotio Moderna movement.

Biography [ edit ] Birth and education [ edit ] Museum Geert Grote Huis, Deventer (2016) He was born in the Hanseatic city Deventer in the Bishopric of Utrecht , where his father held a good civic position. He studied at Aachen , then went to the University of Paris when only fifteen. Here he studied scholastic philosophy and theology at the Sorbonne under a pupil of William of Occam 's, from whom he imbibed the nominalist conception of philosophy; in addition he studied Canon law , [ 1 ] medicine , astronomy and even magic , and apparently some Hebrew . After a brilliant course he graduated in 1358.

[ 2 ] In 1362 he was appointed teacher at the Deventer chapter school.

Religious life [ edit ] Soon after, Groote settled in Cologne , teaching philosophy and theology, and was granted a prebend in Utrecht and another in Aachen . In 1366 his countrymen sent him to Avignon on a secret mission to Pope Urban V . The life of the brilliant young scholar was rapidly becoming luxurious, secular and selfish, when a great spiritual change passed over him which resulted in a final renunciation of every worldly enjoyment. This conversion, which took place in 1374, [ 3 ] appears to have been due partly to the effects of a dangerous illness and partly to the influence of a fellow student, Henry de Calcar , the learned and pious prior of the Charterhouse at Munnikhuizen (Monnikenhuizen) near Arnhem , who had remonstrated with him on the vanity of his life.

[ 2 ] Excerpt from a "simple" Middle Dutch book of hours, using the translation of Geert Groote . Made in the 2nd half of the fifteenth century in Brabant.

[ 4 ] In 1374 Groote turned his family home in Deventer into a shelter for poor women and lived for several years as a guest of the Carthusian monastery. In 1379, having received ordination as a deacon , he became a missionary preacher throughout the diocese of Utrecht. The success which followed his labours not only in the city of Utrecht, but also in Zwolle , Deventer, Kampen , Amsterdam , Haarlem , Gouda , Leiden , Delft , Zutphen and elsewhere, was immense; according to Thomas à Kempis the people left their business and their meals to hear his sermons, so that the churches could not hold the crowds that flocked together wherever he came.

[ 2 ] The bishop of Utrecht supported him warmly, and got him to preach against concubinage in the presence of the clergy assembled in synod . The impartiality of his censures, which he directed not only against the prevailing sins of the laity, but also against heresy , simony , avarice, and impurity among the secular and regular clergy, provoked the hostility of the clergy, and accusations of heterodoxy were brought against him. It was in vain that Groote emitted a Publica Protestatio , in which he declared that Jesus was the great subject of his discourses, that in all of them he believed himself to be in harmony with Catholic doctrine, and that he willingly subjected them to the candid judgment of the Church.

[ 2 ] The bishop was induced to issue an edict which prohibited from preaching all who were not in priestly orders , and an appeal by Groote to Pope Urban VI was without effect. There is a difficulty as to the date of this prohibition; either it was only a few months before Groote's death, or else it must have been removed by the bishop, for Groote seems to have preached in public in the last year of his life.

[ 2 ] At some period (perhaps 1381, perhaps earlier) he paid a visit of some days' duration to the famous mystic John Ruysbroeck , prior of the Augustinian canons at Groenendaal near Brussels ; during this visit was formed Groote's attraction for the rule and life of the Augustinian canons which was destined to bear notable fruit. At the close of his life he was asked by some of the clerics who attached themselves to him to form them into a religious order and Groote resolved that they should be Canons Regular of St. Augustine . No time was lost in the effort to carry out the project, but Groote died before a foundation could be made.

[ 2 ] The initiation of this movement was the great achievement of Groote's life; he lived to preside over the birth and first days of his other creation, the society of Brethren of the Common Life . He died of the plague at Deventer, which he had contracted while nursing the sick, in 1384 at the age of 44.

[ 5 ] Geert Groote was also a famous writer, who made an important Middle Dutch translation of a book of hours . His translation was used innumerable times throughout the following centuries.

[ 4 ] The Brethren of the Common Life [ edit ] Main article: Brethren of the Common Life Young men especially flocked to him in great numbers. Some of these he sent to his schools, others he occupied at transcribing good books, to all he taught thorough Christian piety. Groote and Florence Radewyns , his favourite disciple, founded at Zwolle the Brethren of the Common Life . In 1387 a site was secured at Windesheim, some 24 km (15 mi) north of Deventer, and here was established the monastery that became the cradle of the Windesheim Congregation of canons regular embracing in course of time nearly one hundred houses, and leading the way in the series of reforms undertaken during the 15th century by all the religious orders in Germany.

[ 2 ] Henceforth his communities, which were spreading rapidly through the Netherlands, Lower Germany, and Westphalia, claimed and received all his attention. He contemplated organizing his clerics into a community of canons regular, but it was left to Radewyns, his successor, to realize this plan at Windesheim two years later.

[ 1 ] Devotio Moderna [ edit ] Main article: Devotio Moderna A movement known as the Modern Devotion (Devotio Moderna) was founded in the Netherlands by Groote and Florens Radewyns , in the late fourteenth century. For Groote the pivotal point is the search for inner peace, which results from the denial of one's own self and is to be achieved by "ardour" and "silence". This is the heart of the "New Devotion", or the "Devotio moderna". Solitary meditation on Christ’s Passion and redemption, on one’s own death, the Last Judgment, heaven, and hell was essential.

[ 6 ] In the course of the 15th century, the Modern Devotion found adherents throughout the Netherlands and Germany. Its precepts were further disseminated in texts such as The Imitation of Christ by Thomas à Kempis , which reached an increasingly literate public. In this context small works of art such as diptychs that provided a focus for private worship enjoyed wide popularity.

[ 6 ] Legacy [ edit ] Geert Groote College is located in Amsterdam.

See also [ edit ] Florens Radewyns Hendrik Mande References [ edit ] ^ a b Schrantz, Charles. "Gerard Groote." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 7. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910. 15 Jun. 2013 ^ a b c d e f g Butler 1911 , p. 614.

^ "Geert Groote", The Oxford Dictionary of the Middle Ages , (Robert E. Bjork, ed.) OUP, 2010 ISBN 9780198662624 ^ a b "Middelnederlands getijdenboek" .

lib.ugent.be . Retrieved 2020-08-27 .

^ Butler 1911 , pp. 614–615.

^ a b Hand, John Oliver. "Prayers and Portraits: Unfolding the Netherlandish Diptych", National Gallery of Art, Washington D.C., 12 November 2006 Archived 25 September 2012 at the Wayback Machine Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Butler, Edward Cuthbert (1911). " Groot, Gerhard ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 12 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

614– 615.

This work in turn cites: Thomas à Kempis , Vita Gerardi Magni (English translation by J. P. Arthur, The Founders of the New Devotion , 1905) Chronicon Windeshemense of Johann Busch (ed. K Grube, 1886).

An account, based on the Britannica sources, is in S. Kettlewell, Thomas à Kempis and the Brothers of Common Life (1882), i. c. 5; and a shorter account in F. R. Cruise, Thomas à Kempis , 1887, pt. ii. A sketch, with an account of Groote's writings, is given by L. Schulze in Herzog-Hauck, Realencyklopädie (ed. 3); he insists on the fact that Groote's theological and ecclesiastical ideas were those commonly current in his day, and that the attempts to make him a "reformer before the Reformation" are unhistorical.

[ 1 ] External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Geert Grote .

History of the Christian Church - CCEL v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Portugal 2 Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project People Netherlands Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX ^ Butler 1911 , p. 615.

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐848f445bb8‐dnb9g
Cached time: 20250814145548
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.446 seconds
Real time usage: 0.577 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1733/1000000
Revision size: 10878/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 56000/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2705/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 29943/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.291/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8643782/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  473.862      1 -total
 21.31%  100.989      1 Template:Reflist
 19.81%   93.886      1 Template:History_of_Catholic_theology
 19.36%   91.750      1 Template:Navbox
 13.29%   62.960      1 Template:Short_description
 12.59%   59.663      1 Template:Authority_control
 11.11%   52.663      1 Template:ISBN
  9.46%   44.845      9 Template:Sfn
  7.98%   37.818      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.76%   36.775      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:72363:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814145548 and revision id 1303410185. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geert_Groote&oldid=1303410185 " Categories : 1340 births 1384 deaths 14th-century deaths from plague (disease) 14th-century Roman Catholic clergy 14th-century Roman Catholic theologians Devotio Moderna Dutch Renaissance humanists Dutch Roman Catholic deacons Founders of Catholic religious communities People from Deventer Roman Catholic mystics Scholastic philosophers Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 20:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geert Groote 22 languages Add topic

