Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and overview 2 Permanent collection 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Kettle's Yard 4 languages Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Melayu Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°12′39″N 0°06′51″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.2109°N 0.1141°E ﻿ / 52.2109; 0.1141 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art museum & house in Cambridge, England Kettle's Yard The cottages which comprise the main house of Kettle's Yard Location Cambridge Coordinates 52°12′39″N 0°06′51″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.2109°N 0.1141°E ﻿ / 52.2109; 0.1141 Collections art collections Visitors 231,941 (2019) [ 1 ] Founder Jim Ede Director Andrew Nairne Owner University of Cambridge University of Cambridge Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Whipple Museum of the History of Science Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences The Polar Museum Museum of Zoology Kettle's Yard is an art gallery and house in Cambridge , England .

[ 2 ] The director of the art gallery is Andrew Nairne . Both the house and gallery reopened in February 2018 after an expansion of the facilities.

[ 3 ] History and overview [ edit ] The gallery facade on Castle Street as it looked before the 2018 redevelopment Kettle's Yard House and Gallery lies on the west side of Castle Street , between Northampton Street and St Peter's Church .

It was originally the Cambridge home of Jim Ede and his wife Helen.

[ 4 ] Moving to Cambridge in 1956, they converted four small cottages with the help of Winton Aldridge into one idiosyncratic house and a place to display Ede's collection of early 20th-century art. Ede maintained an 'open house' each afternoon, giving any visitors, particularly students, a personal tour of his collection.

In 1966, Ede gave the house and collection to the University of Cambridge , but continued living there before he and his wife moved to Edinburgh in 1973.

[ 4 ] The house is preserved as the Edes left it, making a very informal space to enjoy the permanent collection and live music.

[ 5 ] In 1970, the house was extended, adding an exhibition gallery in a contrasting modernist style by Leslie Martin .

The house and gallery temporarily closed in June 2015 during a major building project to create a four-floor education wing, improved exhibition galleries, a new entrance area and a café.

[ 6 ] A series of gentle additions by Jamie Fobert Architects offers greatly improved support services for visitors, including a new courtyard and welcome area and a new shop.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The project cost £11,000,000 including £2,320,000 from the Heritage Lottery Fund [ 9 ] and £3,700,000 from Arts Council England . The interior of the house has been left untouched.

During the closure, there were displays of the collection at the Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge and the Jerwood Gallery in Hastings.

Kettle's Yard is part of the University of Cambridge Museums consortium.

[ 10 ] Permanent collection [ edit ] An exhibition of Diet Sayler in the gallery in 2000 Christopher Wood Self-portrait (1927) [ 11 ] The permanent collection is composed of paintings, sculptures and objects collected by Ede. It is largely based on associations and friendships formed when Ede was a curator at Tate Gallery , and as such it is biased towards works from the British avant-garde of the first half of the 20th century.

Ian Hamilton Finlay described Ede's "fusion of art and found objects" on an inscribed pebble as "the Louvre of the pebble".

[ 12 ] Notable artists represented in the collection are: Constantin Brâncuși William Congdon Helen Frankenthaler Henri Gaudier-Brzeska Ian Hamilton Finlay Barbara Hepworth David Jones Joan Miró Henry Moore Ben Nicholson David Peace Winifred Nicholson Alfred Wallis Christopher Wood See also [ edit ] Primavera Gallery on King's Parade, has put on several exhibitions at Kettle's Yard Wysing Arts Centre , a research and development centre for the arts, west of Cambridge in Bourn References [ edit ] ^ "ALVA - Association of Leading Visitor Attractions" .

www.alva.org.uk . Retrieved 9 November 2020 .

^ Kettle's Yard , Culture 24 , UK.

^ Brown, Mark (4 December 2017).

"Works by artist who died in Grenfell fire to be shown at Cambridge gallery" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 5 December 2017 .

^ a b "Kettle's yard house" . Archived from the original on 31 July 2008 . Retrieved 17 September 2008 .

^ "Kettle's Yard music - chamber concerts" . Archived from the original on 18 May 2011 . Retrieved 30 March 2011 .

^ "Development plans – Kettle's Yard" .

^ "Work; Kettle's Yard" .

Jamiefobertarchitects.com/ . Retrieved 2 February 2018 .

^ Wainwright, Oliver (2 February 2018).

"Kettle's Yard's rebirth: 'A magical sequence of spaces worth the 14-year wait' " .

The Guardian . Retrieved 2 February 2018 .

^ "Latest news" . Archived from the original on 1 April 2011 . Retrieved 30 March 2011 .

^ McPhee, Jo (6 August 2013).

"Our Museums" .

www.cam.ac.uk .

^ "Self-Portrait, 1927" .

Kettlesyard.co.uk . Retrieved 27 December 2018 .

^ Exhibition catalogue 'Beauty and Revolution: The Poetry and Art of Ian Hamilton Finlay' Kettles Yard, Cambridge 2014 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Kettle's Yard .

Kettle's Yard Gallery website Kettle's Yard House Kettle's Yard Collection Video conversation Archived 15 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine between Roger Wilson and Paul Coldwell to accompany the exhibition 'Paul Coldwell: I called while you were out' Archived 5 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine 2008/9 "The Analysis of Beauty" by Disinformation at Kettle's Yard on YouTube v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kettle%27s_Yard&oldid=1291682626 " Categories : Art museums and galleries established in 1966 Art museums and galleries in Cambridgeshire Museums in Cambridge Museums of the University of Cambridge Non-School institutions of the University of Cambridge Country houses in Cambridgeshire 1966 establishments in England Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2015 Use British English from August 2015 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 22 May 2025, at 19:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kettle's Yard 4 languages Add topic

