Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Purpose 2 Influences 3 International Toggle International subsection 3.1 Economic and social context 3.2 Regulation of use 4 United States of America Forestry Law 5 Economics 6 Livelihood 7 Enforcement 8 History and development 9 See also 10 References Toggle the table of contents Forestry law 13 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά فارسی Français Hausa Igbo Қазақша Lietuvių Русский Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Field of law This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( February 2017 ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Forestry law" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( February 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Environmental law Pollution control law Environmental impact assessment Air quality law Water quality law Waste management law Environmental cleanup law Natural resources law Species protection Water resources law Mining law Forestry law Fisheries law Game law Reference materials Environmental journals International environmental agreements Environmental laws by country Environmental lawsuits Environmental ministries Supranational environmental agencies Related topics Administrative law Bankruptcy law Climate change litigation Earth jurisprudence Earth law Ecocide Energy law Environmental crime poaching Environmental personhood Environmental justice Insurance law International law Land law Land use Law of the sea Property law Public trust doctrine Rights of nature Right to a healthy environment War and environmental law Wild law v t e Forestry laws govern activities in designated forest lands , most commonly with respect to forest management and timber harvesting .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Forestry laws generally adopt management policies for public forest resources, such as multiple use and sustained yield .

[ 3 ] Forest management is split between private and public management, with public forests being sovereign property of the State. Forestry laws are now considered an international affair.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Governmental agencies are generally responsible for planning and implementing forestry laws on public forest lands, and may be involved in forest inventory , planning, and conservation , and oversight of timber sales.

[ 6 ] Forestry laws are also dependent on social and economic contexts of the region in which they are implemented.

[ 7 ] The development of scientific forestry management is based on the precise measurement of the distribution and volume of wood in a given parcel, the systematic felling of trees, and their replacement by standard, carefully aligned rows of mono-cultural plantations that could be harvested at set times.

[ 8 ] Purpose [ edit ] Forestry laws are intended to protect resources and prevent forest clearing, logging, hunting, and collecting vegetation.

[ 6 ] However, there are no clear limitations set within these laws in regards to allowable cuts, harvesting rotations, and minimum harvesting diameters.

Forest management plans state goals for the upkeep of the land, as well as steps to achieve them.

foresters create management plans that account for each differentiated forest itself.

[ 9 ] In some cases, plans are made with the assumption that ecosystems within a forest are holding a steady state, separate from the forest that surrounds them.

[ 10 ] Many foresters who are in third world countries do not have the knowledge nor training to follow by all the guidelines when making a management plan.

[ 11 ] Tongass National Forest Appropriate public policies and legislation serve to foster sustainable economic and social development in rural and urban areas. These policies work to safeguard the environment and protect flora, fauna and cultural heritage .

[ 12 ] Traditionally, environmental protection has been an element of forestry through emphasizing forest conservation and accounting for environmental impacts on soil and water. In common with other sectors, forestry has been affected by the emergence of environmental awareness and legislation in the last generation.

[ 13 ] This has brought greater emphasis on the protection of wilderness and aesthetic values.

[ 14 ] Influences [ edit ] Biological diversity and climate change have specifically influenced forest law.

[ 15 ] When forest management plans are created, biological diversity is represented in criteria for sustainability. Due to the Kyoto Protocol , the mitigation of climate change has become an objective of forest law and policy, complementing broader climate policies and programs. However, Rosenbaum and colleagues state that there is little legislation containing specific provisions for mitigating forest-based climate change.

[ 16 ] The connections between forest and other areas of law have become more complex as they have grown in ambition and scope and as other areas directly and indirectly place guidelines on how forests are managed or used. Thus the links between a country's forest laws and its general environmental laws become more important as the environmental dimensions of forest legislation increase in complexity.

[ 16 ] Forest legislation now recognizes the role of forests as a habitat for wildlife, a resource for grazing and agriculture, and a contributor to water and soil conservation. More recently, the general principles of environmental law and the more specific values of biological diversity have become a very visible part of forest law.

[ 16 ] The UN Forum on Forests , an intergovernmental policy forum created in 2000, has adopted resolutions on the sustainable development of forests, especially those on Social and Cultural Aspects of Forest and Traditional Forest-Related Knowledge.

[ 16 ] International [ edit ] Due to variations in nature, importance, role of forest resources and legal and institutional settings, forest law is not easily adapted between countries. The World Bank states that despite comparative studies of trends in forest legislation, there is a lack of practical guidance on how to assess improve the law.

[ 13 ] [ 17 ] Actual practices differ from one country to the next, however, in all cases public forests are viewed as a national resource, that is, the sovereign property of the state.

[ 18 ] For example, even though most forest land in the United States and Canada is privately owned, a considerable amount is held by the state as a "public good" but systematically leased to private timber producers. In India , the Raj took ownership of virtually all forests, declaring them to be "wasteland" and, therefore, unowned. In Indonesia , forests are legally state owned but are treated as private property, while in Brazil, the lack of national government renders forests open access commons. In this role, the conservation of forests is tightly linked to the production of timber and other commodities that generate both capital and jobs, and the economies of large regions are almost wholly dependent on natural resource production from those forests.

[ 8 ] [ 19 ] United Nations Forest Management Plan New forest laws have been adopted in Eastern European countries as part of their transition to a market economy. These laws had considerable effect on the structure of forest land ownership, improvements in management regulations, and modernization of the forest sector's institutional framework.

[ 13 ] New forest legislation has also been developed in several countries in Western Europe in order to adapt to changing economic conditions, social demands, and more political participation of interest groups and citizens at local and regional levels.

[ 20 ] Economic and social context [ edit ] The evolution of forest legislation in the European Countries indicates that understanding of how natural resources are to be used in a sustainable manner depends on a given economic and social context.

[ 21 ] The meaning of sustainable forestry is determined by local circumstances and their significance has considerably changed over time. Today sustainable management is understood as forestry practices which respect the naturally given potentials of the ecosystems and maintain the diversity of forests in their typical landscapes. They leave multiple options for an increasing production of wood, protection of the environment, and recreation.

[ 7 ] Regulation of use [ edit ] Public provisions referring to forest uses over more than one generation are among the oldest forms of long-term environmental policies.

[ 22 ] Customary law , codified in the 14th century, regulated forest uses in accordance with the demands and options of their times.

[ 4 ] An increasing number of forest and timber ordinances, issued from the 16th century onward, followed.

[ 22 ] Meeting local needs, long-term availability of raw materials and energy, and increased outputs through better forestry practices were the issues at stake. Legislation established the requirement of a continuous flow of wood production, which meant stopping exploitation of what was available. It recognized the long-term nature of forests, and promoted the involvement of several generations in forestry activities.

[ 23 ] Increasingly, it provided for planning and management, and for measures of regeneration and reforestation. This introduced principles of utilizing renewable natural resources as a requirement for sustainability as we understand it today.

[ 12 ] United States of America Forestry Law [ edit ] In the USA the Federal Government manages about 33% of forests, and 9% is managed by local governments.

[ 24 ] This accounts for 343,901,880 acres (1391722 kilometers)  of forest land.

[ 24 ] Much of this land is made up of National Parks or National Forests which began with the establishment of Yellowstone National Park in 1872. After this, in 1891, the Forest Reserve Act was passed.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] The National Parks are managed by the National Park Service (NPS), which is a bureau of the Department of the Interior (DOI).

[ 26 ] National Forests are managed by the U.S. Forest Service (USFS), an agency of the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA).

[ 27 ] Economics [ edit ] New policies place responsibilities for, and powers over, wood fuel management into the hands of economically interested individuals and the Forest Service . The Forest Service maintains complete control of all production and management decisions through required approval and through control of the rules by which production and management can take place.

[ 28 ] The role of private forestry reaches up to over 80 percent of forest production in some countries.

[ 29 ] However, in many countries, private forestry has never been significant and, even when land has been privatized, the state has often retained the forests. In much of Africa , individual land ownership is relatively limited so that the closest approach to private forestry is usually community forestry (although South Africa and Eswatini , among other countries, have extensive private plantations).

[ 30 ] More recently, the values of farm forestry and of private capital and management have increased official interest in private forestry.

[ 16 ] Illegal forestry activities deprive governments of billions of dollars in tax revenues, as well as cause environmental damage and threaten forests.

[ 31 ] Forest related corruption and widespread violation of forestry laws undermines the rule of law, discourages legitimate investment, and gives unfair advantages. Money generated from illegal forestry activities has even been used to finance armed conflict.

[ 11 ] Concern about the extent to which illegal logging has been contributing to forest loss has grown sharply since the 1980s.

[ 32 ] A very large proportion of the timber entering both national and international markets has been accessed, harvested, transported and traded in contravention of national law in countries such as Bolivia, Brazil, Cambodia, Cameroon, Colombia, Honduras, Indonesia, Nicaragua, Peru, Philippines, and Russia.

[ 33 ] The World Bank (2002) estimates that illegal logging results in an annual loss of around US$10–15 billion in developing countries worldwide.

[ 34 ] Although it is anticipated that better governance, increased rent capture by the state, and improved forest management can all benefit the poor indirectly, the direct impacts of illegal logging and forest law enforcement on rural livelihoods have not been a priority consideration to date.

[ 12 ] Livelihood [ edit ] The ways in which people use and value forests are changing. Growing populations, changing culture, technology, and science are increasing the demand for forest resources. In recent years forest laws around the world have been significantly revised in response to these changes.

[ 16 ] However, the lack of information about who really uses forests presents a major problem to forestry policy makers and supportive development agencies that are mandated to adopt a pro-poor approach. Without clear data it becomes all too easy to overlook the interests of lower income individuals when designing policy interventions aimed at improving forest management or asserting forest law.

[ 12 ] Some forest laws specifically favor poor rural households and ethnic minorities. Over the last few decades, many governments in Latin America recognized indigenous peoples' rights over large territories, but indigenous people often find it difficult to protect those territories from invasion by loggers, miners, and farmers.

[ 11 ] According to the World Bank, "more than 1.6 billion people depend to varying degrees on forests for their livelihoods. About 60 million indigenous people are almost wholly dependent on forests. Some 350 million people who live in or adjacent to dense forests depend on them to a high degree for subsistence and income. In developing countries about 1.2 billion people rely on agroforestry farming systems that help to sustain agricultural productivity and generate income." [ 35 ] Schmithüsen et al., advocate for a rights-based approach to forestry management with emphasis upon  strengthening human rights networks, improving the independence of the judiciary, promoting legal literacy among rural communities, and providing legal aid; rather than a singular focus on forestry laws. They state a rights-based approach should be linked to governance reform programs aimed at creating public accountability and transparency in the management of natural resources and should be developed through processes of broad engagement with civil society organisations and based on national governments' commitments to reform law.

[ 12 ] A large portion of forestry legislation focuses on administrative requirements, fees, taxes, and property rights.

[ 11 ] The recognition of traditional-group rights to areas used in common, such as forest or pasture is still lacking, despite governments or colonial powers recognising individual claims, based on custom or usage, to land used for agriculture or housing. according to the World Bank. By treating such land as "empty" during the process of settling rights, governments around the world have vested in the state ownership of vast expanses of forest land.

[ 16 ] Enforcement [ edit ] Law enforcement is the last resort for obtaining compliance with the law. There are at least three approaches to overcoming the difficulties of proving offenses that have taken place in remote locations. One is to focus enforcement on more visible acts, such as transport. Another, common in civil law, is to make the official report of a sworn official admissible as evidence in further proceedings. This effectively shifts the burden of proof to the defendant. A third device is the use of evidentiary presumptions, which similarly shifts the burden of proof to the defendant.

[ 13 ] In many countries the contrast between what forestry law prescribes and practical implementation may vary. Even where the law is strong, illegal behavior by both public and private actors often continues.

[ 36 ] The United Nations explains illegal behavior due to the lack of financial and human resources to monitor and control forest activities in,  forest departments. As these forest activities occur in remote areas, government officials may be under immense pressure to condone violations, or engage in violations themselves; court systems are backlogged or bankrupt; the difficulties of daily life for the rural poor may overwhelm any likely risks associated with violating the law; etc.

[ 37 ] These explanations underscore the point that while good forestry legislation is necessary, it is obviously not sufficient. The laws in many countries lie unused or underused for reasons like failure of political will, weak institutions, or even general disregard for the rule of law.

[ 16 ] A dual approach of private as well as public law schemes might possibly become an interesting modern policy mix enhancing enforcement: private law certification schemes might support public regulations (f.i. DDS, due diligence systems , like the EU Timber Regulation).

[ 38 ] History and development [ edit ] Further information: Forestry § History Forestry management dates back to customary law codified in the 14th century. In 1992, representatives of 180 countries met in Rio de Janeiro to consider, among other things, the adoption of an Agreement on Forestry Principles.

[ 18 ] They adopted the Agreement on Forestry Principles, entitled a "Non-legally binding authoritative statement of principles for a global consensus on the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests." [ 8 ] Scientific forestry was based on the precise measurement of the distribution and volume of wood in a given parcel, the systematic felling of trees, and their replacement by standard, carefully aligned rows of mono-cultural plantations that could be harvested at set times.

[ 8 ] The tendencies that become apparent from recent changes in forest laws and regulations in several European countries show a variety of approaches and may be judged from different point of views. Relevant criteria for analysis on the advancement of legislation are consistency, comprehensiveness, subsidiarity, and applicability.

[ 39 ] Consistency requires the compatibility of forest regulations with constitutional values and democratic rules, with national policies addressing land-use, economic development and environmental protection, and with international commitments and multilateral agreements. Comprehensiveness refers to the objectives of forest legislation with regard to forest protection and forestry development, to different types of forest tenures, and to the rights and responsibilities of various categories of forest owners. Subsidiarity relates to the role of forests as national, regional and local resources. It also relates to the double nature of forests as private production means that may be used according to the decisions of land owners and as resources that yield numerous benefits to the community. Subsidiarity indicates to what extent public programs support the activities of land owners.

[ 40 ] Applicability refers in particular to the organisational framework of public forest administrations in relation to changing responsibilities and tasks, and to appropriate forms of participation of forest owners and interest groups in regulating forest uses and management practices. Coordination of competencies among public entities is an important aspect in evaluating the applicability of new or amended regulations.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] List of types of formally designated forests Royal forest Chamber of Agriculture in France References [ edit ] ^ "Forestry regulation" .

www.dpi.nsw.gov.au . 2018 . Retrieved 2021-12-09 .

^ "What is Forestry Law? - Becoming a Forestry Lawyer" . Retrieved 2021-12-09 .

^ CIFOR (2006).

Justice in the forest: rural livelihoods and forest law enforcement . Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR).

doi : 10.17528/cifor/001939 .

^ a b Schmithüsen, Franz Josef (2007).

Multifunctional forestry practices as a land use strategy to meet increasing private and public demands in modern societies . ETH, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich, Department of Environmental Sciences, Institute for Human-Environmental Sciences.

OCLC 730303720 .

^ KAIMOWITZ, D. (2003). Forest law enforcement and rural livelihoods. The International Forestry Review, 5(3), 199–210.

http://www.jstor.org/stable/43740118 ^ a b Enters, Thomas; B. Durst, Patrick; B. Applegate, Grahame; C.S. Kho, Peter; Man, Gary (2001). "29. Policies, strategies and technologies for forest resource protection - William B. Magrath* and Richard Grandalski".

Applying Reduced Impact Logging to Advance Sustainable Forest Management . Kuching, Malaysia: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

^ a b "Principles of sustainable tropical forest management where wood production is the primary objective".

Guidelines for the management of tropical forests 1. The production of wood (FAO forestry paper 135) . Rome, Italy: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 1998.

^ a b c d "Why Is There No International Forestry Law?: An Examination of International Forestry Regulation, both Public and Private [eScholarship]" .

Escholarship.org .

doi : 10.5070/L5191019219 . Retrieved 2016-11-30 .

^ CIFOR (2006).

Justice in the forest: rural livelihoods and forest law enforcement . Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR).

doi : 10.17528/cifor/001939 .

^ "Elements of a Management Plan" .

Forest A Syst . University of Georgia Warnell School of Forestry & Natural Resources and College of Agricultural & Environmental Sciences. December 2018 . Retrieved 9 December 2021 .

^ a b c d Kaimowitz, D. (2003). "Forest law enforcement and rural livelihoods".

International Forestry Review .

5 (3): 199– 210.

doi : 10.1505/IFOR.5.3.199.19146 .

^ a b c d e f Franz Schmithüsen; Peter Herbst; Dennis C. Le Master (2000).

"Forging a New Framework for Sustainable Forestry: Recent Developments in European Forest Law" . Vienna: IUFRO . Retrieved 30 November 2016 .

^ a b c d Christy, Lawrence C. (2007). "Forest Law and the Environment".

Forest Law and Sustainable Development Addressing Contemporary Challenges Through Legal Reform . Washington DC: World Bank. pp.

117– 119.

ISBN 978-0-8213-7038-4 .

OCLC 931686319 .

^ Ribe, Robert G. (January 1989).

"The aesthetics of forestry: What has empirical preference research taught us?" .

Environmental Management .

13 (1): 55– 74.

Bibcode : 1989EnMan..13...55R .

doi : 10.1007/bf01867587 .

ISSN 0364-152X .

S2CID 55767653 .

^ Grebner, Donald L.; Bettinger, Pete; Siry, Jacek P. (2013), "Forest Policies and External Pressures" , Introduction to Forestry and Natural Resources , Elsevier, pp.

359– 383, doi : 10.1016/b978-0-12-386901-2.00015-4 , ISBN 9780123869012 , retrieved 2021-12-09 ^ a b c d e f g h Christy, L., & Ebrary, Inc. 2007. Forest law and sustainable development addressing contemporary challenges through legal reform. World Bank, Washington, DC.

^ KAIMOWITZ, D. (2003). Forest law enforcement and rural livelihoods. The International Forestry Review, 5(3), 199–210.

http://www.jstor.org/stable/43740118 ^ a b Lipschutz, Ronnie D. (2000).

"Why Is There No International Forestry Law?: An Examination of International Forestry Regulation, both Public and Private" .

UCLA Journal of Environmental Law and Policy .

19 (1).

doi : 10.5070/l5191019219 .

ISSN 1942-8553 .

^ Sharma, Shubhechchha; Yonariza (2021).

"Chapter 7 - Evaluating forest reforestation policies in Southeast Asia: A case study from Indonesia, Philippines, and Thailand" .

Natural Resource Governance in Asia: From Collective Action to Resilience Thinking . pp.

79– 97.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-323-85729-1.00004-9 .

ISBN 9780323857291 .

S2CID 235832309 .

^ Nichiforel; et al. (June 2020).

"Two decades of forest-related legislation changes in European countriesanalysed from a property rights perspective" .

Forest Policy and Economics .

115 : 102146.

doi : 10.1016/j.forpol.2020.102146 .

hdl : 2164/14158 .

^ "Forests — European Environment Agency" .

www.eea.europa.eu . Retrieved 2021-12-09 .

^ a b Schmithüsen, Franz (1999).

The Expanding Framework of Law and Public Policies Governing Sustainable Uses and Management in European Forests . Zurich: Chair Forest Policy and Forest Economics Department of Forest Sciences. pp.

1– 5.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.513.8999 .

^ Sasaki, Nophea; Asner, Gregory P.; Pan, Yude; Knorr, Wolfgang; Durst, Patrick B.; Ma, Hwan O.; Abe, Issei; Lowe, Andrew J.; Koh, Lian P.; Putz, Francis E. (2016-08-03).

"Sustainable Management of Tropical Forests Can Reduce Carbon Emissions and Stabilize Timber Production" .

Frontiers in Environmental Science .

4 .

doi : 10.3389/fenvs.2016.00050 .

ISSN 2296-665X .

^ a b c "Forestry Overview - National Agricultural Law Center" .

nationalaglawcenter.org . Retrieved 2021-11-11 .

^ "US Forest Service Forest Management - Laws, Regulations & Policies" .

www.fs.fed.us . Retrieved 2021-11-11 .

^ "National Park Service" .

www.doi.gov . 2015-10-21 . Retrieved 2021-11-11 .

^ "About Us" .

www.fs.fed.us . Retrieved 2021-11-11 .

^ "Participation Without Representation: Chiefs, Councils and Forestry Law in the West African Sahel" . Cultural Survival. 1972-06-17 . Retrieved 2016-11-30 .

^ Lobovikov, Maxim; Paudel, Shyam; Ball, Lynn; Piazza, Marco; Guardia, María; Nations, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United; Ren, Hong; Wu, Junqi (2007).

World Bamboo Resources: A Thematic Study Prepared in the Framework of the Global Forest Resources Assessment 2005 . Food & Agriculture Org.

ISBN 978-92-5-105781-0 .

^ Primmer, Eeva; Karppinen, Heimo (February 2010).

"Professional judgment in non-industrial private forestry: Forester attitudes and social norms influencing biodiversity conservation" .

Forest Policy and Economics .

12 (2): 136– 146.

doi : 10.1016/j.forpol.2009.09.007 .

ISSN 1389-9341 .

^ Kaimowitz, D. (2003-09-01).

"Forest law enforcement and rural livelihoods" .

International Forestry Review .

5 (3): 199– 210.

doi : 10.1505/IFOR.5.3.199.19146 .

^ Palmer, C. (2001).

"The extent and causes of illegal logging: an analysis of a major cause of tropical deforestation in Indonesia" .

(CSERGE Working Papers ). Centre for Social and Economic Research on the Global Environment (CSERGE): London, UK. (2001) . Retrieved 2022-03-28 .

^ Marcus., Colchester (2006).

Justice in the forest : rural livelihoods and forest law enforcement . Center for International Forestry Research. pp.

33– 37.

ISBN 979-24-4618-4 .

OCLC 503000680 .

^ "Sustaining Forests and Livelihoods in a Changing World" .

World Bank . Retrieved 2021-12-09 .

^ "Forests and poverty reduction" .

www.fao.org . Retrieved 2021-12-09 .

^ Organization., Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. International Tropical Timber (2005).

Best practices for improving law compliance in the forestry sector . Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

ISBN 92-5-105381-2 .

OCLC 62593354 .

^ "Rationalizing the policy and legal environment".

Best practices for improving law compliance in the forest sector . Rome, Italy: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2005.

ISBN 92-5-105381-2 .

^ Kistenkas, Frederik Hendrik, Concurring regulation in European forest law. Forest certification and the new EU Timber Regulation , GAiA 22/3 (2013): 166-168.

^ Cross-sectoral Policy Impacts Between Forestry and Other Sectors, Part 1 . Rome, Italy: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2003. p. 39.

^ Dube, Yves C.; Schmithüsen, Franz, eds. (2003).

Cross-sectoral Policy Impacts Between Forestry and Other Sectors . Rome, Italy: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. p. 39.

v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Forestry_law&oldid=1291756960 " Categories : Business law Forest management Forestry Environmental law Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from February 2017 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from February 2017 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles needing additional references from December 2016 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with style issues from February 2018 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 06:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Forestry law 13 languages Add topic

