Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 First light 1.2 Inauguration ceremony 1.3 Instrumentation 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Gran Telescopio Canarias 34 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 28°45′24″N 17°53′31″W ﻿ / ﻿ 28.75661°N 17.89203°W ﻿ / 28.75661; -17.89203 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Optical telescope on La Palma, Spain Gran Telescopio Canarias Gran Telescopio Canarias, 2008 Alternative names GranTeCan Location(s) La Palma , Atlantic Ocean , international waters Coordinates 28°45′24″N 17°53′31″W ﻿ / ﻿ 28.75661°N 17.89203°W ﻿ / 28.75661; -17.89203 Altitude 2,267 m (7,438 ft) Diameter 10.4 m (34 ft 1 in) Collecting area 78.54 m 2 (845.4 sq ft) Focal length 169.9 m (557 ft 5 in) Website www .gtc .iac .es Location of Gran Telescopio Canarias Related media on Commons [ edit on Wikidata ] The Gran Telescopio Canarias ( GranTeCan or GTC ) is a 10.4 m (410 in) reflecting telescope located at the Roque de los Muchachos Observatory on the island of La Palma , in the Canary Islands , Spain. It is the world's largest single-aperture optical telescope .

[ 1 ] Construction of the telescope took seven years and cost €130 million.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Its installation was hampered by weather conditions and the logistical difficulties of transporting equipment to such a remote location.

[ 4 ] First light was achieved in 2007 and scientific observations began in 2009.

[ citation needed ] The GTC Project is a partnership formed by several institutions from Spain and Mexico , the University of Florida , the National Autonomous University of Mexico , [ 5 ] and the Instituto de Astrofísica de Canarias (IAC). Planning for the construction of the telescope, which started in 1987, involved more than 1,000 people from 100 companies.

[ 3 ] The division of telescope time reflects the structure of its financing: 90% Spain, 5% Mexico and 5% the University of Florida.

History [ edit ] Dome of the GTC at sunset First light [ edit ] The GTC began its preliminary observations on 13 July 2007, using 12 segments of its primary mirror , made of Zerodur glass-ceramic by the German company Schott AG . Later, the number of segments was increased to a total of 36 hexagonal segments fully controlled by an active optics control system, working together as a reflective unit.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] Its first instrument was the Optical System for Imaging and low Resolution Integrated Spectroscopy (OSIRIS). Scientific observations began in May 2009.

[ 7 ] Inauguration ceremony [ edit ] The Gran Telescopio Canarias formally opened its shutters on July 24, 2009, inaugurated by King Juan Carlos I of Spain .

[ 8 ] More than 500 astronomers, government officials and journalists from Europe and the Americas attended the ceremony.

Instrumentation [ edit ] GTC hosts a suite of advanced instruments, including: Comparison of nominal sizes of apertures of the Gran Telescopio Canarias and some notable optical telescopes OSIRIS : Optical System for Imaging and low-Intermediate-Resolution Integrated Spectroscopy The IAC's OSIRIS (Optical System for Imaging and low Resolution Integrated Spectroscopy), is an imager and spectrograph covering wavelengths from 0.365 to 1.05 μm. It has a field of view (FOV) of 7 × 7 arcmin for direct imaging, and 8 arcmin × 5.2 arcmin for low resolution spectroscopy. For spectroscopy, it offers tunable filters.

[ 9 ] EMIR : Espectrógrafo Multiobjeto Infra-Rojo (near-infrared multi-object spectrograph) MEGARA : Multi-Espectrógrafo en GTC de Alta Resolución para Astronomía is an optical integral-field and multi-object spectrograph covering the visible light and near infrared wavelength range between 0.365 and 1 μm with a spectral resolution in the range R=6000–20000. The MEGARA IFU (also called the Large Compact Bundle, or LCB) offers a contiguous field of view of 12.5 arcsec x 11.3 arcsec, while the multi-object spectroscopy mode allows 92 objects to be observed simultaneously in a field of view of 3.5 arcmin x 3.5 arcmin by means of an equal number of robotic positioners. Both the LCB and MOS modes make use of 100 μm-core optical fibers (1267 in total) that are attached to a set of microlens arrays (with 623 spaxels in the case of the LCB and 92 x 7 in the case of the MOS) with each microlens covering an hexagonal region of 0.62 arcsec in diameter.

[ 10 ] HiPERCAM : High-speed optical camera CanariCam :  is designed as a diffraction-limited imager . It is optimized as an imager, and although it offered a range of other observing modes, these did not compromise the imaging capability. CanariCam worked in the thermal infrared between approximately 7.5 and 25 μm . At the short-wavelength end, the cut-off was determined by the atmosphere—specifically atmospheric seeing . At the long wavelength end, the cut-off was determined by the detector; this loses sensitivity beyond around 24 μm, although the cut-off for individual detectors varied significantly. CanariCam was a very compact design. It was designed for a total weight of the cryostat and its on-telescope electronics to be under 400 kg.

[ citation needed ] Most previous mid-infrared instruments have used liquid helium as a cryogen; one of the requirements of CanariCam was that it should require no expensive and difficult to handle cryogens.

[ citation needed ] . CanariCam used a two-stage closed cycle cryocooler system to cool the cold optics and cryostat interior to approximately 28 K (−245 °C; −409 °F), and the detector itself to around 8 K (−265 °C; −445 °F), the temperature at which the detector worked most efficiently. CanariCam was decommissioned as of February 2021 [update] .

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Other observatory sites La Silla Observatory Mauna Kea Observatories Paranal Observatory Lists and comparisons Extremely large telescope List of largest optical reflecting telescopes List of largest optical telescopes historically References [ edit ] ^ Klotz, Irene (2009-07-24).

"New telescope is world's largest ... for now" .

^ Alvarez, P.

"The GTC Project. Present and Future" (PDF) . pp.

1– 8. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-08-16 . Retrieved 2009-07-24 .

^ a b Moreno, Carlos (2009-07-25).

"Huge telescope opens in Spain's Canary Islands" .

[ dead link ] ^ a b "Tests begin on Canaries telescope" .

BBC . 14 July 2007.

^ Sánchez y Sánchez, Beatriz (2009-10-10).

"México en el Gran Telescopio Canarias" [Mexico in the Gran Telescopio Canarias].

Revista Digital Universitaria, UNAM (in Spanish).

^ Giant telescope begins scouring space July 14, 2007 Archived May 11, 2020, at the Wayback Machine ^ "El Gran Telescopio CANARIAS comienza a producir sus primeros datos científicos" .

Instituto de Astrofísica de Canarias • IAC (in Spanish). 2009-06-17 . Retrieved 2023-10-09 .

^ Moreno, Carlos (July 24, 2009).

"Huge telescope opens in Spain's Canary Islands" .

PhysOrg .

^ "Instruments Osiris" .

Gtc.iac.es . Gran Telescopio Canarias.

^ "MEGARA instrument" .

guaix.fis.ucm.es . Universidad Complutense de Madrid.

^ "Observed for the first time a jet of gas as it emerges from the central star of a planetary nebula | Instituto de Astrofísica de Andalucía - CSIC" .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gran Telescopio Canarias .

Gran Telescopio Canarias GTC News Instituto de Astrofísica de Canarias (IAC) University of Florida CanariCam Archived 2016-11-24 at the Wayback Machine (in Spanish) Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología de México (in Spanish) Instituto de Astronomía de la Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México CBC article— Giant Canary Islands telescope captures first light Images Gran Telescopo Canarias inauguration press dossier (in English) Merrifield, Michael.

"Gran Telescopio Canarias" .

Deep Sky Videos .

Brady Haran .

v t e Astronomy Outline History Timeline Astronomer Astronomical symbols Astronomical object Glossary ... in space Astronomy by Manner Amateur Observational Sidewalk Space telescope Celestial subject Galactic / Extragalactic Local system Solar EM methods Radio Submillimetre Infrared ( Far-infrared ) Visible-light (optical) Ultraviolet X-ray History Gamma-ray Other methods Neutrino Cosmic rays Gravitational radiation High-energy Radar Spherical Multi-messenger Culture Australian Aboriginal Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Greek Hebrew Indian Inuit Maya Medieval Islamic Persian Serbian folk Tibetan Optical telescopes List Category Extremely large telescope Extremely Large Telescope Gran Telescopio Canarias Hale Telescope Hubble Space Telescope Keck Observatory Large Binocular Telescope Southern African Large Telescope Very Large Telescope Related Archaeoastronomy Astrobiology Astrochemistry Astroinformatics Astrology and astronomy Astrometry Astronomers Monument Astroparticle physics Astrophysics Astrotourism Binoculars Constellation IAU Cosmogony Photometry Planetarium Planetary geology Physical cosmology Quantum cosmology List of astronomers French Medieval Islamic Russian Women Telescope X-ray telescope history lists Zodiac Category Commons v t e University of Florida Located in : Gainesville, Florida Colleges and schools Accounting Arts Graduate School of Business Agricultural and Life Sciences Business Construction Dentistry Design, Construction and Planning Education Engineering Health and Human Performance Journalism and Communications Law Liberal Arts and Sciences Medicine Medicine-Jacksonville Nursing Pharmacy Public Health and Health Professions Veterinary Medicine Other units Center for African Studies Center for Latin American Studies Center for Public Service Continuing Education Entrepreneurship and Innovation Center Forensic Science Program Health Science Center New World School of the Arts OCD Program Pharmaceutical Chemistry Program Toxicology Program Research and development Institutes and labs Askew Institute Bridge Software Institute Cancer Hospital Cancer and Genetics Research Complex Cedar Key Light Emerging Pathogens Institute Florida Institute for Sustainable Energy Gran Telescopio Canarias Infectious Disease Pharmacokinetics Laboratory Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences Lake Nona Medical City Mag Lab McKnight Brain Institute Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute P. K. Yonge Research School Rosemary Hill Observatory Sanford-Burnham Institute Scripps Research University of Florida Health Shands Hospital Shands Cancer Hospital UF Health Jacksonville UF Health St. Johns Health Science Center UFHSA UF Training Reactor Whitney Marine Lab Libraries and collections Digital Collections Catalog of Digital Historical Newspapers Florida Digital Newspaper Library International Farming Systems Collection SobekCM George A. Smathers Libraries Baldwin Library of Historical Children's Literature Government Documents Department Latin American Collection Lawton Chiles Legal Information Center Library of Judaica Library West Marston Science Library Panama and the Canal Collection Smathers Library Journals African Studies Quarterly Florida Law Review Journal of Law & Public Policy Journal of Technology Law & Policy Subtropics Programs and projects The AfriPop Project Floral Genome Project Florida Lakewatch iDigBio Oral History Program People Alumni Board of Trustees Faculty and administrators Honorary degree recipients Investment Corporation University presidents Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Cross country Football Men's golf Women's golf Women's gymnastics Women's lacrosse Women's soccer Softball Swimming and diving Men's tennis Women's tennis Track and field Women's volleyball Arenas and stadiums Condron Ballpark (Baseball) Ben Hill Griffin Stadium (Football) Donald R. Dizney Stadium (Lacrosse) James G. Pressly Stadium (Soccer, Track and field) Katie Seashole Pressly Stadium (Softball) Mark Bostick Golf Course (Golf) Scott Linder Stadium (Tennis) Stephen C. O'Connell Center (Multipurpose) Culture and lore University Athletic Association Albert and Alberta Athletic Hall of Fame Dazzlers Gatorade The Pride of the Sunshine " The Orange and Blue " " We Are the Boys " " I Won't Back Down " History and lore East Florida Seminary Taser incident Student life and culture Asian American Student Union 34th Street Wall ACCENT Speakers Bureau Cycling Club Florida Blue Key Florida Opportunity Scholars Program Gator Growl Gator Guard Drill Team Inter-Residence Hall Association Norman Hall Tunnel Theatre Strike Force ROTC Media The Independent Florida Alligator University Press of Florida WUFT TV WUFT FM / WJUF WRUF AM WRUF FM WRUF LD Campus and buildings Baughman Center Carleton Auditorium Century Tower Constans Theatre Cooperative Living Organization Florida Gymnasium Florida Museum of Natural History Harn Museum of Art Historic District The Hub Lake Alice Liberty Pond Norman Gym Norman Tunnel O'Connell Center Phillips Center for the Performing Arts Peabody Hall Plaza of the Americas President's House Reitz Student Union RTS Campus Service Southwest Recreation Center Student Health Care Center Tigert Hall UFPD Headquarters University Auditorium Academic spaces Anderson Bryan Dauer Griffin–Floyd Keene-Flint Leigh Malachowsky Matherly Newell Norman Rolfs Ustler Van Fleet Walker Weil Student housing Hume Murphree area Buckman Fletcher Murphree Sledd Thomas MAC North Riker Yulee area IRHA v t e National Autonomous University of Mexico Faculties Engineering Accounting and Administration Architecture Chemistry Economics Law Medicine Odontology Philosophy and Letters Political and Social Sciences Psychology Sciences Veterinarian Medicine FES Acatlán Aragón Cuautitlán Iztacala Zaragoza Schools Arts and Design Music Nursery and Obstetrics Social Work National Preparatory School Centres Cinematographic Studies DGSCA Centro de Relaciones Internacionales (CRI) Institutes Applied Mathematics and Systems Research Institute Aesthetics Research Institute Engineering Institute Buildings Central Library National Library of Mexico Facilities Ciudad Universitaria (Main Campus) Olympic Stadium Radio UNAM ( AM , FM ) TV UNAM Museo Universitario Arte Contemporáneo (MUAC) National Observatory Kan Balam (Super Computer) History 1999 students' strike 2018 students' protests National Autonomous University of Mexico Okupa Che Royal and Pontifical University of Mexico Alumni Alumni Astronomical Society Professors and researchers Axel Didriksson Luis E. Miramontes Francisco Gil Villegas Miguel Ángel Mancera Arturo Zaldívar Lelo de Larrea Fernando Quevedo Francisco González de la Vega Antonio Lazcano Sports Football club Pumas Dorados de la UNAM Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gran_Telescopio_Canarias&oldid=1296037787 " Categories : Astronomical observatories in La Palma Reflecting telescopes National Autonomous University of Mexico University of Florida Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2024 CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using Wikidata location map with locally defined parameters Articles using Infobox telescope using locally defined parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2019 Articles containing potentially dated statements from February 2021 All articles containing potentially dated statements Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 11:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gran Telescopio Canarias 34 languages Add topic

