Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Fashion 3 Subculture Toggle Subculture subsection 3.1 Music 3.2 Film 3.3 By country 3.3.1 India 3.3.2 United States 4 See also Toggle See also subsection 4.1 Subculture links 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Do it yourself 46 languages العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ລາວ Magyar മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Building, modifying, or repairing, without the aid of experts or professionals "DIY" redirects here. For other uses, see DIY (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Anti-consumerism Theories and ideas Asceticism Affluenza Alternative culture Anti-capitalism Autonomous building Billboard hacking Buyer's remorse Bioeconomics Buddhist economics Buy Nothing Day Collaborative consumption Collapsology Commodification Commodity fetishism Commune Compulsive buying disorder Conspicuous consumption Consumer capitalism Consumerism Conviviality Criticism of advertising Culture jamming Degrowth Do it yourself Downshifting Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological economics Ecovillage Ethical consumerism Feminist political ecology Food loss and waste Freeganism Gift economy Green consumption Hyperconsumerism Laconophilia Local food Microgeneration Non-possession Overconsumption Planned obsolescence Right to repair Political ecology Post-consumerism Simple living Slow Food Steady-state economy Subvertising Sustainable consumer behaviour Sustainable consumption Notable works Walden The Theory of the Leisure Class Brave New World The Affluent Society One-Dimensional Man The Society of the Spectacle ( book , film ) The Consumer Society: Myths and Structures [ fr ] Steal This Book Small Is Beautiful To Have or to Be?

Future Primitive and Other Essays Fight Club ( novel , film ) Escape from Affluenza No Logo Profit over People: Neoliberalism and Global Order The Cultural Creatives Affluenza: The All-Consuming Epidemic Evasion The Corporation Surplus: Terrorized into Being Consumers So, What's Your Price?

What Would Jesus Buy?

Organizations and groups Adbusters Crass CrimethInc.

Deep Green Resistance Democracy Now!

Earth Liberation Front Fifth Estate Freecycle Green Anarchy Institute for Social Ecology Monthly Review Rage Against the Machine Reverend Billy The Venus Project The Yes Men 350.org People Mauro Bonaiuti Noam Chomsky Erich Fromm Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen Edward Goldsmith Paul Goodman André Gorz Ivan Illich Serge Latouche Donella Meadows Pierre Rabhi John Ruskin E. F. Schumacher Bernard Stiegler Henry David Thoreau Related social movements Alter-globalization Amateurism Anarcho-communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-punk Anti-capitalism Anti-corporate activism Anti-globalization movement Communism Diggers (theater) Ecofeminism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Food Not Bombs Fossil fuel phase-out Green anarchism Green left Green politics Hippie Libertarian socialism Neo-Luddism New Left Occupy Wall Street Postmodernism Punk Situationists Slow movement Social anarchism Social ecology See also Advanced capitalism Advertising Barter Consumer behaviour Consumption (economics) Consumption (sociology) Cooperative Counterculture Disneyfication Ecological economics Economic materialism Economic problems Frugality Green economy Gross National Happiness Heterodox economics HospEx Illth Influence of mass media Informal sector Intentional community Left-wing politics McDonaldization Mutual aid Natural resource economics Non-monetary economy Permaculture Post-materialism Productivism Shopping Subsistence economy Sustainability Sweatshops Veblen good Workaholic v t e Part of a series on Individualism Principles Autonomy Civil liberties Do it yourself Eremitism Free love Freethought Human rights Individual Individual rights Individual reclamation Individuation Laissez-faire Libertine Liberty Methodological individualism Negative liberty Personal property Positive liberty Private property Rugged individualism Self-actualization Self-ownership Self-sufficiency Subjectivity Philosophers Antiphon Aristippus Camus Diogenes Emerson Godwin Goldman Hayek Hess Hipparchia Igualada Ingersoll Jefferson Jung Laozi Locke Mandeville Marsden Mencken Mill Mises Montaigne Nietzsche Nozick Onfray Paine Popper Quelle Rand Rothbard Sade Schopenhauer Smith Spencer Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tucker Voltaire Warren Wilde Yang Ideologies Autarchism Anarchism Individualist anarchism Egoist anarchism Market anarchism Social anarchism Anarcho-capitalism Egoism Ethical egoism Rational egoism Existentialism Hedonism Humanism Individualist feminism Equity feminism Liberal feminism Liberalism Classical liberalism Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Libertarian socialism Right-libertarianism Minarchism Mutualism Objectivism Subjectivism Voluntaryism Principal concerns Anti-individualism Authoritarianism Collectivism Conformity Dogmatism Group rights Herd mentality Indoctrination Mass society Mobbing Social engineering Statism Tyranny Tyranny of the majority Theocracy Totalitarianism v t e Boy building a model airplane , Texas, 1942 (photograph by Arthur Rothstein for the Farm Security Administration ) " Do it yourself " (" DIY ") is the method of building, modifying , or repairing things by oneself without the direct aid of professionals or certified experts. Academic research has described DIY as behaviors where "individuals use raw and semi-raw materials and parts to produce, transform, or reconstruct material possessions, including those drawn from the natural environment (e.g., landscaping)".

[ 1 ] DIY behavior can be triggered by various motivations previously categorized as marketplace motivations (economic benefits, lack of product availability, lack of product quality, need for customization), and identity enhancement ( craftsmanship , empowerment, community seeking, uniqueness).

[ 2 ] The term "do-it-yourself" has been associated with consumers since at least 1912 primarily in the domain of home improvement and maintenance activities.

[ 3 ] The phrase "do it yourself" had come into common usage (in standard English) by the 1950s, [ 4 ] in reference to the emergence of a trend of people undertaking home improvement and various other small craft and construction projects as both a creative-recreational and cost-saving activity.

Subsequently, the term DIY has taken on a broader meaning that covers a wide range of skill sets. DIY has been described as a "self-made-culture"; one of designing, creating, customizing and repairing items or things without any special training. DIY has grown to become a social concept with people sharing ideas, designs, techniques, methods and finished projects with one another either online or in person.

DIY can be seen as a cultural reaction in modern technological society to increasing academic specialization and economic specialization which brings people into contact with only a tiny focus area within the larger context, positioning DIY as a venue for holistic engagement.

DIY ethic is the ethic of self-sufficiency through completing tasks without the aid of a paid expert . The DIY ethic promotes the idea that anyone is capable of performing a variety of tasks rather than relying on paid specialists.

History [ edit ] Italian archaeologists have unearthed the ruins of a 6th-century BC Greek structure in southern Italy. The ruins appeared to come with detailed assembly instructions and are being called an "ancient IKEA building". The structure was a temple-like building discovered at Torre Satriano , near the southern city of Potenza , in Basilicata . This region was recognized as a place where local people mingled with Greeks who had settled along the southern coast known as Magna Graecia and in Sicily from the 8th century BC onwards. Christopher Smith, director of the British School at Rome , said that the discovery was, "the clearest example yet found of mason's marks of the time. It looks as if someone was instructing others how to mass-produce components and put them together in this way." Much like our modern instruction booklets, various sections of the luxury building were inscribed with coded symbols showing how the pieces slotted together. The characteristics of these inscriptions indicate they date back to around the 6th century BC, which tallies with the architectural evidence suggested by the decoration. The building was built by Greek artisans coming from the Spartan colony of Taranto in Apulia.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] In North America, there was a DIY magazine publishing niche in the first half of the twentieth century. Magazines such as Popular Mechanics (founded in 1902) and Mechanix Illustrated (founded in 1928) offered a way for readers to keep current on useful practical skills, techniques, tools, and materials. As many readers lived in rural or semi-rural regions, initially much of the material related to their needs on the farm or in a small town. In addition, authors such as F. J. Christopher began to become heavy advocates for do-it-yourself projects.

By the 1950s, DIY became common usage with the emergence of people undertaking home improvement projects, construction projects and smaller crafts. Artists began to fight against mass production and mass culture by claiming to be self-made. However, DIY practices also responded to geopolitical tensions, such as in the form of home-made Cold War nuclear fallout shelters, and the dark aesthetics and nihilist discourse in punk fanzines in the 1970s and onwards in the shadow of rising unemployment and social tensions. In the 1960s and 1970s, books and TV shows about the DIY movement and techniques on building and home decoration began appearing. By the 1990s, the DIY movement felt the impact of the digital age with the rise of the internet.

[ 8 ] With computers and the internet becoming mainstream, increased accessibility to the internet has led to more households undertaking DIY methods. Platforms, such as YouTube or Instagram, provide people the opportunity to share their creations and instruct others on how to replicate DIY techniques in their own home.

[ 9 ] Shelves attached to a toy vehicle The DIY movement is a re-introduction (often to urban and suburban dwellers) of the old pattern of personal involvement and use of skills in the upkeep of a house or apartment, making clothes; maintenance of cars, computers, websites; or any material aspect of living. The philosopher Alan Watts (from the " Houseboat Summit " panel discussion in a 1967 edition of the San Francisco Oracle ) reflected a growing sentiment: Our educational system, in its entirety, does nothing to give us any kind of material competence. In other words, we don't learn how to cook, how to make clothes, how to build houses, how to make love, or to do any of the absolutely fundamental things of life. The whole education that we get for our children in school is entirely in terms of abstractions. It trains you to be an insurance salesman or a bureaucrat, or some kind of cerebral character.

[ 10 ] In the 1970s, DIY spread through the North American population of college and recent-college-graduate age groups. In part, this movement involved the renovation of affordable, rundown older homes. But, it also related to various projects expressing the social and environmental vision of the 1960s and early 1970s. The young visionary Stewart Brand , working with friends and family, and initially using the most basic of typesetting and page-layout tools, developed the first edition of The Whole Earth Catalog (subtitled Access to Tools ) in late 1968. The venture was partially financed by friend and mentor Dick Raymond . Raymond's non-profit, the Portola Institute , published the Catalog , and the surprising success of editions in the 1970s led to a distribution arrangement with the New York publisher Random House .

[ 11 ] Fiberglass dome house, California, in style of the Whole Earth Catalog building techniques The first Catalog , and its successors, used a broad definition of the term "tools." There were informational tools, such as books (often technical in nature), professional journals, courses and classes. There were specialized, designed items, such as carpentry and stonemasonry tools, garden tools , welding equipment, chainsaws , fiberglass materials and so on – even early personal computers. The designer J. Baldwin served as technology editor and wrote many of the reviews of fabrication tools, tools for working soil, etc.

[ 12 ] The Catalog 's publication both emerged from and spurred the great wave of experimentalism, convention-breaking, and do-it-yourself attitude of the late 1960s. Often copied, the Catalog appealed to a wide cross-section of people in North America and had a broad influence.

DIY home improvement books burgeoned in the 1970s, first created as collections of magazine articles. An early, extensive line of DIY how-to books were created by Sunset Books , based upon previously published articles from their magazine, Sunset , based in California.

Time-Life , Better Homes and Gardens , Balcony Garden Web and other publishers soon followed suit.

Electronics World 1959, home assembled amplifier In the mid-1990s, DIY home-improvement content began to find its way onto the World Wide Web . HouseNet was the earliest bulletin-board style site where users could share information.

[ 4 ] Since the late 1990s, DIY has exploded on the Web through thousands of sites.

In the 1970s, when home video ( VCRs ) came along, DIY instructors quickly grasped its potential for demonstrating processes by audio-visual means. In 1979, the PBS television series This Old House , starring Bob Vila , premiered and spurred a DIY television revolution. The show was immensely popular, educating people on how to improve their living conditions (and the value of their house) without the expense of paying someone else to do (as much of) the work. In 1994, the HGTV Network cable television channel was launched in the United States and Canada, followed in 1999 by the DIY Network cable television channel. Both were launched to appeal to the growing percentage of North Americans interested in DIY topics, from home improvement to knitting . Such channels have multiple shows revealing how to stretch one's budget to achieve professional-looking results ( Design Cents , Design on a Dime , etc.) while doing the work yourself.

Toolbelt Diva specifically caters to female DIYers.

Beyond magazines and television, the scope of home improvement DIY continues to grow online where most mainstream media outlets now have extensive DIY-focused informational websites such as This Old House , Martha Stewart , Hometalk , and the DIY Network . These are often extensions of their magazine or television brand. The growth of independent online DIY resources is also spiking.

[ 13 ] The number of homeowners who blog about their experiences continues to grow, along with DIY websites from smaller organizations.

Fashion [ edit ] Mennonite woman dressmaking (1942) DIY is prevalent amongst the fashion community, with ideas being shared on social media, such as YouTube, about clothing, jewellery, makeup, and hairstyles. Techniques include distressing and bleaching jeans, redesigning  old shirts, and studding denim.

The concept of DIY has also emerged within the art and design community. The terms Hacktivist , Craftivist, or maker have been used to describe creatives working within a DIY framework (Busch). Otto von Busch describes 'Hacktivism' as "[including] the participant in the process of making, [to give] rise to new attitudes within the 'maker' or collaborator" (Busch 49).

[ 14 ] Busch suggests that by engaging in participatory forms of fashion, consumers are able to step away from the idea of "mass-homogenized 'Mc-Fashion ' " (Lee 2003)" , as fashion Hacktivism allows consumers to play a more active role in engaging with the clothes they wear (Busch 32).

Subculture [ edit ] See also: Maker culture DIY vehicle at Maker Faire, San Mateo , 2016 DIY as a subculture was brought forward by the punk movement of the 1970s.

[ 15 ] Instead of traditional means of bands reaching their audiences through large music labels, bands began recording, manufacturing albums and merchandise, booking their own tours, and creating opportunities for smaller bands to get wider recognition through repetitive low-cost DIY touring. The burgeoning zine movement took up coverage of and promotion of the underground punk scenes, and significantly altered the way fans interacted with musicians. Zines quickly branched off from being hand-made music magazines to become more personal; they quickly became one of the youth culture's gateways to DIY culture. This led to tutorial zines showing others how to make their own shirts, posters, zines, books, food, etc.

The terms "DIY" and "do-it-yourself" are also used to describe: Zines , London Self-publishing books, zines , doujin , and alternative comics Bands or solo artists releasing their music on self-funded record labels.

Trading of mixtapes as part of cassette culture The international mail art network which circumvents galleries and official art institutions by creating a precursor to social networking .

Homemade stuffs based on the principles of " Recycle , Reuse & Reduce " (the 3R's ). A common term in many Environmental movements encouraging people to reuse old, used objects found in their homes and to recycle simple materials like paper.

Crafts such as knitting , crochet , sewing , handmade jewelry , ceramics Designing business cards, invitations and so on Creating punk or indie musical merchandise through the use of recycling thrift store or discarded materials, usually decorated with art applied by silk screen .

[ 16 ] Independent game development and game modding Contemporary roller derby Skateparks built by skateboarders without paid professional assistance Building musical electronic circuits such as the Atari Punk Console and create circuit bending noise machines from vintage children toys.

Modifying ("modding") common products to allow extended or unintended uses, commonly referred to by the internet term, "life-hacking".  Related to jury-rigging i.e. sloppy/ unlikely mods Hobby electronics or in amateur radio equipment producing.

DIY science: using open-source hardware to make scientific equipment to conduct citizen science or simply low-cost traditional science [ 17 ] Using low-cost single-board computers , such as Arduino and Raspberry Pi , as embedded systems with various applications DIY bio Drink mixing robot Use of a custom Linux distribution catered for a specific purpose.

Building a custom synthesizer .

Use of FPGAs .

Privately made firearms Taxidermyizing the scores of hunting or fishing expeditions.

Music [ edit ] See also: Guerrilla gig , Independent music , and Lo-fi music Much contemporary DIY music has its origins in the late 1970s punk rock subculture.

[ 18 ] It developed as a way to circumnavigate the corporate mainstream music industry .

[ 19 ] By controlling the entire production and distribution chain, DIY bands attempt to develop a closer relationship between artists and fans. The DIY ethic gives total control over the final product without need to compromise with record major labels.

[ 19 ] According to the punk aesthetic, one can express oneself and produce moving and serious works with limited means.

[ 20 ] Arguably, the earliest example of this attitude [ failed verification ] was the punk music scene of the 1970s.

[ 21 ] More recently, the orthodox understanding that DIY originates in 1970s punk, with its clearest practices being in the self-produced 7" single and self-published fanzines, has been challenged. As George McKay asks in the title of his 2023 article: 'Was punk DIY? Is DIY punk?' McKay argues instead for what he terms a 'depunking' of DIY.

[ 22 ] Riot grrrl , associated with third-wave feminism , also adopted the core values of the DIY punk ethic by leveraging creative ways of communication through zines and other projects.

[ 23 ] Adherents of the DIY punk ethic also work collectively. For example, punk impresario David Ferguson 's CD Presents was a DIY concert production , recording studio , and record label network.

[ 24 ] Film [ edit ] Main article: Guerrilla filmmaking A form of independent filmmaking characterized by low budgets, skeleton crews, and simple props using whatever is available.

By country [ edit ] As a means of adaptation during the Cuban Special Period times of economic crisis, resolver ("to resolve") became an important part of Cuban culture.

Resolver refers to a spirit of resourcefulness and do-it-yourself problem solving.

[ 25 ] India [ edit ] Main article: Jugaad Jugaad is a colloquial Hindi , Bengali , Marathi , Punjabi , Sindhi and Urdu word, which refers to a non-conventional, frugal innovation, often termed a " hack ".

[ 26 ] It could also refer to an innovative fix or a simple work-around, a solution that bends the rules, or a resource that can be used in such a way. It is also often used to signify creativity: to make existing things work, or to create new things with meager resources.

[ 27 ] United States [ edit ] Main article: Rasquache Rasquache is the English form of the Spanish term rascuache , originally with a negative connotation in Mexico it was recontextualized by the Mexican and Chicano arts movement to describe a specific artistic aesthetic, Rasquachismo , suited to overcoming material and professional limitations faced by artists in the movement.

[ 28 ] See also [ edit ] Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Do-It-Yourself Look up do it yourself in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Do it yourself .

Bricolage Circuit bending Edupunk Hackerspace Handyman Instructables Junk box Kludge Mail art Maker culture Number 8 wire Open design Power tool Prosumer Ready-to-assemble furniture 3D printing Subculture links [ edit ] Punk subculture Basement show Bricolage Cassette culture Circuit bending Critical making D.I.Y. or Die: How to Survive as an Independent Artist Edupunk Guerrilla gig Hackerspace Homebuilt aircraft Individualism Infoshops Maker culture Mumblecore Off-the-grid Remodernist Film Self-publishing Underground comix White box (computer hardware) Solarpunk References [ edit ] ^ Wolf & McQuitty (2011). Understanding the Do-It-Yourself Consumer: DIY Motivation and Outcomes.

Academy of Marketing Science Review ^ Wolf & McQuitty (2011) ^ Gelber, Steven M (March 1997).

"Do-It-Yourself: Constructing, Repairing and Maintaining Domestic Masculinity" .

American Quarterly .

49 (1): 66– 112.

doi : 10.1353/aq.1997.0007 .

ISSN 1080-6490 .

^ a b McKellar, S.; Sparke, P. (eds.).

Interior Design and Identity .

^ Newsletter of the Hellenic Society of Archaeometry, N.110, May 2010, p.84 ^ Ancient Building Came With DIY Instructions Archived 30 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine , Discovery News, Mon Apr 26, 2010 ^ Ancient Building Comes with Assembly Instructions, (photos) Archived 23 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine , Discovery News ^ "A history of Do It Yourself (DIY): infographic" .

Stonetack . 7 February 2018 . Retrieved 29 April 2020 .

^ Comm, Joel (19 May 2017).

"Why the Huge Do-It-Yourself Market Is Just Getting Started" .

Inc.com . Retrieved 30 April 2020 .

^ Watts, Alan et al. "Houseboat Summit" in The San Francisco Oracle , issue #7.  San Francisco.

^ Markoff, John (2022).

Whole Earth: The Many Lives of Stewart Brand (first ed.). New York: Penguin. p. 9780735223943.

^ Brand, Stewart, ed. (June 1971).

The Last Whole Earth Catalog (first ed.). Portola Institute.

ISBN 0-394-70459-2 .

^ Saranow, Jennifer (28 September 2007).

"BlogWatch: This Old House" .

The Wall Street Journal .

^ von Busch, O. (2008).

Fashion-able, Hacktivism and engaged Fashion Design (PDF) (PhD thesis). University of Gothenburg.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ Triggs, Teal (March 2006). "Triggs, Teal (2006) Scissors and Glue: Punk Fanzines and the Creation of a DIY Aesthetic, in "Journal of Design History", vo. 19, n. 1, pp. 69–83".

Journal of Design History .

19 (1): 69– 83.

doi : 10.1093/jdh/epk006 .

S2CID 154677104 .

Yet, it remains within the subculture of punk music where the homemade, A4, stapled and photocopied fanzines of the late 1970s fostered the "do-it-yourself" (DIY) production techniques of cut-n-paste letterforms, photocopied and collaged images, hand-scrawled and typewritten texts, to create a recognizable graphic design aesthetic.

^ Hanford, Mark (29 June 1995).

"DIY guide to screen printing t-shirts for cheap" .

Archived from the original on 3 March 2025 . Retrieved 24 September 2007 .

Ever wonder where bands get their T-shirts made? Some of them probably go to the local screen printers and pay a bunch of money to have their shirts made up, then they have to turn around and sell them to you for a high price. Others go the smart route, and do it themselves. Here's a quick how-to on the cheap way to going about making T-shirts.

^ Pearce, Joshua M. 2012. " Building Research Equipment with Free, Open-Source Hardware.

" Science 337 (6100): 1303–1304.

open access ^ Mumford, Gwilym (6 December 2014).

"Eagulls, Hookworms, Joanna Gruesome: how UK music scenes are going DIY" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 9 June 2015 .

^ a b Albini, Steve (17 November 2014).

"Steve Albini on the surprisingly sturdy state of the music industry – in full" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 9 June 2015 .

^ David Byrne , Jeremy Deller, Audio Games , in Modern Painters , March 1, 2010. "I think I embrace a bit of the punk aesthetic that one can express oneself with two chords if that's all you know, and likewise one can make a great film with limited means or skills or clothes or furniture. It's just as moving and serious as works that employ great skill and craft sometimes. Granted, when you learn that third chord, or more, you don't have to continue making 'simple' things, unless you want to. Sometimes that's a problem." ^ Triggs, Teal (March 2006).

"Oxford Journal of Design History Webpage" .

Journal of Design History .

19 (1): 69– 83.

doi : 10.1093/jdh/epk006 . Archived from the original on 30 June 2006 . Retrieved 24 September 2007 .

Yet, it remains within the subculture of punk music where the homemade, A4, stapled and photocopied fanzines of the late 1970s fostered the 'do-it-yourself' (DIY) production techniques of cut-n-paste letterforms, photocopied and collaged images, hand-scrawled and typewritten texts, to create a recognizable graphic design aesthetic.

^ McKay, George (2024).

"Was punk DIY? Is DIY punk? Interrogating the DIY/Punk nexus, with particular reference to the early UK punk scene, c . 1976–1984" .

Diy, Alternative Cultures & Society .

2 : 94– 109.

doi : 10.1177/27538702231216190 .

^ Bennet, Andy; Peterson, Richard A. (2004).

"Music scenes: local, translocal and virtuas" . Vanderbilt University Press. pp.

116– 117.

ISBN 978-0-8265-1451-6 .

^ Jarrell, Joe (26 September 2004).

"Putting Punk in Place--Among the Classics" .

San Francisco Chronicle . pp. PK–45.

^ García Martínez, Antonio (July 26, 2017).

"Inside Cuba's D.I.Y. Internet Revolution" .

Wired .

ISSN 1059-1028 .

^ "जुगाड़" [creative improvisation].

aamboli.com (in Hindi).

^ Yuke.

"Jugaad" .

Appropedia, the sustainability wiki . Retrieved 9 October 2024 .

^ "A lesson in "rasquachismo" art: Chicano aesthetics & the "sensibilities of the barrio" " .

Smithsonian Insider . 31 January 2017 . Retrieved 20 April 2018 .

Further reading [ edit ] Atkinson, P. (1 January 2006).

"Do It Yourself: Democracy and Design" .

Journal of Design History .

19 (1): 1– 10.

doi : 10.1093/jdh/epk001 .

ISSN 0952-4649 .

Brass, Elaine; Sophie Poklewski Koziell (1997). Denise Searle (ed.).

Gathering Force: DIY Culture – Radical Action for Those Tired of Waiting . London: Big Issue.

ISBN 1-899419-01-2 .

DIY, Alternative Cultures and Society journal Kimmelman, Michael (14 April 2010).

"D.I.Y. Culture" .

The New York Times Abroad . Retrieved 4 August 2011 .

McKay, George (1996).

Senseless Acts of Beauty: Cultures of Resistance since the Sixties . London: Verso.

ISBN 1-85984-028-0 .

McKay, George, ed. (1998).

DiY Culture: Party & Protest in Nineties Britain . New York: Verso.

ISBN 1-85984-260-7 .

McKay, George. (2023).

'Was punk DIY? Is DIY punk? Interrogating the DIY/punk nexus, with particular reference to the early UK punk scene, c. 1976-1984.' DIY, Alternative Cultures and Society .

Smith, G. and Gillett, A. G., (2015).

"Creativities, innovation, and networks in garage punk rock: A case study of the Eruptörs" .

Artivate: A Journal of Entrepreneurship in the Arts , 9–24 St John, Graham, ed. (2001).

FreeNRG: Notes From the Edge of the Dancefloor . Altona: Commonground.

ISBN 1-86335-084-5 .

Wall, Derek (1999).

Earth First and the Anti-Roads Movement: Radical Environmentalism and Comparative Social Movements . London: Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-19064-9 .

Wang, Amy X. (4 April 2025).

"The Strange Allure of Watching Other People Tear Up Their Homes" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 15 April 2025 .

v t e Simple living Practices Barter Cord-cutting DIY ethic Downshifting Dry toilet Fasting Forest gardening Freeganism Frugality Gift economy Intentional community Local currency Low-impact development No frills Off-the-grid Permaculture Regift Sattvic diet Self-sufficiency Slow living Slow movement (culture) Subsistence agriculture Sustainable living Sustainable sanitation Veganism Vegetarianism War tax resistance WWOOF Religious and spiritual Amish Aparigraha Asceticism Detachment Distributism Jesus movement Mendicant Mindfulness Monasticism New Monasticism Plain dress Plain people Quakers Rastafari Temperance Testimony of simplicity Tolstoyan movement Twelve Tribes communities Secular movements Back-to-the-land Car-free Environmental Hippie Open Source Ecology Slow Small house Tiny house Transition town Notable writers Wendell Berry Ernest Callenbach G. K. Chesterton Duane Elgin Mahatma Gandhi Richard Gregg Tom Hodgkinson Harlan Hubbard Satish Kumar Helen Nearing Scott Nearing Peace Pilgrim Nick Rosen Dugald Semple E. F. Schumacher George Skene Keith Henry David Thoreau Leo Tolstoy Valluvar Modern-day adherents Mark Boyle Robin Greenfield Ted Kaczynski Pentti Linkola Jim Merkel Peace Pilgrim Suelo Thomas Media " Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral " Escape from Affluenza The Good Life The Moon and the Sledgehammer Mother Earth News The Power of Half Small Is Beautiful Walden Related Affluenza Agrarianism Amateurism Anarcho-primitivism Anti-consumerism Appropriate technology Bohemianism Consumerism Critique of work Deep ecology Degrowth Ecological footprint Food miles Front Porch Republic Green anarchism The good life Global warming Hedonophobia Intentional living commune Rainbow Gathering Itinerant Low-technology Nonviolence Peak oil Sustainability Work–life interface v t e Independent production Reading Alternative comics Alternative manga Fanzine Webcomic business Webtoon Minicomic Co-ops Doujinshi conventions printers shops Self-publishing Small press Amateur press association Audio Independent music Record label Netlabel Open-source label Radio Station Pirate radio Cassette culture Doujin music Lo-fi music Tracker (MOD) music Podsafe Underground music Musical instruments Circuit bending Experimental musical instrument Video Amateur Home movies Amateur film Amateur pornography Fan film Machinima Professional Independent animation Cinema of Transgression Independent film American eccentric cinema Indiewood List of American independent films Mumblecore Exploitation film Guerrilla filmmaking B movie Golden Age '50s '60s–'70s '80s– present Z movie Midnight movie Low-budget film No-budget film No wave cinema Double feature Software Cowboy coding Demoscene Free software Open-source software Software cracking Unofficial patch Warez scene Video games Indie games development developers Homebrew Fan game Doujin soft Mod Open-source video game ROM hack Food Drinks Independent soft drink Homebrewing Microbrewery Other Indie art Amateur photography Mail art Naïve art Outsider art Visionary environment Indie RPG Independent circuit (wrestling) Independent TV station General Independent media Indie design Do it yourself ( DIY ethic ) Doujin Make (magazine) Maker Faire Social peer-to-peer processes v t e Environmental humanities Art Crop art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Land art Landscape painting Photography conservation landscape nature wildlife Sculpture trail Site-specific art Sustainable art Culture Cultural ecology Cultural landscape Ecolinguistics Ecological anthropology Ecosemiotics Environmental anthropology Ethnoecology Traditional ecological knowledge Literature Ecocomposition Ecocriticism Ecopoetry Geocriticism Nature writing Outdoor literature Philosophy Aesthetics of nature Critical realism Deep ecology Ecofeminism Ecophenomenology Ecosophy Environmental ethics Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Predation problem Social ecology Religion Ecotheology Environmental theology Religion and environmentalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Other Anthrozoology Ecomusicology Environmental communication Environmental education adult arts-based Environmental history Environmental interpretation Environmental journalism Environmental law Outdoor education Political representation of nature Psychogeography Thematic interpretation Related Animal studies Bioethics Biophilia hypothesis Do it yourself ( ethic ) Natural history ( museums ) Popular science Property theory ( common property ) Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Simple living Slow food Spirit of place Sustainability studies Applied Arts and Crafts movement Acoustic ecology Biomimicry Ecological design Ecomuseum Educational trail Environmental design Landscape architecture assessment planning Nature center New Urbanism Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable fashion Themed walk Environment portal Category Commons Journals Degrees Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Do_it_yourself&oldid=1301955369 " Categories : Do it yourself Building DIY culture Handbooks and manuals Skills Cassette culture 1970s–1990s Simple living Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Hindi-language sources (hi) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2014 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from December 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 15:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Do it yourself 46 languages Add topic

