Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Phyletic gradualism 8 languages Català فارسی Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theory in evolutionary biology Phyletic gradualism, top, would consist of steady evolutionary change in small steps, in contrast to punctuated equilibrium Apparently sudden changes can be explained either by macromutation or by relatively rapid episodes of gradual evolution, since 10,000 years barely registers in the fossil record.

Part of a series on Evolutionary biology Darwin's finches by John Gould Index Introduction Main Outline Glossary Evidence History Processes and outcomes Population genetics Variation Diversity Mutation Natural selection Adaptation Polymorphism Genetic drift Gene flow Speciation Adaptive radiation Co-operation Coevolution Coextinction Contingency Divergence Convergence Parallel evolution Extinction Natural history Origin of life Common descent History of life Timeline of evolution Human evolution Recent human evolution Phylogeny Biodiversity Biogeography Classification Evolutionary taxonomy Cladistics Transitional fossil Extinction event History of evolutionary theory Overview Renaissance Before Darwin Darwin Origin of Species Before synthesis Modern synthesis Molecular evolution Evo-devo Current research History of speciation History of paleontology ( timeline ) Fields and applications Applications of evolution Biosocial criminology Ecological genetics Evolutionary aesthetics Evolutionary anthropology Evolutionary computation Evolutionary ecology Evolutionary economics Evolutionary epistemology Evolutionary ethics Evolutionary game theory Evolutionary linguistics Evolutionary medicine Evolutionary neuroscience Evolutionary physiology Evolutionary psychology Experimental evolution Invasion genetics Island biogeography Phylogenetics Paleontology Selective breeding Speciation experiments Sociobiology Systematics Universal Darwinism Social implications Eugenics Evolution as fact and theory Dysgenics Social effects Creation–evolution controversy Theistic evolution Objections to evolution Level of support Nature-nurture controversy Evolutionary biology portal Category v t e Phyletic gradualism is a model of evolution which theorizes that most speciation is slow, uniform and gradual.

[ 1 ] When evolution occurs in this mode, it is usually by the steady transformation of a whole species into a new one (through a process called anagenesis ). In this view no clear line of demarcation exists between an ancestral species and a descendant species, unless splitting occurs. The theory is contrasted with punctuated equilibrium .

History [ edit ] The word phyletic derives from the Greek φυλετικός phūletikos , which conveys the meaning of a line of descent.

[ 2 ] Phyletic gradualism contrasts with the theory of punctuated equilibrium , which proposes that most evolution occurs isolated in rare episodes of rapid evolution, when a single species splits into two distinct species, followed by a long period of stasis or non-change. These models both contrast with variable-speed evolution ("variable speedism"), which maintains that different species evolve at different rates, and that there is no reason to stress one rate of change over another.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins argues that constant-rate gradualism is not present in the professional literature, thereby the term serves only as a straw-man for punctuated-equilibrium advocates. In his book The Blind Watchmaker , Dawkins observes that Charles Darwin himself was not a constant-rate gradualist, as suggested by Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould . In the first edition of On the Origin of Species , Darwin stated that "Species of different genera and classes have not changed at the same rate, or in the same degree. In the oldest tertiary beds a few living shells may still be found in the midst of a multitude of extinct forms... The Silurian Lingula differs but little from the living species of this genus".

[ 5 ] Lingula is among the few brachiopods surviving today but also known from fossils over 500 million years old. In the fifth edition of The Origin of Species , Darwin wrote that "the periods during which species have undergone modification, though long as measured in years, have probably been short in comparison with the periods during which they retain the same form".

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Punctuated equilibrium Punctuated gradualism Quantum evolution References [ edit ] ^ Eldredge, N. and S. J. Gould (1972).

"Punctuated equilibria: an alternative to phyletic gradualism" In T.J.M. Schopf, ed., Models in Paleobiology . San Francisco: Freeman Cooper. p. 84.

^ φυλετικός phūletikos originates from φυλέτης phūletēs "one of the same tribe," from φυλή phulē, "clan, race, people", derived from φύεσθαι phuesthai, "to descend, to originate." ^ Dawkins, Richard. 1996.

The Blind Watchmaker . New York: W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 0-393-31570-3 ^ Futuyma, Douglas. 2005.

Evolution . Sunderland MA: Sinauer Associates, pp. 86-89 ^ Charles Darwin, 1859.

On the origin of species London: John Murray. 1st edition, p. 313 .

^ Charles Darwin, 1869.

The Origin of Species London: John Murray. 5th edition, p. 551 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Phyletic gradualism at Wikimedia Commons The distinction between phyletic gradualism and punctuated equilibrium models - by Mark Ridley Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Phyletic_gradualism&oldid=1304594966 " Categories : Evolutionary biology Rate of evolution Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 00:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Phyletic gradualism 8 languages Add topic

