Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 References to Muhammad Toggle References to Muhammad subsection 1.1 Maimonides 1.2 Obscure and indirect references 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Jewish views on Muhammad 9 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Bahasa Indonesia עברית Simple English Türkçe اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Judaism's view of Muhammad ) Views of the Jewish religion on the Islamic prophet Muhammad This article is part of a series about Muhammad Life Mecca Hijrah First Islamic state After Conquest of Mecca Farewell Pilgrimage ( Farewell Sermon ) Hadith Milestones and records Career Military Diplomatic Miracles Quran ( First revelation ) Isra and Mi'raj Splitting of the Moon Views and Perspectives Views Jews Christians Perspectives Islam Bible Judaism Medieval Christian Historicity Criticism Succession Saqifah Ghadir Khumm Companions of Muhammad Hadith of the pen and paper Ahl al-Bayt Praise Salawat Naat Mawlid Related Mohammedan Mahound Al-Masjid an-Nabawi Possessions Relics Seal History of Islam Islam portal Biography portal v t e Very few texts in Judaism refer to or take note of the Islamic prophet, Muhammad . Those that do generally reject Muhammad's proclamation of receiving divine revelations from God .

References to Muhammad [ edit ] In the Middle Ages, it was common for Jewish writers to describe Muhammad as ha-meshuggah ("the madman"), a term frequently used in the Bible for those who believe themselves to be prophets.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Maimonides [ edit ] Maimonides referred to Muhammad as a false prophet and an insane man. In his Epistle to Yemen he wrote, "After [Jesus] arose the Madman who emulated his precursor [Jesus], since he paved the way for him. But he added the further objective of procuring rule and submission [ talb al-mulk ; pursuit of sovereignty] and he invented what was well known [Islam]." [ 4 ] In his authoritative work of law, the Mishneh Torah (Hilkhot Melakhim 11:10–12), Maimonides indicated that, nevertheless, Muhammad was part of God's plan of preparing the world for the coming of the Jewish Messiah : "All those words of Jesus of Nazareth and of this Ishmaelite [i.e., Muhammad] who arose after him are only to make straight the path for the messianic king and to prepare the whole world to serve the Lord together. As it is said: 'For then I will change the speech of the peoples to a pure speech so that all of them shall call on the name of the Lord and serve him with one accord' (Zephaniah 3:9)." [ 5 ] Obscure and indirect references [ edit ] Natan'el al-Fayyumi , a prominent 12th-century Yemenite rabbi and theologian, and the founder of what is sometimes called " Jewish Ismailism ," wrote in his philosophical treatise Bustan al-Uqul ("Garden of the minds") that God sends prophets to establish religions for other nations, which do not have to conform to the precepts of the Jewish Torah. Nethanel explicitly considered Muhammad a true prophet who was sent from Heaven with a particular message that applies to the Arabs but not to the Jews.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Al-Fayyumi's explicit acceptance of Muhammad's prophecy was rare and virtually unknown until recent times beyond his native Yemen .

[ 8 ] The apocalyptic Midrash The Secrets of Rabbi Simon ben Yohai compares Muhammad to the Jewish Messiah . According to this text, ascribed to the famous 1st-century sage and mystic Simeon bar Yochai , and thought to have been written at the beginning of the Muslim conquest or in the 8th century, [ 9 ] Muhammad's role as a prophet includes redeeming the Jews from the Christian ("Roman" or "Edomite") oppression and playing a positive role in the messianic process.

[ 10 ] A number of stories from the Islamic tradition about Muhammad entered mainstream Jewish thought incidentally due to the great cultural convergence in Al-Andalus from the 9th to 12th centuries, known as the Golden Age of Iberian Jewry . For example, Rabbi Jacob Joseph of Polonne , one of the early Hasidic mystics, wrote that one pious man ( hasid ) taught that the internal struggle against the evil inclination is greater than external battle, quoting Bahya ibn Paquda 's popular treatise Chovot HaLevavot .

In the Judeo-Arabic original version of that book, Bahya Ibn Paquda refers to both external and internal battles as jihad and the "pious man" about whom the story is told initially is Muhammad, though the author does not mention his source by name.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Judaism's view of Jesus Islamic-Jewish relations Muhammad's views on Jews Muhammad and the Bible References [ edit ] ^ Norman A. Stillman (1979).

The Jews of Arab lands: a history and source book . Jewish Publication Society. p.

236 .

ISBN 978-0-8276-0198-7 . Retrieved 26 December 2011 .

^ Defending the West: A Critique of Edward Said's Orientalism By Ibn Warraq Page 255 ^ The Legacy of Islamic Antisemitism: From Sacred Texts to Solemn History page 21 ^ Norman Roth.

Jews, Visigoths, and Muslims in Medieval Spain: Cooperation and Conflict , BRILL , 1994, p. 218.

^ A. James Rudin .

Christians & Jews Faith to Faith: Tragic History, Promising Present, Fragile Future , Jewish Lights Publishing, 2010, pp. 128–129.

^ The Bustan al-Ukul, by Nathanael ibn al-Fayyumi, edited and translated by David Levine, Columbia University Oriental Studies Vol. VI, p. 105 ^ Gan ha-Sekhalim , ed. Kafih (Jerusalem, 1984), ch. 6.

^ Abraham's children: Jews, Christians, and Muslims in conversation, by Norman Solomon, Richard Harries, Tim Winter, T&T Clark Int'l, 2006, ISBN 0-567-08161-3 , p. 137 Netanel's work was virtually unknown beyond his native Yemen until modern times, so had little influence on later Jewish thought.

^ The History of Jerusalem: The Early Muslim Period , by Joshua Prawer and Haggai Ben-Shammai, NYU Press, 1996, ISBN 978-0814766392 , p. 304 ^ Abraham's children: Jews, Christians, and Muslims in conversation, by Norman Solomon, Richard Harries, Tim Winter, T&T Clark Int'l, 2006, ISBN 0-567-08161-3 , p. 133 "Nistarot" places the Muslim conquests in an eschatological context, and implies that Muhammad had a positive role to play in the messianic process.

^ A Sufi-Jewish Dialogue: Philosophy and Mysticism in Bahya ibn Paquda's Duties of the Heart, by Diana Lobel, University of Pennsylvania Press, ISBN 0-8122-3953-9 , p. ix "How does a perennially popular manual of Jewish piety come to be quoting Islamic traditions about the Prophet Muhammad? Muslim Spain of the tenth through twelfth century, known as the "Golden Age" of Hispano-Jewish poetry and letters, is a time of great convergence and cultural creativity." Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jewish_views_on_Muhammad&oldid=1290763491 " Categories : Islam and Judaism Judaism-related controversies Muhammad and Judaism Religious perspectives on Muhammad Point of view Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 May 2025, at 22:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jewish views on Muhammad 9 languages Add topic

