Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 African socialism 2 Arab socialism 3 Middle Eastern socialism 4 Latin American socialism 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Third World socialism 5 languages العربية Español Bahasa Indonesia پښتو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political umbrella term Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e Third World socialism is an umbrella term for many movements and governments of the 20th century—all variants of socialism —that have taken place in numerous less-developed countries. There have been many leaders of this practice and political philosophy which remained strong until at least the 1990s, including: Michel Aflaq , Salah al-Din al-Bitar , Zulfikar Ali Bhutto , Buddhadasa , Fidel Castro , Muammar Gaddafi , Saddam Hussein , Juan Domingo Perón , Modibo Keïta , Walter Lini , Gamal Abdel Nasser , Jawaharlal Nehru , Kwame Nkrumah , Julius Nyerere , Sukarno , Ahmed Sékou Touré and other socialist leaders of the Third World who saw socialism as the answer to a strong and developed nation.

Third World socialism is made up of African socialism , Arab socialism , Buddhist socialism , Islamic socialism , Melanesian socialism , Nasserism , Peronism , and Nehruism . Gaddafi's version was more inspired in the ideas of Arab nationalism , direct democracy , strongman politics and national liberation struggle while Bhutto's was more Western-aligned and resembled, allied and inspired itself in the ideas of Western democratic socialism / social democracy and had membership in the Socialist International .

In the 21st century, a surge in leftist governments called the pink tide occurred in Latin America. Latin American socialism of the 21st century is an ideologically-specific form of Third Worldism . It incorporates anti-Americanism and a connection with the less-developed Eastern Europe and finds solidarity with other developing countries including variants in the Arab world.

African socialism [ edit ] The leaders of African socialism were Julius Nyerere, first president of Tanzania after the independence, who coined the concept of Ujamaa and collectivized the land; Kwame Nkrumah , first president of Ghana, who was one of the fathers of the Non-Aligned Movement , praised state planning policies like the five-year plans and an agency for the regulation of cocoa exports and in several political speeches and writings developed his theory of 
African socialism; Modibo Keïta , father of Mali; and Ahmed Sékou Touré , father of Guinea.

Arab socialism [ edit ] The main figures of Arab socialism are Gamal Abdel Nasser , second president of Egypt, who nationalized the Suez Canal , and the Ba'ath Party , founded in Syria by Michel Aflaq , which gained popularity in the whole Arab world and reached the government in Syria (1963-present) and Iraq (1963-2003). Arab socialism is defined as "a non-Marxist socialism adapted to the strong conservative Islamic roots of the Arab world". Arab socialism postulated the elimination of economic inequality and relied on economic planning and public ownership of the economy, and partly under Soviet influence, elements of the Soviet socialism. It also promoted women's right and abolition of discrimination based on religion and religious denomination.

[ 1 ] Noam Chomsky argued that the main trait shared by both Arab socialism and Marxist socialism was "the idea that the government has direct responsibility for the welfare of the people". Arab socialism mainly concerned itself with the liberation of the Arab nations from their exploitation by the West. The main characteristic of Marxism, liberation of the working class from its exploitation by the bourgeoisie, was also present in Arab socialism, but presented as something that can be realized by resisting Western imperialism and economic interests, as well as through religious Islamic rhetoric.

[ 1 ] In case of Nasser, his Arab socialist policy consisted of mass nationalizations, including the Suez Canal , as well as the pharmaceutical, cement, phosphate, and tobacco industries, hitherto owned by French and British concerns. Nasser also created new, state-owned enterprises, such as a national steel company. Main concern of Nasser, in line with Arab socialism, was "indigenizing" the Egyptian economy and safeguarding the political independence of Egypt, especially in economic aspect. Some sectors such as banking, overseas trade and transportation became entirely public-owned, while private investment was permitted in other sectors such as mining, though limited to Egyptian citizens only in order to hinder foreign dependence.

[ 1 ] Middle Eastern socialism [ edit ] Iran experienced a short Third World socialism period at the zenith of the Tudeh Party after the abdication of Reza Shah and his replacement by his son, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi (though the party never rose to power). After failing to reach power, this form of third world socialism was replaced by Mosaddegh 's populist, non-aligned Iranian nationalism of the National Front party as the main anti- monarchy force in Iran, reaching power (1949–1953), and it remained with that strength even in opposition (after the overthrow of Mossadegh ) until the rise of Islamism and the Iranian Revolution .

[ 2 ] The Tudehs have moved towards basic socialist communism since then.

[ 3 ] Kemalism can very arguably be added to the list, [ 4 ] [ 5 ] as it appeared before the notion of Third World was created in post- World War II , it added populism to the equation (something not all Third World socialists did; Nasser and Nkrumah, for example, did) and Turkey is more developed than the typical notion of a Third World country, but as it was used as a model of government after the Turkish War of Independence to rebuild Turkey and recover it from the underdevelopment of the Ottoman Empire , creating a strong nation in face of the prospect of European colonialism , it can be considered as reaching the templates of a Third World socialism movement. From the 1960s onwards, Third World socialist and Third Worldist thought influenced left-Kemalism.

[ 6 ] The Kemalist experiment, [ 7 ] Fabian socialism and social democracy in general [ 8 ] and the main Third World communist country, the People's Republic of China , [ 8 ] were big influences on the movement. Despite being inspired by social democracy, most of these states were affected in one time or the other by strongmen or big man leaders or one-party systems . In any case, most Third World socialist states are followers of social democratic reformism (normally state-guided), preferring it to revolution , although some adopted a kind of permanent revolution stance on the social progress to a socialist society.

Latin American socialism [ edit ] Many Latin American thinkers argued that the United States used Latin American countries as "peripheral economies" at the expense of Latin American social and economic development, which many saw as an extension of neo-colonialism and neo-imperialism .

[ 9 ] This shift in thinking led to a surge of dialogue related to how Latin America could assert its social and economic independence from the United States. Many scholars argued that a shift to socialism could help liberate Latin America from this conflict.

The New Left emerged in Latin America, a group which sought to go beyond existing Marxist–Leninist efforts at achieving economic equality and democracy to include social reform and address issues unique to Latin America such as racial and ethnic equality, indigenous rights and environmental issues.

[ 10 ] Notable New Left movements in Latin America include the Cuban Revolution of 1959, the victory of the Sandinista revolution in Nicaragua of 1979, the Workers' Party government in Porto Alegre of 1990, among others.

Because of its close proximity and strong historical connection to the United States , Cuba served an integral role in spreading socialism to the rest of Latin America .

Che Guevara described Cuba as "a guiding light" to Latin American countries caught in conflict between imperialism and socialism.

[ 11 ] In Guevara's speech "On Revolutionary Medicine", he recounts his travels through Latin America and the misery, hunger and disease he witnessed and explained how a shift to socialism could help alleviate these struggles.

[ 12 ] As part of the New Left , Fidel Castro and Che Guevara implemented leftist politics in Cuba while incorporating policies aimed at addressing social issues.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Cuban officials intended for Cuba to spur similar leftist revolutions in the rest of Latin America, what he saw as a common "liberation struggle", in countries like Venezuela , Bolivia and Nicaragua .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] In the case of Juan Perón , elected president of Argentina on three times, his Third World socialist stance was fused with radical populism , which aligned itself with the Third World and the Non-Aligned Movement (what Perón called "the third position"), with a significant state intervention for development such as five-year plans , the nationalization of railways , ports and banks, the creation of an agency to regulate grain exports (the IAPI ) and the establishment of a modern welfare state . Despite his progressive policies, Perón did not define himself or his doctrine as "socialist" during his first presidencies (1946–1955), but he did later during his exile and during his third presidency (1973–1974) when he coined the term "Christian national socialism" ( socialismo nacional cristiano ), [ 17 ] sort of an Argentine way to socialism. Perón defined it as "a ‘national’ road to socialism, understood as a system of economic socialization and popular power respectful of specific national conditions and traditions." [ 18 ] Amongst his influences, Perón listed the " Nordic model ", corporatism and non-aligned, Third World socialist models such as Christian socialism and Nasserism .

[ 19 ] Scholars described Perón's ideology as a variant of non-Marxist Christian socialism, [ 20 ] Third World socialism, [ 21 ] or a fusion of "indigenous socialism with Argentine nationalism".

[ 22 ] See also [ edit ] Maoism (Third Worldism) Non-Aligned Movement Third-Worldism Three Worlds Theory References [ edit ] ^ a b c Gowans, Stephen (2019).

Israel, a Beachhead in the Middle East: From European Colony to Us Power Projection Platform . Montreal: Baraka Books. pp.

70– 90.

ISBN 978-1-77186-194-6 .

^ Dabashi, Hamid (2000).

"The End of Islamic Ideology - Iran" .

Social Research . Retrieved 6 March 2008 .

^ Omidvar, Mehdi.

"Brief History of the Tudeh Party of Iran" . Archived from the original on 28 August 2008 . Retrieved 6 March 2008 .

^ Alevi identity . Retrieved 5 May 2009 .

^ Nostalgia for the modern . Retrieved 5 May 2009 .

^ A Historical Companion to Postcolonial Literatures . Retrieved 5 May 2009 .

^ Provizer, Norman W., ed. (1978).

Analyzing the Third World: Essays from Comparative Politics . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Schenkman Pub. Co. p. 322.

ISBN 0870739425 .

^ a b "Changing Faiths - From the Prologue of Heaven on Earth" .

PBS . Archived from the original on December 23, 2006 . Retrieved 5 March 2018 .

"This was a hybrid of communism and social democracy , exemplified by Julius Nyerere 's Tanzania, and modeled partly after Chinese Maoism, partly after British Fabianism ".

^ Henrique Cardoso, Fernando ; Faletto Vernè, Enzo (1969).

Dependency and development in Latin America .

University of California Press .

^ Barrett, Patrick; Chavez, Daniel; Rodríguez-Garavito, César (2008).

The New Latin American Left: Utopia Reborn .

Pluto Press .

doi : 10.2307/j.ctt183q5k5 .

ISBN 978-0-7453-2677-1 .

JSTOR j.ctt183q5k5 .

^ Guevara, Che (1962).

"Tactics and Strategy of the Latin American Revolution" (PDF) .

^ Guevara, Che (1960).

"On Revolutionary Medicine" .

^ Barrett, Chavez & Rodríguez-Garavito 2008 , pp. 1–39.

^ Guevara, Che .

"Guerrilla Warfare: A Method, Cuba Socialista" (PDF) .

^ "Cuba: the only way out is to spread the revolution throughout Latin America" .

El Militante . 29 October 2007 . Retrieved 18 April 2017 .

^ Guevara, Che .

"People's War, People's Army" (PDF) . Retrieved 18 April 2017 .

^ Koch, Robert D. (27 March 2020).

The Geopolitics of Juan Perón: A New Order for an Imperfect World (Doctor of Philosophy in History thesis). University of South Florida. pp.

4– 5.

^ Gillespie, Richard (1982).

Soldiers of Peron: Argentina's Montoneros . Oxford University Press. pp.

38– 39.

ISBN 0-19-821131-7 .

^ Peronism and Argentina . pp.

9– 12 . Retrieved 5 March 2018 .

^ Finchelstein, Federico (2014).

The Ideological Origins of the Dirty War: Fascism, Populism, and Dictatorship in Twentieth Century Argentina . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 75.

ISBN 978-0-19-993024-1 .

^ Zanatta, Loris (2022).

"Peronismo e castrismo. Il socialismo nazionale in America Latina" (PDF) .

Il Pensiero Storico: Rivista internazionale di storia delle idee (in Italian).

11 . Fondata da Antonio Messina: 98.

ISBN 979-88-411-1980-7 .

ISSN 2612-7652 .

^ Ranis, Peter (1992).

Argentine Workers: Peronism and Contemporary Class Consciousness . University of Pittsburgh Press. p. 20.

ISBN 0-8229-3703-4 .

External links [ edit ] Economic Reform and Third-World Socialism: A Political Economy of Food Policy in Post-Revolutionary Societies .

v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Third_World_socialism&oldid=1294852527 " Categories : Non-Aligned Movement Political ideologies Third-Worldism Types of socialism Imperialism studies Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 June 2025, at 05:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Third World socialism 5 languages Add topic

