Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Information technology 2 Policy analysis 3 Practitioners 4 See also 5 References 6 Selected publications 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Systems analysis 33 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी עברית Қазақша Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Problem-solving technique that breaks down a system into its component pieces This article is about the interdisciplinary field. For the analysis of systems in electrical engineering, see system analysis .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Systems analysis" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Futures studies Concepts Accelerating change Cashless society Global catastrophic risk Future Earth Mathematics Race Climate Space exploration Universe Historical materialism Kondratiev wave Kardashev scale Moore's law Peak oil Population cycle Resource depletion Singularity Swanson's law Techniques Backcasting Causal layered analysis Chain-linked model Consensus forecast Cross impact analysis Delphi Real-time Delphi Foresight Future-proof Futures wheel Future workshop Horizon scanning Reference class forecasting Scenario planning Systems analysis Threatcasting Trend analysis Technology assessment and forecasting Critical design Design fiction Exploratory engineering FTA Hype cycle Science fiction prototyping Speculative design TRL Technology scouting Related topics Futarchy Transhumanism v t e Systems analysis is "the process of studying a procedure or business to identify its goal and purposes and create systems and procedures that will efficiently achieve them". Another view sees systems analysis as a problem-solving technique that breaks a system down into its component pieces and analyses how well those parts work and interact to accomplish their purpose.

[ 1 ] The field of system analysis relates closely to requirements analysis or to operations research . It is also "an explicit formal inquiry carried out to help a decision maker identify a better course of action and make a better decision than they might otherwise have made." [ 2 ] The terms analysis and synthesis stem from Greek, meaning "to take apart" and "to put together", respectively. These terms are used in many scientific disciplines , from mathematics and logic to economics and psychology, to denote similar investigative procedures. The analysis is defined as "the procedure by which we break down an intellectual or substantial whole into parts," while synthesis means "the procedure by which we combine separate elements or components to form a coherent whole." [ 3 ] System analysis researchers apply methodology to the systems involved, forming an overall picture.

System analysis is used in every field where something is developed. Analysis can also be a series of components that perform organic functions together, such as systems engineering.

Systems engineering is an interdisciplinary field of engineering that focuses on how complex engineering projects should be designed and managed.

Information technology [ edit ] The development of a computer-based information system includes a system analysis phase. This helps produce the data model , a precursor to creating or enhancing a database . There are several different approaches to system analysis. When a computer-based information system is developed, system analysis (according to the Waterfall model ) would constitute the following steps: The development of a feasibility study: determining whether a project is economically, socially, technologically, and organizationally feasible Fact-finding measures, designed to ascertain the requirements of the system's end-users (typically involving interviews, questionnaires, or visual observations of work on the existing system) Gauging how the end-users would operate the system (in terms of general experience in using computer hardware or software), what the system would be used for, and so on Another view outlines a phased approach to the process. This  approach breaks system analysis into 5 phases: Scope Definition: Clearly defined objectives and requirements necessary to meet a project's requirements as defined by its stakeholders Problem analysis: the process of understanding problems and needs and arriving at solutions that meet them Requirements analysis: determining the conditions that need to be met Logical design: looking at the logical relationship among the objects Decision analysis: making a final decision Use cases are widely used system analysis modeling tools for identifying and expressing the functional requirements of a system. Each use case is a business scenario or event for which the system must provide a defined response. Use cases evolved from the object-oriented analysis.

Policy analysis [ edit ] Main article: Policy analysis The discipline of what is today known as policy analysis originated from the application of system analysis when it was first instituted by United States Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara .

[ 4 ] Practitioners [ edit ] Practitioners of system analysis are often called up to dissect systems that have grown haphazardly to determine the current components of the system. This was shown during the year 2000 re-engineering effort as business and manufacturing processes were examined as part of the Y2K automation upgrades.

[ 5 ] Employment utilizing system analysis include system analyst , business analyst , manufacturing engineer , systems architect , enterprise architect , software architect , etc.

While practitioners of system analysis can be called upon to create new systems, they often modify, expand, or document existing systems ( processes , procedures, and methods ). Researchers and practitioners rely on system analysis. Activity system analysis has been already applied to various research and practice studies, including business management, educational reform, educational technology, etc.

See also [ edit ] Related topics System thinking System architecture Software architecture Enterprise architecture Systems analyst Systems design Policy analysis Program designer Cybernetics Systems theory Types of system analysis Accident analysis Business analysis Cost-effectiveness analysis / cost–benefit analysis DSRP Failure analysis Logico-linguistic modeling Morphological analysis Soft systems methodology Software prototyping Spiral model Waterfall model System thinkers Donella Meadows Nancy Leveson Russell L. Ackoff Howard T. Odum Henry Paynter Jay Forrester Gregory Bateson Stewart Brand Buckminster Fuller Robert S. McNamara Stafford Beer Ludwig von Bertalanffy References [ edit ] ^ System Analysis and Design for the Global Enterprise by Lonnie D. Bentley p.160 7th edition ^ SYSTEMS ANALYSIS ^ Tom Ritchey, Analysis and Synthesis.

^ Radin, Beryl A. (2000).

Beyond Machiavelli : policy analysis comes of age . Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.

ISBN 0878407731 .

OCLC 41834855 .

^ Géza HUSI: Mechatronics Control Systems Selected publications [ edit ] Bentley, Lonnie D.

, Kevin C. Dittman , and Jeffrey L. Whitten .

System analysis and design methods.

(1986, 1997, 2004).

Hawryszkiewycz, Igor T.

Introduction to system analysis and design.

Prentice-Hall PTR, 1994.

Whitten, Jeffery L.

, Lonnie D. Bentley , and Kevin C. Dittman.

Fundamentals of system analysis and design methods.

(2004).

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Systems analysis .

Look up systems analysis in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

A useful set of guides and a case study about the practical application of business and system analysis methods A comprehensive description of the discipline of system analysis from Simmons College, Boston, MA, USA (Archive of original from www.simmons.edu) System Analysis and Design introductory level lessons v t e Systems engineering Subfields Aerospace engineering Biological systems engineering Cognitive systems engineering Configuration management Earth systems engineering and management Electrical engineering Enterprise systems engineering Health systems engineering Performance engineering Reliability engineering Safety engineering Sociocultural Systems Engineering Processes Requirements engineering Functional Analysis and Allocation System integration Verification and validation Design review System of systems engineering Concepts Business process Fault tolerance System System lifecycle V-Model Systems development life cycle Tools Decision-making Function modelling IDEF Optimization Quality function deployment Spare part System dynamics Systems Modeling Language Systems analysis Systems modeling Work breakdown structure People James S. Albus Ruzena Bajcsy Benjamin S. Blanchard Wernher von Braun Kathleen Carley Harold Chestnut Wolt Fabrycky Barbara Grosz Arthur David Hall III Derek Hitchins Robert E. Machol Radhika Nagpal Simon Ramo Joseph Francis Shea Katia Sycara Manuela M. Veloso John N. Warfield Related fields Control engineering Computer engineering Industrial engineering Operations research Project management Quality management Risk management Software engineering Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐brh95
Cached time: 20250817155922
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.335 seconds
Real time usage: 0.451 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1464/1000000
Revision size: 7750/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 45771/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2111/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 35866/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.229/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6026284/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  385.303      1 -total
 18.20%   70.141      1 Template:Reflist
 17.23%   66.404      1 Template:Futures_studies
 16.92%   65.188      1 Template:Sidebar
 15.71%   60.520      1 Template:Cite_book
 13.20%   50.852      1 Template:Short_description
 12.84%   49.471      2 Template:Sister_project
 12.84%   49.457      1 Template:Commons_category
 12.54%   48.322      2 Template:Side_box
 12.19%   46.959      1 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:45002:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817155922 and revision id 1296234962. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Systems_analysis&oldid=1296234962 " Categories : Systems analysis Futures techniques Financial analysts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2017 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 June 2025, at 18:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Systems analysis 33 languages Add topic

