Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Programs and facilities 2 Mackay School of Mines Building Toggle Mackay School of Mines Building subsection 2.1 W. M. Keck Earth Science and Mineral Engineering Museum 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Mackay School of Earth Sciences and Engineering 1 language اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 39°32′22″N 119°48′48″W ﻿ / ﻿ 39.53944°N 119.81333°W ﻿ / 39.53944; -119.81333 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from W. M. Keck Earth Science and Mineral Engineering Museum ) The Mackay School of Earth Sciences and Engineering (formerly Mackay School of Mines ) is a specialized school within the University of Nevada, Reno . It is named after John Mackay , father of Clarence Mackay .

Programs and facilities [ edit ] Part of the College of Science, the school has three academic departments: Geological Sciences and Engineering, Mining Engineering and Geography.

[ 1 ] The Mackay School also houses four departments devoted to public service: Nevada Bureau of Mines and Geology , Nevada Seismological Laboratory, Nevada State Climate Office and the Nevada Stable Isotope Laboratory. Research facilities include the Great Basin Center for Geothermal Energy, Center for Research in Economic Geology, Mining Life-Cycle Center, Center for Neotectonic Studies, Arthur Brant Laboratory for Exploration Geophysics, Collaboratory for Computational Geosciences, Dendro Laboratory and Geospatial Laboratory. The school is also affiliated with the U.S. Geological Survey and Desert Research Institute .

Mackay School of Mines Building [ edit ] United States historic place Mackay School of Mines Building U.S. National Register of Historic Places U.S. Historic district Contributing property Front of the Mackay Mines building Show map of Nevada Show map of the United States Location University of Nevada, Reno campus, Reno, Nevada Coordinates 39°32′22″N 119°48′48″W ﻿ / ﻿ 39.53944°N 119.81333°W ﻿ / 39.53944; -119.81333 Built June 1908 ; 117 years ago ( 1908-06 ) Architect William Symmes Richardson, Frederic Joseph DeLongchamps Architectural style Colonial Revival, Georgian Colonial NRHP reference No.

82003258 [ 2 ] Added to NRHP April 1, 1982 ; 43 years ago ( 1982-04-01 ) In June 1908, the Mackay School of Mines building was presented to the University of Nevada, as a memorial to John Mackay, by his widow and son, Marie Louise Mackay and Clarence Mackay . A statue of John Mackay by Gutzon Borglum stands in front of the mining building on the main quad of the campus.

The "Mackay School of Mines Building," was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1982.

[ 2 ] W. M. Keck Earth Science and Mineral Engineering Museum [ edit ] The W. M. Keck Earth Science and Mineral Engineering Museum is located within the building. It focuses on early Nevada mining history, minerals, ores, fossil specimens and photographs and also contains a collection of ornate Mackay family silver completed by Tiffany & Co.

in 1878.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Academic Departments" .

University of Nevada, Reno . Retrieved October 9, 2011 .

^ a b "National Register Information System" .

National Register of Historic Places .

National Park Service . April 15, 2008.

^ "The W. M. Keck Museum" .

University of Nevada, Reno . Retrieved October 9, 2011 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mackay School of Mines .

Official website v t e University of Nevada, Reno Located in : Reno, Nevada Academics College of Agriculture, Biotechnology and Natural Resources College of Business College of Education College of Engineering College of Liberal Arts College of Science Graduate School National Judicial College School of the Arts School of Community Health Sciences School of Earth Sciences and Engineering School of Journalism School of Medicine School of Nursing School of Social Research and Justice Studies School of Social Work University of Nevada Cooperative Extension Athletics Football Mackay Stadium Battle for Nevada Boise State–Nevada football rivalry Lawlor Events Center Men's basketball Women's basketball William Peccole Park Baseball Mountain West Conference Campus Arboretum Fleischmann Planetarium Historic district Morrill Hall Student life People Black Rock Press Insight Magazine The Nevada Sagebrush Wolf Pack Radio Traditions Hail to our Sturdy Team History Founded : 1874 Students : 21,353 Endowment : 306.6 million v t e National Register of Historic Places in Washoe County , Nevada 1872 California-Nevada State Boundary Marker 20th Century Club Alamo Ranchhouse Alpha Tau Omega Fraternity House Benson Dillon Billinghurst House Bethel AME Church Borland-Clifford House Bowers Mansion Burke-Berryman House Cal-Vada Lodge Hotel California Building Charles H. Burke House El Cortez Hotel Federal Building and U.S. Courthouse Field Matron's Cottage First Church of Christ, Scientist First United Methodist Church Fleischmann Atmospherium Planetarium Francis G. Newlands House Francovich House Frey Ranch Gerlach Water Tower Glendale School Greystone Castle Hawkins House Humphrey House Immaculate Conception Church Joseph Giraud House Joseph H. Gray House Lake Mansion Landrum's Hamburger System No. 1 Levy House Luella Garvey House Mackay School of Mines Building McCarthy-Platt House McKinley Park School Mary Lee Nichols School Morrill Hall, University of Nevada, Reno Mount Rose Elementary School Nevada-California-Oregon Railroad Depot Nevada-California-Oregon Railway Locomotive House and Machine Shop Newlands Historic District Nortonia Boarding House Nystrom Guest House Old Winters Ranch/Winters Mansion Patrick Ranch House Pearl Upson House Peavine Ranch Peleg Brown Ranch Pincolini Hotel Pioneer Theater-Auditorium Rainier Brewing Company Bottling Plant Reno National Bank-First Interstate Bank Reno Southern Pacific Railroad Depot Riverside Hotel Robison House St. Thomas Aquinas Cathedral Complex Southside School Trinity Episcopal Cathedral Twaddle Mansion Twaddle-Pedroli Ranch Tyson House US Post Office-Reno Main University of Nevada Reno Historic District Vachina Apartments-California Apartments Veterans Memorial School Virginia Street Bridge W.E. Barnard House Wadsworth Union Church Walter Cliff Ranch District Washoe County Courthouse Washoe County Library Washoe County Library-Sparks Branch Whittell Estate William J. Graham House Withers Log House National Register of Historic Places listings in Nevada Nevada State Historic Places by county v t e U.S. National Register of Historic Places Topics Architectural style categories Contributing property Historic district History of the National Register of Historic Places Keeper of the Register National Park Service Property types Lists by state List of U.S. National Historic Landmarks by state : Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Lists by insular areas American Samoa Guam Minor Outlying Islands Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Lists by associated state Federated States of Micronesia Marshall Islands Palau Other areas District of Columbia American Legation, Morocco Lists of specific structure types Amusement rides Jails and prisons University and college buildings Related National Historic Preservation Act Historic Preservation Fund National Register of Historic Places portal Category Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Czech Republic 2 This article about a university or college in Nevada is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e This article about a property in Nevada on the National Register of Historic Places is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mackay_School_of_Earth_Sciences_and_Engineering&oldid=1169248583#W._M._Keck_Earth_Science_and_Mineral_Engineering_Museum " Categories : 1908 establishments in Nevada Buildings and structures in Reno, Nevada Colonial Revival architecture Frederic Joseph DeLongchamps buildings Geology education Individually listed contributing properties to historic districts on the National Register in Nevada National Register of Historic Places in Reno, Nevada School buildings completed in 1908 Schools of mines in the United States University and college buildings on the National Register of Historic Places in Nevada University of Nevada, Reno Western United States university stubs Nevada building and structure stubs Nevada Registered Historic Place stubs Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles using NRISref without a reference number Use mdy dates from August 2023 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata NRHP infobox with nocat Commons category link is on Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 8 August 2023, at 00:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mackay School of Earth Sciences and Engineering 1 language Add topic

