Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Selected bibliography 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Gaston Wiet 6 languages العربية فارسی Français Italiano مصرى Тоҷикӣ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Gaston Wiet (18 December 1887, in Paris [ 1 ] – 20 April 1971, in Neuilly-sur-Seine) was a 20th-century French orientalist .

Biography [ edit ] Wiet graduated from the Institut national des langues et civilisations orientales , and with a law degree, was boarder at the Institut Français d'Archéologie Orientale of Cairo in 1909–1911. As an assistant professor in Lyon, where he taught Arabic and Turkish, then a professor in Cairo, he was drafted in 1914, assigned to the Armée d'Orient as a second lieutenant. He ended the war with the rank of captain, decorated by the Serbian government.

Museum of Islamic Art, Cairo today.

In 1919, he resumed his teaching activities in Lyon and Paris. In 1926 he was appointed director of the Museum of Islamic Art , a position he held until 1951.

[ 2 ] He wrote 14 of the 35 volumes of the catalog of the museum, of which he did much to enrich the collections, particularly in the areas of items of furniture and epigraphy.

In 1940, Wiet became, in Cairo, one of the most ardent supporters of Free France and général de Gaulle .

On his return to France in 1951, Wiet was appointed professor at the Collège de France (chair of Arabic language and literature), a position he held until 1959. In 1957, he was elected a member of the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres .

Selected bibliography [ edit ] Cairo.

Muhammad Ali of Egypt mosque.

Maspero, J.

; Wiet, G.

(1919).

MIFAO 36 1e série fasc.2 - Matériaux pour servir à la géographie de l'Égypte (in French). Cairo: Impr. de l'Institut français d'archéologie orientale.

Wiet, G.

(1930).

MIFAO 52 - Matériaux pour un Corpus Inscriptionum Arabicarum Part 1 Égypte. T. 2 (in French). Cairo: Impr. de l'Institut français d'archéologie orientale.

1931: Répertoire chronologique d'épigraphie arabe , founded by Étienne Combe, Jean Sauvaget and Gaston Wiet, Cairo, Institut français d'archéologie orientale.

Wiet, G.

(1932).

MIE 19 - Les biographies de Manhal Safi (in French). Cairo: Impr. de l'Institut français d'archéologie orientale.

Munier, H.

; Wiet, G.

(1932).

Précis de l'histoire d'Egypte par divers historiens et archéologues (in French). Vol. 2. Cairo: Impr. de l'Institut français d'archéologie orientale.

1932: Les mosquées du Caire , with Louis Hautecoeur, Paris, E. Leroux, 2 vol. (Reprint Hachette , 1966).

Wiet, G.

(1935).

MIE 26 - L'épigraphie arabe de l'exposition d'art persan du Caire (in French). Cairo: Impr. de l'Institut français d'archéologie orientale.

L'Égypte arabe, de la conquête arabe à la conquête ottomane (642–1517) , Paris, Société d'histoire nationale, 1937.

1937: Le livre des pays ( Kitâb al-Bouldân ) by Ya'qûbî , presentation and translation by Gaston Wiet, Cairo, Institut français d'archéologie orientale.

1942: Mémoires sur l'Égypte, année 1791 , Trécourt, Jean-Baptiste, edited and annotated by Gaston Wiet, Cairo, Institut Français d'Archéologie Orientale.

Wiet, G.

(1947).

MIE 52 - Soieries persanes (in French). Cairo: Impr. de l'Institut français d'archéologie orientale.

1952: Leçon inaugurale faite le 4 décembre 1951 , Collège de France, chaire de langue et littérature arabes, Paris, Collège de France.

1955: Ibn Iyâs, Muḥammad ibn Ahmad, Journal d'un bourgeois du Caire, chronique d'Ibn Iyâs , translated and annotated by Gaston Wiet, Paris, S.E.V.P.E.N., (Bibliothèque générale de l'École pratique des hautes études).

1959: Le minaret de Djâm : la découverte de la capitale des sultans ghorîdes : XIIe-XIIIe , with André Maricq, (foreword by Daniel Schlumberger ), Paris, Klincksieck, (Mémoires de la Délégation archéologique française en Afghanistan, XVI).

1961: Gaston Wiet, Grandeur de l'Islam, de Mahomet à François Ier , Paris, Éditions de la Table ronde . (Reprint Éditions Kontre Kulture [ fr ] , 2014) 1964–1965: La configuration de la terre ( Kitab Surat al-Ard ) by Ibn Hauqal , translations and notes by Gaston Wiet and J.H. Kramers , Paris, Maisonneuve et Larose, 2 vol.

1966: Introduction à la littérature arabe , Paris, Maisonneuve et Larose [ fr ] .

References [ edit ] ^ Digital archive of civil registry of Paris, birth certificate N°2/1334/1887,date and place of death mentioned in the margin of the act.

^ After the Republican coup, Gaston Wiet, who was, somehow, a senior "officer" of the Egyptian monarchy, was invited, with discretion, to leave office by the new authorities.

External links [ edit ] Grandeur de l’Islam , par Gaston Wiet on Le bréviaire des patriotes Grandeur de l'Islam on Kontre Kulture Wiet (Gaston), Grandeur de l'Islam on Persée Notice nécrologique (Académie des inscriptions et belles-lettres) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Greece Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Portals : linguistics France Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gaston_Wiet&oldid=1292845452 " Categories : French orientalists French Arabists Arabic–French translators Academic staff of the Collège de France Members of the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres Members of the Institut Français d'Archéologie Orientale 1887 births Scientists from Paris 1971 deaths 20th-century French translators Hidden category: CS1 French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 29 May 2025, at 04:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gaston Wiet 6 languages Add topic

