Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Early poetry 2.2 New-York Review 2.3 New-York Evening Post 2.4 Picturesque America 2.5 Translation of Homer 3 Death 4 Critical response 5 Legacy 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents William Cullen Bryant 26 languages العربية تۆرکجه Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano Қазақша Latina Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American writer and journalist For the late 19th Century American populist orator and politician, see William Jennings Bryan .

William Cullen Bryant Cabinet card of Bryant by José Maria Mora , c.

1876 Born ( 1794-11-03 ) November 3, 1794 Cummington, Massachusetts , U.S.

Died June 12, 1878 (1878-06-12) (aged 83) New York City , U.S.

Resting place Roslyn Cemetery , Greenvale, New York , U.S.

Occupation Poet journalist editor Alma mater Williams College Notable works " Thanatopsis " Relatives Charity Bryant , Sylvia Drake (aunts) Signature Literature portal William Cullen Bryant (November 3, 1794 – June 12, 1878) was an American romantic poet , journalist, and long-time editor of the New York Evening Post . Born in Massachusetts, he started his career as a lawyer but showed an interest in poetry early in his life.

In 1825, Bryant relocated to New York City , where he became an  editor of two major newspapers. He also emerged as one of the most significant poets in early literary America and has been grouped among the fireside poets for his accessible and popular poetry.

Early life and education [ edit ] Bryant was born on November 3, 1794, [ 1 ] in a log cabin near Cummington, Massachusetts ; this home of his birth is commemorated with a plaque.

[ 2 ] He was the second son of Peter Bryant (August 12, 1767 – March 20, 1820), a physician and later a state legislator , and Sarah Snell (December 4, 1768 – May 6, 1847). The genealogy of his mother traces back to passengers on the Mayflower , including John Alden (1599–1687), his wife Priscilla Mullins, and her parents William and Alice Mullins. The story of the romance between John and Priscilla is the subject of a famous narrative poem The Courtship of Miles Standish , by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow , who was also their descendant.

He was the nephew of Charity Bryant , a Vermont -based seamstress, who is the subject of Rachel Hope Cleves 's 2014 book, Charity and Sylvia: A Same-Sex Marriage in Early America .

[ 3 ] Bryant described their relationship: "If I were permitted to draw the veil of private life, I would briefly give you the singular, and to me interesting, story of two maiden ladies who dwell in this valley. I would tell you how, in their youthful days, they took each other as companions for life, and how this union, no less sacred to them than the tie of marriage, has subsisted, in uninterrupted harmony, for more than forty years." [ 4 ] Charity and Sylvia Drake are buried together at Weybridge Hill Cemetery in Weybridge, Vermont .

Bryant and his family moved to a new home when he was two years old. Bryant's boyhood home, William Cullen Bryant Homestead , is now a museum. After just one year at Williams College , which he entered with sophomore standing, Bryant hoped to transfer to Yale . But a talk with his father led him to realize that the family's finances could not support it. His father advised Bryant to purse a legal career as his best available choice, and the disappointed poet began to study law in Worthington and Bridgewater in Massachusetts .

In 1815, Bryant was admitted to the bar and began practicing law in nearby Plainfield , walking the seven miles from Cummington every day. On one of these walks, in December 1815, he noticed a single bird flying on the horizon; the sight moved him enough to write " To a Waterfowl ".

[ 5 ] Bryant developed his interest in poetry early in life. Under his father's tutelage, he emulated Alexander Pope and other Neo-Classic British poets. " The Embargo ", a critical work on President Thomas Jefferson published in 1808, reflected Bryant's Federalist political views. The first edition quickly sold out, partly because of publicity attached to Bryant's young age at the time of its publication. A second, expanded edition included Bryant's translation of classical verse. During his collegiate studies and his reading for the law, he wrote little poetry, but encounters with the Graveyard Poets and then William Wordsworth regenerated his passion for what Bryant called "the witchery of song." [ 6 ] Career [ edit ] Early poetry [ edit ] Engraving of Bryant, c.

1843 An 1867 portrait of Hiram Powers and Bryant, now housed at the National Gallery of Art , in Washington, D.C.

" Thanatopsis " is Bryant's most famous poem, which Bryant may have been working on as early as 1811.

In 1817, his father took some pages of verse from his son's desk, and at the invitation of Willard Phillips, an editor of the North American Review who had previously been tutored in the classics by Bryant, submitted them along with his own work. The editor of the Review, Edward Tyrrel Channing , read the poem to associate editor Richard Henry Dana Sr.

, who immediately exclaimed, "That was never written on this side of the water!" [ 7 ] Someone at the North American joined two of the son's discrete fragments, gave the result the Greek-derived title Thanatopsis ("meditation on death"), mistakenly attributed it to the father, and published it. After clarification of the authorship, the son's poems began appearing with some regularity in the Review . A portion of Bryant's poem, Thanatopsis, is at the base of the William Cullen Bryant Memorial behind the New York Public Library , which was dedicated in 1911. " To a Waterfowl ", published in 1821, was the most popular.

[ citation needed ] On January 11, 1821, [ 8 ] still striving to build a legal career, Bryant married Frances Fairchild. Soon after, he received an invitation to speak from Phi Beta Kappa at Harvard University to deliver the August commencement. Bryant spent months working on "The Ages", a panorama in verse of the history of civilization, culminating in the establishment of the United States. He subsequently published "The Ages", which led the volume and was titled Poems , which he arranged to publish on the same trip to Harvard. For that book, he added sets of lines at the beginning and end of "Thanatopsis" that changed the poem.

"Thanatopsis" established Bryant's career as a poet. From 1816 to 1825, Bryant depended on his law practice in Great Barrington, Massachusetts to sustain his family financially but he traded his unrewarding profession for New York City and the promise of a literary career. With the encouragement of a distinguished and well-connected literary family, the Sedgwicks, he quickly gained a foothold in New York City's vibrant cultural life.

By 1832, after publishing an expanded version of Poems in the U.S. and, with the assistance of Washington Irving , in Great Britain , Bryant began to be recognized as one of his generation's greatest poets.

New-York Review [ edit ] Bryant's first employment, in 1825, was as editor of the New-York Review , which merged with the United States Review and Literary Gazette the following year, in 1826. Bryant's stories over the seven-year period from his time with the Review to the publication of Tales of Glauber Spa in 1832 show a variety of strategies, making him the most inventive of practitioners of the genre during this early stage of its evolution.

[ 9 ] New-York Evening Post [ edit ] In the throes of the failing struggle to raise subscriptions, he accepted part-time duties with the New-York Evening Post under William Coleman ; then, partly because of Coleman's ill health, traceable to the consequences of a duel and then a stroke, Bryant's responsibilities expanded rapidly. From assistant editor he rose to editor-in-chief and co-owner of the newspaper that had been founded by Alexander Hamilton. Over the next half century, the Post would become the most respected paper in the city and, from the election of Andrew Jackson , the major platform in the Northeast for the Democratic Party and subsequently of the Free Soil and Republican Parties. In the process, the Evening-Post also became the pillar of a substantial fortune. Despite his Federalist beginnings, Bryant had shifted to being one of the most liberal voices of the century.

An early supporter of organized labor , with his 1836 editorials asserting the right of workmen to strike, Bryant also defended religious minorities and immigrants, and promoted the abolition of slavery.

[ 10 ] He "threw himself into the foreground of the battle for human rights" [ 11 ] and did not cease speaking out against the corrupting influence of certain bankers in spite of their efforts to break down the paper.

[ 12 ] According to newspaper historian Frank Luther Mott, Bryant was "a great liberal seldom done justice by modern writers".

[ 13 ] He was elected an associate fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1855.

[ 14 ] Despite his once staunch opposition to Thomas Jefferson and his party , Bryant became one of the key supporters in the Northeast of that same party under Jackson. Bryant's views, always progressive though not quite populist, led him to join the Free Soilers when the Free Soil Party became a core of the new Republican Party in 1856.

Bryant vigorously campaigned for John Frémont , which enhanced his standing in party councils. In 1860, he was one of the prime Eastern exponents of Abraham Lincoln , and Bryant introduced Lincoln at Cooper Union prior to his Cooper Union speech , which was considered influential in lifting Lincoln to the nomination and then the presidency. In the 1860 presidential election , he elected Lincoln and Hannibal Hamlin as a presidential elector .

[ 15 ] Picturesque America [ edit ] Bryant edited Picturesque America , which was published between 1872 and 1874. This two-volume set was lavishly illustrated and described scenic places in the United States and Canada .

[ 16 ] Translation of Homer [ edit ] In his final years, Bryant shifted from writing his own poetry to a blank verse translation of Homer 's works. He assiduously worked on the Iliad and The Odyssey from 1871 to 1874. He is also remembered as one of the principal authorities on homeopathy and as a hymnist for the Unitarian Church , both legacies of his father's influence on him.

In 1843, Bryant bought a house in Roslyn Harbor on Long Island . He christened and named the house Cedarmere because of the cedar trees around its pond.

In 1865, he bought the farmhouse in Cummington, where he grew up and summered annually until his death. He made substantial improvements to the houses at both properties. He was known for his attention to trees on his land, and later in life he expressed concerns that deforestation in the United States would prove disastrous for American agriculture.

[ 17 ] Death [ edit ] Bryant died in 1878 of complications from an accidental fall suffered after participating in a Central Park ceremony to honor Italian patriot Giuseppe Mazzini . He is buried at Roslyn Cemetery in Greenvale, New York .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Critical response [ edit ] Kindred Spirits , an 1849 portrait by Asher Durand , depicting Bryant with Thomas Cole Bryant became one of the most significant poets in early American literary history. He is typically included among the group of poets referred to as the fireside poets , along with Longfellow, John Greenleaf Whittier , James Russell Lowell , and Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.

[ 20 ] They are considered to be among the first American poets whose popularity rivaled that of British poets , both at home and abroad and are so named because their writing was a source of entertainment for families gathered around the fire at home.

[ 21 ] Bryant's poetry has been described as being "of a thoughtful, meditative character, and makes but slight appeal to the mass of readers." [ 22 ] Edgar Allan Poe praised Bryant and specifically the poem "June" in his essay " The Poetic Principle ": The rhythmical flow, here, is even voluptuous—nothing could be more melodious. The poem has always affected me in a remarkable manner. The intense melancholy which seems to well up, perforce, to the surface of all the poet's cheerful sayings about his grave, we find thrilling us to the soul—while there is the truest poetic elevation in the thrill. The impression left is one of a pleasurable sadness.

[ 23 ] Editor and children's writer Mary Mapes Dodge wrote that Bryant's poems "have wrought vast and far-reaching good in the world." She predicted, "You will admire more and more, as you grow older, the noble poems of this great and good man." [ 24 ] Poet and literary critic Thomas Holley Chivers said that the "only thing [Bryant] ever wrote that may be called Poetry is 'Thanatopsis', which he stole line for line from the Spanish. The fact is, that he never did anything but steal—as nothing he ever wrote is original." [ 25 ] Writer and critic John Neal wrote in American Writers (1824–25): "Mr. B. is not and never will be a good poet. He wants fire—he wants the very rashness of a poet—the prodigality and fervor of those who are overflowing with inspiration." [ 26 ] This critique may have influenced Lowell, who wrote a very similar criticism in his 1848 poem A Fable for Critics .

[ 27 ] Bryant's poetry is tender and graceful, pervaded by a contemplative melancholy, and a love of solitude and the silence of the woods. Though he was brought up to admire Pope, and in his early youth imitated him, he was one of the first American poets to throw off his influence. Bryant had an interest in science and in geology especially.

Thomas Cole was a friend and both, at different times, considered the "geological structure" of Volterra in Italy.  He met Charles Lyell in England in 1845.

[ 28 ] As a writer, Bryant was an early advocate of American literary nationalism , and his own poetry focusing on nature as a metaphor for truth established a central pattern in the American literary tradition.

Some [ 29 ] however, argue that a reassessment is long overdue. It finds great merit in a couple of short stories Bryant wrote while trying to build interest in periodicals he edited. More importantly, it perceives a poet of great technical sophistication who was a progenitor of Walt Whitman , to whom he was a mentor.

[ 29 ] Legacy [ edit ] William Cullen Bryant Memorial , a statue of Bryant in Bryant Park next to the New York Public Library in Midtown Manhattan Although Bryant was born in New England , where his family had deep ties, he spent almost all of his life as a devout and influential New Yorker. He helped conceive of the idea of a large park in Manhattan , which ultimately led to development of Central Park . He also was a leading proponent of creating the Metropolitan Museum of Art , and he was one of a group of founders of New York Medical College as well as the Century Association .

[ 30 ] He had close affinities with the Hudson River School of art and was a close friend of Thomas Cole .

In 1884, in recognition of Bryant, Reservoir Square, at the intersection of 42nd Street and Sixth Avenue, was renamed Bryant Park . Reservoir Square was behind New York City 's massive above-ground reservoir, on Fifth Avenue. In 1900 the reservoir was demolished and replaced by the main building of the New York Public Library. In 1915, a statue of William Cullen Bryant by sculptor Herbert Adams was one of the statues of “Eminent Americans” that surrounded The Palace of Fine Arts at the Panama Pacific International Exposition in San Francisco, California . The William Cullen Bryant Memorial in Bryant Park includes a bronze of the same work.

Just outside New York City, the Long Island village of Roslyn Harbor, New York is home to the William Cullen Bryant Preserve, located on land he formerly owned next to what is now the Nassau County Museum of Art . Bryant is also the namesake of the Bryant Library in Roslyn, New York , located near his Cedarmere Estate .

Other locations named after Bryant include: Bryant, a neighborhood in Seattle ; Bryant Woods, one of the four original villages in Columbia, Maryland ; Cullen Bryant Park in Toronto, Ontario ; the Bryant Free Library in Cummington, Massachusetts; and the Bryant House at Williams College .

Several schools are named after Bryant, including William Cullen Bryant High School in Long Island City, New York , and elementary schools in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, Teaneck, New Jersey, Long Beach, California , [ 31 ] Cleveland, Ohio , and Great Barrington, Massachusetts . A rural schoolhouse in Sanford, Maine was also named for Bryant.

The William Cullen Bryant Viaduct between Flower Hill and Roslyn, New York is named in honor of Bryant – as is The Bryant Library , which serves as the Roslyn community's public library.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Martin Luther King Jr.

quoted Bryant in his speech " Give Us the Ballot ", when he said, "there is something in this universe which justifies William Cullen Bryant in saying: 'Truth crushed to earth will rise again.

' " [ 34 ] See also [ edit ] Cullen, Saskatchewan and Bryant, Saskatchewan Notes [ edit ] ^ Nelson, Randy F. (1981).

The Almanac of American Letters . Los Altos, California: William Kaufmann, Inc. pp.

48 .

ISBN 0-86576-008-X .

^ Ehrlich, Eugene and Gorton Carruth.

The Oxford Illustrated Literary Guide to the United States . New York: Oxford University Press, 1982: 46.

ISBN 0-19-503186-5 ^ "The improbable, 200-year-old story of one of America's first same-sex 'marriages'" .

Washington Post , March 20, 2015.

^ "Image 142 of Letters of a traveller; or, Notes of things seen in Europe and America" .

Library of Congress, Washington, D.C. 20540 USA . Retrieved 2024-11-20 .

^ Ehrlich, Eugene and Gorton Carruth.

The Oxford Illustrated Literary Guide to the United States . New York: Oxford University Press, 1982: 56.

ISBN 0-19-503186-5 ^ " "I Broke the Spell That Held Me Long" " .

The Poetry Foundation . 2019-01-02 . Retrieved 2024-11-20 .

^ Brooks, Van Wyck (1952).

The Flowering of New England . New York: E. P. Dutton and Company. p. 116.

^ Vital Records of Great Barrington, Massachusetts, to the Year 1850 .

NEHGS . 1904. p.

31 .

His 1878 biographer, Parke Godwin , confused the issue of the marriage date through a typographical error, as explained at Genealogy.com ^ Gado, Frank (ed.) The Complete Stories of William Cullen Bryant . Antoc, 2014.

^ Bryant, William Cullen (1994).

Power For Sanity: Selected Editorials of William Cullen Bryant, 1829-61 . New York: Fordham University Press.

^ Felton, Cornelius, in North America Review , quoted in Parke Godwin, A Biography of William Cullen Bryant (New York: D. Appleton, 1993) I, pp. 400–401.

^ Bryant, Evening Post , November 25, 1837 ^ American Journalism, a History, 1690–1960 , Macmillan (1962).

^ "Book of Members, 1780–2010: Chapter B" (PDF) . American Academy of Arts and Sciences . Retrieved September 15, 2016 .

^ Proceedings of the New York Electoral College, Held at the Capitol in the City of Albany, December 4, 1860 . Albany: Weed, Parsons & Company. 1861. p. 11.

^ "Steel engraved prints from 'Picturesque America' by William Cullen Bryant 1872–1874: Some Background Information About the Author: W. C. Bryant and the Prints" (2016). Antiqua Print Gallery.

^ John Hay, Postapocalyptic Fantasies in Antebellum American Literature (Cambridge University Press, 2017), 135-142.

ISBN 9781108289566 ^ The Bryant Library ^ "Roslyn Cemetery | Profiles | Roslyn Landmark Society" .

www.roslynlandmarks.org . Retrieved 2024-11-04 .

^ Heymann, C. David.

American Aristocracy: The Lives and Times of James Russell, Amy, and Robert Lowell . New York: Dodd, Mead & Company, 1980: 91.

ISBN 0-396-07608-4 ^ Bertens, Hans and Theo D'haen.

American Literature: A History . London: Routledge, 2014: 62.

ISBN 978-0-415-56998-9 ^ Alexander K. McClure, ed. (1902).

Famous American Statesmen & Orators . Vol. VI. New York: F. F. Lovell Publishing Company. p. 62.

^ Sova, Dawn B.

Edgar Allan Poe: A to Z . New York: Checkmark Books, 2001: 37.

ISBN 0-8160-4161-X ^ Sorby, Angela.

Schoolroom Poets: Childhood, Performance, and the Place of American Poetry, 1865–1917 . Durham, NH: University of New Hampshire Press, 2005: 77.

ISBN 1-58465-458-9 ^ Parks, Edd Winfield (1962).

Ante-Bellum Southern Literary Critics . Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press. p. 175.

^ Daggett, Windsor (1920).

A Down-East Yankee From the District of Maine . Portland, Maine: A.J. Huston. p. 13.

OCLC 1048477735 .

^ Pattee, Fred Lewis (1937). "Introduction". In Pattee, Fred Lewis (ed.).

American Writers: A Series of Papers Contributed to Blackwood's Magazine (1824–1825) . Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press. p. 23.

OCLC 464953146 .

^ Ringe, D.A., 1955.

William Cullen Bryant and the Science of Geology . American Literature, 26(4): 507-514.

^ a b Frank Gado, ed. (1996).

Famous American Statesmen & Orators . New York: Antoca. p. 198.

^ "About NYMC" . New York Medical College.

^ D. H. Coop (2011).

"School News" (PDF) . p. 8.

^ "Bill Introduced By Senator Martins to Rename Roslyn Viaduct Passes Senate" .

NY State Senate . 2012-03-27 . Retrieved 2020-08-09 .

^ "Bryant Library (Roslyn War Memorial Building) | Profiles | Roslyn Landmark Society" .

www.roslynlandmarks.org . Retrieved 2024-11-04 .

^ King, Martin Luther Jr. (17 May 1957).

" 'Give Us the Ballot', Address at the Prayer Pilgrimage for Freedom" .

References [ edit ] William Cullen Bryant: An American Voice by Frank Gado ( ISBN 978-1-58465-619-7 ) William Cullen Bryant by Charles H. Brown ( ISBN 978-0-684-12370-7 ) This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Cousin, John William (1910).

A Short Biographical Dictionary of English Literature . London: J. M. Dent & Sons – via Wikisource .

Further reading [ edit ] Muller, Gilbert H.

William Cullen Bryant: Author of America Archived 2008-05-15 at the Wayback Machine . New York: State University of New York Press, 2008.

ISBN 978-0-7914-7467-9 Symington, Andrew James.

William Cullen Bryant: a biographical sketch : with selections from his poems and other writings . New York: Harper and Brothers, 1880.

Internet Archive .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to William Cullen Bryant .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: William Cullen Bryant Wikimedia Commons has media related to William Cullen Bryant .

Works Works by William Cullen Bryant at Project Gutenberg Works by or about William Cullen Bryant at the Internet Archive Works by William Cullen Bryant at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Bryant's edition of the Odyssey "THE SKELETON'S CAVE" by William Cullen Bryant; taken from "Tales of Glauber Spa" (1832) Other Essay on William Cullen Bryant by Wynn Yarborough Mr. Lincoln and Friends: William Cullen Bryant Archived 2015-09-25 at the Wayback Machine William Cullen Bryant Homestead in Cummington, Mass.

"Perspectives in American Literature - A Research and Reference Guide - An Ongoing Project" by Paul P. Reuben v t e Romanticism Countries Denmark England (literature) France (literature) Germany Japan Norway Poland Russia (literature) Scotland Spain (literature) Sweden (literature) Movements Ancients Bohemianism Coppet group Counter-Enlightenment Dark Düsseldorf School German historical school Gothic revival Hudson River School Indianism Jena Lake Poets Nationalist Nazarene movement Neo Pre Sturm und Drang Post Purismo Transcendentalism Ukrainian school Ultra Wallenrodism Themes Blue flower British Marine Gesamtkunstwerk Gothic fiction Hero Byronic Romantic Historical fiction Mal du siècle Medievalism Noble savage Nostalgia Ossian Pantheism Rhine Romantic genius Wanderlust Weltschmerz White Mountain art Writers Brazil Abreu Alencar Manuel Antônio de Almeida Alves Assis Azevedo Barreto Dias Guimarães Macedo Magalhães Reis Taunay Varela France Baudelaire Bertrand Chateaubriand Dumas Gautier Hugo Lamartine Mérimée Musset Nerval Nodier Staël Vigny Germany A. v. Arnim B. v. Arnim Beer Brentano Eichendorff Fouqué Goethe Brothers Grimm Günderrode Gutzkow Hauff Heine Hoffmann Hölderlin Jean Paul Kleist Mörike Novalis Schwab Tieck Uhland Great Britain Barbauld Blake Anne Brontë C. Brontë E. Brontë Burns Byron Carlyle Clare Coleridge de Quincey Maria Edgeworth Keats Maturin Polidori Radcliffe Mary Robinson Scott Seward M. Shelley P. B. Shelley Southey Wordsworth Poland Fredro Krasiński Józef Ignacy Kraszewski Malczewski Mickiewicz Norwid Potocki Wincenty Pol Słowacki Portugal Castelo Branco Castilho João de Deus Dinis Garrett Herculano Soares dos Passos Romania Mihail Kogălniceanu Constantin Negruzzi Vasile Alecsandri Dimitrie Bolintineanu Mihai Eminescu George Coșbuc Octavian Goga Alexandru Macedonski Barbu Ștefănescu Delavrancea Russia Baratynsky Batyushkov Gogol Karamzin Küchelbecker Lermontov Pushkin Tyutchev Vyazemsky Zhukovsky Serbia Jakšić Kostić Njegoš Radičević Stojadinović-Srpkinja Zmaj Spain Bécquer Rosalía de Castro Espronceda Gutiérrez Saavedra Zorrilla U.S.

Bryant Cooper Emerson Hawthorne Josiah Gilbert Holland Irving Longfellow Lowell Poe Other Abovian Alfieri Andersen Baratashvili Botev Chavchavadze Foscolo Frashëri Geijer Grundtvig Heliade Isaacs Lenau Leopardi Mácha Manzoni Maturin Oehlenschläger Orbeliani Prešeren Raffi Runeberg Shevchenko Topelius Vörösmarty Wergeland Musicians Austria Bruckner Czerny Hummel Mahler Schubert Thalberg Wolf Czechia Dvořák Moscheles Reicha Smetana Voříšek France Adam Alkan Auber Berlioz Fauré Halévy Méhul Onslow Saint-Saëns Germany Beethoven Brahms Bruch Kalkbrenner Loewe Marschner Fanny Mendelssohn Felix Mendelssohn Meyerbeer Moszkowski C. Schumann R. Schumann Spohr Strauss Wagner Weber Great Britain Elgar Holst Vaughan Williams Hungary Erkel Goldmark Heller Hubay Joachim Liszt Italy Bellini Busoni Cherubini Donizetti Paganini Respighi Rossini Spontini Verdi Poland Bortkiewicz Chopin Lipiński Moniuszko Paderewski Stolpe Tausig Wieniawski Russia Arensky Balakirev Borodin Cui Glinka Lyapunov Medtner Mussorgsky Rachmaninoff Rimsky-Korsakov Rubinstein Scriabin Tchaikovsky Serbia Hristić Konjović Mokranjac Stanković U.S.

Chadwick Beach Foote Foster Joplin MacDowell Sousa Other Bennett Berwald Field Franck Grieg Sibelius Sor Philosophers Belinsky Berchet Burke Carlyle Chaadayev Coleridge Constant Emerson Fichte Goethe Hazlitt Hegel Khomyakov Lamennais Larra Maistre Mazzini Michelet Müller Novalis Quinet Rousseau Schelling Schiller A. Schlegel F. Schlegel Schleiermacher Senancour Snellman Staël Thoreau Tieck Wackenroder Visual artists Aivazovsky Bierstadt Blake Bonington Bryullov Chassériau Church Constable Cole Corot Dahl David d'Angers Delacroix Edelfelt Friedrich Fuseli Gallen-Kallela Géricault Girodet Głowacki Goya Gude Hayez Janmot Jones Kiprensky Koch Lampi Leutze Martin Michałowski Palmer Porto-Alegre Préault Révoil Richard Rude Runge Saleh Scheffer Stattler Stroy Tidemand Tropinin Turner Veit Ward Wiertz Scholars Abraham Abrams Barzun Beiser Berlin Blanning Bloom Blume Dahlhaus Ferber Frye Janion Lacoue-Labarthe Lovejoy de Man Nancy Porthan Ricks Rosen Wellek Related topics Coleridge's theory of life German idealism List of romantics List of Romantic poets Middle Ages in history Opium and Romanticism Romantic ballet Romantic epistemology Romantic medicine Romantic poetry Romantic psychology Romanticism and economics Romanticism and the French Revolution Romanticism in science Bacon Evolution theory Wanderer above the Sea of Fog ← Age of Enlightenment Modernism → Category v t e Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees John Adams John Quincy Adams Jane Addams Louis Agassiz Susan B. Anthony John James Audubon George Bancroft Clara Barton Henry Ward Beecher Alexander Graham Bell Daniel Boone Edwin Booth Louis Brandeis Phillips Brooks William Cullen Bryant Luther Burbank Andrew Carnegie George Washington Carver William Ellery Channing Rufus Choate Henry Clay Grover Cleveland James Fenimore Cooper Peter Cooper Charlotte Cushman James Buchanan Eads Thomas Alva Edison Jonathan Edwards Ralph Waldo Emerson David Farragut Stephen Foster Benjamin Franklin Robert Fulton Josiah W. Gibbs William C. Gorgas Ulysses S. Grant Asa Gray Alexander Hamilton Nathaniel Hawthorne Joseph Henry Patrick Henry Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.

Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

Mark Hopkins Elias Howe Washington Irving Andrew Jackson Thomas J. Jackson Thomas Jefferson John Paul Jones James Kent Sidney Lanier Robert E. Lee Abraham Lincoln Henry Wadsworth Longfellow James Russell Lowell Mary Lyon Edward MacDowell James Madison Horace Mann John Marshall Matthew Fontaine Maury Albert A. Michelson Maria Mitchell James Monroe Samuel F. B. Morse William T. G. Morton John Lothrop Motley Simon Newcomb Thomas Paine Alice Freeman Palmer Francis Parkman George Peabody William Penn Edgar Allan Poe Walter Reed Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Augustus Saint-Gaudens William Tecumseh Sherman John Philip Sousa Joseph Story Harriet Beecher Stowe Gilbert Stuart Sylvanus Thayer Henry David Thoreau Mark Twain Lillian Wald Booker T. Washington George Washington Daniel Webster George Westinghouse James McNeill Whistler Walt Whitman Eli Whitney John Greenleaf Whittier Emma Willard Frances Willard Roger Williams Woodrow Wilson Orville Wright Wilbur Wright Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Artists MusicBrainz Discography of American Historical Recordings People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC 2 Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=William_Cullen_Bryant&oldid=1299220039 " Categories : 1794 births 1878 deaths 19th-century American poets 19th-century American male writers 1860 United States presidential electors American male poets American people of English descent American Unitarians Bryant Park Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees Knickerbocker Group New York Post people New York (state) Democrats New York (state) Free Soilers New York (state) Republicans People from Cummington, Massachusetts People from Roslyn, New York People from Roslyn Harbor, New York Poets from Massachusetts Poets from New York (state) Romantic poets Translators of Homer Williams College alumni Newspaper poets Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 Wikipedia articles incorporating text from A Short Biographical Dictionary of English Literature Webarchive template wayback links Commons link from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 04:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents William Cullen Bryant 26 languages Add topic

