Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Habitat and Ecology 4 Description 5 References Toggle the table of contents Kraken carinae 1 language Magyar Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Kraken (genus) ) Genus of single-celled organisms Kraken Kraken carinae Scientific classification Domain: Eukaryota Clade : Sar Clade : Rhizaria Phylum: Cercozoa Class: Imbricatea Subclass: Krakenia Cavalier-Smith 2018 Order: Krakenida Dumack et al.

2017 ex Cavalier-Smith 2018 Family: Krakenidae Dumack et al.

2017 Genus: Kraken Dumack et al. 2016 Type species Kraken carinae Dumack et al.

2016 Kraken is a genus of amoebae within the Cercozoa , containing the sole species Kraken carinae . These amoebae are characterized by a small round cell body and a network of thin and very long filopodia that can reach up to a mm in diameter. Kraken amoebae feed on bacteria and live in freshwater and soil systems.

Etymology [ edit ] Kraken was named after the German word Krakonen, which is the name used to refer to the Norse mythological monster .

Kraken was named as such due to the method of feeding, in which the large network of branching filopodia grab bacteria and transports it to the cell body. The mythological monster Kraken was told to catch its prey with one of its many arms in a similar manner.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Kraken is a recently discovered genus, having first been described in 2016 at the University of Koln. Thomas Cavalier-Smith established the phylum Cercozoa in 1998, which consists of flagellates and filose amoebae that are widely morphologically diverse. Genetic analysis and morphological characteristics place the Genus Kraken as a Cercozoan.

[ 2 ] Currently, the genus consists of a single species, Kraken carinae . Through genetic analysis, ultrastructure data, and phylogenetic analysis, Kraken could not accurately be placed in an existing family, thus the new family Krakenidae was established. Currently, it is being considered to establish the new order Krakenida.

[ 3 ] Habitat and Ecology [ edit ] Kraken has only been observed and collected from Europe and Antarctica , though it is suspected to be distributed worldwide.

Kraken is found in dry surface soil sediment, most prevalently in bacteria rich environments. Members have also been collected in freshwater lakes and aquatic moss pillars in the Antarctic region, suggesting a wider possible range of tolerance and habitability.

[ 1 ] The full extent of Krakens preferred environment has not been studied.

Some organisms have also been collected in agricultural crops, particularly growing around wheat . This may suggest some ecosystem interactions that have yet to be studied further.

[ 1 ] Kraken preys predominantly on bacteria.

Description [ edit ] Kraken consists of a round cell body, that is typically 7-9 μm in diameter. One large filopodium originates from the basal end of the cell body, and expands up to 300 μm. The filopodium branches extensively and forms a very large network, expanding the diameter of the organism to over 500 μm. The filopodia are thin, and taper at the ends.

Kraken are very fragile. When the cell body is slightly mechanically disturbed in a lab setting, the filopodia retract close to the cell body. This often leads to cell death.

[ 1 ] The filopodia are used to catch prey, mainly bacteria. The filopodia catch and attach prey through their vast network. These bacteria then glide through or along the filopodia to the cell body for digestion.

[ 1 ] The cell body does not have any covering, instead it is surrounded by scales. These scales are formed in the cisternae of the Golgi apparatus, and carried to the surface. The scales are made of silica, are evenly distributed around the cell body, and do not overlap.

[ 3 ] Typically Kraken has only one nucleus, though binucleate organisms have been observed. The organisms means of reproduction have not been studied, and whether it reproduces by sexual or asexual means is unknown. The nuclei contain one large round nucleolus each.

[ 3 ] The cell body contains a contractile vacuole, a single large food vacuole, and several small granules. Also present is various numbers of mitochondria with flat shaped cristae. The periphery of the cell body is lined with extrusomes, and consists of an internal capsule that discharges and catches prey.

[ 3 ] Kraken has the ability to encyst when dormant.

Kraken movement is relatively slow. There are 3 highly unusual methods of movement. The filopodium can grip the substrate and carry the cell body above the surface by a swaying locomotive action. The cell body can also move along a deeply branched filopodia. In a unique manner, Kraken can also completely disassemble its cell body and transport cell material through the filopodia network, where it is then deposited and reassembled elsewhere. This serves to move the cell body to the distal ends of the filopodia, which can then reposition and branch to new areas.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Dumack, Kenneth; Schuster, Julia; Bass, David; Bonkowski, Michael (June 2016). "A Novel Lineage of 'Naked Filose Amoebae'; Kraken carinae gen. nov. sp. nov. (Cercozoa) with a Remarkable Locomotion by Disassembly of its Cell Body".

Protist .

167 (3): 268– 278.

doi : 10.1016/j.protis.2016.04.002 .

PMID 27236418 .

^ Cavalier-Smith, T. (August 1998). "A revised six-kingdom system of life".

Biological Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society .

73 (3): 203– 266.

doi : 10.1017/S0006323198005167 .

^ a b c d e Dumack, Kenneth; Mylnikov, Alexander P.; Bonkowski, Michael (July 2017). "Evolutionary Relationship of the Scale-Bearing Kraken (incertae sedis, Monadofilosa, Cercozoa, Rhizaria): Combining Ultrastructure Data and a Two-Gene Phylogeny".

Protist .

168 (3): 362– 373.

doi : 10.1016/j.protis.2017.04.004 .

PMID 28582680 .

v t e Rhizaria classification Domain Archaea Bacteria Eukaryota (major groups Metamonada Discoba Diaphoretickes Hacrobia Cryptista Rhizaria Alveolata Stramenopiles Plants Amorphea Amoebozoa Opisthokonta Animals Fungi Mesomycetozoea ) Cercozoa Granofilosea Cryptofilida Desmothoracida h Leucodictyida af Limnofilida a Chlorarachnea a Chlorarachnida Minorisida Rhabdamoeba Monadofilosa Eoglissa Metromonadea Metopiida Metromonadida Helkesea af Helkesida Ventrifilosa Sarcomonadea * af Glissomonadida Katabiidae Paracercomonadida Cercomonadida Imbricatea Krakenida Spongomonadida Marimonadida Variglissida Discocelida Discomonadida Silicofilosea Thaumatomonadida f Euglyphida t Thecofilosea Ventricleftia Ventricleftida Tectosia Tectofilosida Phaeodarea h Phaeogymnocellida Phaeocystida Phaeosphaerida Phaeocalpida Phaeogromida Phaeoconchida Eothecia Cryomonadida f Ebriacea f Matazida Endomyxa Marimyxia Gromiidea Gromiida t Reticulosida a Ascetosporea s Claustrosporida Haplosporida Mikrocytida Paradinida Paramyxida Proteomyxia Vampyrellidea Vampyrellida Phytomyxea m Phagomyxida Plasmodiophorida Marinomyxa Retaria Radiolaria h Sticholonchea Taxopodida Acantharea Arthracanthida Chaunocanthida Holocanthida Symphyacanthida Polycystinea Collodaria Nassellaria Spumellaria Orodaria † Entactinaria Foraminifera a Monothalamea * Allogromiida * Xenophyophorea Astrorhizida * Reticulomyxa Tubothalamea † Fusulinida Miliolida Spirillinida Ammodiscidae Globothalamea Textulariida Rotaliida Robertinida Carterinida Globigerinida † Globotruncanida † Heterohelicida † Guembelitriida Globigerinitoidea incertae sedis Involutinida Lagenida Heterogromia Komokiacea Rhizaria incertae sedis Aquavolonida Tremulida Gymnosphaerida h Labyrinthomyxidae Rhizoplasmidae Myxodictyium Pontomyxa Protomyxa Protogenes Pseudospora Discocelia * paraphyletic †extinct organization type: f flagellates ; a amoebae ; af amoeboflagellates ; t testate amoebae ; h heliozoan amoebae ; s sporozoan-like ; m fungus-like .

Taxon identifiers Kraken Wikidata : Q25344562 GBIF : 10964184 IRMNG : 11913001 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kraken_carinae&oldid=1303614923 " Categories : Rhizaria species Protists described in 2016 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 01:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kraken carinae 1 language Add topic

