Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and career 2 World War II 3 Involvement with ICBM program 4 Return to public life 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Trevor Gardner Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American aeronautical engineer (1915-1963) For the British colonial and university administrator, see Trevor Gardner (administrator) .

Trevor Gardner Born ( 1915-08-24 ) August 24, 1915 Cardiff , Wales Died September 28, 1963 (1963-09-28) (aged 48) Washington, D.C.

, United States of America Years of service U.S. Air Force Trevor Gardner (24 August 1915 - 28 September 1963) was U. S. Assistant Secretary of the Air force for Research and Development during the early 1950s. Together with Bernard Schriever , the Air Staff's Assistant for Development Planning, Gardner was one of the prime movers of the U.S.

ICBM program and was instrumental to the U-2 program.

[ 1 ] Early life and career [ edit ] Gardner was born in Cardiff , Wales, on 24 August 1915. He moved to the United States in 1928 and became a naturalized citizen in 1937. He received a Bachelor of Science degree in engineering from the University of Southern California in 1937. He returned to the University of Southern California to teach freshman mathematics while obtaining his master's degree in business administration which he was awarded in 1939.

World War II [ edit ] During World War II Gardner's work at the California Institute of Technology focused on rocket and atomic bomb projects for the Office of Scientific Research and Development . With the end of World War II, Gardner became associated with General Tire and Rubber Company of California as general manager and executive vice president. Three years later he left to found Hycon Manufacturing Co., an electronics manufacturer. He was president of Hycon until February 1953 when he became the Secretary of the Air Force's Special Assistant for Research and Development.

Involvement with ICBM program [ edit ] U.S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower began his first term by initiating a defense policy that sought to
significantly reduce spending. Gardner was asked to lead a committee and implement an
economy program to reduce missile development activities. Its final report recommended
that promising missile projects should be continued. The Atlas, under development since
1951, was America's best hope, however its development had been constrained by the Air
Force due to the belief that missiles required too great an investment in systems that
seemed "impossible.' "Impatient, Gardner requested a scientific review of all Air Force
missile programs in April 1953. The impetus came from two directions. First, he was
concerned over the growing Soviet threat and, in August 1953, they exploded a hydrogen
bomb. The other trend was the development of lighter nuclear weapons. The "impossible"
ICBM was now much more possible. In October 1953 Gardner established a second
committee — the Teapot Committee — to review the Air Force's strategic missiles — the Snark , Navaho , and Atlas. He directed the committee to find ways to accelerate the development of the Atlas. The
committee issued its report on 10 February 1954. Its thrust called for a "radical
reorganization of the ...[Atlas] project considerably transcending the Convair framework"
Gardner developed a five-year plan to accelerate the Atlas which would yield a
"preliminary capability" by June 1958.

In early 1955 most of the Eisenhower administration assumed that America had a strong
lead over the Soviet Union in strategic technology and felt no particular urgency for the
ICBM programs. The Killian Report indicated that America was becoming vulnerable and
that the ICBM should be given the "highest priority." While an Air Force priority, he
believed that ICBMs must also be a national priority. He indicated that the U. S. could
have a rudimentary ICBM by mid-1958 if the program was conducted on a crash basis.
Eisenhower requested a briefing and, on 28 July 1955, Gardner, von Neumann, and
Schriever made a presentation to the President and the National Security Council . As a result, the National Security Council recommended the ICBM be designated a "research
program of the highest priority" which the President approved on 13 September 1955.
Gardner had achieved his goal.

In January 1955 the Scientific Advisory Committee urged the Air Force to develop a
tactical ballistic missile. All three services developed plans and the interservice rivalry
led to a compromise with the Air Force building the Thor and the Army and Navy in
charge of the Jupiter . Gardner viewed this approach as dangerous since the IRBM could
drain resources from the ICBM and threaten its early delivery. His fears were realized
when President Eisenhower assigned the ICBM and the IRBM "joint" highest national
priority. The ICBM program no longer had a unique status. Trevor Gardner felt betrayed
and resigned his position in protest on 10 February 1956.

[ 2 ] Return to public life [ edit ] After the election in 1960 Gardner again became active in public life. He served on the
President's Space Task Force Commission to review the nation's space program and also
chaired the U.S. Air Force Space Task Force. He also became involved in preventing the
use of weapons. Gardner played a major role in establishing the U. S. Arms Control and
Disarmament Agency and was named to its General Advisory Commission on 1 March
1962. At the time of his death on 28 September 1963 in his home in Washington, D.C.,
Gardner was actively participating in Project Forecast, which was to chart the future
course of the Air Force for the next decade. Gardner died on 28 September 1963.

Gardner was honored by the U.S. Air Force as an Air Force Space and Missile Pioneer in 1997.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Teapot Committee References [ edit ] ^ "Ch7-2" .

^ Time (magazine) ^ "Air Force Space Command - SpaceMissilePioneers" .

www.afspc.af.mil . Archived from the original on 2008-03-14.

External links [ edit ] https://web.archive.org/web/20110930070518/http://www.afspc.af.mil/shared/media/document/AFD-100405-060.pdf Much of this article is taken directly from this U.S. federal government public-domain source.

navy.mil [ dead link ] more biographical material on Gardner Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trevor_Gardner&oldid=1285972572 " Categories : 1915 births 1963 deaths Welsh emigrants to the United States University of Southern California alumni California Institute of Technology people American people of Welsh descent People from Cardiff University of Southern California faculty Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2025 This page was last edited on 16 April 2025, at 22:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trevor Gardner Add languages Add topic

