Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Main definition 2 Darkness (lunar night) 3 Alternate usage Toggle Alternate usage subsection 3.1 Lunar calendars 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Lunar day 9 languages বাংলা فارسی Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Română தமிழ் Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Time for Moon to complete one rotation on its axis For the tidal lunar day of about 24 hours and 50 minutes, see Tide .

"Moon day" redirects here. For the day of the week named after the Moon, see Monday .

A full lunar day observed from the Earth, where orbital libration causes the apparent wobble.

A lunar day is the time it takes for Earth 's Moon to complete on its axis one synodic rotation , meaning with respect to the Sun . Informally, a lunar day and a lunar night is each approximately 14 Earth days. The formal lunar day is therefore the time of a full lunar day-night cycle . Due to tidal locking , this equals the time that the Moon takes to complete one synodic orbit around Earth , a synodic lunar month , returning to the same lunar phase . The synodic period is about 29.53 Earth days, which is about 2.2 days longer than its sidereal period .

Main definition [ edit ] Relative to the fixed stars on the celestial sphere , the Moon takes 27 Earth days , 7 hours, 43 minutes, 12 seconds to complete one orbit ; [ 1 ] however, since the Earth–Moon system advances around the Sun at the same time, the Moon must travel farther to return to the same phase. On average, this synodic period lasts 29 days, 12 hours, 44 minutes, 3 seconds, [ 1 ] the length of a lunar month on Earth. The exact length varies over time because the speed of the Earth–Moon system around the Sun varies slightly during a year due to the eccentricity of its elliptical orbit, variances in orbital velocity , and a number of other periodic and evolving variations about its observed, relative, mean values, which are influenced by the gravitational perturbations of the Sun and other bodies in the Solar System .

As a result, daylight at a given point on the Moon lasts approximately two weeks from beginning to end, followed by approximately two weeks of lunar night .

Darkness (lunar night) [ edit ] Lunar night is the darkest on the far side and during lunar eclipses on the near side (and darker than a moonless night on Earth). On the near side Earthshine makes the night about 43 times brighter, and sometimes even 55 times brighter than a night on Earth illuminated by the light of the full moon. No person has been on the Moon during its night and experienced earthshine.

[ 2 ] Alternate usage [ edit ] The term lunar day may also refer to the period between moonrises or high moon in a particular location on Earth. This period is typically about 50 minutes longer than a 24-hour Earth day, as the Moon orbits the Earth in the same direction as the Earth's axial rotation.

[ 3 ] The term lunar day is also used in the context of night and day, i.e., opposite to the lunar night.  This is common in discussions of the huge difference in temperatures, such as discussion about lunar rovers . For example, "the Soviet Union's Luna missions [...] were designed to survive one lunar day (two Earth weeks)", [ 4 ] while China's Yutu-2 rover, which landed in January 2019, was designed to survive lunar nights by shutting down.

[ 5 ] Lunar calendars [ edit ] In some lunar calendars , such as the Vikram Samvat , a lunar day, or tithi , is defined as 1/30 of a lunar month , or the time it takes for the longitudinal angle between the Moon and the Sun to increase by 12 degrees. By this definition, lunar days generally vary in duration.

See also [ edit ] Lunisolar calendar Mars sol , the Martian day Synodic day References [ edit ] ^ a b "Month" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 15 April 2015 .

^ Siegel, Ethan (March 18, 2017).

"Ask Ethan: How Bright Is The Earth As Seen From The Moon?" .

Forbes . Retrieved April 29, 2025 .

^ "Frequency of Tides - The Lunar Day" .

NOAA . Retrieved 15 May 2019 .

^ "This is why lunar colonies will need to live underground" .

^ Urrutia, Doris Elin (16 May 2019).

"Goodnight, Chang'e-4! China's Probe on Moon's Far Side Naps for Lunar Night" .

space.com . Future US, Inc . Retrieved 15 November 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Lunar days and other lunar data for many different cities . Lunarium.co.uk.

Lunar Standard Time (LST) Archived 2017-11-14 at the Wayback Machine lunarclock.org.

v t e Moon Outline Physical properties Internal structure Topography Atmosphere Gravity field Hill sphere Magnetic field Sodium tail Moonlight Earthlight Orbit Orbital elements Distance Perigee and apogee Libration Nodes Nodal period Precession Syzygy New moon Full moon Eclipses Lunar eclipse Total penumbral lunar eclipse Tetrad Solar eclipse Solar eclipses on the Moon Eclipse cycle Supermoon Tide Tidal force Tidal locking Tidal acceleration Tidal range Lunar station Surface and features Selenography Terminator Limb Hemispheres Near side Far side Poles North pole South pole Face Maria List Mountains Peak of eternal light Valleys Volcanic features Domes Calderas Lava tubes Craters List Ray systems Permanently shadowed craters South Pole–Aitken basin Regolith swirls Rilles Wrinkle ridges Rocks Lunar basalt 70017 Changesite-(Y) Water Space weathering Micrometeorite Sputtering Quakes Transient lunar phenomenon Selenographic coordinate system Science Observation Libration Lunar theory Origin Giant-impact hypothesis Theia Lunar magma ocean Geology Timescale Late Heavy Bombardment Lunar meteorites KREEP Volcanism Experiments Lunar laser ranging ALSEP Lunar sample displays Apollo 11 Apollo 17 Lunar seismology Exploration Missions Apollo program Explorers Probes Landing Colonization Moonbase Tourism Lunar resources Time-telling and navigation Lunar calendar Lunisolar calendar Month Lunar month Nodal period Fortnight Sennight Lunar station Lunar distance Phases and names New Full Names Crescent Super and micro Blood Blue Black Dark Wet Tetrad Daily phenomena Moonrise Meridian passage Moonset Related Lunar deities Lunar effect Earth phase Moon illusion Pareidolia Man in the Moon Moon rabbit Craters named after people Artificial objects on the Moon Memorials on the Moon Moon in science fiction list Apollo era futuristic exploration Hollow Moon Moon landing conspiracy theories Moon Treaty " Moon is made of green cheese " Natural satellite Double planet Lilith (hypothetical second moon) Splitting of the Moon Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lunar_day&oldid=1291145904 " Categories : Orbit of the Moon Units of time Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 19 May 2025, at 10:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lunar day 9 languages Add topic

