Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Abstract definitions 2 Kinds 3 Drafting 4 Media 5 In law 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Document 79 languages अंगिका العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština ChiShona Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Қазақша Kiswahili Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Written material conveying information For other uses, see Document (disambiguation) .

For technical reasons , terms beginning with "Document #" redirect here. For other uses, see Document #5 , Document #7 , Document #8 , and Document #12 .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( April 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Documents across mediums .

Top-left : a word processor document using LibreOffice .

Top-right : a copy of the Swiss Constitution in German .

Bottom-left : a vinyl record holding a set of songs.

Bottom-right : a computer program interpreting a fragment of a clay tablet with cuneiform script about king Shalmaneser III Part of a series on Library and information science Outline Glossary Histories Libraries - Information Focus Archives management - Collections management ( Preservation ) - Data management - Information management ( cataloguing ) - Knowledge management - Library management Curation Data - Metadata - Information - Documents - Artefacts - Knowledge Interdisciplinary fields Archival science - Communication studies - Computer science - Data science - Documentation science - Epistemology - Library science - Information science - Science and technology studies Areas Academic - Archival - Legal - Health - Private - Public - School - Special WikiProject Category v t e A document is a written , drawn , presented, or memorialized representation of thought, often the manifestation of non-fictional , as well as fictional , content.  The word originates from the Latin Documentum , which denotes a "teaching" or "lesson": the verb doceō denotes "to teach". In the past, the word was usually used to denote written proof useful as evidence of a truth or fact. In the Computer Age , "document" usually denotes a primarily textual computer file , including its structure and format, e.g. fonts, colors, and images . Contemporarily, "document" is not defined by its transmission medium , e.g., paper, given the existence of electronic documents . "Documentation" is distinct because it has more denotations than "document". Documents are also distinguished from " realia ", which are three-dimensional objects that would otherwise satisfy the definition of "document" because they memorialize or represent thought; documents are considered more as two-dimensional representations. While documents can have large varieties of customization, all documents can be shared freely and have the right to do so, creativity can be represented by documents, also. History, events, examples, opinions, stories etc. all can be expressed in documents.

Abstract definitions [ edit ] The concept of "document" has been defined by Suzanne Briet as "any concrete or symbolic indication, preserved or recorded, for reconstructing or for proving a phenomenon, whether physical or mental." [ 1 ] An often-cited article concludes that "the evolving notion of document " among Jonathan Priest, Paul Otlet , Briet, Walter Schürmeyer , and the other documentalists increasingly emphasized whatever functioned as a document rather than traditional physical forms of documents. The shift to digital technology would seem to make this distinction even more important.

David M. Levy has said that an emphasis on the technology of digital documents has impeded our understanding of digital documents as documents.

[ 2 ] A conventional document, such as a mail message or a technical report , exists physically in digital technology as a string of bits, as does everything else in a digital environment. As an object of study, it has been made into a document. It has become physical evidence by those who study it.

"Document" is defined in library and information science and documentation science as a fundamental, abstract idea: the word denotes everything that may be represented or memorialized to serve as evidence . The classic example provided by Briet is an antelope : "An antelope running wild on the plains of Africa should not be considered a document[;] she rules. But if it were to be captured, taken to a zoo and made an object of study, it has been made into a document. It has become physical evidence being used by those who study it. Indeed, scholarly articles written about the antelope are secondary documents, since the antelope itself is the primary document." [ 3 ] [ 4 ] This opinion has been interpreted [ by whom?

] as an early expression of actor–network theory .

Kinds [ edit ] A document can be structured, like tabular documents, lists , forms , or scientific charts, semi-structured like a book or a newspaper article , or unstructured like a handwritten note. Documents are sometimes classified as secret , private , or public. They may also be described as drafts or proofs . When a document is copied , the source is denominated the " original ".

Documents are used in numerous fields, e.g.: Academia : manuscript , thesis , paper , journal , chart , and technical drawing Media : mock-up , script , image , photography , and newspaper article Administration , law , and politics : application , brief , certificate , commission , constitutional document , form , gazette , identity document , license , manifesto , summons , census , and white paper Business : invoice , request for proposal , proposal , contract , packing slip , manifest , report (detailed and summary), spreadsheet , material safety data sheet , waybill , bill of lading , financial statement , nondisclosure agreement (NDA), mutual nondisclosure agreement, and user guide Geography and planning : topographic map , cadastre , legend , and architectural plan Such standard documents can be drafted based on a template .

Drafting [ edit ] The page layout of a document is how information is graphically arranged in the space of the document, e.g., on a page. If the appearance of the document is of concern, the page layout is generally the responsibility of a graphic designer .

Typography concerns the design of letter and symbol forms and their physical arrangement in the document (see typesetting ).

Information design concerns the effective communication of information , especially in industrial documents and public signs . Simple textual documents may not require visual design and may be drafted only by an author , clerk , or transcriber .

Forms may require a visual design for their initial fields, but not to complete the forms.

Media [ edit ] A page of  1859 Traditionally, the medium of a document was paper and the information was applied to it in ink , either by handwriting (to make a manuscript ) or by a mechanical process (e.g., a printing press or laser printer ). Today, some short documents also may consist of sheets of paper stapled together.

Historically, documents were ] into a codex (book).

Contemporary electronic means of memorializing and displaying documents include: Monitor of a desktop computer , laptop , tablet ; optionally with a printer to produce a hard copy ; Personal digital assistant ; Dedicated e-book device ; Electronic paper , typically, using the Portable Document Format (PDF); Information appliance ; Digital audio player ; and Radio and television service provider .

Digital documents usually require a specific file format to be presentable in a specific medium.

In law [ edit ] Documents in all forms frequently serve as material evidence in criminal and civil proceedings. The forensic analysis of such a document is within the scope of questioned document examination . To catalog and manage the large number of documents that may be produced during litigation , Bates numbering is often applied to all documents in the lawsuit so that each document has a unique, arbitrary, identification number.

See also [ edit ] Archive Book Documentality Documentation History of the book Identity document Letterhead Realia (library science) Travel document References [ edit ] ^ Briet, S. (1951). "Qu'est-ce que la documentation?".

Éditions Documentaires Industrielles et Techniques .

Quoted in Buckland, Michael (1991).

"Information as Thing" .

people.ischool.berkeley.edu . Retrieved 2023-10-18 .

^ Levy, David M., Fixed or Fluid? Document Stability and New Media.

, CiteSeerX 10.1.1.119.8813 , archived from the original on 2013-06-06 , retrieved 2023-10-18 ^ Buckland, M. "What Is a Digital Document?" 1998. In Document Numérique Paris. 2(2).

[1] Archived 2011-10-02 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Buckland, Michael (2018).

"Document theory" (PDF) .

Knowledge Organization .

45 (5): 425– 436.

doi : 10.5771/0943-7444-2018-5-425 . Archived from the original on 2022-05-06 . Retrieved 2023-10-18 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) Further reading [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Documents .

Briet, S. (1951). Qu'est-ce que la documentation? Paris: Documentaires Industrielles et Techniques.

Buckland, M. (1991). Information and information systems. New York: Greenwood Press.

Frohmann, Bernd (2009). Revisiting "what is a document?", Journal of Documentation, 65(2), 291–303.

Hjerppe, R. (1994). A framework for the description of generalized documents. Advances in Knowledge Organization, 4, 173–180.

Houser, L. (1986). Documents: The domain of library and information science. Library and Information Science Research, 8, 163–188.

Larsen, P.S. (1999). Books and bytes: Preserving documents for posterity. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 50(11), 1020–1027.

Lund, N. W. (2008). Document theory. Annual Review of Information Science and Technology, 43, 399–432.

Riles, A. (Ed.) (2006). Documents: Artifacts of Modern Knowledge. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, MI.

Schamber, L. (1996). What is a document? Rethinking the concept in uneasy times. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 47, 669–671.

Signer, Beat: What is Wrong with Digital Documents? A Conceptual Model for Structural Cross-Media Content Composition and Reuse , In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Conceptual Modeling (ER 2010), Vancouver, Canada, November 2010.

Smith, Barry. " How to Do Things with Documents ", Rivista di Estetica , 50 (2012), 179–198.

Smith, Barry. " Document Acts ", in Anita Konzelmann-Ziv, Hans Bernhard Schmid (eds.), 2013.

Institutions, Emotions, and Group Agents.Contributions to Social Ontology (Philosophical Studies Series), Dordrecht: Springer Ørom, A. (2007). The concept of information versus the concept of a document. I: Document (re)turn. Contributions from a research field in transition. Ed. By Roswitha Skare, Niels Windfeld Lund & Andreas Vårheim. Frankfurt is Main: Peter Lang. (pp. 53–72).

Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Spain Latvia 2 Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Document&oldid=1305858859 " Categories : Documents Information science Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2018 All articles lacking in-text citations Use British English from July 2022 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 13:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Document 79 languages Add topic

