Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and etymology 2 Description Toggle Description subsection 2.1 Morphology and anatomy 2.2 Phylogenetics 2.3 Life cycle 3 Culturing techniques 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Fonticula 7 languages Deutsch Español Français Galego 한국어 Interlingua Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Slime mold that forms a volcano-shaped fruiting body Fonticula Macro photograph of an F. alba colony radius growing on a plate.

Scientific classification Domain: Eukaryota Clade : Amorphea Order: Rotosphaerida Family: Nucleariidae Genus: Fonticula Worley, Raper & Hohl 1979 Species: F. alba Binomial name Fonticula alba O'Kelly & Nerad 1999 Fonticula is a genus of cellular slime mold which forms a fruiting body in a volcano shape.

[ 1 ] As long ago as 1979 it has been known to not have a close relationship with either the Dictyosteliida or the Acrasidae , the two well-established groups of cellular slime molds.

[ 2 ] In 1979, Fonticula was made a new genus of its own due to the unique characteristics of its fruiting body, with only one species: Fonticula alba .

[ 2 ] The life cycle of Fonticula alba alternates between an amoeboid vegetative stage and aggregative fruiting stage. The fruiting body of the genus has a unique shape, as its sorocarp resembles a volcano and sorus looks like a ball of hot lava emerging from that volcano.

Molecular phylogenies have found alignments in genes of Fonticula alba to subgroups in Opisthokonta. A 2009 study has found that Fonticula is the sister taxa to Nuclearia , thus making it related to the kingdom Fungi .

Fonticula , Nuclearia , and Fungi have been united into the Holomycota , which is sister to the Holozoa .

History and etymology [ edit ] While working at the University of Wisconsin in 1979, Ann Worley, Kenneth Raper and Marianne Hohl discovered an organism that fit no recognized genus of the slime mold taxon Acrasiomycetes . At the time Acrasiomycetes could be divided into two classes: Acrasidae and Dictyostelidae.  This classification was based on morphological characteristics, but it is now known that the two subgroups are not closely related.

[ 3 ] Moreover, F. alba did not truly fit into either of these subclasses but shared a few characteristics of both.

[ 2 ] Although F. alba shared characteristics of subclasses within Acrasiomycetes, Worley et al.

(1979) were convinced that its best fit taxonomically would be in a new, undescribed family designated as Fonticulaceae , which would then contain the genus Fonticula .  The new genus name Fonticula is a reference to the fruiting-body morphology: Fonti- from the Latin word Fons ( fountain , "shape, form") and -cula , from Latin diminutive culus ( little , "size").

[ 2 ] Opisthokonta is an exceptionally diverse eukaryotic group, containing shared ancestry between fungi, animals and even a few protists (Brown et al.

, 2009).  In 2009 it was concluded that the genus Fonticula is part of the unranked group Opisthokonta.  Brown et al.

(2009) sequenced nuclear encoded genes of Fonticula alba for phylogenetic analysis and concluded that the genus was a sister group to the filose amoebae in the genus Nuclearia and that the Fonticula and Nuclearia clade are sister groups to fungi.

[ citation needed ] Description [ edit ] Morphology and anatomy [ edit ] The morphological characteristics of genus Fonticula are unlike those seen in slime mold subgroups Acrasidae or Dictyostelidae.  Several studies have found that in its vegetative state, myxamoebae of F. alba are generally small and irregular in form, ranging from 8–12 x 6–10 μm in size.

[ 2 ] [ 1 ] The myxamoebae have finger-like projections deemed as filose pseudopodia, which extent at the posterior or lateral ends of the cell.

[ 2 ] Worley et al.

(1979) found that the myxamoebae had a distinguishable ectoplasm and endoplasm.  The clear ectoplasm is on the outer edges, while the inner endoplasm is more granular.  Vacuoles are also found in numerous digestion stages in actively feeding F. abla .

[ 2 ] These small vacuoles contain bacteria. In active feeding stages, there is a slime coat surrounding the myxamoeba to which bacteria sink onto.

[ 1 ] The ultrastructure of Fonticula also includes small contractile vacuoles, which are mainly deposited towards the posterior end of the cell.

[ 2 ] An ultrastructural feature that is shared between Fonticula and certain Acrasidae is mitochondria with discoid cristae.

[ 2 ] The golgi apparatus lends a helping hand in the fruiting stage in Fonticula as numerous dictyosomes are involved in the sorogenesis process.

[ 1 ] Cells in the genus are generally uninucleate , however there have been cases of some cells containing two or even three nuclei.

[ 2 ] The nucleus of F. alba cells have an inconspicuous nucleolus under the light microscope.

[ 2 ] The fruiting body of F. alba contains an unbranched sorocarp, which is composed of upright tapered stalks which apically bear a round source containing spores.  Stalks range from 200–500 μm in length. The sori on the fruiting body are white, and roughly 200–350 μm in diameter.  Spores are cystic in shape, and roughly 5.0–6.0 μm in diameter.

[ 2 ] Phylogenetics [ edit ] Multigene phylogenetic analysis was conducted in F. alba in 2009 which allowed it to be placed into Opisthokonta. The five nuclear encoded genes that were sequenced were: small subunit ribosomal RNA (SSU rRNA), actin, beta-tubulin, elongation factor 1-alpha (EF1-a) and heat shock protein 70 (HSP70). The study's results depicted that from 42 eukaryotic taxa, many alignments were made with a total of 2802 aligned sequences (Brown et al., 2009). Phylogenetic trees based on the molecular genetics sequenced in this study showed that the genus Fonticula was a sister taxon to the genus Nuclearia . Those two sister taxa as a clade are in turn a sister taxa to Fungi.

Fonticula therefore represents the first evolution of an organism with a cellular slime mold-like morphology within the broad-group Opisthokonta (Brown et al., 2009); (Brown, 2010).

Another study done by Barlow et al. in 2014 traced the evolution of the five adaptor protein (AP) complexed in fungi, but also provided some insight onto Fonticula alba . The adaptor proteins investigated work in vesicular transport in eukaryotes, particularly in cargo-selection and coat-protein recruitment. The study found that F. alba had all five adaptor protein complexes present in its genome, whereas the kingdom Fungi only retained the first three adaptor protein complexes (Barlow et al., 2014). This study concluded that the last common ancestor of the sister groups Fungi, and Fonticula and Nuclearia (also known as the clade Holomycota ) contained a complete set of all five adaptor protein complexes.

Life cycle [ edit ] An amoeboid trophic phase alternating with an aggregating fruiting phase describes the life cycle of F. alba . Fruiting bodies are volcano-like structures that are unique to its genus.

[ 1 ] Commencing of the fruiting stage occurs when trophic amoeba halt their feeding, and dense aggregations begin to form (Deasey, 1982). Over time, an envelope of a mucus-like substance begins to surround the aggregated amoebae.

[ 2 ] The amoebae at the top of the aggregation begin to project upward, and a hyaline membrane is laid down onto the projection, as development occurs. Stalk material is secreted while the amoebae move upwards within the projection.

In early stages of orogenesis, the cells form a number of dictyosomes from the outer nuclear membrane in response to a certain stimuli.

[ 1 ] The dictyosomes aid in the accumulation and deposition of stalk material. The golgi apparatus in F. alba swells up, instead of having small vesicles pinch off is cristae, which is unique to the genus.

[ 1 ] The vesicles produce a thread-like material, within a mucous-matrix that lets the aggregated mound turn into a tapered stalk.

[ 2 ] The vesicles then release their internal contents via fusing with plasma membrane of the sorogenic cells. The material made within the vesicles is mostly assembled at the thick base of the stalk, and is thought to provide structural support. Cells are amoeboid during stalk formation.

As the sorocarp reaches max height, orogenic cells begin to depict differential shapes and thus different functions. Amoeboid cells remain near the base, continuously producing stalk material through their numerous dictyosomes during spore formation. These cells continue producing stalk material even when spores have been released.

[ 1 ] Cystic cells are above the amoeboid cells, these cells are preparing to flourish into spores and thus have less dictyosomes, known as "pre-spores".

[ 1 ] The ultrastructural comparison between the amoeboid cells and pre-spores is quite evident. The pre-spores have less dictyosomes which tend to be flattened. As the number of dictyosomes decreases, the cytoplasm takes up more room within the cell and the cell adapts a more round shape (Deasey, 1982).  There is also a difference in the plasma membrane of amoeboid orogenic cells and pre-spore cells. The pre-spore cells plasma membrane appears to be invaginated, whilst the amoeboid cells PM looks smooth (Deasey, 1982). Elliptical cells, located in the upper neck of the sorocarp are a little further along into spore-development than the cyst cells. These cells lack dictyosomes, are thick-walled and thought to increase pressure within the neck of the stalk.

[ 1 ] As pressure increases, the encysted cells will then come up from the apex and come together and form a large ball called the sorus.

[ 2 ] The majority of the cells within the source have successfully developed into spores. When the sorus is developed, the neck of the fruiting body is almost fully lacking in sorogenis cells. Amoeboid cells remain at the base of the sorocarp.

[ 1 ] Spores of F. alba release and flow as the stalk collapses as time goes on. The optimal pH for growth and fruiting-body development for Fonticula alba is a substrate with a near neutral pH. A lower pH may result in a poorly developed fruiting structure.

[ 2 ] Culturing techniques [ edit ] The vegetative stage in F. alba consists of unicellular, myxamoeba that feed on bacterial cells.

[ 2 ] F. alba grows with Klebsiella pneumoniae upon a nutrient agar.

[ 2 ] In the study done by Worley et al (1979), Fonticula alba was cultured on a tryptone-glucose-yeast-extract agar.

Worley et al. (1979), also investigated the effect of substrate concentration on Fonticula alba cell growth and sorocarp formation. They found that on a more concentrated substrate, cell growth advanced more quickly and normal sorocarp formation followed. On less concentrated media, they found opposite results.

F. alba was also cultured with different strains of bacteria, to determine if other bacterial species could serve as a nutrient. The agar was streaked with different bacteria such as Bacillus megaterium , Serratia marcescens , Pseudomonas fluorescens , Micrococcus luteus , and Escherichia coli . The strains with B. megaterium , S. marcescens , and P. fluorescens sorocarps did develop, but lesser and later than normal. In the strains with M. luteus it was found that no sorocarps or myxamoebae grew. The strain with E. coli did show adequate growth and fruiting. However, compared to K. pneumoniae , the sorocarps that grew with E. coli were smaller in size.

[ 2 ] F. alba grows at an optimal temperature range of 25–28 degrees celsius. However, it tends to grow at a broad range of 16–37 degrees celsius. Studies have shown that it does not grow at a lower bracket 10 degrees celsius or a higher bracket of 40 degrees celsius.

[ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Mary C. Deasey and Lindsay S. Olive (31 July 1981), "Role of Golgi Apparatus in Sorogenesis by the Cellular Slime Mold Fonticula alba", Science , 213 (4507): 561– 563, Bibcode : 1981Sci...213..561D , doi : 10.1126/science.213.4507.561 , PMID 17794844 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t Ann C. Worley, Kenneth B. Raper and Marianne Hohl (July–August 1979), "Fonticula alba: A New Cellular Slime Mold (Acrasiomycetes)", Mycologia , 71 (4): 746– 760, doi : 10.2307/3759186 , JSTOR 3759186 ^ Matthew W. Brown, Jeffrey Silberman, and Frederick W. Spiegel (May 2012), "A contemporary evaluation of the acrasids (Acrasidae, Heterolobosea, Excavata)", European Journal of Protistology , 48 (2): 103– 123, doi : 10.1016/j.ejop.2011.10.001 , JSTOR 3759186 , PMID 22154141 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Further reading [ edit ] Deasey, M.C. (1982). "Spore Formation by the Cellular Slime Mold Fonticula alba".

Mycologia , 74(4), 607. doe:10.2307/3792748 Brown, M. W. (2010) Placing the forgotten slime molds (Sappinia, Copromyxa, Fonticula, Acrasis, and Pocheina), using molecular phylogenetics (Order No. 3407349). Available from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global. (305185206).

Barlow, L.D., Dacks, J. B., & Wideman, J.G. (2014). "From all to (nearly) none".

Cellular Logistics 4(1). doe:10.4161/cl.28114 v t e Eukaryote classification Domain Archaea Bacteria Eukaryota (major groups Metamonada Discoba Diaphoretickes Hacrobia Cryptista Rhizaria Alveolata Stramenopiles Plants Amorphea Amoebozoa Opisthokonta Animals Fungi Mesomycetozoea ) Amorphea Amoebozoa Discosea Tubulinea Variosea Archamoebea Cutosea Eumycetozoa (true slime molds) Obazoa Apusomonadida Breviatea Opisthokonta Holomycota Rotosphaerida Fungi ¹ Holozoa Tunicaraptor † Bicellum Ichthyosporea Pluriformea Filozoa Filasterea Choanozoa Choanoflagellata Animalia (animals) ¹ Diaphoretickes Telonemia Haptista Centroplasthelida Haptophytina SAR Rhizaria Cercozoa Endomyxa Retaria Foraminifera Radiolaria * Alveolata Colponemida * Ciliophora (ciliates) Myzozoa Apicomplexa Chrompodellida Dinoflagellata Perkinsozoa Stramenopiles Platysulcus Kaonashia Bigyra * Bicosoecida Placidozoa Sagenista Gyrista Developea Pirsoniales Hyphochytriomycetes Ochrophyta (brown algae, diatoms and relatives) Oomycetes (water molds) Actinophryida CAM Pancryptista Microheliella Cryptista Palpitomonas Katablepharidida Cryptomonada Archaeplastida ( plants sensu lato ) Picozoa Rhodophyta (red algae) Rhodelphidia Glaucophyta Viridiplantae (green plants or plants sensu stricto ) Prasinodermophyta Chlorophyta Streptophyta Mesostigmatophyceae Chlorokybophyceae Spirotaenia Klebsormidiophyceae Charophyceae Coleochaetophyceae Zygnematophyceae Embryophyta (land plants or plants sensu strictissimo ) ¹ " Excavates "* Discoba Jakobea Tsukubamonas Discicristata Heterolobosea Euglenozoa Metamonada * Anaeramoebidae Parabasalia Barthelona Skoliomonas Fornicata Preaxostyla Malawimonadida Malawimonadidae Imasidae Incertae sedis Provora Nebulidia Nibbleridia Hemimastigophora Spironematellidae Paramastigidae Ancyromonadida Ancyromonadidae Planomonadidae Divimonas CRuMs Diphylleida Mantamonadida Rigifilida Glissandrida Genera of uncertain affiliation Acinetactis Actinastrum Berkeleyaesol Kamera Magosphaera Meringosphaera Meteora Parakaryon (?) Quasibodo Tetrahelia Acritarchs and other fossils † Algospongia † Archaeochaeta † Cephalonyx † Changchengia † Cheleutochroa † Chitinozoa † Coryphidium † Cucumiforma † Dictyosphaera † Diskagma (?) † Eosolena † Francevillian biota (?) † Germinosphaera † Grandilingulata † Granomarginata † Grypania † Gunflint microbiota † Horodyskia † Introvertocystis † Korilophyton † Leiosphaeridia † Navifusa † Portalites † Protosterol biota † Pterospermopsimorpha † Qingshania † Quadrisporites † Schizofusa † Shuiyousphaeridium † Simia † Tappania † Tawuia (?) † Tetraporina † Thuchomyces (?) † Tuanshanzia † Valeria † Vernanimalcula ¹non- protist groups *possibly paraphyletic groups bold denotes groups with over 1,000 species Taxonomy of protists v t e Opisthokonta Domain Archaea Bacteria Eukaryota (major groups Metamonada Discoba Diaphoretickes Hacrobia Cryptista Rhizaria Alveolata Stramenopiles Plants Amorphea Amoebozoa Opisthokonta Animals Fungi Mesomycetozoea ) Holomycota Cristidiscoidea Nuclearida Nuclearidea Nucleariida Nucleariidae Fonticulida Fonticulea Fonticulida Fonticulaceae Parvulariidae Fungi Rozellomyceta Rozellomycota Rozellomycetes Rozellida Rozellidae Microsporidiomycota Morellosporales Mitosporidiaceae Morellosporaceae Nucleophagales Nucleophagaceae Paramicrosporidiales Paramicrosporidiaceae Microsporidia Chytridiopsidea Chytridiopsida Buxtehudeidae Hesseidae Chytridiopsidae Metchnikovellea Metchnikovellida Amphiacanthidae Metchnikovellidae Microsporea Abelsporidae Burenelloidea Burkeidae Cougourdellidae Cylindrosporidae Duboscqiidae Golbergiidae Microfilidae Neonosemoidiidae Pleistosporidiidae Pseudopleistophoridae Striatosporidae Telomyxidae Toxoglugeidae Amblyosporida Amblyosporidae Caudosporidae Gurleyidae Glugeida Facilisporidae Glugeidae Myosporidae Pereziidae Pleistophoridae Spragueidae Thelohaniidae Tuzetiidae Unikaryonidae Neopereziida Fibrillasporidae Janacekiidae Neopereziidae Tubulinosematidae Nosematida Encephalitozoonidae Enterocytozoonidae Heterovesiculidae Mrazekiidae Nosematidae Ordosporidae Ovavesiculida Ovavesiculidae Aphelidiomyceta Aphelidiomycota Aphelidea Aphelidiales Aphelidiaceae Eumycota (True Fungi) Neocallimastigomycota Monoblepharomycota Chytridiomycota Blastocladiomycota Basidiobolomycota Entomophthoromycota Kickxellomycota Mortierellomycota Calcarisporiellomycota Mucoromycota Glomeromycota Entorrhizomycota Basidiomycota Ascomycota Holozoa Ichthyosporida Ichthyosporea Dermocystida Dermocystidiaceae Ichthyophonida Sphaeroformina Creolimacidae Piridae Psorospermidae Trichomycina Amoebidiidae Eccrinaceae Ichthyophonidae Paramoebidiidae Parataeniellaceae Pluriformea Corallochytrea Corallochytriida Corallochytriidae Syssomonadidae Filozoa Filasterozoa Filasterea Ministeriida Capsasporidae Ministeriidae Txikisporidae Choanozoa Choanoflagellata Choanoflagellatea Acanthoecida Stephanoecidae Acanthoecidae Craspedida Salpingoecidae Metazoa (Animalia) Porifera Ctenophora Placozoa Cnidaria Xenacoelomorpha Ambulacraria Chordata Protostomia Sources and alternative views: Wikispecies .

Taxon identifiers Fonticula Wikidata : Q5465200 Wikispecies : Fonticula EoL : 100826 GBIF : 3208078 IndexFungorum : 12087 IRMNG : 1325273 MycoBank : 12087 Open Tree of Life : 926877 SpeciesFungorum : 12087 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fonticula&oldid=1301302751 " Categories : Nucleariid genera Holomycota Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 03:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fonticula 7 languages Add topic

