Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 2.1 Ontological status 2.2 Existentialism 3 Religion Toggle Religion subsection 3.1 Buddhism 3.2 Christianity 3.3 Hinduism 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Essence 46 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Corsu Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Latina Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy Nederlands 日本語 پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia That which makes or defines an entity For other uses, see Essence (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e Essence ( Latin : essentia ) has various meanings and uses for different thinkers and in different contexts. It is used in philosophy and theology as a designation for the property or set of properties or attributes that make an entity the entity it is or, expressed negatively, without which it would lose its identity . Essence is contrasted with accident , which is a property or attribute the entity has accidentally or contingently , but upon which its identity does not depend.

Etymology [ edit ] The English word essence comes from Latin essentia , via French essence . The original Latin word was created purposefully, by Ancient Roman philosophers , in order to provide an adequate Latin translation for the Greek term ousia .

The concept originates as a precise technical term with Aristotle, who used the Greek expression to ti ên einai [ 1 ] literally meaning "the what it was to be." This also corresponds to the scholastic term quiddity or sometimes the shorter phrase to ti esti [ 2 ] literally meaning "the what it is" and corresponding to the scholastic term haecceity (thisness) for the same idea. This phrase presented such difficulties for its Latin translators that they coined the word essentia to represent the whole expression. For Aristotle and his scholastic followers, the notion of essence is closely linked to that of definition ( horismos ).

[ 3 ] Stoic philosopher Seneca (d. 65 AD) attributed creation of the word to Cicero (d. 43 BC), while rhetor Quintilian (d. 100 AD) claimed that the word was created by the Stoic philosopher Sergius Plautus (d. 62 AD).

Early use of the term is also attested in works of Apuleius (d. 170 AD) and Tertullian (d. 240 AD). During Late Antiquity , the term was often used in Christian theology , and through the works of Augustine (d. 430), Boethius (d. 524) and later theologians, who wrote in Medieval Latin , it became the basis for consequent creation of derived terms in many languages.

[ 4 ] Thomas Aquinas , in his commentary on De hebdomadibus (Book II) by Boethius , states that in this work the distinction between essence ( id quod est , what the thing is) and Being ( esse ) was introduced for the first time. Whereas the Being participated in entities is infinite and infinitely perfect, the essence — and not the matter — delimits the perfection of the Being in entities and makes them finite.

[ 5 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Ontological status [ edit ] In his dialogues Plato suggests that concrete beings acquire their essence through their relations to " forms "—abstract universals logically or ontologically separate from the objects of sense perception. These forms are often put forth as the models or paradigms of which sensible things are "copies". Sensible bodies are in constant flux and imperfect and hence, by Plato's reckoning, less real than the forms which are eternal, unchanging, and complete. Typical examples of forms given by Plato are largeness, smallness, equality, unity, goodness, beauty, and justice.

According to nominalists such as William of Ockham , universals are not concrete entities, just names (i.e., labels); there are only individuals.

[ 6 ] Universals are words that can call to several individuals; for example, the word "homo". Therefore, a universal is reduced to a spoken sound (according to Roscelin ), [ 7 ] or the (mental) concept to which it corresponds (as Ockham had it)—rather than a substantial, actual "thing" that exists outside of these contexts.

John Locke distinguished between "real essences" and "nominal essences". Real essences are the thing(s) that makes a thing a thing, whereas nominal essences are our conception of what makes a thing a thing.

[ 8 ] According to Edmund Husserl , essence is ideal . However, ideal means that essence is an intentional object of consciousness. Essence is interpreted as sense .

[ 9 ] Existentialism [ edit ] Existentialism is often summed up by Jean-Paul Sartre 's statement that for human beings " existence precedes essence ", which he understood as a repudiation of the philosophical system that had come before him. Instead of "is-ness" generating "actuality," he argued that existence and actuality come first, and the essence is derived afterward.

In this respect he breaks with Søren Kierkegaard , who, although often described as a proto-existentialist, identified essence as "nature." For him, there is no such thing as "human nature" that determines how a human will behave or what a human will be. First, he or she exists, and then comes property.

Jean-Paul Sartre 's more materialist and skeptical existentialism furthered this existentialist tenet by flatly refuting any metaphysical essence, any soul, and arguing instead that there is merely existence, with attributes as essence.

Thus, in existentialist discourse, essence can refer to: a physical aspect or property; the ongoing being of a person (the character or internally determined goals); or the infinite inbound within the human (which can be lost, can atrophy, or can be developed into an equal part with the finite), depending upon the type of existentialist discourse.

Religion [ edit ] Part of a series on the Philosophy of religion Religious concepts Afterlife Apophatism Cataphatism Eschatology Enlightenment Intelligent design Liberation Miracle Mysticism Religious belief Reincarnation Religious faith Scripture (religious text) Soul Spirit Theological veto God Conceptions Anthropopathism Brahman Demiurge Divinely simple Form of the Good Holy Spirit Maltheist Occasionalism Pandeist Personal Process-theological Summum bonum Supreme Being Unmoved mover Existence Arguments for Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Arguments against 747 gambit Atheist's wager Creator of God Evil Evil God Fate of the unlearned Free will God of the gaps Hell Hitchens's razor Incompatible properties Inconsistency Nonbelief Noncognitivism Omnipotence paradox Poor design Russell's teapot By religion Abrahamic Baháʼí Christianity Islam Judaism Mormonism Mandaeism Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Wicca Theories of religion Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism atheist Christian Feminist Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Christian religious secular Inclusivism Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism humanistic metaphysical religious New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Process Secular Shrine Theory Shendao shejiao Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Al-Ghazali Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 19th-century Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir Usman dan Fodio Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal Contemporary George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber Sergei Bulgakov René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Pavel Florensky Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J. L. Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I. Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew Kurt Gödel Graham Oppy J. L. Schellenberg Paul Draper William L. Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Cornel West Loyal Rue Herman Philipse Kai Nielsen Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Yujin Nagasawa Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Ethics in religion Exegesis Faith and rationality History of religions Natural theology Religion and science Religious philosophy Theology v t e Buddhism [ edit ] Within the Madhyamaka school of Mahayana Buddhism , Candrakirti identifies the self as "an essence of things that does not depend on others; it is an intrinsic nature. The non-existence of that is selflessness ." [ 10 ] Buddhapālita adds, while commenting on Nagārjuna 's Mūlamadhyamakakārikā , "What is the reality of things just as it is? It is the absence of essence. Unskilled persons whose eye of intelligence is obscured by the darkness of delusion conceive of an essence of things and then generate attachment and hostility with regard to them." [ 11 ] For the Madhyamaka Buddhists, ' Emptiness ' (also known as Anatta or Anatman ) is the strong assertion that: all phenomena are empty of any essence; anti-essentialism lies at the root of Buddhist praxis; and it is the innate belief in essence that is considered to be an afflictive obscuration which serves as the root of all suffering .

However, the Madhyamaka also rejects the tenets of idealism , materialism or nihilism ; instead, the ideas of truth or existence , along with any assertions that depend upon them, are limited to their function within the contexts and conventions that assert them, possibly somewhat akin to relativism or pragmatism . For the Madhyamaka , replacement paradoxes such as Ship of Theseus are answered by stating that the Ship of Theseus remains so (within the conventions that assert it) until it ceases to function as the Ship of Theseus.

In Nagarjuna 's Mulamadhyamakakarika Chapter XV examines essence itself.

Christianity [ edit ] Essence, nature, or substance in Christianity means what something is in itself and is distinguished from something's accidents (appearance). For example, according to transubstantiation , the eucharistic bread and wine appear to be bread and wine, but are in essence - Jesus' body and blood.

[ 12 ] Another example is Jesus' teaching "Stop judging by appearances, but judge justly." [ 13 ] A third example is the Beatific Vision : the angels and saints in Heaven see God's essence.

[ 14 ] Hinduism [ edit ] In understanding any individual personality, a distinction is made between one's Swadharma (essence) and Swabhava (mental habits and conditionings of ego personality). Svabhava is the nature of a person, which is a result of his or her samskaras (impressions created in the mind due to one's interaction with the external world). These samskaras create habits and mental models and those become our nature. While there is another kind of svabhava that is a pure internal quality – smarana – we are here focusing only on the svabhava that was created due to samskaras (because to discover the pure, internal svabhava and smarana, one should become aware of one's samskaras and take control over them).

Dharma is derived from the root dhr "to hold." It is that which holds an entity together. That is, Dharma is that which gives integrity to an entity and holds the core quality and identity (essence), form and function of that entity. Dharma is also defined as righteousness and duty. To do one's dharma is to be righteous, to do one's dharma is to do one's duty (express one's essence).

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Avicenna Essentialism Hypokeimenon Modal logic Phenomenon Physical ontology Smarana Theory of forms Transubstantiation References [ edit ] ^ Aristotle , Metaphysics , 1029b.

^ Aristotle, Metaphysics , 1030a.

^ S. Marc Cohen, "Aristotle's Metaphysics" , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , accessed 20 April 2008.

^ Brown 1996 , p. 275-276.

^ In fact, angels are finite due to the finitude of their essence, even being without any matter.

Father Battista Mondin , O.P. (2022).

Ontologia e metafisica [ Ontology and metaphysics ]. Filosofia (in Italian) (3rd ed.).

Edizioni Studio Domenicano . p. 146, 151.

ISBN 978-88-5545-053-9 .

^ Roscelin, De gener. et spec.

, 524.

^ Roscelin, De generibus et speciebus.

^ Locke on Real Essence . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University. 2022.

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ E. Husserl, Ideas Pertaining to a Pure Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy , paragraphs 3 and 4.

^ Bodhisattvayogacaryācatuḥśatakaṭikā 256.1.7. Translations from "The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path of Enlightenment", Vol. 3 by Tsong-Kha-Pa, Snow Lion Publications ISBN 1-55939-166-9 .

^ Buddhapālita-mula-madhyamaka-vrtti , P5242, 73.5.6-74.1.2.

^ "Compendium of the Catechism of the Catholic Church" .

vatican.va .

^ "John, CHAPTER 7 | USCCB" .

bible.usccb.org . Retrieved 10 March 2025 .

^ "Benedictus Deus On the Beatific Vision of God - Papal Encyclicals Online" . 1334 . Retrieved 10 March 2025 .

^ "Kaipa Group: Igniting the Genius Within Organizations and Individuals" .

www.prasadkaipa.com . Retrieved 10 March 2025 .

Sources [ edit ] Athanasopoulos, Constantinos; Schneider, Christoph, eds. (2013).

Divine Essence and Divine Energies: Ecumenical Reflections on the Presence of God . Cambridge, UK: James Clarke & Co.

ISBN 9780227900086 .

Aveling, Francis (1909).

"Essence and Existence" .

The Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 5. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Brown, Stephen F. (1996). "Theology and Philosophy".

Medieval Latin: An Introduction and Bibliographical Guide . Washington, D.C.: CUA Press. pp.

267– 287.

ISBN 9780813208428 .

Weedman, Mark (2007).

The Trinitarian Theology of Hilary of Poitiers . Leiden-Boston: Brill.

ISBN 978-9004162242 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Essence .

Maurice De Wulf : "Nominalism, Realism, Conceptualism." , in: The Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 11. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1911.

Robertson, Teresa; Atkins, Philip.

"Essential vs. Accidental Properties" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases National France BnF data Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐v2ftp
Cached time: 20250814221947
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.641 seconds
Real time usage: 0.802 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2465/1000000
Revision size: 13636/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 135600/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3490/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 100112/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.413/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16845031/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  658.711      1 -total
 18.28%  120.438      1 Template:Reflist
 16.32%  107.483      1 Template:Langx
 16.31%  107.406      6 Template:Cite_book
 15.57%  102.545      1 Template:Philosophy_sidebar
 10.24%   67.476      1 Template:Short_description
  8.32%   54.783      1 Template:Metaphysics
  8.23%   54.203      4 Template:Sidebar
  8.01%   52.769      1 Template:Navbox
  5.57%   36.685      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:480672:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814221947 and revision id 1303252896. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Essence&oldid=1303252896 " Categories : Aristotelianism Concepts in logic Metaphysical properties Essentialism Existentialist concepts Madhyamaka Metaphysical theories Modal logic Philosophy of Aristotle Philosophy of life Substance theory Identity (philosophy) Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2017 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 22:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Essence 46 languages Add topic

