Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of media ethics 2 Areas of media ethics Toggle Areas of media ethics subsection 2.1 Ethics of journalism 2.2 Online journalism 2.3 Ethics of entertainment media 2.4 Media and democracy 2.5 Media integrity 2.5.1 Radio ethics and integrity 2.6 Digital media ethics 2.6.1 Ethics of images 3 Attempts to develop a universal code of media ethics Toggle Attempts to develop a universal code of media ethics subsection 3.1 UNESCO INFOethics Congresses 3.2 International Symposium on Information Ethics, Karlsuhe, 2004 4 Contexts of media ethics Toggle Contexts of media ethics subsection 4.1 Media ethics and public officials 4.2 Intercultural dimensions of media ethics 5 Meta-issues in media ethics Toggle Meta-issues in media ethics subsection 5.1 Similarities between media ethics and other fields of applied ethics 5.2 Differences between media ethics and other fields of applied ethics 6 Artificial intelligence in digital content 7 Further reading 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 10.1 Books 10.2 Journals 10.3 Cases 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Media ethics 13 languages العربية Deutsch Esperanto فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latviešu Македонски Nederlands සිංහල Suomi Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subdivision of applied ethics This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( July 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Media ethics is the subdivision of applied ethics dealing with the specific ethical principles and standards of media , including broadcast media , film , theatre , the arts , print media and the internet. The field covers many varied and highly controversial topics, ranging from war journalism to Benetton ad campaigns.

Media ethics promotes and defends values such as a universal respect for life and the rule of law and legality.

[ 1 ] Media Ethics defines and deals with ethical questions about how media should use texts and pictures provided by the citizens.

Literature regarding the ways in which specifically the Internet impacts media ethics in journalism online is scarce, thereby complicating the idea for a universal code of media ethics.

[ 2 ] History of media ethics [ edit ] Research and publications in the field of information ethics has been produced since the 1980s.

[ 3 ] Notable figures include Robert Hauptman (who focused his work specifically on censorship, privacy, access to information , balance in collection development, copyright, fair use, and codes of ethics), Rafael Capurro , Barbara J. Kostrewski and Charles Oppenheim (who wrote the article " "Ethics in Information Science" , discussing issues as confidentiality of information, bias in information provided to clients or consumers, the quality of data supplied by online vendors, etc.).

[ 3 ] In the 1990s, the term "information ethics" began to be explored by various Computer Science and Information departments in the United States.

[ 3 ] In the late 1990s, textbooks such as Richard Severson's The Principles of Information Ethics and Marsha Cook Woodbury's Computer and Information Ethics , and Deborah G. Johnson 's Computer Ethics were published.

[ 3 ] Areas of media ethics [ edit ] Though it is hard to exactly define media ethics, William H. Bishop identifies the set of ethics as concerning the " moral behavior of individuals based on an established and expressed standard of the group, which is in and of itself a collection of individual values." [ 4 ] Media ethics can be defined as the set of moral principles and values as applied to the conduct, roles, and content of the mass media, in particular journalism ethics and standards and marketing ethics ;  also the field of study concerned with this topic. In relation to news coverage it includes issues such as impartiality , objectivity , balance , bias , privacy, and the public interest . More generally, it also includes stereotyping , taste and decency, obscenity , freedom of speech , advertising practices such as product placement , and legal issues such as defamation . On an institutional level it includes debates over media ownership and control, commercialization , accountability, the relation of the media to the political system, issues arising from regulation (e.g.

censorship ) and deregulation .

Ethics of journalism [ edit ] Main article: Journalism ethics and standards Photographers crowd around a starlet at the Cannes Film Festival .

The ethics of journalism is one of the most well-defined branches of media ethics, primarily because it is frequently taught in schools of journalism . Journalistic ethics tend to dominate media ethics, sometimes almost to the exclusion of other areas.

[ 5 ] Topics covered by journalism ethics include: News manipulation. News can manipulate and be manipulated. Governments and corporations may attempt to manipulate news media; governments, for example, by censorship , and corporations by share ownership. The methods of manipulation are subtle and many. Manipulation may be voluntary or involuntary. Those being manipulated may not be aware of this. See: news propaganda .

Truth . Truth may conflict with many other values.

Public interest. Revelation of military secrets and other sensitive government information may be contrary to the public interest , even if it is true. However, public interest is not a term which is easy to define.

Privacy. Salacious details of the lives of public figures is a central content element in many media. Publication is not necessarily justified simply because the information is true.

Privacy is also a right , and one which conflicts with free speech . See: paparazzi .

Fantasy. Fantasy is an element of entertainment, which is a legitimate goal of media content. Journalism may mix fantasy and truth, with resulting ethical dilemmas. See: National Enquirer , Jayson Blair scandal, Adnan Hajj photographs controversy .

Taste. Photo journalists who cover war and disasters confront situations which may shock the sensitivities of their audiences. For example, human remains are rarely screened. The ethical issue is how far should one risk shocking an audience's sensitivities in order to correctly and fully report the truth. See photojournalism .

Conflict with the law. Journalistic ethics may conflict with the law over issues such as the protection of confidential news sources . There is also the question of the extent to which it is ethically acceptable to break the law in order to obtain news. For example, undercover reporters may be engaging in deception , trespass and similar torts and crimes. See undercover journalism , investigative journalism .

Online journalism [ edit ] Internationally recognized journalist and scholar Steven J. A. Ward defines journalism ethics as the responsible use of freedom of speech. Ward says that "media ethics can only exist when journalists have agreed to use responsibly their powers of publication." [ 6 ] The ethics of online journalism holds great importance to the authenticity and credibility of reported literature although it can be difficult to gauge a set standard because of differences in national and international cultural values.

[ 7 ] In this current digital climate with multiple new technologies and broad availability of information, Journalists have less ascendancy over what is considered important news. Online journalists must now assist consumers in making sense of it all.

[ 8 ] The Internet has shaped and redefined various ethical and moral issues for both online journalists and journalists  utilizing online resources.

[ 2 ] While some journalists continue to adhere to ethical principles of traditional journalism, many journalists believe that with the absence of a mutually agreed upon code of ethics specifically pertaining to internet ethics, and lack of literature dealing specifically with the ways in which the Internet impacts media ethics in journalism online, the online environment poses new threats to the profession.

[ 2 ] Some of the core issues of media ethics in online journalism include commercial pressures, accuracy and credibility (which include the issues dealing with hyperlinks), verification of facts, regulation, privacy, and news-gathering methods.

[ 2 ] In addition the ethics in question are not only limited to the action of reporters, but the decisions organizations and outlets that release information. Questions emerge on the ethical responsibilities of organizations to the public such as whether it is unethical for stories to be reported expediently to get the better of competition rather than taking time to receive the full story.

[ 8 ] Ethics of entertainment media [ edit ] Issues in the ethics of entertainment media include: The depiction of violence and sex, and the presence of strong language . Ethical guidelines and legislation in this area are common and many media (e.g. film, computer games) are subject to ratings systems and supervision by agencies. An extensive guide to international systems of enforcement can be found under motion picture rating system .

"Fluff or "Celebrity News": Over the years, print media has faced a decline, and so, journalists began to report on what is referred to as "Celebrity News", or "Fluff." As more outlets adopt this topic to report on, people become dependent on them. According to Alden Weight, most people know not to completely trust these outlets due to ethical discrepancies, but issues arise when less informed citizens find these reports to be completely true.

[ 9 ] [ neutrality is disputed ] Product placement . An increasingly common marketing tactic is the placement of products in entertainment media. The producers of such media may be paid high sums to display branded products. The practice is controversial and largely unregulated. Detailed article: product placement .

Advertising: Attraction and persuasion are currently found in modern journalism. It is found that these methods of advertising may alter an audience's point of view of what is realistic and falsified information.

[ 9 ] Stereotypes . Both advertising and entertainment media make heavy use of stereotypes . Stereotypes may negatively affect people's perceptions of themselves or promote socially undesirable behavior. The stereotypical portrayals of men , affluence and ethnic groups are examples of major areas of debate Women in Media: Entertainment media often exploits female bodies by objectifying and de-humanizing them. By doing so, the concept of female bodies being bought and sold becomes common.

Media outlets usually use either images or imagery of female bodies to counter negative news that is provided throughout the day.

[ 9 ] Taste and taboos . Entertainment media often questions of our values for artistic and entertainment purposes.

Normative ethics is often about moral values, and what kinds should be enforced and protected. In media ethics, these two sides come into conflict. In the name of art, media may deliberately attempt to break with existing norms and shock the audience. That poses ethical problems when the norms abandoned are closely associated with certain relevant moral values or obligations.  The extent to which this is acceptable is always a hotbed of ethical controversy. See: Turner Prize , obscenity , freedom of speech , aesthetics .

Alterations. There is universal agreement between journalists that it is acceptable to crop pictures or edit voice recordings as long as the speaker's meaning is not altered. Alternatively, almost all journalists concur that it is unethical to create fake, or synthetic, events that were made via AI-generated images or deepfakes . What is disputed, however, is the lengths that journalists and creators may go to in order to enhance their news broadcasts. This leaves an undetermined gray area that questions whether images can be altered to, for example, make the sky appear bluer.

[ 10 ] Media and democracy [ edit ] In democratic countries, a special relationship exists between media and government. Although the freedom of the media may be constitutionally enshrined and have precise legal definition and enforcement, the exercise of that freedom by individual journalists is a matter of personal choice and ethics.
Modern democratic government subsists in representation of millions by hundreds. For the representatives to be accountable , and for the process of government to be transparent , effective communication paths must exist to their constituents . Today these paths consist primarily of the mass media, to the extent that if press freedom disappeared, so would most political accountability .
In this area, media ethics merges with issues of civil rights and politics . Issues include: Subversion of media independence by financial interests.

[ 11 ] Government monitoring of media for intelligence gathering against its own people. See, for example, NSA call database .

See: freedom of information , media transparency Right to Information .
L Mera Media integrity [ edit ] Media integrity refers to the ability of a media outlet to serve the public interest and democratic process , making it resilient to institutional corruption within the media system, [ 12 ] economy of influence, conflicting dependence and political clientelism. Media integrity encompasses following qualities of a media outlet: independence from private or political interests transparency about own financial interests commitment to journalism ethics and standards responsiveness to citizens The concept was devised particularly for the media systems in the region of South East Europe , [ 13 ] within the project South East European Media Observatory , gathering organizations which are part of the South East European Network for Professionalization of Media (SEENPM) .

Radio ethics and integrity [ edit ] Radio broadcasters are held to the same standards as journalists when it comes to adhering to a code of ethics. As a spoken broadcast, however, radio hosts and DJs are held to standards as to how they manipulate their audience. Time compression, also known as Cash, is an effective way for hosts to include more time for commercials within their broadcasts. Recorded and live programs are slightly sped up, not enough for viewers to notice, which leaves time for additional thirty-second commercials in the broadcast. In turn, broadcasts will make more money from promoting more advertisements.

[ 10 ] WABC, a New York-based radio station, implemented this technique on The Rush Limbaugh Show . Limbaugh was unaware of this alteration to his program, and aired his grievances live on air to apologize to listeners.

Digital media ethics [ edit ] Digital news media includes online journalism, blogging, digital photojournalism, citizen journalism, and social media.

[ 14 ] It talks about how journalism should interact and use the 'new media' to publish stories including how to use texts and images provided by other people.

Ethics of images [ edit ] There are new ethical issues due to the new image technology. Citizens now have the availability to take pictures and videos in easier and faster ways like smartphones which allow them to not only collect information but also edit and manipulate it.

[ 15 ] This convergence of ease of capture, ease of transmission, and ease of manipulation questions the traditional principles of photojournalism which were developed for non-digital capture and transmission of pictures and video.

[ 14 ] The main issues regarding the new image technology is that the newsroom cannot trust the easily obtained images and also the limit of the image edit. It is vague and very difficult to decide the borderline of image manipulation.

It is very complicated and still a dilemma to clarify the principles of responsible image-making and ethics on it.

Attempts to develop a universal code of media ethics [ edit ] Within the last two decades, numerous regional discussions have taken place in Europe, Latin America, Africa, and Asia in order to create a universal code of ethics for the information society.

[ 16 ] One of the core issues in developing a universal code for media ethics is the difficulty of finding a common ground between ethical principles from one culture to another.

[ 16 ] Also, such codes may be interpreted differently according to various moral and legal standards.

[ 16 ] UNESCO INFOethics Congresses [ edit ] The ethical facet of the global information society has been on the UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization) agenda since 1997, when the organization initiated their first INFOethics Congress.

[ 16 ] The objective of this summit was to spark debate on the ethical dimension of the global information society.

[ 16 ] The UNESCO INFOethics Congresses then met in 1998 and 2000, where specialists coming from a wide range of educational, scientific, and cultural environments addressed the ethical dimensions of global media and information.

[ 16 ] International Symposium on Information Ethics, Karlsuhe, 2004 [ edit ] In 2004, the ICIE, or International Center for Information Ethics, organized the first international symposium on information ethics in Karlsruhe, Germany .

[ 16 ] Experts with varying scientific backgrounds such as computer science, information science , media studies , and economics, gathered from all over the world to discuss the internet from both an ethical and intercultural perspective.

[ 16 ] Contexts of media ethics [ edit ] Media ethics and public officials [ edit ] The media has manipulated the way public officials conduct themselves through the advancement of technology. Constant television coverage displays the legislative proceedings; exposing faster than ever before, unjust rulings throughout the government process.

Truth telling is crucial in media ethics as any opposition of truth telling is considered deception . Anything shown by the media whether print or video is considered to be original. When a statement is written in an article or a video is shown of a public official, it is the original "truthful" words of the individual official themselves.

Intercultural dimensions of media ethics [ edit ] If values differ interculturally, the issue arises of the extent to which behaviour should be modified in the light of the values of specific cultures. Two examples of controversy from the field of media ethics: Google's self-censorship in China .

The Jyllands-Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy in Denmark, and subsequently worldwide.

Meta-issues in media ethics [ edit ] One theoretical question for media ethics is the extent to which media ethics is just another topical subdivision of applied ethics , differing only in terms of case applications and raising no theoretical issues peculiar to itself. The oldest subdivisions of applied ethics are medical ethics and business ethics . Does media ethics have anything new to add other than interesting cases?

Similarities between media ethics and other fields of applied ethics [ edit ] Privacy and honesty are issues extensively covered in medical ethical literature, as is
the principle of harm-avoidance. The trade-offs between media economics and social values has been
covered extensively in business ethics (as well as medical and environmental ethics ).

Differences between media ethics and other fields of applied ethics [ edit ] The issues of freedom of speech and aesthetic values (taste) are primarily at home in media ethics. However a number of further issues distinguish media ethics as a field in its own right.

A theoretical issue peculiar to media ethics is the identity of observer and observed . The press is one of the primary guardians in a democratic society of many of the freedoms, rights and duties discussed by other fields of applied ethics. In media ethics the ethical obligations of the guardians themselves come more strongly into the foreground. Who guards the guardians? This question also arises in the field of legal ethics .

A further self-referentiality or circular characteristic in media ethics is the questioning of its own values. Meta-issues can become identical with the subject matter of media ethics. This is most strongly seen when artistic elements are considered.

Benetton advertisements and Turner prize candidates are both examples of ethically questionable media uses which question their own
questioner.

Another characteristic of media ethics is the disparate nature of its goals. Ethical dilemmas emerge when goals conflict. The goals of media usage diverge sharply. Expressed in a consequentialist manner, media usage may be subject to pressures to maximize: economic profits, entertainment value, information provision, the upholding of democratic freedoms, the development of art and culture, fame and vanity.

Artificial intelligence in digital content [ edit ] Artificial intelligence (AI) has emerged as a force in the creation of digital content displayed in the media. It has the capability to produce text and images. AI tools give its users the ability to generate imagery and writing quickly, bringing in an ethical concern regarding biases from source data, misinformation, and manipulative content.

[ 17 ] Algorithms utilized by AI systems often lend themselves to creating engaging and viral-prone content. These lend themselves to the dissemination of misleading, and inaccurate information. These issues raise ethical concerns and an importance of establishing ethical frameworks to address AI in media. When AI-generated content provides the public with misinformation , and bias, there is an unclear idea of who is responsible for the harm or damage caused.

[ 18 ] These problems are made greater by social media platforms. These platforms provide financial and social benefit for those who receive large amounts of attention, leading media creators to more frequently spread unreviewed and opinionated information.

[ 19 ] Further reading [ edit ] Hauptman, Robert (2002).

Ethics and Librarianship . McFarland.

ISBN 978-0-7864-8080-7 .

Capurro, Rafael. "Informationethos und Informationsethik (Information Ethos and Information Ethics)".

Nachrichten für Dokumentation .

39 ( 1– 4).

Capurro; Britz, Rafael; Johannes B. (2010).

"In Search of a Code of Global Information Ethics: The Road Travelled and New Horizons" (PDF) .

Ethical Space: The International Journal of Communication Ethics .

7 – via Academic Search Complete.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Severson, Richard J. (1997).

The Principles of Information Ethics . M.E. Sharpe.

ISBN 978-0-7656-3346-0 .

Woodbury, Marsha Cook (2010).

Computer and Information Ethics . Stipes Pub.

ISBN 978-1-60904-002-4 .

See also [ edit ] Ethics Information ethics Journalism ethics and standards Journalism scandals Marketing ethics Media Alliance References [ edit ] ^ Moldovan, Gratian.

"Media Ethics in the Ideological Context of the Twentieth Century" .

Contemporary Readings in Law and Social Justice .

6 : 589– 593 – via Academic Search Complete.

^ a b c d Deuze I, Yeshua II, Mark I, Daphna II (December 2001). "Online Journalists Face New Ethical Dilemmas: Lessons From The Netherlands".

Journal of Mass Media Ethics .

16 (4): 273– 292.

doi : 10.1207/S15327728JMME1604_03 .

S2CID 144433650 – via Academic Search Complete.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c d Froehlich, Thomas (December 2004).

"A Brief History of Information Ethics" .

Universitat de Barcelona. Facultat de Biblioteconomia I Documentació – via Academic Search Complete.

^ Bishop, William H. (2013).

"The Role of Ethics in 21st Century Organizations" .

Journal of Business Ethics .

118 (3): 635– 637.

ISSN 0167-4544 .

JSTOR 42921253 .

^ "AllenNCW2001" . Archived from the original on 27 June 2004.

^ "Why Hyping Transparency Distorts Journalism Ethics" .

MediaShift . 2013-11-04 . Retrieved 2025-05-20 .

^ Auman, Ann; Stos, Susan; Burch, Elizabeth (March 2020).

"Ethics Without Borders in a Digital Age" .

Journalism & Mass Communication Educator .

75 (1): 9– 15.

doi : 10.1177/1077695820901941 .

ISSN 1077-6958 .

S2CID 213837211 .

^ a b Atkinson, Lucy (August 2008).

"Book Review: Cecilia Friend and Jane B. Singer, Online Journalism Ethics: Traditions and Transitions. Armonk, NY. M.E. Sharpe, 2007. xi + 245 pp. (ISBN 978-0-7656-1574-9, pbk)" .

New Media & Society .

10 (4): 671– 674.

doi : 10.1177/14614448080100040503 .

ISSN 1461-4448 .

S2CID 13182774 .

^ a b c Weight, Alden (Spring 2011). "Making A Monkey Look Good: The Case For Consumer Ethics of Entertainment Media".

Teaching Ethics .

doi : 10.5840/tej20111129 .

^ a b Pavlik, John V. (2001).

"Journalism Ethics and New Media" .

Journalism and New Media : 82– 98.

JSTOR 10.732/pavl11482.10 .

^ Bill Moyers , Media and Democracy , The Nation (Editorial), December 15, 2003 ^ Lessig, Lawrence.

"Institutional Corruption" .

wiki.lessig.org . Retrieved 2016-03-11 .

^ Petković, Brankica, ed. (2014).

Media Integrity Matters: Reclaiming Public Service Values in Media and Journalism: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia, Serbia (PDF) . Ljubljana: Peace Institute.

^ a b "Digital Media Ethics" .

Center for Journalism Ethics . Retrieved 2019-11-24 .

^ Friend, Cecilia and Jane Singer.

Online Journalism Ethics: Traditions and Transitions . Armonk, N.Y.: M. E. Sharpe, 2007.

[ ISBN missing ] [ page needed ] ^ a b c d e f g h Capurro; Britz, Rafael; Johannes B. (2010).

"In Search of a Code of Global Information Ethics: The Road Travelled and New Horizons" (PDF) .

Ethical Space: The International Journal of Communication Ethics .

7 – via Academic Search Complete.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Köbis, Nils Christopher (September 9, 2022). "The Corruption Risks of Artificial Intelligence".

Transparency International : 7– 10.

^ Harbor, Anton (2014). "Accountability and the Media".

The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science .

652 : 206– 210.

doi : 10.1177/0002716213515154 .

^ Replogle, Elaine. "Fame, Social Media Use, and Ethics".

Sociological Forum .

29 (3).

Further reading [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Patterson, Philip; Wilkins, Lee (2013).

Media Ethics: Issues and Cases, 8th edition . McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 978-0-07-352624-9 .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Journals [ edit ] The Journal of Mass Media Ethics Cases [ edit ] Louisiana State University, School of Mass Communication Indiana University, School of Journalism Archived 2007-09-18 at the Wayback Machine The Poynter Institute External links [ edit ] Poynter Institute bibliography of Media ethics Fourth Estate Code of Ethics Archived 2020-01-25 at the Wayback Machine U.S. Government reference "Global Issues, Media and Ethics" Media Ethics Resources on World Wide Web Silha Center for the Study of Media Ethics and Law Ethics on the Web from the School of Communications at California State University, Fullerton Key quotes on media ethics & media reform Media impact on democracy Media Ethics: Some Specific Problems Archived 2012-11-07 at the Wayback Machine – from the Education Resources Information Center Clearinghouse on Reading and Communication Skills, Bloomington, Indiana .

v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject Authority control databases : National Czech Republic ^ Chadwick, Ruth; Belsey, Andrew (1992).

Ethical Issues in Journalism and the Media (Professional Ethics) . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 0-203-00588-0 .

^ Black, Jay; Barney, Ralph D (2002). "Codes of Ethics: A Special Issue".

Journal of Mass Media Ethics .

17 (2).

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Media_ethics&oldid=1301905739 " Categories : Professional ethics Journalism ethics Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Pages with missing ISBNs Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from July 2015 All articles that may contain original research All articles with minor POV problems Articles with minor POV problems from December 2018 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 09:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Media ethics 13 languages Add topic

