Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Biota 3 Conservation Toggle Conservation subsection 3.1 The Gulf of Kutch Marine National Park and Sanctuary 3.1.1 Tourism 4 Vessel Traffic Service 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Gulf of Kutch 52 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Català Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français ગુજરાતી 한국어 हिन्दी Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Kiswahili Lietuvių Македонски മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Русский संस्कृतम् Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 22°36′N 69°30′E ﻿ / ﻿ 22.600°N 69.500°E ﻿ / 22.600; 69.500 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Inlet of the Arabian Sea on the west coast of India Gulf of Kutch on the left. Image NASA Earth Observatory Gulf of Kutch in 1896 The Gulf of Kutch is located between the peninsula regions of Kutch and Saurashtra , bounded in the state of Gujarat that borders Pakistan . It opens towards the Arabian Sea facing the Gulf of Oman .

It is about 50 km wide at the entrance before narrowing into marshland, creeks and inlets.

[ 1 ] The south coast is bordered by islands, mud flats and coral reefs, due to the large amount of marine life found in this region it has large sections of it have become protected as parks and sanctuaries. The northern side is lined with extensive mud flats, the largest of which lie between Mundra and Kuvay. Also, a large portion of the shipping harbours in the region are located on the northern side including Māndvi, Bedi, and Kandla. Maximum depth of the Gulf of Kutch is around 123 m (403 ft).

[ 1 ] Additionally, there are numerous shoals at the mouth of the gulf namely Lushington, Ranwara, Bobby and Gurur. The gulf expands deep into Gujarat with a length of approximately 150 km before becoming an 8500 km 2 delta. The low annual rainfall that flows into the gulf means that there are no major rivers going into the gulf and creating run-off.

[ 2 ] Tidal conditions range with spring tide peaking around 6.2 m while the annual average is around 4 m. Moreover, the height of the tides can also vary depending on how deep into the gulf it's recorded. Ohka has been measured in a range of 3.06 m while Kandla has shown heights of 5.89 m at the same time.

[ 1 ] Similarly, the speed of the current has been recorded between 1.5 and 2.5 knots at the entrance and 3 to 5 knots within the centre.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] The Gulf of Kutch is referred to in the Periplus of the Erythraean Sea , a travelogue written in about 50 CE, as the Gulf of Baraca .

[ 3 ] Biota [ edit ] Wildlife diversity has been primarily monitored within the marine protected region with one study showing a recorded total of 1,127 species of fauna and flora.

[ 4 ] The total included 200 species of molluscs, 3 species of turtles, 3 species of marine mammals. Other studies have recorded hundred of species of fish.

Coral Reefs The Gulf of Kutch contains fringing, platform and patch reefs as well as coral pinnacles with at least 37 different species of hard corals with other reports indicating 44 species of hard coral and 12 species of soft coral. These coral reefs are thousands of years old with the youngest being from 5,240 years old at Salaya although these coral clusters grow at a rate of 1 cm to 10 cm a year.

[ 5 ] Conservation [ edit ] Conservation within the Gulf of Kutch have aimed to curb the collapse of local ecosystems in the last century. Before the Marine National Park and Sanctuary no government supported environment protect existed in the region. Conservation efforts have been extensive in maintaining a large area although the growing industrialisation, tourism and climate change marine diversity has been reduced.

The Gulf of Kutch Marine National Park and Sanctuary [ edit ] The Gulf of Kutch Marine National Park and Sanctuary (MNPS) was established in 1980 with the creation of the first marine sanctuary and park in response to a number of notifications received by the state of Gujarat. These first installations covered the islands that are located along the coast of Saurashtra with the inter tidal sectors becoming the first National Park areas. In recognition of the for their conservation efforts MNPS were classified by the Wildlife Institute of India as a part of the West coast Biotic Province in 1982.

The area the MNPS covers include 148.92 km 2 of 42 islands and 309 km 2 of inter tidal zone. 162.89 km 2 is dedicated as National Park area with the remaining classified as sanctuary land.

[ 6 ] Under the Wild Life Protection Act of 1972 this means that no human intrusion is permitted in the park regions but certain rights may be permitted in sanctuaries such as fishing. Initially, the MNPS was established to protect regions with rich ecosystems but since the 1991 Coastal Zone Regulation Notification coral reefs as well as mangroves have been included in this protection.

Coral Reefs are regions of extreme biodiversity but can also be extremely fragile under certain conditions. It has been observed using satellite data that all coral reefs combined have shrunk 43% between 1975 and 1986 with an almost 100 km 2 loss.

[ 7 ] The reason for this coral damage was due to sediment covering the coral preventing sun light from entering. As a result, it starved the coral of nutrients leading to death. The main cause of the mud was due to coral dredging by a nearby cement company. As a result of these findings bans were placed on coral mining near protected areas, and between 1985 and 1991 coral reefs started to increase in size. However, with the growing industry inside the Gulf of Kutch coral reefs are once again declining.

Mangroves are less protected than coral reefs as only 140 km 2 is under MNPS control out of 665.9 km 2 .

[ 8 ] Between 1960 and 1980 mangroves suffered severe destruction regardless of the MNPS. This destruction is credited to mass industry building that consequently decreased the amount of freshwater available to the mangroves. As a result, some mangrove species became endangered such as Rhizophora and Ceriops while at least one went extinct. While recently mangrove cover has increased it mostly attributed to districts Jamnagar and Kutch.

Tourism [ edit ] With the introduction of MNPS parts of the environment have been restored promoting tourism around and on the islands. This has also resulted in policy change around these areas. Pirotan island in 1994 was planned to be classified under the maximum protection level wherein only scientific research and environmental assistants could enter. This was formulated as a part of the 1994 management plan. However, with a growing number of tourists each year the plan was never implemented and between 2006 and 2007 seven thousand tourists entered the island. Both tourism and educational programs are managed by the Gujarat Ecological Education Research Foundation (GEER).

Vessel Traffic Service [ edit ] In 2012, the vessel traffic service (VTS-GOK) was opened in the Gulf of Kutch. The project was the join initiative of the Kandla Port Trust, Gujarat Maritime Board and the Directorate General of Lighthouses And Lightships of India. It is one of the largest VTS system in the world covering water area of 16,500 square kilometres (6,400 sq mi). It extends from Koteshwar to Okha , about 800 km. It cost ₹ 165 crore (equivalent to ₹ 311 crore or US$37 million in 2023). It has nine radars, three repeater stations and six port monitoring stations. Two additional monitoring stations of the Indian Coast Guard at Jakhau and Okha and one station of Indian Navy at Okha is also integrated in the system. The master control centre is located in Kandla .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Coral reefs in India Marine archaeology in the Gulf of Cambay Marine National Park, Gulf of Kutch Rann of Kutch Wildlife Sanctuary References [ edit ] ^ a b c Wagle, B G (1979).

"Geomorphology of the Gulf of Kutch" (PDF) .

Indian Journal of Marine Sciences .

8 : 123– 126.

^ a b Kunte, P. D.; Wagle, B. G.; Sugimori, Yasuhiro (January 2003).

"Sediment transport and depth variation study of the Gulf of Kutch using remote sensing" .

International Journal of Remote Sensing .

24 (11): 2253– 2263.

doi : 10.1080/01431160210164316 .

ISSN 0143-1161 .

S2CID 128498617 .

^ Schoff, Wilfred H.: T he Periplus of the Erythrean Sea – Travel and Trade in the Indian Ocean by a Merchant of the First Century , Longmans, Green and Co. London, 1912.

^ S., Singh, H. (2002).

Marine protected areas in India : status of coastal wetlands and their conservation . Gujarat Ecological Education and Research (GEER) Foundation.

OCLC 52269629 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Chandanathil Pappachan Geevan; Dixit, Arun Mani (2012).

"State of Environment Report on Coastal and Marine Environment Gujarat State 2012" .

doi : 10.13140/RG.2.1.3392.4727 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Biswas, Nilanjana (2009).

"Gulf of Kutch Marine National Park and Marine Wildlife Sanctuary: A case study" .

International Collective in Support of Fishworkers .

^ Nair, V. R. (2002).

Status of Flora and Fauna of Gulf of Kachchh . National Institute of Oceanography, Goa.

^ Magotra, Rohit; Pandey, Pushkar; Kumar, Mohit; Gupta, Mohit Kumar; Kaushik, Asha; Parikh, Jyoti (15 July 2020).

"Role of Marine National Park for Sustainable Livelihoods of Artisan Fisherfolk" .

Ecology, Economy and Society .

3 (2).

doi : 10.37773/ees.v3i2.118 .

ISSN 2581-6101 .

S2CID 225639634 .

^ "VTS system to make navigation easier in Gulf of Kutch" .

The Times of India . 13 December 2012 . Retrieved 26 July 2020 .

^ "India: VTS for the Gulf of Kachchh to the Nation DGLL to Launch AIS for Tracking Vessels" .

Safety4Sea . 13 February 2012.

^ "VTS: Directorate General of Lighthouses & Lightships" .

www.dgll.nic.in . Retrieved 26 July 2020 .

22°36′N 69°30′E ﻿ / ﻿ 22.600°N 69.500°E ﻿ / 22.600; 69.500 v t e Hydrography of Gujarat Rivers Aji Ambika Auranga Bhadar Bhukhi Bhurud Chirai Chok Dai-minsar Daman Ganga Dhadhar Dnyanganga Fulki Gajansar Ghela Girna Gomai Hiran Kali Kalubhar Kankawati Kareshwar Kayla Keri Khalkhalio Khari Kharod Khokhra Kim Kolak Machchu Machchundri Mahi Malan (Mordhara) Malan (Gir) Meshwo Mindhola Mitiyativali Nagmati Nara Narmada Nayra Ozat Padalio Panzara Par Pur Purna Rangmati Rav Raval Rukmavati Rupen (Taranga) Rupen (Gir) Sabarmati Sai Sang Sangavadi saraswati Shahi Shetrunji Sukhbhadar Sunar Suvi Tapti Tawa Und Utavali Vaan Vatrak Vegdi Vishwamitri West Banas Lakes Chandola Lake Chharodi Lake Chimnabai Lake Damodar Kund Gopi Talav Hamirsar Lake Kankaria Lake Lakhota Lake Munsar Lake Nagalpur Lake Narayan Sarovar Nal Sarovar Para Lake Saputara Lake Shakoor Lake Sursagar Lake Thol Lake Vastrapur Lake Dams Ajwa Bhadbhut barrage Dantiwada dam Dharoi dam Dholidhaja Kalpasar (proposed) Kamleshwar Nayka Sardar Sarovar Ukai Vasna Barrage Related topics Narmada basin Ocean Arabian Sea Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Khambhat v t e Hydrography of the Indian subcontinent Inland rivers Bagmati Beas Betwa Bhagirathi Brahmaputra Chambal Chenab Damodar Godavari Gandaki Ganges Ghaghara Indus Jhelum Kali Kaveri Kosi Krishna Luni Mahanadi Mahananda Mahaweli Meghna Narmada Padma Ravi Sarasvati Sankosh Sharda Son Sutlej Tapti Yamuna Inland lakes, deltas, etc.

Ganges Basin Ganges Delta Indus Delta Dal Lake Pookode Lake Skeleton Lake Chilika Lake Lake Powai Borith Lake Saiful Muluk Gosaikunda Nizam Sagar Red Hills Lake Malampuzha Kerala backwaters Pulicat Lake Coastal Indian Ocean Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Mannar Laccadive Sea Palk Bay Palk Strait Categories Lakes of Bangladesh / India / Nepal / Pakistan / Sri Lanka Reservoirs and dams in India / Sri Lanka Rivers of Bangladesh / Bhutan / India / Nepal / Pakistan / Sri Lanka v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Israel Geographic Pleiades Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gulf_of_Kutch&oldid=1299509748 " Categories : Landforms of Gujarat Gulfs of India Gulfs of the Indian Ocean Underwater diving sites in India Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 errors: missing periodical Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2019 Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 21:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gulf of Kutch 52 languages Add topic

