Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geology 2 Notable features along the ridge 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Explorer Ridge 6 languages Català Español Italiano Polski Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 49°40′00″N 130°20′00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 49.6667°N 130.3333°W ﻿ / 49.6667; -130.3333 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mid-ocean ridge west of British Columbia, Canada Bathymetry of Explorer Ridge area, collected between 1980 and 1984. Bathymetry is contoured at a 200-meter interval. The inset shows the ridge location. The open white circle represents the approximately location of the Magic Mountain vent site.

Pillow lavas and breccia overlain with slabby pieces of sulfide formed from hydrothermal venting on the east side of the Southern Explorer Ridge.

Bathymetry image showing the crest of Southern Explorer Ridge. Purple and dark blue colors indicate deepest depths.

The Explorer Ridge is a mid-ocean ridge , a divergent tectonic plate boundary located about 241 km (150 mi) west of Vancouver Island , British Columbia , Canada. It lies at the northern extremity of the Pacific spreading axis. To its east is the Explorer plate , which together with the Juan de Fuca plate and the Gorda plate to its south, is what remains of the once-vast Farallon plate which has been largely subducted under the North American plate . The Explorer Ridge consists of one major segment, the Southern Explorer Ridge, and several smaller segments. It runs northward from the Sovanco fracture zone to the Queen Charlotte triple junction , a point where it meets the Queen Charlotte Fault and the northern Cascadia subduction zone .

Geology [ edit ] This divergent boundary first formed about 5–7 million years ago when the northern end of the Juan de Fuca plate broke off along the Nootka Fault to form the Explorer plate . This apparently had some important ramifications for regional geologic evolution. When this change was completed, Cascade Arc volcanism from Northern California to southwestern British Columbia returned and the present-day Cascade Range and Olympic Mountains started to form.

[ 1 ] The oceanic crust is moving away from the Explorer Ridge to either side. On the eastern side the eastward moving Explorer plate is being subducted under the North American plate . The belt of volcanoes along the Pacific Ranges are the direct results of this collision. The western side of the Explorer Ridge is associated with the northwest trending Pacific plate which has formed the Queen Charlotte Fault , an active transform fault along the coast of British Columbia and southeast Alaska .

The Explorer Ridge is also seismically active. Most seismicity recorded in this area occurred on or near the Explorer Transform Fault Zone. The relatively shallow depth of the Southern Explorer Ridge (up to 1800 m) in comparison with most other segments of the northeast Pacific spreading centers suggests that there has been considerable volcanic activity along this segment in the past 100,000 years.

[ 2 ] Notable features along the ridge [ edit ] The Explorer Ridge includes a deep rift valley which runs along the axis of the ridge along nearly its entire length. This rift marks the actual boundary between adjacent tectonic plates, where magma from the mantle reaches the seafloor, erupting as lava and producing new crustal material for the plates.

Before 2002 Explorer Ridge was the least explored of the northeast Pacific spreading centers, even though it was known to have robust hydrothermal activity and is seismically active.

[ 3 ] Along the Southern Explorer Ridge lies a large hydrothermal vent area called Magic Mountain . It is an unusual hydrothermal site, with its off-axis location and relatively long-lived activity. The source of the hydrothermal fluid that fuels Magic Mountain probably rises along fault systems associated with a recent episode of rifting that, in turn, followed a massive outpouring of lava. These vents are forming seafloor massive sulfide deposits on the ocean floor. Many strange deep-water creatures have been found here.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Geology of the Pacific Northwest Gorda Ridge Juan de Fuca Ridge Sovanco fracture zone Volcanism of Canada References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Explorer Ridge .

^ The Cascade Episode Retrieved on 2008-06-10 ^ NOAA Ocean Explorer: Submarine Ring of Fire Retrieved on 2008-06-16 ^ Vents Program: Explorer Ridge Retrieved on 2008-06-10 ^ NOAA Ocean Explorer: Submarine Ring of Fire Retrieved on 2008-06-10 v t e Mid-ocean ridges Present Central Indian Chile East Pacific Explorer Gakkel Gorda Juan de Fuca Mid-Atlantic Pacific-Antarctic South American-Antarctic Southeast Indian Southwest Indian Former Aegir Alpha Antarctic-Phoenix Kula-Farallon Mid-Labrador Osbourn Trough Pacific-Farallon Pacific-Kula Geology portal Oceans portal v t e Tectonic plates Major plates African Antarctic Eurasian Indo-Australian Australian Indian North American Pacific South American Minor plates Amurian Arabian Burma Caribbean Caroline Cocos Indian Nazca New Hebrides Okhotsk Philippine Scotia Somali Sunda Yangtze Microplates Adriatic Aegean Sea Anatolian Balmoral Reef Banda Sea Bird's Head Capricorn Coiba Conway Reef Explorer Futuna Galápagos Gonâve Gorda Greenland Halmahera Iberian Iranian Juan de Fuca Juan Fernández Kerguelen Kermadec Lwandle Madagascar Malpelo Manus Maoke Mariana Molucca Sea Niuafo’ou North Andes North Bismarck North Galápagos Okinawa Panama Pelso Philippine Mobile Belt Rivera Rovuma Sangihe Seychelles Shetland Solomon Sea South Bismarck South Sandwich Timor Tisza Tonga Trobriand Victoria Woodlark Ancient plates Baltic Bellingshausen Charcot Cimmeria Farallon Insular Intermontane Izanagi Kula Lhasa Malvinas Moa Phoenix Kshiroda Oceanic ridges Aden Ridge Carlsberg Ridge Central Indian Ridge Chile Ridge Cocos Ridge East Pacific Rise Explorer Ridge Gakkel Ridge Galápagos Spreading Center Gorda Ridge Juan de Fuca Ridge Mid-Atlantic Ridge Knipovich Ridge Kolbeinsey Ridge Mohns Ridge Reykjanes Ridge Pacific–Antarctic Ridge South American–Antarctic Ridge Southeast Indian Ridge Southwest Indian Ridge Ancient oceanic ridges Aegir Ridge Alpha Ridge Antarctic–Phoenix Ridge Kula–Farallon Ridge Mid-Labrador Ridge Pacific–Farallon Ridge Pacific–Kula Ridge Geology portal List Category Commons 49°40′00″N 130°20′00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 49.6667°N 130.3333°W ﻿ / 49.6667; -130.3333 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Explorer_Ridge&oldid=1273645083 " Categories : Underwater ridges of the Pacific Ocean Plate tectonics Mountain ranges of British Columbia Volcanism of British Columbia Coast of British Columbia Seismic zones of British Columbia Oceanography of Canada Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 February 2025, at 09:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Explorer Ridge 6 languages Add topic

