Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical context 2 Notes 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ptolemy-el-Garib 3 languages العربية Español Latina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Manuscript of Life of Aristotle attributed to al-Gharib. Ms. Ayasofia 4833 Ptolemy-el-Garib ( Arabic , more correctly al-gharīb , "Ptolemy the foreigner," explained as meaning "Ptolemy the unknown") (fl. c. 300 AD) [ 1 ] was a Hellenistic pinacographer , probably of the Peripatetic school , who wrote a Life of Aristotle notable for its catalog of Aristotle 's works.  This work survives in an Arabic manuscript in Istanbul .

[ 2 ] A critical edition, with French translation was published by Marwan Rashed.

[ 3 ] Historical context [ edit ] The excerpts known prior to this discovery were collected in Ingemar Düring 's Aristotle in the Ancient Biographical Tradition (Göteborg 1957), pp. 221–231.

Marian Plezia has cast doubt on the idea that Ptolemy-el-Garib's Life was an important source of later Neoplatonic lives of Aristotle.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Tarán, Leonardo; Gutas, Dimitri.

Aristotle Poetics: Editio Maior of the Greek Text with Historical Introductions and Philological Commentaries . Leiden: Brill (2012), p. 16.

^ Gottschalk 1990 reported that an edition was in preparation by Marian Plezia and Józef Bielawski . Plezia died in 1996, Bielawski in 1997.
A transcription of the Ms. Ayasofia 4833 fol. 10b-11a, 14b-18a (with the Catalogue of Aristotle's works) is now available in: Christel Hein, Definition und Einteilung der Philosophie. Von der spätantiken Einleitungsliteratur zur arabischen Enzyklopädie , New York: Peter Lang, 1985, pp. 415-439).

^ Ptolémée "al Gharib", Épître à Gallus sur la vie, le testament et les écrits d’Aristote , Paris, Les Belles Lettres, 2021.

References [ edit ] Hans Gottschalk, "The Earliest Aristotelian Commentators," in Aristotle Transformed (ed. Richard Sorabji, 1990), pp. 56f. n. 5.

Further reading [ edit ] Ingemar Düring, "Ptolemy's Vita Aristotelis rediscovered," in Philomathes: studies and essays in the humanities in memory of Philip Merlan , ed. Robert B. Palmer and Robert Hamerton-Kelly (The Hague: Nijhoff, 1971), pp. 264-269 - includes an English translation of Ptolemy's preface.

Dimitri Gutas , "The spurious and the authentic in the Arabic Lives of Aristotle," in Pseudo-Aristotle in the Middle Ages: the Theology and other texts . Edited by Ryan William Francis, Kraye Jill, and Schmitt Charles Bernard. London: Warburg Institute. University of London 1986. pp. 15-36 (Reprinted as Chapter VI in D. Gutas, Greek philosophers in the Arabic tradition, Aldershot, Ashgate, 2000).

Marian Plezia, "De Ptolemaeo pinacographo," Eos 63 (1975), pp. 37–42.

——, "De Ptolemaei Vita Aristotelis," in Aristoteles: Werk und Wirkung , vol. 1 ( Aristoteles und seine Schule ), ed. Jürgen Wiesner (Berlin: de Gruyter, 1985), pp. 1-11.

External links [ edit ] The Ancient Catalogues of Aristotle's Writings: Hesychius and Ptolemy al-Garib. A Survey of Current Research Bibliography on the Ancient Catalogues of Aristotle's Writings contains a list of studies on Ptolemy-el-Garib v t e Peripatetic philosophers Greek era Aristotle Eudemus Theophrastus Aristoxenus Chamaeleon Echecratides Phaenias Praxiphanes Neleus of Scepsis Dicaearchus Nicomachus Demetrius of Phalerum Strato of Lampsacus Clearchus Archestratus (music theorist) Hieronymus of Rhodes Lyco of Troas Aristo of Ceos Satyrus Critolaus Calliphon Diodorus of Tyre Erymneus Roman era Xenarchus of Seleucia Cratippus Apellicon of Teos Andronicus of Rhodes Aristo of Alexandria Boethus of Sidon Athenaeus Mechanicus Ammonius of Athens Alexander of Aegae Aristocles of Messene Aristocles of Pergamon Aristoxenus of Cyrene Aspasius Aristotle of Mytilene Adrastus Herminus Sosigenes Alexander of Aphrodisias Ptolemy-el-Garib Themistius Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 National Germany United States France BnF data Vatican Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX This biography of a philosopher from ancient Greece is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ptolemy-el-Garib&oldid=1292282482 " Categories : Ancient Greek biographers Roman-era Peripatetic philosophers Works about Aristotle Ancient Greek philosopher stubs Hidden category: All stub articles This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 04:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ptolemy-el-Garib 3 languages Add topic

