Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Professional Certification in the United States Toggle Professional Certification in the United States subsection 1.1 Certification by the American Planning Association 1.2 Certification by the Transportation Professional Certification Board 2 Professional Certification in the United Kingdom 3 Professional Certification in Canada 4 References 5 See also Toggle the table of contents Professional transportation planner Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Professional transportation planner" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A professional transportation planner is a professional engaged in the practice of transportation planning , relating to the transportation aspects of urban planning and infrastructure planning .

Professional Certification in the United States [ edit ] In the United States, a professional transportation planner is certified in one of two ways: as a Certified Transportation Planner by the American Institute of Certified Planners , the professional institute of the American Planning Association , or as a Professional Transportation Planner by the Transportation Professional Certification Board, an autonomous body affiliated with the Institute of Transportation Engineers . Only a small percentage of practicing transportation planners in the United States hold either the CTP or PTP credential. A select number of transportation planners choose to obtain both certifications.

Certification by the American Planning Association [ edit ] The American Institute of Certified Planners (AICP) awards the Certified Transportation Planner ( AICP CTP ) certificate to professional planners who have achieved an advanced level of expertise in transportation planning. The Advanced Specialty Certification recognizes planners for their expertise and leadership specifically within transportation planning.

AICP CTP certification is possible only for planners who are members of AICP in good standing, have at least eight years of work experience in the transportation planning field, and pass a rigorous exam administered annually. Certification must be maintained by meeting certain requirements.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Certification by the Transportation Professional Certification Board [ edit ] The Transportation Professional Certification Board, an independent organization affiliated with the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), awards the Professional Transportation Planner ( PTP ) certificate to professional planners with demonstrated education and experience in transportation planning.

[ 3 ] PTP certification is possible only for planners who have an accredited degree in planning or transportation, have at least three years (for master's degree and Ph.D. holders) or four years (for bachelor's degree holders) of work experience in the transportation planning field, and pass a rigorous exam administered three times annually. Certification must be renewed every three years. ITE membership is not required to possess certification.

[ 4 ] Professional Certification in the United Kingdom [ edit ] In the United Kingdom, professional transportation planners are certified as a Transport Planning Professional ( TPP ) and are members of Chartered Institution of Highways and Transportation and the Transport Planning Society. The TPP certification is an equivalent designation as the Charter Engineer.

Professional Certification in Canada [ edit ] In Canada, certain provinces restrict the use of the title Professional Planner (PP) to those licensed planners who have passed both an exam and an accredited degree.

References [ edit ] ^ "Advanced Specialty Certification" .

www.planning.org . Retrieved 29 April 2016 .

^ https://www.planning.org/asc/transportation/ Archived 24 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 29 April 2016 ^ http://www.tpcb.org/ptp/default.asp Archived 10 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 29 April 2016 ^ http://www.tpcb.org/ptp/requirements.asp Archived 1 May 2007 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 29 April 2016 See also [ edit ] Transportation planning Urban planning Professional traffic operations engineer Traffic operations practitioner specialist Traffic signal operations specialist Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Professional_transportation_planner&oldid=1089026154 " Categories : Transportation planning Transport occupations Professional titles and certifications Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles needing additional references from April 2016 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from April 2015 Use American English from April 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in American English This page was last edited on 21 May 2022, at 13:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Professional transportation planner Add languages Add topic

