Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical background 2 Contemporary laws Toggle Contemporary laws subsection 2.1 Canada 2.2 United States 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Birth aboard aircraft and ships 4 languages العربية Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( December 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Legal status of persons Birthright Birthplace Aboard aircraft and ships Jus sanguinis Jus soli Birth tourism Nationality Citizenship missing multiple transnational Naturalization Ius Doni Oath Test Law Lost citizenship denaturalized renounced Immigration Alien Enemy Criminalization Diplomatic protection Expatriate Foreign worker Illegal Law Integration Permanent residency Refugee Right to homeland Voluntary return Identity cleansing Right of return v t e The subject of birth aboard aircraft and ships is one with a long history in public international law . The law on the subject is complex, because various states apply differing principles of nationality , namely jus soli and jus sanguinis , to varying degrees and with varying qualifications.

Historical background [ edit ] Before 1961, a number of states expressly provided, in their laws, that births and deaths aboard an aircraft registered to that state are considered to have occurred on national territory, and thus the nationality laws of that territory apply. One such was § 32(5) of the British Nationality Act 1948 .

Contemporary laws [ edit ] Under the 1944 Convention on International Civil Aviation , articles 17–21, all aircraft have the nationality of the state in which they are registered, and may not have multiple nationalities. The law of the aircraft's nationality is applicable on the aircraft. However, nationality laws of any country already apply everywhere, since it is for each country to determine who are its nationals. So this convention has no effect on nationality laws. The convention does not say that a birth on a country's aircraft is to be treated as a birth in that country for the purposes of nationality.

Under the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness , for the purposes of determining the obligations under the convention, a birth on a ship or aircraft in international waters or airspace shall be treated as a birth in the country of the ship or aircraft's registration. However, the convention applies only to births where the child would otherwise be stateless. Since in most cases a child would be covered by one or more countries' jus sanguini at birth (getting the same citizenship as its parents), this convention rarely comes into play. In addition, there are still very few member states that are party to the 1961 convention.

Canada [ edit ] Children born in Canadian airspace are automatically extended Canadian citizenship, but birth in or over international waters is assessed on a case-by-case basis. Various factors are assessed in determining citizenship at birth, parentage being the most important factor. But being born in a Canadian-registered vehicle would establish a connection with Canada which would probably be taken into account, if application was made to have the person declared a Canadian citizen.

[ 1 ] United States [ edit ] Main articles: Birthright citizenship in the United States of America and United States nationality law U.S. law holds that natural persons born on foreign ships docked at U.S. ports or born within the limit of U.S.

territorial waters are U.S. citizens. An important exception to this rule is children born to people who (in line with the 14th Amendment ) are not "subject to the jurisdiction" of the United States, e.g. foreign diplomats accredited with the United States Department of State or invading foreign enemy forces.

[ 2 ] Despite a common misconception to the contrary, birth on board a U.S.-flagged ship, airliner, or military vessel outside of the 12-nautical-mile (22 km; 14 mi) limit is not considered to be a birth on U.S. territory, and the principle of jus soli thus does not apply.

[ 3 ] In addition to the question of a child's citizenship, there is also a question of how to report "Place of Birth" for children born in transit. US State Department guidance instructs that a child born in international waters should have their place of birth listed as "AT SEA", while those born in the territorial waters of any country would list the name of that country.

[ 4 ] A child born in flight in a region where no country claims sovereignty would list their place of birth as "IN THE AIR".

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] List of people born at sea References [ edit ] ^ Josh Elliot (May 11, 2015).

"Air-born: Will baby delivered mid-flight get Canadian citizenship?" .

CTV News . Retrieved March 7, 2017 .

^ Jeffrey A. Schoenblum (2006).

Multistate and Multinational Estate Planning (Third ed.). CCH. pp.

9– 56.

ISBN 0-8080-8950-1 .

^ "8 FAM 301.1 ACQUISITION BY BIRTH IN THE UNITED STATES" .

fam.state.gov . Retrieved 2022-02-23 .

^ a b "U.S. Department of State Foreign Affairs Manual - 8 FAM 403.4 (U) Place of Birth" . United States.

Further reading [ edit ] Barbara Reukema (1982). "Birth on board aircraft".

Discriminatory Refusal of Carriage in North America . Kluwer Law and Taxation Publishers. pp.

117– 124.

ISBN 90-6544-049-6 .

William Samore (July 1951). "Statelessness as a Consequence of the Conflict of Nationality Laws".

The American Journal of International Law .

45 (3). The American Journal of International Law, Vol. 45, No. 3: 476– 494.

doi : 10.2307/2194545 .

JSTOR 2194545 .

S2CID 147312560 .

Gerhard Von Glahn (1976).

"The Law and the Individual" .

Law Among Nations: An Introduction to Public International Law . Macmillan. pp.

202 .

ISBN 0-02-423150-9 .

Lauterpacht (June 1986). " re Delgado de Román".

International Law Reports . Cambridge University Press. pp.

371– 372.

ISBN 0-949009-37-7 .

— a 1956 case in Argentina exemplifying how both Spanish and Argentinian laws could apply to a birth aboard ship.  The decision in the case cites "Birth on Board Ship".

Spanish Encyclopedia . Vol. 23. p. 328.

.

British Institute of International Affairs (1965). "Nationality in Public International Law".

The British Year Book of International Law . Vol. 39. Hodder and Stoughton. p. 306.

v t e Nationality laws By continent Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Congo Republic Democratic Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia Somaliland 3 South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Western Sahara 3 Zambia Zimbabwe Americas North Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Greenland (Kingdom of Denmark) Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama St. Kitts and Nevis St. Lucia St. Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States ( Puerto Rico , US Virgin Islands ) South Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Asia Afghanistan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China East Timor India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Kuwait Laos Lebanon Malaysia Mongolia Myanmar Nepal North Korea Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Taiwan 3 Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe European Union and Schengen Area Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Rest of Europe Albania Armenia Andorra 2 Azerbaijan Belarus Bosnia and Herzegovina Georgia Kosovo 3 Moldova Monaco 2 Montenegro North Macedonia Northern Cyprus 3 Russia San Marino Serbia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Vatican City 2 Oceania Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Nauru Kiribati Marshall Islands New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu United States ( American Samoa , Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands , Guam ) Vanuatu International organizations Commonwealth of Nations European Union Mercosur Nordic Council Caribbean Community African Union By procedure Loss of citizenship Denaturalization Renunciation of citizenship Naturalization Birth aboard aircraft and ships Ius sanguinis Ius soli Repatriation By result Citizenship Multiple citizenship Passport Internal Permanent residency Right of return Second-class citizen Statelessness Travel visa Defunct Nazi Germany Ancient Rome Soviet Union 1 British Overseas Territories .

2 Open border with Schengen Area .

3 Partially recognized.

Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Birth_aboard_aircraft_and_ships&oldid=1302841017 " Categories : Law of the sea Aviation law Nationality law Statelessness Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from December 2013 All articles that may contain original research This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 18:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Birth aboard aircraft and ships 4 languages Add topic

