Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Career 2 Research 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Steven Laureys 2 languages Français Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Belgian neurologist (born 1968) This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Steven Laureys" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Steven Laureys Dr. Steven Laureys in his office Born ( 1968-12-24 ) 24 December 1968 (age 56) Leuven , Belgium Nationality Belgian Citizenship Belgium Education PhD (2000) Alma mater University of Liège Vrije Universiteit Brussel Scientific career Fields Neurology Steven Laureys (born 24 December 1968 in Leuven ) [ 1 ] is a Belgian neurologist . He is principally known as a clinician and researcher in the field of neurology of consciousness.

Career [ edit ] Laureys graduated as a Medical Doctor from the Vrije Universiteit Brussel , Belgium , in 1993. While specializing in neurology he entered a research career and obtained his MSc in Pharmaceutical Medicine working on pain and stroke using in vivo microdialysis and diffusion MRI in the rat (1997). Drawn by functional neuroimaging , he moved to the Cyclotron Research Center at the University of Liège , Belgium, where he obtained his PhD studying residual brain function in the vegetative state in 2000. He is board-certified in neurology (1998) and in end-of-life and palliative medicine (2004).

He currently leads the Coma Science Group at the Cyclotron Research Centre of the University of Liège , Belgium . He is clinical professor of neurology , at the Liège University Hospital and Research Director at the National Fund for Scientific Research .

Laureys is chair of the World Federation of Neurology's Coma and Disorders of Consciousness Research Group and of the European Neurological Society's Subcommittee on Coma and Disorders of Consciousness.

[ 2 ] Since 2009, he is invited professor at the Royal Academy of Belgium .

Research [ edit ] His team assesses the recovery of neurological disability and of neuronal plasticity in severely brain damaged patients with altered states of consciousness by means of multimodal functional neuroimaging . It aims at characterizing the brain structure and the residual cerebral function in patients who survive a severe brain injury : patients in coma , vegetative state , minimally conscious state and locked in syndrome .

The importance of this project is twofold. First, these patients represent a problem in terms of diagnosis , prognosis , treatment and daily management. Second, these patients offer the opportunity to explore human consciousness , which is presently one major conundrum neurosciences have to solve. Indeed, these patients present a complete, nearly graded, range of conscious states from unconsciousness ( coma ) to full awareness ( locked-in syndrome ).

This research confronts clinical expertise and bedside behavioral evaluation of altered states of consciousness with state-of-the-art multimodal imaging combining the information from positron emission tomography (PET), functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), structural MRI , electroencephalography (EEG), event related potential (ERP) and transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) data.

See also [ edit ] Rom Houben , a conscious man incorrectly identified as comatose by Laureys, who made insufficiently rigorous tests of alleged facilitated communication References [ edit ] ^ "In context" .

Lancet Neurology .

7 (11): 989. November 2008.

doi : 10.1016/S1474-4422(08)70236-9 .

S2CID 54239169 .

^ "ENS Subcommittees" . European Neurological Society . Retrieved 19 July 2009 .

External links [ edit ] Coma Science Group (with downloadable papers) Steven Laureys' page at the University of Liège Cyclotron Research Centre Liège University Hospital Wikimedia Commons has media related to Steven Laureys .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Norway Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii ORCID Scopus Google Scholar DBLP People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Steven_Laureys&oldid=1263039702 " Categories : 1968 births Living people Belgian neuroscientists Belgian consciousness researchers and theorists Cognitive neuroscientists Materialists Belgian medical writers Belgian science writers Electroencephalographers 21st-century Belgian scientists Academic staff of Université Laval Vrije Universiteit Brussel alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 BLP articles lacking sources from December 2023 All BLP articles lacking sources Articles with hCards Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 December 2024, at 10:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Steven Laureys 2 languages Add topic

