Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Classification of schools Toggle Classification of schools subsection 2.1 Āstika 2.2 Nāstika 3 Usage in religion Toggle Usage in religion subsection 3.1 Hinduism 3.1.1 Without reference to Vedas 3.1.2 Based on belief in Atman 3.2 Jainism 3.3 Buddhism 4 See also 5 Notes Toggle Notes subsection 5.1 Citations 5.2 Sources Toggle the table of contents Āstika and nāstika 31 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা भोजपुरी Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia ಕನ್ನಡ Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Classification of Indian philosophies "Astika" redirects here. For other uses, see Astika (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Hindu philosophy Orthodox Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Heterodox Charvaka Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Ajñana Sub-schools Smartist Advaita Vaishnavite Bhedabheda Vishishtadvaita Dvaita Shuddhadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Svabhavika Bhedabheda Mahanubhava Ekasarana Dharma Akshar Purushottam Darshan Shaivite Shaiva Siddhanta Pratyabhijna Panchartika Pramanavada Shakti Vishishtadvaita Shiva Bhedabeda Shiva Advaita Neo-Vedanta Integral yoga Teachers ( Acharyas ) Nyaya Akṣapāda Gotama Jayanta Bhatta Raghunatha Siromani Mīmāṃsā Jaimini Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Prabhākara Advaita (Mayavada) Gaudapada Vāchaspati Misra Adi Shankara Vishishtadvaita Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Dvaita (Tattvavada) Madhvacharya Jayatirtha Vyasatirtha Shuddhadvaita Vallabha Achintya Bheda Abheda Chaitanya Mahaprabhu Svabhavika Bhedabheda Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Purushottam Keshav Kashmiri Harivyas devacharya Mahanubhava Chakradhara Ekasarana Dharma Sankardev Akshar Purushottam Darshan Swaminarayan Tantra Shakta Abhinavagupta Nigamananda Paramahansa Ramprasad Sen Bamakhepa Kamalakanta Bhattacharya Anandamayi Ma Neo-Vedanta Vivekananda Aurobindo Radhakrishnan Others Samkhya Kapila Yoga Patanjali Vaisheshika Kaṇāda , Prashastapada Secular Valluvar Major texts Śruti Smṛti Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Upanishads Principal Upanishads Minor Upanishads Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama (Hinduism) Vachanamrut Shastras and Sutras Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Puranas Dharmaśāstra Arthashastra Kama Sutra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Shiva Samhita Secular ethics Kural Hinduism Other Indian philosophies v t e Part of a series on Buddhism Glossary Index Outline History Timeline The Buddha Pre-sectarian Buddhism Councils Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Decline in the Indian subcontinent Later Buddhists Buddhist modernism Dharma Concepts Four Noble Truths Noble Eightfold Path Dharma wheel Five Aggregates Impermanence Suffering No-self Dependent Origination Middle Way Mettā Emptiness Morality Karma Rebirth Saṃsāra Cosmology Buddhist texts Buddhavacana Early Texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana Sutras Pāli Canon Sanskrit literature Tibetan canon Chinese canon Post-canon Practices Three Jewels Buddhist paths to liberation Five precepts Perfections Meditation Philosophical reasoning Devotional practices Merit making Recollections Mindfulness Wisdom Sublime abidings Aids to Enlightenment Monasticism Lay life Buddhist chant Pilgrimage Vegetarianism Nirvāṇa Awakening Four Stages Arhat Pratyekabuddhayāna Bodhisattva Buddha Traditions Theravāda Pāli Mahāyāna Hinayana Chinese Vajrayāna Tibetan Navayana Newar Buddhism by country Bhutan Brazil Cambodia China India Indonesia Japan Korea Laos Malaysia Mongolia Myanmar New Zealand Russia Singapore US Sri Lanka Taiwan Thailand Tibet Vietnam Buddhism portal v t e Part of a series on Jainism Jains History Timeline Index Philosophy Anekantavada Cosmology Ahimsa Karma Dharma Mokṣa Kevala Jnana Dravya Tattva Brahmacarya Aparigraha Gunasthana Saṃsāra Ethics Ethics of Jainism Mahavratas (major vows) Ahiṃsā (non-violence) Satya (truth) Asteya (non-stealing) Brahmacarya (chastity) Aparigraha (non-possession) Anuvratas (further vows) Sāmāyika Sallekhana Jain prayers Bhaktamara Stotra Micchami Dukkadam Navkar Mantra Ṇamōkāra mantra Jai Jinendra Major figures The 24 Tirthankaras Rishabha Pārśva Mahavira Arihant Ganadhara Kundakunda Siddhasenadivākarasuri Samantabhadra Haribhadra Yashovijaya Major sects Schools and Branches Digambara Śvetāmbara Jain literature Samayasāra (Digambara) Pravachanasara (Digambara) Agama (Śvetāmbara) Tattvartha Sutra Dravyasamgraha (Digambara) Kalpa Sūtra (Śvetāmbara) Uttaradhyayana (Śvetāmbara) Cīvaka Cintāmaṇi Silappatikaram Valayapathi Festivals Diwali Mahavir Janma Kalyanak Paryushana Samvatsari Pilgrimages Tirth Abu Palitana Girnar Shikharji Shravanabelagola Other Ekendriya Temples Jain flag Jain symbols Parasparopagraho Jivanam Topics list Religion portal v t e Āstika ( Sanskrit : आस्तिक, IAST : āstika ) and nāstika ( Sanskrit : नास्तिक, IAST : nāstika ) are mutually exclusive terms that modern scholars use to classify the schools of Indian philosophy as well as some Hindu , Buddhist and Jain texts.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 4 ] The various definitions for āstika and nāstika philosophies have been disputed since ancient times, and there is no consensus.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] One standard distinction, as within ancient- and medieval-era Sanskrit philosophical literature, is that āstika schools accept the Vedas , the ancient texts of India, as fundamentally authoritative, while the nāstika schools do not.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 5 ] However, a separate way of distinguishing the two terms has evolved in current Indian languages like Telugu , Hindi and Bengali , wherein āstika and its derivatives usually mean ' theist ', and nāstika and its derivatives denote ' atheism '.

[ 9 ] Still, philosophical tradition maintains the earlier distinction, for example, in identifying the school of Sāṃkhya , which is non-theistic (as it does not explicitly affirm the existence of God in its classical formulation), as āstika ( Veda -affirming) philosophy, though "God" is often used as an epithet for consciousness ( purusha ) within its doctrine.

[ 10 ] Similarly, though Buddhism is considered to be nāstika , Gautama Buddha is considered an avatar of the god Vishnu in some Hindu denominations .

[ 11 ] Due to its acceptance of the Vedas, āstika philosophy, in the original sense, is often equivalent to Hindu philosophy : philosophy that developed alongside the Hindu religion .

Āstika ( Sanskrit : आस्तिक ; from Sanskrit: asti , 'there is, there exists') means one who believes in the existence of a Self or Brahman , etc. It has been defined in one of three ways: [ 5 ] [ 12 ] as those who accept the epistemic authority of the Vedas ; as those who accept the existence of ātman ; as those who accept the existence of Ishvara .

Nāstika ( Sanskrit : नास्तिक; from Sanskrit: na , 'not' + āstika ), by contrast, are those who deny all the respective definitions of āstika ; [ 5 ] they do not believe in the existence of Self.

[ 13 ] The six most studied Āstika schools of Indian philosophies, sometimes referred to as orthodox schools, are Nyāyá , Vaiśeṣika , Sāṃkhya , Yoga , Mīmāṃsā , and Vedānta . The five most studied Nāstika schools of Indian philosophies, sometimes referred to as heterodox schools, are Buddhism , Jainism , Chārvāka , Ājīvika , and Ajñana .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] However, this orthodox-heterodox terminology is a construct of Western languages, and lacks scholarly roots in Sanskrit. Recent scholarly studies state that there have been various heresiological translations of Āstika and Nāstika in 20th century literature on Indian philosophies, but many are unsophisticated and flawed.

[ 5 ] Etymology [ edit ] Āstika is a Sanskrit adjective and noun that derives from asti ('there is or exists'), [ 13 ] meaning 'knowing that which exists' or ' pious .' [ 16 ] The word Nāstika ( na , not, + āstika ) is its negative.

One of the traditional etymologies of the term āstika —based on Pāṇini's Aṣṭādhyāyī 4.4.60 (" astināstidiṣṭam matiḥ ")—defines the concept as 'he whose opinion is that Īśvara exists' ( asti īśvara iti matir yasya ).

[ 17 ] According to Sanskrit grammarian Hemachandra , āstika is a synonym for 'he who believes'.

[ 17 ] Other definitions include: 'opposite of nāstika ' ( nāstika bhinna ); 'he whose idea is that Īśvara exists' ( īśvara asti iti vādī ); and 'he who considers the Vedas as authorities' ( vedaprāmāṇyavādī ).

As used in Hindu philosophy, the differentiation between āstika and nāstika does not refer to theism or atheism.

[ 5 ] The terms often, but not always, relate to accepting Vedic literature as an authority, particularly on their teachings on Self. The Veda and Hinduism do not subscribe to or include the concept of an almighty that is separate from oneself i.e. there is no concept of God in the Christian or Islamic sense. N. N. Bhattacharya writes: The followers of Tantra were often branded as Nāstika by the political proponents of the Vedic tradition.  The term Nāstika does not denote an atheist since the Veda presents a godless system with no singular almighty being or multiple almighty beings.  It is applied only to those who do not believe in the Vedas.  The Sāṃkhya s and Mīmāṃsaka s do not believe in God, but they believe in the Vedas and hence they are not Nāstikas. The Buddhists, Jains, and Cārvākas do not believe in the Vedas; hence they are Nāstikas.

— Bhattacharyya 1999 , pp. 174 Āstika is also a name, such as that of a Vedic scholar born to the goddess Mānasā ('Mind') and the sage Jaratkaru .

[ 18 ] Classification of schools [ edit ] Views of the six heretical teachers The views of six śramaṇa in the Pāli Canon, known as the six heretical teachers , based on the Sāmaññaphala Sutta .

[ 19 ] Pūraṇa Kassapa Amoralism ( akiriyavāda ; natthikavāda ) There is no reward or punishment for either good or bad deeds.

Makkhali Gośāla ( Ājīvika ) Fatalism ( ahetukavāda ; niyativāda ) We are powerless; suffering is pre-destined.

Ajita Kesakambalī ( Charvaka ) Materialism ( ucchedavāda ; natthikavāda ) Live happily; with death, all is annihilated.

Pakudha Kaccāyana Eternalism and categoricalism ( sassatavāda ; sattakāyavāda ) Matter, pleasure, pain and the soul are eternal and do not interact.

Nigaṇṭha Ñāṭaputta ( Jainism ) Restraint ( mahāvrata ) Be endowed with, cleansed by, and suffused with [merely] the avoidance of all evil.

[ 20 ] Sañjaya Belaṭṭhiputta ( Ajñana ) Agnosticism ( amarāvikkhepavāda ) "I don't think so. I don't think in that way or otherwise. I don't think not or not not." Suspension of judgement.

The terms Āstika and Nāstika have been used to classify various Indian intellectual traditions.

Āstika [ edit ] The āstika schools are six systems or ṣaḍdarśana that consider the Vedas a reliable and authoritative source of knowledge.

[ 21 ] These are often coupled into three groups for both historical and conceptual reasons.

Nyāyá-Vaiśeṣika Nyaya , the school of logic Vaisheshika , the atomist school Sāṃkhya-Yoga Samkhya , the enumeration school Yoga , the school of Patañjali (which assumes the metaphysics of Sāṃkhya) Mimāṃsā-Vedanta Mīmāṃsā , the tradition of Vedic exegesis Vedanta or Uttara Mimāṃsā , the Upaniṣadic tradition.

Nāstika [ edit ] The main schools of Indian philosophy that reject the Vedas were regarded as heterodox in the tradition: [ 3 ] Buddhism Jainism Charvaka Ājīvika Ajñana The use of the term nāstika to describe Buddhism and Jainism in India is explained by Gavin Flood as follows: At an early period, during the formation of the Upaniṣads and the rise of Buddhism and Jainism, we must envisage a common heritage of meditation and mental discipline practiced by renouncers with varying affiliations to non-orthodox (Veda-rejecting) and orthodox (Veda-accepting) traditions.... These schools [such as Buddhism and Jainism] are understandably regarded as heterodox ( nāstika ) by orthodox ( āstika ) Brahmanism.

— Gavin Flood [ 22 ] Tantric traditions in Hinduism have both āstika and nāstika lines; as Banerji writes in Tantra in Bengal : Tantras are ... also divided as āstika or Vedic and nāstika or non-Vedic.  In accordance with the predominance of the deity the āstika works are again divided as Śākta, Śaiva, Saura, Gāṇapatya and Vaiṣṇava .

— Banerji [ 23 ] Usage in religion [ edit ] Hinduism [ edit ] Manusmriti, in verse 2.11, defines Nāstika as those who do not accept " Vedic literature in entirety based on two roots of science of reasoning ( Śruti and Smriti )".

[ 5 ] The 9th century Indian scholar Medhatithi analyzed this definition and stated that Nāstika does not mean someone who says "Vedic literature are untrue", but rather one who says "Vedic literature are immoral".

Medhatithi further noted verse 8.309 of Manusmriti , to provide another aspect of the definition of Nāstika as one who believes, "there is no other world, there is no purpose in giving charity , there is no purpose in rituals and the teachings in the Vedic literature." [ 5 ] Manusmriti does not define, or imply a definition for Astika. It is also silent or contradictory on specific rituals such as animal sacrifices, asserting Ahimsa ( non-violence , non-injury) is dharma in its verses such as verse 10.63 based on Upanishadic layer of Vedic literature, even though the older layer of Vedic literature mention such sacrifices unlike the later layer of Vedic literature.

[ 24 ] Indian scholars, such as those from Samkhya, Yoga, Nyaya and Vedanta schools, accepted Astika to be those that include Śabda ( शब्द ; or Aptavacana , testimony of Vedic literature and reliable experts) as a reliable means of epistemology , but they accepted the later ancient layer of the Vedic literature to be superseding the earlier ancient layer.

[ 5 ] Without reference to Vedas [ edit ] In contrast to Manusmriti , the 6th century CE Jain scholar and doxographer Haribhadra , provided a different perspective in his writings on Astika and Nāstika. Haribhadra did not consider "reverence for Vedas" as a marker for an Astika. He and other 1st millennium CE Jaina scholars defined Astika as one who "affirms there exists another world, transmigration exists, virtue ( punya ) exists, vice ( paapa ) exists." [ 5 ] [ 6 ] The 7th century scholars Jayaditya and Vamana, in Kasikavrtti of Pāṇini tradition, were silent on the role of or authority of Vedic literature in defining Astika and Nāstika. They state, "Astika is the one who believes there exists another world. The opposite of him is the Nāstika." [ 5 ] [ 25 ] Similarly the widely studied 2nd–3rd century CE Buddhist philosopher Nagarjuna , in Chapter 1 verses 60–61 of Ratnāvalī, wrote Vaiśeṣika and Sāṃkhya schools of Hinduism were Nāstika, along with Jainism, his own school of Buddhism and Pudgalavadins ( Vātsīputrīya ) school of Buddhism.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Based on belief in Atman [ edit ] Astika, in some texts, is defined as those who believe in the existence of Atman (Self), while Nastika being those who deny there is any "Self" in human beings and other living beings.

[ 12 ] [ 28 ] All six schools of Hinduism classified as Astika philosophies hold the premise, "Atman exists". Buddhism, in contrast, holds the premise, "Atman does not exist." [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Asanga Tilakaratna translates Astika as 'positivism' and Nastika as 'negativism', with Astika illustrated by Brahmanic traditions who accepted "Self and God exists", while Nastika as those traditions, such as Buddhism, who denied "Self and God exists." [ 31 ] Jainism [ edit ] According to G. S. Ghurye , the Jain texts define na + astika as one "denying what exists" or any school of philosophy that denies the existence of the Self.

[ 32 ] The Vedanta sub-traditions of Hinduism are "astika" because they accept the existence of Self, while Buddhist traditions denying this are referred to as "nastika".

[ 32 ] One of the earliest mentions of astika concept in Jain texts is by Manibhadra , who states that an astika is one who "accepts there exist another world ( paraloka ), transmigration of Self, virtue and vice that affect how a Self journeys through time".

[ 33 ] The 5th–6th century Jainism scholar Haribhadra , states Andrew Nicholson, does not mention anything about accepting or rejecting the Vedas or god as a criterion for being an astika or nastika . Instead, Haribhadra explains nastika in the manner of the more ancient Jain scholar Manibhadra, by stating a nastika to be one "who says there is no other worlds, there is no purpose in charity, there is no purpose in offerings".

[ 33 ] An astika , to Haribhadra, is one who believes that there is a purpose and merit in an ethical life such as ahimsa (non-violence) and ritual actions.

[ 33 ] This exposition of the word astika and nastika by Haribhadra is similar to one by the Sanskrit grammarian and Hindu scholar Pāṇini in section 4.4.60 of the Astadhyayi .

[ 34 ] The 12th century Jaina scholar Hemachandra similarly states, in his text Abithana Chintamani , that a nastika is any philosophy that presumes or argues there is "no virtue and vice." [ 35 ] Buddhism [ edit ] Nagarjuna , according to Chandradhar Sharma, equates Nastikya to "nihilism".

[ 36 ] The 4th century Buddhist scholar Asanga , in Bodhisattva Bhumi , refers to nastika Buddhists as sarvaiva nastika , describing them as who are complete deniers. To Asanga, nastika are those who say "nothing whatsoever exists", and the worst kind of nastika are those who deny all designation and reality.

[ 37 ] Astika are those who accept merit in and practice a religious life.

[ 37 ] According to Andrew Nicholson, later Buddhists understood Asanga to be targeting Madhyamaka Buddhism as nastika , while considering his own Yogachara Buddhist tradition to be astika .

[ 37 ] Initial interpretations of the Buddhist texts with the term astika and nastika , such as those composed by Nagarjuna and Aśvaghoṣa , were interpreted as being directed at the Hindu traditions. However, states John Kelly, most later scholarship considers this as incorrect, and that the astika and nastika terms were directed towards the competing Buddhist traditions and the intended audience of the texts were Buddhist monks debating an array of ideas across various Buddhist traditions.

[ 38 ] The charges of being a nastika were serious threat to the social standing of a Buddhist, and could lead to expulsion from Buddhist monastic community. Thus, states Nicholson, the colonial era Indologist definition of astika and nastika schools of Indian philosophy, was based on a narrow study of literature such as a version of Manusmriti , while in truth these terms are more complex and contextually apply within the diverse schools of Indian philosophies.

[ 37 ] The most common meaning of astika and nastika, in Buddhism, Hinduism and Jainism was the acceptance and adherence to ethical premises, and not textual validity or doctrinal premises, states Nicholson. It is likely that astika was translated as orthodox, and nastika as heterodox, because the early European Indologists carried the baggage of Christian theological traditions and extrapolated their own concepts to Asia, thereby distorting the complexity of Indian traditions and thought.

[ 37 ] See also [ edit ] philosophy portal Ātman (Buddhism) Atheism in Hinduism Atman (Hinduism) Jīva (Jainism) Śāstra pramāṇam in Hinduism Transtheism Notes [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Perrett, Roy. 2000.

Indian Philosophy . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0815336112 . p. 88.

^ Mittal, Sushil, and Gene Thursby. 2004.

The Hindu World . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415772273 . pp. 729–30.

^ a b Flood 1996 , pp. 82.

^ Flood: "These schools [such as Buddhism and Jainism] are understandably regarded as heterodox ( nāstika ) by orthodox ( āstika ) Brahmanism." [ 3 ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Nicholson, Andrew J. 2013.

Unifying Hinduism: Philosophy and Identity in Indian Intellectual History .

Columbia University Press .

ISBN 978-0231149877 . ch. 9.

^ a b Doniger, Wendy. 2014.

On Hinduism .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0199360079 . p. 46.

^ Grayling, A. C. (2019).

The History of Philosophy . Penguin Books. p. 519.

^ Chatterjee, Satischandra, and Dhirendramohan Datta. 1984.

An Introduction to Indian Philosophy (8th reprint ed.). Calcutta: University of Calcutta . p. 5n1:

"In modern Indian languages, 'āstika' and 'nāstika' generally mean 'theist' and 'atheist,' respectively. But in Sanskrit philosophical literature, 'āstika' means 'one who believes in the authority of the Vedas'. ('nāstika' means the opposite of these). The word is used here in the first sense. The six orthodox schools are 'āstika', and the Cārvāka is 'nāstika' in both the senses." ^ For instance , the Atheist Society of India produces a monthly publications Nastika Yuga , which it translates as 'The Age of Atheism'.

Archived 18 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Francis Clooney (2008). "Restoring 'Hindu Theology' as a category in Indian intellectual discourse". In Gavin Flood (ed.).

The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism . Blackwell Academic. pp.

451– 455.

ISBN 978-0-470-99868-7 .

"By Sāṃkhya reasoning, the material principle itself simply evolves into complex forms, and there is no need to hold that some spiritual power governs the material principle or its ultimate source." ^ Literature review of secondary references of Buddha as Dashavatara which regard Buddha to be part of standard list: Britannica A Dictionary of Asian Mythology By David Adams Leeming p. 19 "Avatar" Hinduism: An Alphabetical Guide By Roshen Dalal p. 112 "Dashavatara" ""The standard and most accepted list found in Puranas and other texts is: ... Rama, Krishna, Buddha, Kalki." The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism: A-M p. 73 "Avatar" Hindu Gods and Goddesses By Sunita Pant Bansal p. 27 "Vishnu Dashavatara" Hindu Myths (Penguin Books) pp. 62–63 The Book of Vishnu (see index) Seven secrets of Vishnu By Devdutt Pattanaik p. 203 "In the more popular list of ten avatars of Vishnu, the ninth avatar is shown as Buddha, not Balarama." A Dictionary of Hinduism p. 47 "Avatara" BBC Flood, Gavin D. (13 July 1996).

An Introduction to Hinduism . Cambridge University Press. p.

116 .

ISBN 978-0-521-43878-0 .

^ a b GS Ghurye , Indian Sociology Through Ghurye, a Dictionary, Ed: S. Devadas Pillai (2011), ISBN 978-8171548071 , page 354 ^ a b Monier-Williams 2006 ^ Flood 1996 , pp. 82, 224–49 ^ For an overview of this method of classification, with detail on the grouping of schools, see: Radhakrishnan & Moore 1989 ^ Apte 1965 , pp. 240 ^ a b Squarcini, Federico (2011). "Traditions against Tradition. Criticism, Dissent and the Struggle for the Semiotic Primacy of Veridiction". In Squarcini, Federico (ed.).

Boundaries, Dynamics and Construction of Traditions in South Asia . Anthem Press. p. 446.

doi : 10.7135/UPO9781843313977.018 .

ISBN 9781843313977 .

^ George Williams (2003), Handbook of Hindu Mythology, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0195332612 , page 65 ^ "DN 2 Sāmaññaphala Sutta; The Fruits of the Contemplative Life" .

www.dhammatalks.org . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ Bhikku, Ñāṇamoli; Bhikku, Bodhi (9 November 1995).

The Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the Majjhima Nikaya (Fourth ed.). Simon and Schuster. pp.

1258– 59.

ISBN 978-0-86171-072-0 . Retrieved 10 July 2024 .

^ Flood 1996 , pp. 231–2 ^ Flood 1996 , pp. 82 ^ Banerji 1992 , pp. 2 ^ Sanskrit: Manusmriti with six scholar commentaries VN Mandlik, page 1310 English: Manusmriti 10.63 Berkeley Center for World Religion, Peace and World Affairs, Georgetown University ^ P. Haag and V. Vergiani (Eds., 2009), Studies in the Kāśikāvṛtti, Firenze: Società Editrice Fiorentina, ISBN 978-8860321145 ^ Markus Dressler and Arvind Mandair (2011), Secularism and Religion-Making, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0199782949 , page 59 note 39 ^ Ernst Steinkellner (1991), Studies in the Buddhist Epistemological Tradition: Proceedings of the Second International Dharmakīrti Conference, Vienna, Volume 222, Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, ISBN 978-3700119159 , pages 230–238 ^ C Sharma (2013), A Critical Survey of Indian Philosophy, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120803657 , page 66 ^ Dae-Sook Suh (1994), Korean Studies: New Pacific Currents, University of Hawaii Press, ISBN 978-0824815981 , page 171 ^ John C. Plott et al (2000), Global History of Philosophy: The Axial Age, Volume 1, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120801585 , page 63, Quote: "The Buddhist schools reject any Ātman concept. As we have already observed, this is the basic and ineradicable distinction between Hinduism and Buddhism".

^ Asanga Tilakaratna (2003, Editors: Anne Blackburn and Jeffrey Samuels), Approaching the Dhamma: Buddhist Texts and Practices in South and Southeast Asia, Pariyatti, ISBN 978-1928706199 , pages 128–129; God, states Tilakaratna, in Brahmanic traditions is Parama-atma (universal Self, Ishvara , Brahman) ^ a b S. Devadas Pillai (1997).

Indian Sociology Through Ghurye, a Dictionary . Popular Prakashan. pp.

353– 354.

ISBN 978-81-7154-807-1 .

^ a b c Andrew J. Nicholson (2013).

Unifying Hinduism: Philosophy and Identity in Indian Intellectual History . Columbia University Press. pp.

172– 175.

ISBN 978-0-231-14987-7 .

^ Andrew J. Nicholson (2013).

Unifying Hinduism: Philosophy and Identity in Indian Intellectual History . Columbia University Press. p. 173.

ISBN 978-0-231-14987-7 .

^ Ramkrishna Bhattacharya (2011).

Studies on the Carvaka/Lokayata . Anthem Press. pp.

164– 166.

ISBN 978-0-85728-433-4 .

^ Chandradhar Sharma (2000).

A Critical Survey of Indian Philosophy . Motilal Banarsidass. p. 101.

ISBN 978-81-208-0365-7 .

^ a b c d e Andrew J. Nicholson (2013).

Unifying Hinduism: Philosophy and Identity in Indian Intellectual History . Columbia University Press. pp.

174– 176.

ISBN 978-0-231-14987-7 .

^ John D Kelly (1996). Jan E. M. Houben (ed.).

Ideology and Status of Sanskrit: Contributions to the History of the Sanskrit Language . BRILL Academic. pp.

88– 89.

ISBN 90-04-10613-8 .

Sources [ edit ] Apte, V. S. (1965), A Practical Sanskrit Dictionary Banerji, S. C. (1992), Tantra in Bengal (Second Revised and Enlarged ed.), Delhi: Manohar, ISBN 81-85425-63-9 Bhattacharyya, N. N. (1999), History of the Tantric Religion (Second Revised ed.), New Delhi: Manohar, ISBN 81-7304-025-7 Flood, Gavin (1996), An Introduction to Hinduism , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 81-7596-028-0 Francis Clooney (2003). Flood, Gavin (ed.).

Blackwell companion to Hinduism .

Blackwell Publishing .

ISBN 0-631-21535-2 .

Monier-Williams, Monier (2006), Monier-Williams Sanskrit Dictionary , Nataraj Books, ISBN 1-881338-58-4 Radhakrishnan, Sarvepalli ; Moore, Charles A. (1989) [1957], A Source Book in Indian Philosophy (Princeton paperback 12th ed.), Princeton University Press, ISBN 0-691-01958-4 Vivekananda, Swami (1900), Complete Works of, Volume 1, Lectures and Discourses , ISBN 978-8185301761 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) v t e Indian philosophy Topics Atheism Atomism Idealism Logic Monotheism Vedic philosophy Kama Artha Moksha Ancient Āstika Hindu : Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Shaiva Raseśvara Pashupata Shaivism Pāṇiniya Nāstika Ājīvika Ajñana Charvaka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist philosophy and Early Buddhist schools Śūnyatā Madhyamaka Yogachara Sautrāntika Svatantrika Medieval Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Sikh Philosophy Shaiva Pratyabhijna Pashupata Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Modern Integral yoga Gandhism Radical Humanism Progressive utilization theory Texts Abhinavabharati Arthashastra Bhagavad Gita Bhagavata Purana Brahma Sutra Buddhist texts Dharmashastra Hindu texts Jain Agamas Kamasutra Mimamsa Sutras All 108 texts Principal Nyāya Sūtras Nyayakusumanjali Panchadasi Samkhyapravachana Sutra Sangam texts Sarvadarsanasangraha Shiva Sutras Tarka-Sangraha Tattvacintāmaṇi Tirukkuṟaḷ Upanishads Minor Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Vedangas Vedas Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Yoga Vasistha More...

Philosophers Adi Shankara Abhinavagupta Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Maṇḍana Miśra Valluvar Avatsara Vāchaspati Misra Uddalaka Aruni Gautama Buddha Yājñavalkya Gārgī Vāchaknavī Buddhaghosa Patañjali Kanada Kapila Brihadratha Ikshvaku Jaimini Vyasa Chanakya Dharmakirti Akshapada Gotama Nagarjuna Padmasambhāva Vasubandhu Gaudapada Ramana Maharshi Vivekananda Dayananda Saraswati Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Raikva Sadananda Sakayanya Satyakama Jabala Madhvacharya Mahavira Guru Nanak More...

Concepts Abhava Abhasavada Abheda Adarsana Adrishta Advaita Aham Ahimsa Aishvarya Akrodha Aksara Anatta Ananta Anavastha Anupalabdhi Apauruṣheyā Artha Asiddhatva Asatkalpa Ātman Avyakta Bhrama Brahman Bhuman Bhumika Catuṣkoṭi Chaitanya Chidabhasa Cittabhumi Dāna Devatas Dharma Dhi Dravya Dhrti Ekagrata Guṇa Hitā Idam Ikshana Ishvaratva Jivatva Kama Karma Kasaya Kshetrajna Lakshana Matsya Nyaya Mithyatva Mokṣa Nididhyasana Nirvāṇa Nishkama Karma Niyama Padārtha Paramatman Paramananda Parameshashakti Parinama-vada Pradhana Prajna Prakṛti Pratibimbavada Pratītyasamutpāda Puruṣa Rājamaṇḍala Ṛta Sakshi Samadhi Saṃsāra Satya Satkaryavada Shabda Brahman Sphoṭa Sthiti Śūnyatā Sutram Svātantrya Iccha-mrityu Syādvāda Taijasa Tajjalan Tanmatra Tyāga Uparati Upekkhā Utsaha Vivartavada Viraj Yamas Yoga More...

v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Āstika_and_nāstika&oldid=1300152028 " Categories : Āstika Nāstika Hindu philosophical concepts Schools and traditions in ancient Indian philosophy Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from May 2015 Use dmy dates from May 2015 Articles containing Sanskrit-language text CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 15:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Āstika and nāstika 31 languages Add topic

