Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Established religions and religious institutions 2 Baháʼí Faith 3 Buddhism 4 Christianity Toggle Christianity subsection 4.1 Biblical/Mosaic law 4.2 Canon law 4.2.1 Canons of the Apostles 4.2.2 Catholic Church 4.2.3 Orthodox Churches 4.2.4 Anglican Communion 4.2.5 Presbyterian and Reformed Churches 4.2.6 Lutheranism 4.2.7 The United Methodist Church 5 Hinduism 6 Islam 7 Jainism 8 Judaism 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Religious law 39 languages العربية Asturianu Български Català Čeština ChiTumbuka Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski עברית Latina Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ethical and moral codes taught by religious traditions Legal systems by common law, civil law, Islamic law, Jewish law, or mixed.

Religious law includes ethical and moral codes taught by religious traditions . Examples of religiously derived legal codes include Christian canon law (applicable within a wider theological conception in the church, but in modern times distinct from secular state law [ 1 ] ), Jewish halakha , Islamic sharia , and Hindu law .

[ 2 ] In some jurisdictions, religious law may apply only to that religion's adherents; in others, it may be enforced by civil authorities for all residents.

Established religions and religious institutions [ edit ] A state religion (or established church ) is a religious body officially endorsed by the state . A theocracy is a form of government in which a God or a deity is recognized as the supreme civil ruler.

In both theocracies and some religious jurisdictions, conscientious objectors may cause religious offense . The contrary legal systems are secular states or multicultural societies in which the government does not formally adopt a particular religion, but may either repress all religious activity or enforce tolerance of religious diversity.

Baháʼí Faith [ edit ] Main article: Baháʼí laws Baháʼí laws are laws and ordinances used in the Baháʼí Faith and are a fundamental part of Baháʼí practice.

[ 3 ] The laws are based on authenticated texts from Bahá'u'lláh , the founder of the Baháʼí Faith, subsequent interpretations from `Abdu'l-Bahá and Shoghi Effendi and legislation by the Universal House of Justice .

[ 4 ] Baháʼí law is presented as a set of general principles and guidelines and individuals must apply them as they best seem fit.

[ 4 ] While some social laws are enforced by Baháʼí institutions, emphasis is placed on individuals following the laws based on their conscience, understanding, and reasoning. Baháʼís are expected to observe these laws out of love for Bahá'u'lláh.

[ 4 ] The laws are seen as the method of the maintenance of order and security in the world.

[ 3 ] A few examples of laws and basic religious observances of the Kitáb-i-Aqdas which are considered obligatory for Baháʼís include: Recite an obligatory prayer each day. There are three such prayers among which one can be chosen each day.

Observe a Nineteen Day Fast from sunrise to sunset from March 2 through March 20. During this time Baháʼís in good health between the ages of 15 and 70 abstain from eating and drinking.

Gossip and backbiting are prohibited and viewed as particularly damaging to the individual and their relationships.

Buddhism [ edit ] Main article: Pāṭimokkha See also: Dhammasattha This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( November 2018 ) In Buddhism , Patimokkha is a code of 227 rules and principles followed by Buddhist monks and nuns .

[ 5 ] Christianity [ edit ] Further information: Legalism (theology) and Letter and spirit of the law See also: Antinomianism , Christian ethics , and Render unto Caesar The Corpus Juris Canonici , the fundamental collection of Catholic canon law for over 750 years.

Within the framework of Christianity , there are several possible definitions for religious law. One is the Mosaic Law (from what Christians consider to be the Old Testament ), also called divine law or biblical law ; the most famous example is the Ten Commandments . Another is the instructions of Jesus of Nazareth to his disciples in the Gospel (often referred to as the Law of Christ or the New Commandment or the New Covenant , in contrast to the Old Covenant ). Another is the Apostolic Decree of Acts 15, which is still observed by the Greek Orthodox Church .

[ 6 ] Another is canon law in the Catholic , Anglican , and Orthodox churches.

In some Christian denominations , law is often contrasted with grace (see also Law and Gospel and Antithesis of the Law ): the contrast here speaks to an attempt to gain salvation by obedience to a code of laws as opposed to seeking salvation through faith in the atonement made by Jesus on the cross. From the Gospel of John : John 1:16-18 — And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace. For the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ., KJV Biblical/Mosaic law [ edit ] Further information: Biblical law § Christianity Christian views of the Old Covenant vary and are to be distinguished from Christian theology , ethics , and practice . The term "Old Covenant", also referred to as the Mosaic covenant and the Law of Moses , refers to the statements or principles of religious law and religious ethics codified in the first five books or Pentateuch of the Old Testament . Views of the Old Covenant are expressed in the New Testament , such as Jesus ' antitheses of the law , the circumcision controversy in Early Christianity , and the Incident at Antioch and position of Paul the Apostle and Judaism . Most Christians hold that only parts are applicable , while some Protestants have the view that none is applicable .

Dual-covenant theologians have the view that only Noahide Laws apply to Gentiles . The Jewish Christianity movement is virtually extinct. According to the New Testament Christians are no longer regarded as Gentiles (Romans 8: 28–29) Canon law [ edit ] Main article: Canon law Canon law is the body of laws and regulations made by or adopted by ecclesiastical authority for the governance of the Christian organization and its members. It is the internal ecclesiastical law governing the Roman Catholic Church , the Eastern and Oriental Orthodox Churches , and the Anglican Communion of churches.

[ 7 ] The way that such church law is legislated , interpreted and at times adjudicated varies widely among these three bodies of churches. In all three traditions, a canon was initially a rule adopted by a church council (From Greek kanon / κανών, Hebrew kaneh / קנה, for rule, standard, or measure); these canons formed the foundation of canon law.

Canons of the Apostles [ edit ] Main article: Apostolic Canons The Canons of the Apostles [ 8 ] or Ecclesiastical Canons of the Same Holy Apostles [ 9 ] is a collection of ancient ecclesiastical decrees (eighty-five in the Eastern , fifty in the Western Church) concerning the government and discipline of the Early Christian Church, incorporated with the Apostolic Constitutions which are part of the Ante-Nicene Fathers Catholic Church [ edit ] Part of a series on the Canon law of the Catholic Church Ius vigens (current law) 1983 Code of Canon Law Omnium in mentem Magnum principium Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Ad tuendam fidem Ex corde Ecclesiae Indulgentiarum Doctrina Praedicate evangelium Veritatis gaudium Custom Matrimonial nullity trial reforms of Pope Francis Documents of the Second Vatican Council Christus Dominus Lumen gentium Optatam totius Orientalium ecclesiarum Presbyterorum ordinis Sacrosanctum concilium Precepts of the Church Legal history Jus antiquum ( c.

33 –1140) Ancient Church Orders Didache The Apostolic Constitutions Canons of the Apostles Collections of ancient canons Collectiones canonum Dionysianae Collectio canonum quadripartita Collectio canonum Quesnelliana Collectio canonum Wigorniensis Gelasian Decree Symmachian forgeries Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals Donation of Constantine Gregorian Reform Lay investiture controversy Dictatus papae Libertas ecclesiae Plenitudo potestatis Jus novum ( c.

1140 –1563) Corpus Juris Canonici Decretum Gratiani Decretist Canon Episcopi Margaritae Jus commune Decretals of Gregory IX Decretalist Regulæ Juris Extravagantes Liber Septimus Jus novissimum ( c.

1563 –1918) Council of Trent Benedictus Deus Tametsi Apostolicae Sedis moderationi Jus codicis (1918-present) 1917 Code of Canon Law Ecclesiae Sanctae 1983 Code of Canon Law Other Contractum trinius Papal judge-delegate Right of option Eastern law Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Eastern Canonical Reforms of Pius XII Nomocanon Eparchy Exarchate Ordinariate for Eastern Catholic faithful Protosyncellus Liturgical law Latin Church General Roman Calendar Ranking of liturgical days in the Roman Rite General Instruction of the Roman Missal Code of Rubrics Sacrosanctum Concilium Mysterii Paschalis Musicam sacram Scripturarum thesaurus Liturgiam authenticam Quattuor abhinc annos Ecclesia Dei Summorum Pontificum Magnum principium Traditionis custodes Red Mass Holy day of obligation Sacramental law Communicatio in sacris Ex opere operato Omnium in mentem Validity and liceity Sacraments Holy Orders Impediment (Catholic canon law) Abstemius Defect of birth Obligation of celibacy Nullity of Sacred Ordination Apostolicae curae Dimissorial letters Episcopal consecrators Approbation (Catholic canon law) Confession Penitential canons Paenitentiale Theodori Seal of the Confessional Internal and external forum Note on the importance of the internal forum and the inviolability of the Sacramental Seal Apostolic Penitentiary Canon penitentiary Complicit absolution Sacramentum Poenitentiae Eucharist Eucharistic discipline Canon 915 Celebret Mass stipend Sacramentals Indulgence Indulgentiarum doctrina Sacred places Altars Major basilica Minor basilica Oratory (chapel) Sacred times Feast days Fast days and abstinence Paenitemini Holy day of obligation Matrimonial law Canonical form (Latin Church) Tametsi Ne Temere Banns of marriage Declaration of Nullity Dignitas connubii Matrimonial Nullity Trial Reforms of Pope Francis Vetitum Defender of the Bond Impediments to Marriage Affinity Clandestinity Impediment of crime Disparity of cult Ligamen Public propriety Matrimonial dispensation Ratum sed non consummatum Sanatio in radice Natural marriage Pauline privilege Petrine privilege Supreme authority, particular churches , and canonical structures Supreme authority of the Church Roman Pontiff Papal conclave College of Bishops Supra-diocesan/eparchal structures College of Cardinals Conference of bishops Synod of Bishops Particular churches Churches sui juris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Local particular churches Appointment of bishops Abbacy nullius Apostolic vicariate Apostolic vicar Apostolic administration Apostolic administrator Diocese/Archdiocese Aeque principaliter Cathedraticum In persona episcopi Diocesan Curia Moderator of the Curia Chancery Deanery Vicar forane Eparchy Eparchal curia Military ordinariate Mission sui juris Personal ordinariate Anglicanorum Coetibus Juridic persons Parish Team of priests in solidum Collegiate church Parish register Lay trusteeism Roman Curia Dicastery Congregation Pontifical council Personal prelature Types of membership of Opus Dei Association of the Christian faithful Vicar general Quinquennial visit ad limina Jurisprudence Canonical coronation Canonically crowned images Computation of time Custom Delegata potestas non potest delegari Derogation Dispensation Taxa Innocentiana Faculty Indult Impediment Donation Interpretation Pontifical Council for Legislative Texts Jurisdiction Peritus Obreption & subreption Obrogation Promulgation Resignation of the Roman Pontiff Sede vacante Simony Vacatio legis Validity and liceity Visitation Apostolic visitor Philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law Theology Ecclesiology Treatise on Law Determinatio Temporal goods (property) Benefice Cathedraticum Contract law Mass stipend Stole fee Temporalities Law of persons Person (Catholic canon law) Formal act of defection from the Catholic Church Canonical age Emancipation Exemption Heresy Clerics Secular clergy Regular clergy Obligation of celibacy Clerics and public office Incardination and excardination Laicization (dispensation) Canonical faculties Office Canonical provision Canonical election Juridic and physical persons Jus patronatus Associations of the faithful Consecrated life Canonical documents Acta Apostolicae Sedis Acta Sanctae Sedis Censor librorum Imprimatur Imprimi potest Notary Protonotary apostolic Apostolic constitution Canon Concordat Decree Decretal Encyclical Motu proprio Ordinance Papal brief Papal bull Penitential Positive law Rescript Parish register Ecclesiastical Latin Penal law Canon 1324 Canon 1397 §2 Censure (Catholic canon law) De delictis gravioribus Complicit absolution Crimen sollicitationis Excommunication List of excommunicable offences in the Catholic Church List of people excommunicated by the Catholic Church List of cardinals excommunicated by the Catholic Church Interdict Laicization (penal) Latae sententiae and ferendae sententiae Lifetime of prayer and penance Canonical admonitions Ecclesiastical prison Procedural law Pars statica (tribunals & ministers/parties) Tribunals Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura Tribunal of the Roman Rota Apostolic Penitentiary Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith Ministers of Justice Judicial Vicar / Officialis Auditor Parties Defender of the Bond Procurator Pars dynamica (trial procedure) Dignitas connubii (matrimonial causes) Appeal as from an abuse Presumption Penal procedure Vos estis lux mundi Canonization Congregation for the Causes of Saints Maiorem hac dilectionem Advocatus Diaboli Oblatio vitae Positio Beatification and canonization process in 1914 Election of the Roman Pontiff Current law Universi Dominici gregis Papal renunciation Reforms of Pope Benedict XVI Historical Cum proxime Jus exclusivae Papal appointment Aeterni Patris Filius Romano Pontifici eligendo Ingravescentem aetatem Ubi periculum Quia propter Legal practice and scholarship List of legal abbreviations Academic degrees Licentiate of Canon Law Doctor of Canon Law Doctor of both laws Journals and Professional Societies Canon Law Society of America The Jurist Faculties of canon law Catholic University of America School of Canon Law Canonists Medieval Gratian Hostiensis Jean Lemoine Raymond of Penyafort Rufinus Johannes Teutonicus Geoffrey of Trani Burchard of Worms Brocard Modern & Contemporary Eugenio Corecco John D. Faris Pietro Gasparri Ladislas Orsy Edward N. Peters Law of consecrated life Solemn vow Exclaustration Manifestation of Conscience Canonical erection of a house of religious Pontifical right Diocesan right Congregation for Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life Institute of consecrated life Religious institute Congregation Order Monasticism Canons regular Mendicant orders Clerics regular Secular institute Cum Sanctissimus Primo Feliciter Provida Mater Ecclesia Society of apostolic life Decretum laudis Catholicism portal v t e The canon law of the Catholic Church ( Latin : jus canonicum ) [ 10 ] is the system of laws and legal principles made and enforced by the hierarchical authorities of the Church to regulate its external organization and government and to order and direct the activities of Catholics toward the mission of the Church.

[ 11 ] It was the first modern Western legal system [ 12 ] and is the oldest continuously functioning legal system in the West, [ 13 ] predating the European common law and civil law traditions.  What began with rules ("canons") adopted by the Apostles at the Council of Jerusalem in the 1st century has blossomed into a highly complex and original legal system encapsulating not just norms of the New Testament , but some elements of the Hebrew ( Old Testament ), Roman , Visigothic , Saxon , and Celtic legal traditions spanning thousands of years of human experience. while the unique traditions of Eastern Catholic canon law govern the 23 Eastern Catholic particular churches sui iuris .

Positive ecclesiastical laws derive formal authority in the case of universal laws from promulgation by the supreme legislator—the Supreme Pontiff —who possesses the totality of legislative, executive, and judicial power in his person, [ 14 ] while particular laws derive formal authority from promulgation by a legislator inferior to the supreme legislator, whether an ordinary or a delegated legislator. The actual subject material of the canons is not just doctrinal or moral in nature, but all-encompassing of the human condition.

It has all the ordinary elements of a mature legal system: [ 15 ] laws, courts, lawyers, judges, [ 15 ] a fully articulated legal code for the Latin Church as well as a code for the Eastern Catholic Churches , [ 16 ] principles of legal interpretation , [ 17 ] and coercive penalties.

[ 18 ] It lacks civilly binding force in most secular jurisdictions. Those who are versed and skilled in canon law, and professors of canon law, are called canonists [ 19 ] (or colloquially, canon lawyers).

[ 20 ] Canon law as a sacred science is called canonistics.

The jurisprudence of Catholic canon law is the complex of legal principles and traditions within which canon law operates, while the philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law are the areas of philosophical, theological, and legal scholarship dedicated to providing a theoretical basis for canon law as a legal system and as true law.

In the early Church , the first canons were decreed by bishops united in " Ecumenical " councils (the Emperor summoning all of the known world's bishops to attend with at least the acknowledgement of the Bishop of Rome ) or "local" councils (bishops of a region or territory).  Over time, these canons were supplemented with decretals of the Bishops of Rome, which were responses to doubts or problems according to the maxim, Roma locuta est, causa finita est ("Rome has spoken, case is closed").

Later, they were gathered together into collections , both unofficial and official. The first truly systematic collection was assembled by the Camaldolese monk Gratian in the 11th century, commonly known as the Decretum Gratiani ("Gratian's Decree").

Pope Gregory IX is credited with promulgating the first official collection of canons called the Decretalia Gregorii Noni or Liber Extra (1234).  This was followed by the Liber Sextus (1298) of Boniface VIII , the Clementines (1317) of Clement V , the Extravagantes Joannis XXII and the Extravagantes Communes , all of which followed the same structure as the Liber Extra. All these collections, with the Decretum Gratiani , are together referred to as the Corpus Juris Canonici . After the completion of the Corpus Juris Canonici , subsequent papal legislation was published in periodic volumes called Bullaria .

By the 19th century, this body of legislation included some 10,000 norms, many difficult to reconcile with one another due to changes in circumstances and practice. This situation impelled Pope Pius X to order the creation of the first Code of Canon Law , a single volume of clearly stated laws. Under the aegis of Cardinal Pietro Gasparri , the Commission for the Codification of Canon Law was completed under Benedict XV , who promulgated the Code, effective in 1918. The work having been begun by Pius X , it was sometimes called the "Pio-Benedictine Code" but more often the 1917 Code.  In its preparation, centuries of material was examined, scrutinized for authenticity by leading experts, and harmonized as much as possible with opposing canons and even other Codes, from the Codex of Justinian to the Napoleonic Code .

Pope John XXIII initially called for a Synod of the Diocese of Rome, an Ecumenical Council , and an updating to the 1917 Code.  After the Second Ecumenical Council of the Vatican (Vatican II) closed in 1965, it became apparent that the Code would need to be revised in light of the documents and theology of Vatican II.  After multiple drafts and many years of discussion, Pope John Paul II promulgated the revised Code of Canon Law (CIC) in 1983 . Containing 1752 canons, it is the law currently binding on the Latin (Western) Roman Church.

The canon law of the Eastern Catholic Churches, which had developed some different disciplines and practices, underwent its own process of codification, resulting in the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches promulgated in 1990 by Pope John Paul II .

The institutions and practices of canon law paralleled the legal development of much of Europe, and consequently both modern Civil law and Common law bear the influences of canon law.  Edson Luiz Sampel, a Brazilian expert in canon law, says that canon law is contained in the genesis of various institutes of civil law, such as the law in continental Europe and Latin American countries. Sampel explains that canon law has significant influence in contemporary society.

Currently, all Latin Catholic seminary students are expected to take a course in canon law (c. 252.3). Some ecclesiastical officials are required to have the doctorate ( JCD ) or at least the licentiate ( JCL ) in canon law in order to fulfill their functions: Judicial Vicars (c. 1419.1), Judges (c. 1421.3), Promoters of Justice (c. 1435), Defenders of the Bond (c. 1435).  In addition, Vicars General and Episcopal Vicars are to be doctors or at least licensed in canon law or theology (c. 478.1), and canonical advocates must either have the doctorate or be truly expert in canon law (c. 1483).  Ordinarily, bishops are to have advanced degrees in sacred scripture, theology, or canon law (c. 378.1.5). St.

Raymond of Penyafort (1175–1275), a Spanish Dominican priest, is the patron saint of canonists, due to his important contributions to the science of canon law.

Orthodox Churches [ edit ] The Greek-speaking Orthodox have collected canons and commentaries upon them in a work known as the Pēdálion (Greek: Πηδάλιον, "Rudder"), so named because it is meant to "steer" the Church. The Orthodox Christian tradition in general treats its canons more as guidelines than as laws, the bishops adjusting them to cultural and other local circumstances. Some Orthodox canon scholars point out that, had the Ecumenical Councils (which deliberated in Greek) meant for the canons to be used as laws, they would have called them nómoi/νόμοι (laws) rather than kanónes/κανόνες (rules), but almost all Orthodox conform to them. The dogmatic decisions of the Councils, though, are to be obeyed rather than to be treated as guidelines, since they are essential for the Church's unity.

Anglican Communion [ edit ] Main article: Canon law (Anglican Communion) In the Church of England , the ecclesiastical courts that formerly decided many matters such as disputes relating to marriage, divorce, wills, and defamation, still have jurisdiction of certain church-related matters (e.g., discipline of clergy, alteration of church property, and issues related to churchyards).  Their separate status dates back to the 11th century when the Normans split them off from the mixed secular/religious county and local courts used by the Saxons. In contrast to the other courts of England, the law used in ecclesiastical matters is at least partially a civil law system, not common law , although heavily governed by parliamentary statutes.  Since the Reformation , ecclesiastical courts in England have been royal courts.  The teaching of canon law at the universities of Oxford and Cambridge was abrogated by Henry VIII ; thereafter practitioners in the ecclesiastical courts were trained in civil law , receiving a Doctor of Civil Law (D.C.L.) degree from Oxford, or an LL.D.

from Cambridge.  Such lawyers (called "doctors" and "civilians") were centred at " Doctors Commons ", a few streets south of St Paul's Cathedral in London , where they monopolized probate , matrimonial, and admiralty cases until their jurisdiction was removed to the common law courts in the mid-19th century.  (Admiralty law was also based on civil law instead of common law, thus was handled by the civilians too.) Charles I repealed Canon Law in Scotland in 1638 after uprisings of Covenanters confronting the Bishops of Aberdeen following the convention at Muchalls Castle and other revolts across Scotland earlier that year.

Other churches in the Anglican Communion around the world (e.g., the Episcopal Church in the United States and the Anglican Church of Canada ) still function under their own private systems of canon law.

Presbyterian and Reformed Churches [ edit ] Main article: Presbyterian polity In Presbyterian and Reformed Churches, canon law is known as "practice and procedure" or  "church order", and includes the church's laws respecting its government, discipline, legal practice and worship.

Lutheranism [ edit ] The Book of Concord is the historic doctrinal statement of the Lutheran Church , consisting of ten credal documents recognized as authoritative in Lutheranism since the 16th century.

[ 21 ] However, the Book of Concord is a confessional document (stating orthodox belief) rather than a book of ecclesiastical rules or discipline, like canon law.  Each Lutheran national church establishes its own system of church order and discipline, though these are not referred to as "canons".

The United Methodist Church [ edit ] The Book of Discipline contains the laws, rules, policies and guidelines for The United Methodist Church.  It is revised every four years by the General Conference, the law-making body of The United Methodist Church; the last edition was published in 2016.

[ 22 ] Hinduism [ edit ] Main article: Hindu law See also: Dharmaśāstra Hindu law , a term of colonial origin, is derived from Hindu texts such as the Vedas, Upanishads, Dharmashastras, Puranas, Itihasas, Dharmasutras, Grihya Sutras, Arthashastra and Niti Shastras.

Islam [ edit ] Further information: Sharia , Fiqh , and Application of Sharia by country A manuscript of Ibn Hanbal's legal writings, produced October 879.

Sharia laws by country for civil and criminal cases regional variations only for Muslims Sharia , also known as Islamic law ( قانون إسلامي qānūn ʾIslāmī ) , is the moral code and religious law of Islam . Sharia is derived from two primary sources , the precepts set forth in the Quran and the example set by the Islamic prophet Muhammad in the sunnah . Islamic jurisprudence ( fiqh ) interprets and extends the application of sharia to questions not directly addressed in the primary sources (the Quran and the sunnah) by including secondary sources . These secondary sources usually include the consensus of the sahabah (companions of the prophet) and ulama (religious scholars) embodied in ijma , as well as analogy from the Quran and sunnah through qiyas . In the Maliki school of law also, 'amal ahlil madinah (the practices of the people of Medina) is also included.

Muslims believe the sharia is Allah's law , but they differ as to what exactly it entails.

[ 23 ] Modernists, traditionalists and fundamentalists all hold different views of sharia, as do adherents to different schools of Islamic thought and scholarship. Different countries, societies and cultures have varying interpretations of sharia as well.

Sharia deals with many topics addressed by secular law, including crime , politics and economics , as well as personal matters such as sexual intercourse , hygiene , diet , prayer , inheritance and fasting . Where it has official status, sharia is applied by Islamic judges, or qadis . The imam has varying responsibilities depending on the interpretation of sharia; while the term is commonly used to refer to the leader of communal prayers, the imam may also be a scholar, religious leader, or political leader.

The reintroduction of sharia is a longstanding goal for Islamist movements in Muslim countries. Some Muslim minorities in Asia ( e.g.

, in India ) have maintained institutional recognition of sharia to adjudicate their personal and community affairs. In Western countries, where Muslim immigration is more recent, Muslim minorities have introduced sharia family law for use in their own disputes with varying degrees of success, e.g., Britain's Muslim Arbitration Tribunal . Attempts by Muslims to impose sharia on non-Muslims in countries with large Muslim populations have been accompanied by controversy, [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] violence, [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] and even warfare (cf.

Second Sudanese Civil War ).

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Jainism [ edit ] Main article: Jain law See also: Jain ethical code Jain law or Jaina law refers to the modern interpretation of ancient Jain Law that consists of rules for adoption, marriage, succession and death for the followers of Jainism .

[ 35 ] Judaism [ edit ] Main article: Halakha See also: Sanhedrin Halakha ( Hebrew : הלכה ; literally "walking") is the collective body of rabbinic Jewish religious laws derived from the Written and Oral Torah , including the Mishnah , the halakhic Midrash , the Talmud , and its commentaries. After the destruction of the Second Temple by the Romans in the year 70 during the First Jewish-Roman War , the Oral Law was developed through intensive and expansive interpretations of the written Torah.

The halakhah has developed gradually through a variety of legal and quasi-legal mechanisms, including judicial decisions, legislative enactments, and customary law . The literature of questions to rabbis, and their considered answers, are referred to as Responsa . Over time, as practices develop, codes of Jewish law were written based on Talmudic literature and Responsa. The most influential code, the Shulchan Aruch , guides the religious practice of most Orthodox and some Conservative Jews .

According to rabbinic tradition there are 613 mitzvot in the written Torah. The mitzvot in the Torah (also called the Law of Moses ) pertain to nearly every aspect of human life. Some of these laws are directed only to men or to women, some only to the ancient priestly groups (the Kohanim and Leviyim ) members of the tribe of Levi , some only to farmers within the Land of Israel . Some laws are only applicable when there is a Temple in Jerusalem (see Third Temple ).

See also [ edit ] Religion portal Law portal Doctrine and Covenants – Part of the scriptural canons of Latter Day Saint denominations Ethics in religion Judicial interpretation – Ways courts interpret laws, especially Constitutional laws Law and religion – Interdisciplinary study Lawsuits against God – Civil action brought in a court of law against a supernatural being Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets List of national legal systems – System for interpreting and enforcing the laws Morality and religion – Relationship between religious views and morals Religious police Rule according to higher law – Belief that universal principles of morality override unjust laws Rule of law – Political situation in which everyone is subject to the law References [ edit ] ^ Ladislas Orsy, "Towards a Theological Conception of Canon Law" (published in Jordan Hite, T.O.R., & Daniel J. Ward, O.S.B., "Readings, Cases, Materials in Canon Law: A Textbook for Ministerial Students, Revised Edition" (Collegeville, MN: The Liturgical Press, 1990), pg. 11 ^ Gad Barzilai, Law and Religion , Ashgate, 2007 ^ a b * Smith, Peter (2008).

An Introduction to the Baha'i Faith . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 158.

ISBN 978-0-521-86251-6 .

^ a b c Smith 2008 , pp. 159 [ citation not found ] ^ "Pāṭimokkha | The Buddhist Monastic Code, Volumes I & II" .

www.dhammatalks.org . Retrieved 2022-04-15 .

^ Karl Josef von Hefele 's commentary on canon II of Gangra notes: "We further see that, at the time of the Synod of Gangra , the rule of the Apostolic Synod with regard to blood and things strangled was still in force. With the Greeks, indeed, it continued always in force as their Euchologies still show.

Balsamon also, the well-known commentator on the canons of the Middle Ages, in his commentary on the sixty-third Apostolic Canon , expressly blames the Latins because they had ceased to observe this command. What the Latin Church, however, thought on this subject about the year 400, is shown by St. Augustine in his work Contra Faustum , where he states that the Apostles had given this command in order to unite the heathens and Jews in the one ark of Noah; but that then, when the barrier between Jewish and heathen converts had fallen, this command concerning things strangled and blood had lost its meaning, and was only observed by few. But still, as late as the eighth century, Pope Gregory the Third (731) forbade the eating of blood or things strangled under threat of a penance of forty days. No one will pretend that the disciplinary enactments of any council, even though it be one of the undisputed Ecumenical Synods , can be of greater and more unchanging force than the decree of that first council, held by the Holy Apostles at Jerusalem, and the fact that its decree has been obsolete for centuries in the West is proof that even Ecumenical canons may be of only temporary utility and may be repealed by disuse, like other laws." ^ "Canon law" . Catholic Encyclopedia . Retrieved 2024-11-07 .

^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: Apostolic Canons" . New Advent . Retrieved 2024-11-07 .

^ "The Ecclesiastical Canons of the Same Holy Apostles" . Ante-Nicene Fathers, Vol VII . Retrieved 2024-11-07 .

^ Black's Law Dictionary, 5th Edition, pg. 771: "Jus canonicum" ^ Della Rocca, Manual of Canon Law , pg. 3 ^ Berman, Harold J.

Law and Revolution , pg. 86 & pg. 115 ^ Dr. Edward N. Peters , CanonLaw.info Home Page , accessed November-07-2024 ^ Canon 331 , 1983 Code of Canon Law ^ a b Edward N. Peters , "A Catechist's Introduction to Canon Law" Archived 2022-10-22 at the Wayback Machine , CanonLaw.info, accessed June-11-2013 ^ Manual of Canon Law, pg. 49 ^ "Code of Canon Law: text - IntraText CT" .

www.intratext.com . Retrieved 2024-11-07 .

^ St. Joseph Foundation newsletter, Vol. 30 No. 7 Archived 2014-07-14 at the Wayback Machine , pg. 3 ^ Black's Law Dictionary, 5th Edition, pg. 187: "Canonist" ^ Berman, Law and Revolution , pg. 288 ^ F. Bente, ed. and trans., Concordia Triglotta , (St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House , 1921), p. i ^ Book of Discipline (United Methodist) ^ Otto, Jan Michiel (2008). p. 7. "When people refer to the sharia, they are in fact referring to their sharia, in the name of the eternal will of the Almighty God." ^ Hamann, Katie (December 29, 2009).

"Aceh's Sharia Law Still Controversial in Indonesia" .

Voice of America . Retrieved November 7, 2024.

^ Iijima, Masako (January 13, 2010).

"Islamic Police Tighten Grip on Indonesia's Aceh" . Reuters. Retrieved September 18, 2011.

^ "Aceh Sharia Police Loved and Hated" .

The Jakarta Post .

^ Staff (January 3, 2003).

"Analysis: Nigeria's Sharia Split" .

BBC News . Retrieved September 19, 2011. "Thousands of people have been killed in fighting between Christians and Muslims following the introduction of sharia punishments in northern Nigerian states over the past three years".

^ Harnischfeger, Johannes (2008) p. 16. "When the Governor of Kaduna announced the introduction of Sharia, although non-Muslims form almost half of the population, violence erupted, leaving more than 1,000 people dead" (p. 189). "When a violent confrontation loomed in February 200?, because the strong Christian minority in Kaduna was unwilling to accept the proposed sharia law, the sultan and his delegation of 18 emirs went to see the governor and insisted on the passage of the bill." ^ Mshelizza, Ibrahim (July 28, 2009).

"Fight for Sharia Leaves Dozens Dead in Nigeria – Islamic Militants Resisting Western Education Extend Their Campaign of Violence" .

The Independent . Retrieved September 19, 2011.

^ "Nigeria in Transition: Recent Religious Tensions and Violence" Archived 2013-11-05 at the Wayback Machine . PBS.

^ Staff (December 28, 2010).

"Timeline: Tensions in Nigeria – A Look at the Country's Bouts of Inter-Religious and Ethnic Clashes and Terror Attacks" .

Al Jazeera English .  Retrieved September 19, 2011. "Thousands of people are killed in northern Nigeria as non-Muslims opposed to the introduction of sharia, or Islamic law, fight Muslims who demand its implementation in the northern state of Kaduna".

^ Ibrahimova, Roza (July 27, 2009).

"Dozens Killed in Violence in Northern Nigeria" (video (requires Adobe Flash ; 00:01:49)).

Al Jazeera English . Retrieved September 19, 2011. "The group Boko Haram, which wants to impose sharia (Islamic law) across the country, has attacked police stations and churches." ^ Library of Congress Country Studies: Sudan: . "The factors that provoked the military coup, primarily the closely intertwined issues of Islamic law and of the civil war in the south, remained unresolved in 1991. The September 1983 implementation of the sharia throughout the country had been controversial and provoked widespread resistance in the predominantly non-Muslim south. ...Opposition to the sharia, especially to the application of hudud (sing., hadd), or Islamic penalties, such as the public amputation of hands for theft, was not confined to the south and had been a principal factor leading to the popular uprising of April 1985 that overthrew the government of Jaafar an Nimeiri." ^ "FRONTLINE/WORLD . Sudan - The Quick and the Terrible . Facts and Stats" .

www.pbs.org . Retrieved 2020-03-19 .

^ Jain, Champat Rai (2004), Selections from the Jaina law , Jaina Vidyā Saṁsthāna, ISBN 9788188677016 Further reading [ edit ] Norman Doe.

Comparative Religious Law: Judaism, Christianity, Islam . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2018.

Buddhism and Law: An Introduction. Edited by Rebecca Redwood French and Mark A. Nathan. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2014. Pp. 407.- Volume 31. Issue 1.

Ulanov, M.S., Badmaev, V.N., Holland, E.C. Buddhism and Kalmyk Secular Law in the Seventeenth to Nineteenth Centuries.

Inner Asia , 2017, no.19, pp. 297–314.

External links [ edit ] Judaism 101: A List of the 613 Mitzvot (Commandments) v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e Lists of countries by laws and law enforcement rankings Age of Candidacy for political office Consent Criminal responsibility Drinking Smoking Gambling Driving Majority Marriage in the US Retirement Mandatory retirement School-leaving in the US Voting Suffrage Youth suffrage Working Drugs and alcohol Drug and precursor laws by country or territory Alcohol Alcohol consumption Bath salts Legal status of Mephedrone Legal status of Methylone Legal status of MPDV Cocaine use Legality Methamphetamine Legality Opiate use Psychedelics Amanita mushroom Legality Ayahuasca Legality Cannabis Legality Annual use Lifetime use Ibogaine Legality LSD Legality Psilocybin mushroom Legality Salvia divinorum Legality Death Murder Intentional homicide By gender Legality of euthanasia Legality of suicide Legality of assisted suicide Weapons and explosives Air guns Guns Deaths Households Laws Ownership Knives Pepper spray Tasers Punishment Death penalty Incarceration Life imprisonment Policing Crime statistics Size of police forces Obscenity Incest Laws Pornography Child pornography Fictional pornography depicting minors Simulated child pornography Internet pornography Prostitution Sex trafficking Sexual assault Child sexual abuse Rape Sodomy law Reproduction Abortion law Minors and abortion Adoption law International adoption Human cloning Sterilization Surrogacy Marriage Marriage law Cousin marriage in the US ) Divorce Impotence Polygamy Same-sex marriage Human rights Children's rights Children in the military Intersex rights Human trafficking Women's rights Freedom of movement By country In the air Abode Property and environment Air Estate Land Minerals Mining Mortgage Water Riparian water Business Competition Mergers and acquisitions Monopoly Corporate Corporate liability Legality of cryptocurrency Violence Corporal punishment At home At school In court LGBT rights Police misconduct Police accountability Police brutality Annual rates by country Prisoner abuse Police body camera Alcohol law Slavery International ownership International waters Maritime law UN Convention on the Law of the Sea Antarctic Treaty System World Intellectual Property Organization World Intellectual Property Indicators Foreign ownership International copyright treaties Censorship Censorship by country Book censorship by country Cartographic censorship Film censorship by country Internet censorship by country Censorship of LGBT issues Political censorship Television censorship by country Video gaming censorship by country Other Animal rights Immigration law National legal systems Religious law Separation of church and state Sharia World Justice Project List of international rankings Lists by country v t e Religion in politics General concepts Anti-clericalism Anti-clericalism and Freemasonry Caesaropapism Civil religion Clericalism Clerical fascism Confessionalism Constitutional references to God Divine law Divine rule Engaged Spirituality Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Freedom of religion Humanism Identity politics Organized secularism Political religion Religious anarchism Religious anti-Masonry Religious anti-Zionism Religious communism Religious humanism Religious law Religious nationalism Religious pacifism Religion and peacebuilding Religious police Religious rejection of politics Religious segregation Religious separatism Religious socialism Religious views on same-sex marriage Secular humanism Secular liberalism Secular state Secularism Secularity Secularization Secular religion Separation of church and state Spiritual left State atheism State religion Theocracy Theonomy Christianity and politics Blaine Amendment Christian anarchism Christian anti-communism Christian anti-Masonry Papal ban Christian anti-Zionism Christian communism Christian corporatism Christian democracy Christian egalitarianism Christian environmentalism Evangelical environmentalism Christian fascism German Christians (movement) National Catholicism Positive Christianity Protestant Reich Church Christian feminism Mormon feminism Christian humanism Christian law Christian left Evangelical left Christian libertarianism Christian nationalism Christian pacifism Christian peacemaking Christian reconstructionism Christian republic Christian right Christian socialism In Utah Christian state Christian Zionism Cisalpinism Dominion Theology Febronianism Gallicanism Liberation theology Maronite politics Phoenicianism Papal state Pillarisation Political Catholicism Relations between the Catholic Church and the state In Argentina Sphere sovereignty Subsidiarity Temporal power Theodemocracy Ultramontanism Neo-ultramontanism Islam and politics Hui pan-nationalism Human Rights in Islam Imamate Islamic anarchism Islamic anti-Masonry Islamic anti-Zionism Islamic democracy Islamic fascism Islamic feminism Sharia law by country In Pakistan In South Asia Islamic pacifism Islamic republic Islamic socialism Islamic state Islamic Zionism Islamism Criticism Islamization Khilafat Petro-Islam Political quietism Taliban Talibanization Two-nation theory Judaism and politics Halachic state Jewish anarchism Jewish anti-Zionism Haredim Jewish Autonomism Jewish democracy Jewish fascism Kahanism Revisionist Maximalism Jewish feminism Jewish law Jewish left Jewish pacifism Jewish political movements Jewish right Jewish secularism Jewish socialism Bundism Poale Zion Zionism Religious World Agudath Israel Hinduism and politics Akhand Bharat Hindu feminism Gandhism Hindu law Hindu modernism Hindu nationalism Hindutva Hindu Rashtra Panun Kashmir Bangabhumi Hindu revolution Hindu revivalism Hindu environmentalism Integral humanism Indigenous Aryans Rama Rajya Saffronisation Shuddhi Uniform civil code Buddhism and politics Buddhist anti-communism Buddhist feminism Buddhist law Buddhist modernism Buddhist nationalism 969 Movement Nichirenism Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist socialism Engaged Buddhism Humanistic Buddhism Secular Buddhism Other American civil religion Disestablishmentarianism Imperial cult Ancient Rome Gottgläubig Khalistan movement Neopaganist feminism Religious aspects of Nazism Cult of personality State Shinto Authority control databases National Germany Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐vzcnb
Cached time: 20250818053808
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.768 seconds
Real time usage: 1.033 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4451/1000000
Revision size: 35412/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 179793/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2476/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 27/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 96421/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.427/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26757437/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  756.900      1 -total
 22.49%  170.220      1 Template:Reflist
 12.19%   92.293      1 Template:Canon_Law
 11.69%   88.466      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.42%   78.889      2 Template:Langx
  8.86%   67.063      1 Template:Cite_book
  8.41%   63.650     10 Template:Annotated_link
  8.26%   62.491      1 Template:Transliteration
  6.62%   50.091      1 Template:Short_description
  5.00%   37.835      1 Template:Law Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:201285:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818053808 and revision id 1303547666. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Religious_law&oldid=1303547666 " Category : Religious law Hidden categories: All articles with broken links to citations Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles to be expanded from November 2018 All articles to be expanded Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 16:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Religious law 39 languages Add topic

