Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Fellow of the Cambridge Philosophical Society (F.C.P.S.) 3 Journals 4 Lectures 5 Nobel laureates 6 Notable Fellows 7 Blue Plaque 8 Society Archives 9 Charles Darwin: Extracts from Letters to Henslow 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Cambridge Philosophical Society 3 languages Català Deutsch Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Biological Reviews ) Scientific society, founded in 1819 Cambridge Philosophical Society The Cambridge Philosophical Society Wax Seal, 1832.

Formation 1819 ; 206 years ago ( 1819 ) Type Scientific Society Registration no.

213811 [ 1 ] Legal status Royal Charter, granted by King William IV in 1832 Focus for the purpose of promoting scientific inquiry Headquarters 17 Mill Lane, Cambridge, CB2 1RX United Kingdom Membership Honorary Members and Fellows President Professor Lindsay Greer Main organ The Council Website www .cambridgephilosophicalsociety .org Remarks keep alive the spirit of inquiry The Cambridge Philosophical Society ( CPS ) is a scientific society at the University of Cambridge .  It was founded in 1819. The name derives from the medieval use of the word philosophy to denote any research undertaken outside the fields of law , theology and medicine . The society was granted a royal charter by King William IV in 1832. The society is governed by an elected council of senior academics, which is chaired by the Society's President, according to a set of statutes.

The society has published several scientific journals , including Biological Reviews (established 1926) and Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society (formerly entitled Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society , published since 1843).

Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society was published between 1821–1928, but was then discontinued.

History [ edit ] The society was founded in 1819 by John Stevens Henslow , Adam Sedgwick and Edward Clarke , is Cambridge's oldest scientific society.

[ 2 ] Its prime purpose is to "keep alive the spirit of inquiry". For over 200 years, this spirit has been kept alive by its members and its activities. The society is independent of the University of Cambridge , although its offices are located within the University of Cambridge estate in central Cambridge. The Society has provided an open forum and played a key role in raising the profile of the sciences to the public.

The society is a registered charity: 213811 [ 3 ] and has 11 Trustees. It is assisted by a number of full-time and part-time paid staff. Membership of the Society is currently over 2,000.

Fellow of the Cambridge Philosophical Society (F.C.P.S.) [ edit ] Members of the Society are called Fellows and are entitled to use the ‘FCPS’ post-nominals. Fellows are usually academics or graduate students involved in mathematical or scientific research within the University.  A Fellow must be recommended in writing by both a Fellow of the Society who has been a member for at least three years and a person of appropriate standing, who knows the candidate in a professional capacity.  Approved candidates are elected at open meetings of the Society following proposal at Council Meetings.

[ 4 ] The equivalent organisation for philosophers is the Cambridge Moral Sciences Club .

Journals [ edit ] The society publishes one of the oldest mathematical journals in history: " Mathematical Proceedings " first published in 1843 and now published for  Cambridge Philosophical Society by Cambridge University Press .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] It has also published " Biological Reviews " [ 7 ] since 1926.

Lectures [ edit ] The society organizes lectures given by prominent scientists and mathematicians.

[ 8 ] The lectures are free and open to all who are interested to attend.

Nobel laureates [ edit ] The Society has had numerous Fellows and Honorary Fellows who have been awarded the Nobel Prize . The first two recipients were Honorary Fellows Hendrik A Lorentz and Pieter Zeeman in 1902 for the Nobel Prize in Physics . The Society's first women winner was Honorary Fellow Marie Curie in 1903 for the Nobel Prize in Physics. Marie Curie was the first person to win or share two Nobel Prizes, being awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1911.

In 1964, Dorothy Hodgkin became not only the first female Fellow of the Society to win a Nobel Prize (Chemistry) but also the first female member of the University of Cambridge to do so.

Currently 49 Nobel Prize winners are listed amongst its Fellows and Honorary Fellows of the Cambridge Philosophical Society.

[ 9 ] Notable Fellows [ edit ] Stephen Hawking was elected a Fellow of the Society in 1970 until his death in 2018.

Charles Babbage Sir George Gabriel Stokes John William Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh Sir George Darwin James Clerk Maxwell Lawrence Bragg Francis Crick Paul Dirac Jamal Nazrul Islam Stephen Hawking John Stevens Henslow Antony Hewish Dorothy Hodgkin Roger Penrose Lord Rayleigh Ernest Rutherford Abdus Salam [ 9 ] Adam Sedgwick J.J. Thomson Alan Turing Martin Rees Blue Plaque [ edit ] The Society’s bicentenary blue plaque on 2 All Saints Passage, Cambridge.

To commemorate the Society’s bicentenary, a blue plaque to the Society was erected in March 2019 on 2 All Saints Passage (the house built by the Society in 1833 to house its meeting room, library and collections). The plaque was unveiled by Sir Martin Rees at opening of the Society’s exhibition at Cambridge University Library .

[ 10 ] Society Archives [ edit ] Coloured plate from R.T. Lowe ' On the Fishes of Madeira ' from Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, Volume 6, 1838.

The society has built up an exceptional historical scientific record dating back to 1819. While not on public display, the archives can be viewed by prior arrangement with the Cambridge Philosophical Society.

[ 11 ] The Society archives include the following: Minutes of Council and of General Meetings Membership and subscription records Archives relating to the various premises occupied by the Society Archives relating to the Society’s publications Archives of the Library and Reading Room predating 1976 (the date at which the Library, by then known as the Scientific Periodicals Library and later as the Central Science Library, became a dependent library of Cambridge University Library) Archives relating to events and activities Some archives of individual members, such as Sir Joseph Larmor (1857–1942, physicist and mathematician) Charles Darwin: Extracts from Letters to Henslow [ edit ] The front page of the 1960 reprint of Extracts from Letters to Henslow .

Charles Darwin , a student at Christ's College , University of Cambridge, came to know John Stevens Henslow as his tutor and through his attendance at Henslow's scientific talks at the University. Darwin had been recommended by Henslow to take his place aboard the survey ship HMS Beagle on a two-year voyage to survey South America , which eventually lasted five years and circumnavigated the globe.

During the voyage, Darwin corresponded by letter with Henslow after reaching South America, and collected specimens with him in mind, particularly plants. Extracts from ten of Darwin's letters from South America to Henslow were first read out at a meeting of the Cambridge Philosophical Society on 16 November 1835, around the time that the ship reached Tahiti. Two days later, Adam Sedgwick read geological notes based on the letters to the Geological Society of London . The Council of the Cambridge Philosophical Society had the extracts printed in a pamphlet dated 1 December 1835, for private  distribution among the Members of the Society,.

The pamphlet has been described as the first writing of Charles Darwin ever to be published, but earlier, while still at Cambridge University, he had his notes on insects published in a book by James Francis Stephens .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] The readings were held and the pamphlet Extracts from Letters to Henslow was printed without Darwin's knowledge. Upon learning of this pamphlet, Darwin was "a good deal horrified" at Henslow making public "what had been written without care or accuracy". The publicity helped Darwin's career, and at the end of his life acknowledged their friendship as the most important "circumstance" of his life.

The original pamphlet is now rare. According to American Book Prices Current only four copies have appeared at auction since 1975. On 19 June 2014 Christies auctioned an original copy in New York (Sale 2861) and realised $221,000.

[ 14 ] In 1960 it was reprinted privately to mark the 100th anniversary of the publication of the " Origin of Species " on 26 November 1859 and issued to Members and Associates of the Society.

References [ edit ] ^ "CAMBRIDGE PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY - Charity 213811" .

register-of-charities.charitycommission.gov.uk .

^ "Our History" .

Cambridge Philosophical Society . 2 July 2018 . Retrieved 5 January 2022 .

^ "CAMBRIDGE PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY - Charity 213811" .

register-of-charities.charitycommission.gov.uk .

^ "Membership" .

cambridge philosophical society .

^ "Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society" .

Cambridge Core .

^ "Cambridge Philosophical Society" . Archived from the original on 16 October 2018 . Retrieved 26 September 2018 .

^ "Biological Reviews" .

Wiley Online Library .

doi : 10.1111/(ISSN)1469-185X .

^ "Events | Pain: Why does it exist, how does it work and how can we more effectively treat it?" .

Cambridge Philosophical Society .

^ a b "Nobel Winners | Cambridge Philosophical Society" .

www.cambridgephilosophicalsociety.org .

^ "Cambridge Philosophical Society" .

Cambridge Past, Present and Future . 15 April 2010.

^ "Archive | Cambridge Philosophical Society" .

www.cambridgephilosophicalsociety.org .

^ "Darwin Online: Letters on Geology" .

Darwin Online . 19 January 1973 . Retrieved 27 January 2022 .

^ "Darwin Online: Darwin's insects in Stephens' Illustrations of British entomology (1829-32)" .

Darwin Online . Retrieved 27 January 2022 .

^ "DARWIN, Charles. For Private Distribution ... Extracts from Letters addressed to Professor Henslow by C. Darwin, Esq. Cambridge: [the University Press for the Cambridge Philosophical Society], Dec. 1, 1835" .

www.christies.com .

Further reading [ edit ] A. Rupert Hall (1969).

The Cambridge Philosophical Society: A History 1819-1969 . Cambridge Philosophical Society.

ISBN 0-9500348-1-9 .

Susannah Gibson (2019).

The Spirit of Inquiry: How One Extraordinary Society Shaped Modern Science . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780198833376 External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Proceedings of the Cambridge Philosophical Society Cambridge Philosophical Society University of Cambridge Discovery: 200 Years of the Cambridge Philosophical Society Cambridge Philosophical Society on LittleSis , a website that publishes data on who-knows-who between government, donors and business v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Czech Republic Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cambridge_Philosophical_Society&oldid=1283925994 " Categories : 1819 establishments in England Clubs and societies of the University of Cambridge Scientific societies based in the United Kingdom Philosophical societies in the United Kingdom Student subject associations in the United Kingdom Organizations established in 1819 Cambridge Philosophical Society Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Wikisource templates with missing id This page was last edited on 4 April 2025, at 14:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cambridge Philosophical Society 3 languages Add topic

