Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Shefrin and Statman study 3 Prospect theory 4 Avoiding the disposition effect 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Disposition effect 6 languages Deutsch Español Français Italiano Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cognitive bias The disposition effect is an anomaly discovered in behavioral finance . It relates to the tendency of investors to sell assets that have increased in value, while keeping assets that have dropped in value.

[ 1 ] Hersh Shefrin and Meir Statman identified and named the effect in their 1985 paper, which found that people dislike losing significantly more than they enjoy winning. The disposition effect has been described as one of the foremost vigorous actualities around individual investors because investors will hold stocks that have lost value yet sell stocks that have gained value." [ 2 ] In 1979, Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky traced the cause of the disposition effect to the so-called " prospect theory ".

[ 3 ] The prospect theory proposes that when an individual is presented with two equal choices, one having possible gains and the other with possible losses, the individual is more likely to opt for the former choice even though both would yield the same economic result.

The disposition effect can be minimized by a mental approach called hedonic framing, which refers to a concept in behavioral finance and psychology where people perceive and react differently to gains and losses based on how they are presented or "framed." For example, individuals might feel better about a net positive outcome if multiple smaller gains are presented separately rather than as one large gain, or they might prefer to combine losses to reduce the psychological impact.

[ 4 ] Overview [ edit ] Nicholas Barberis and Wei Xiong have depicted the disposition impact as the trade of individual investors are one of the most important realities. The influence, they note, has been recorded in all the broad individual investor trading activity databases available and has been linked to significant pricing phenomena such as post-earnings announcement drift and momentum at the stock level. In other conditions, for example in the real estate market, disposition effects were also discovered.

[ 5 ] Barberis has noted that the disposition effect is not a rational sort of conduct because of the reality of stock market momentum, meaning stocks that have performed well in the past six months appear to perform well in the next six months, and stocks that have done badly in the past six months tend to do poorly in the next six months.

[ 5 ] This being the case, the rational act would be to hold on to stocks which have recently increased in value; and to sell stocks which have recently decreased in value. However, individual investors tend to do just the contrary.

Alexander Joshi has summed up the disposition effect as the disposition that investors have to hold on to losing positions longer than winning positions, saying that investors would illustrate risk-seeking conduct by retaining the losers because they dislike losses and fear preventing them. Alternatively, investors will want to lock in money, so that they display risk-averse conduct by selling winners.

[ 6 ] Dacey and Zielonka showed that the greater the level of stock prices volatility, the more prone the investor was to sell a loser, contrary to the disposition effect. This result explains the panic selling of stocks during a market collapse.

[ 7 ] Shefrin and Statman study [ edit ] The effect was identified and named by Hersh Shefrin and Meir Statman in 1985. In their study, Shefrin and Statman noted that individuals do not like causing losses any more than they like making benefits, and individuals are able to gamble on losses. Consequently, investors will be energetic to sell stocks that have risen in value but holding onto stocks that have decreased value. The researchers coined the term "disposition effect" to describe this tendency of holding on to losing stocks too long and to sell off well-performing stocks too readily. Shefrin colloquially described this as a "predisposition toward get-evenitis." John R. Nofsinger has called this sort of investment behavior as a product of the desire to avoid regret and seek pride.

[ 8 ] Prospect theory [ edit ] Researchers have traced the cause of the disposition effect to so-called "prospect theory", which was first identified and named by Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky in 1979.

[ 3 ] Kahneman and Tversky stated that losses generate more emotional feelings which affect individual than the effects of an equivalent amount of gains.

[ 3 ] and that people consequently base their decisions not on perceived losses but on perceived gains. What this means is that, if presented with two equal choices, one described in terms of possible gains and the other described in terms of possible losses, they would opt for the former choice, even though both would yield the same economic end result. For example, even though the net result of receiving $50 would be the same as the net result of gaining $100 and then losing $50, people would tend to take a more favorable view of the former than of the latter scenario.

[ citation needed ] In Kahneman and Tversky's study, participants were presented with two situations. In the first, they had $1,000 and had to select one of two choices. Under Choice A, they would have a 50% chance of gaining $1,000, and a 50% chance of gaining $0; under Choice B, they would have a 100% chance of gaining $500. In the second situation, they had $2,000 and had to select either Choice A (a 50% chance of losing $1,000, and 50% of losing $0) or Choice B (a 100% chance of losing $500). An overwhelming majority of participants chose “B” in the first scenario and "A" in the second.

[ 3 ] This suggested that people are willing to settle for an acceptable amount of earnings (despite they have a reasonable opportunity of gaining more). However, people are willing to participate in risk-seeking activities where they can reduce their losses. In a sense, people value losses more than the same amount of gains.

[ 5 ] This phenomenon is called the “asymmetric value function," which means, in short, the pain of loss outweighs the equivalent level of gain.

[ 5 ] The prospect theory can explain such phenomena as people who prefer not to deposit their money in a bank, even though they would earn interest , or people who choose not to work overtime because they would have to pay higher taxes . It also plainly underlies the disposition effect. In both situations presented to participants in Kahneman and Tversky's study, the participants sought, in risk-averse fashion, to cash in on guaranteed gains. This behavior plainly explains why investors act too soon to realize stockmarket gains.

[ 9 ] Avoiding the disposition effect [ edit ] The disposition effect can be minimized by means of a mental approach called "hedonic framing". For example, individuals can try to force themselves to think of a single large gain as a number of smaller gains, to think of a number of smaller losses as a single large loss, to think of the combination of a major gain and a minor loss as a net minor gain, and, in the case of a combined major loss and minor gain, to think of the two separately. In a similar manner, investors show a reversed disposition effect when they are framed to think of their investment as progress towards a specific investment goal rather than a generic investment.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Cognitive dissonance Endowment effect Escalation of commitment Loss aversion Status quo bias References [ edit ] ^ Weber, Martin; Camerer, Colin (January 1995).

"The disposition effect in securities trading: an experimental analysis" .

Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization .

33 (2): 167– 184.

doi : 10.1016/S0167-2681(97)00089-9 .

hdl : 10419/161406 . Retrieved 30 October 2020 .

^ Shefrin, Hersh; Statman, Meir (July 1985). "The Disposition to Sell Winners Too Early and Ride Losers Too Long: Theory and Evidence".

The Journal of Finance .

40 (3): 777– 790.

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-6261.1985.tb05002.x .

^ a b c d Kahneman, Daniel; Tversky, Amos (1979). "Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision under Risk".

Econometrica .

47 (2): 263– 291.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.592.6674 .

doi : 10.2307/1914185 .

ISSN 0012-9682 .

JSTOR 1914185 .

^ Richard Thaler.

"Web Supplement to Chapter 8: Hedonic Framing" (PDF) . McGraw-Hill Education . Retrieved 21 October 2024 .

^ a b c d Barberis, Nicholas; Xiong, Wei (April 2009).

"What Drives the Disposition Effect? An Analysis of a Long-Standing Preference-Based Explanation" (PDF) .

The Journal of Finance .

LXIV (2): 751– 784.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.318.3772 .

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-6261.2009.01448.x .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 August 2017 . Retrieved 11 January 2017 .

^ Joshi, Alexander.

"Behavioural Finance – The disposition effect" .

The Marshall Society .

Archived from the original on 13 January 2017 . Retrieved 11 January 2017 .

^ Dacey, Raymond; Zielonka, Piotr (2013).

"High volatility eliminates the disposition effect in a market crisis" .

Decyzje .

10 (20): 5– 20.

doi : 10.7206/DEC.1733-0092.9 .

S2CID 56028710 .

^ "Disposition Effect" .

Behavioural Finance .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2017 . Retrieved 11 January 2017 .

^ Kahneman, Daniel; Tversky, Amos (2003).

Choices, Values, and Frames . Cambridge University Press. p. 372.

ISBN 9780521627498 .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2017 . Retrieved 12 January 2017 .

^ Seidens, Sebastian; Wierzbitzki, Marc (31 October 2018). "The Causal Influence of Investment Goals on the Disposition Effect".

SSRN 3275998 .

External links [ edit ] A list of published papers on the topic v t e Decision theory Core concepts Ambiguity aversion Bounded rationality Choice architecture Expected utility Expected value Hyperbolic discounting Leximin Loss aversion Multi-attribute utility Path dependence Principle of indifference Prospect theory Rational choice theory Risk aversion Risk-seeking Satisficing Strategic dominance Subjective expected utility Sure-thing Utility theorem Decision models Anscombe-Aumann framework Causal decision Decision field theory Emotional choice Evidential decision Fuzzy-trace theory Intertemporal choice Naturalistic decision Normative model Quantum cognition Recognition-primed decision Rubicon model Savage's subjective expected utility model Decision analysis tools Analytic hierarchy process Analytic network process Cost–benefit analysis Cost-effectiveness analysis Cost–utility analysis Decision conferencing Decision curve analysis Decision rule Decision support system Decision table Decision tree Decision matrix Decisional balance sheet Gittins index Influence diagram Minimax MCDA Scoring rule Value of information perfect sample uncertainty Paradoxes and biases Allais paradox Certainty effect Cognitive bias Decoy effect Disposition effect Ellsberg paradox Endowment effect Framing effect Heuristics Newcomb's paradox Pseudocertainty effect Reference dependence Regret St. Petersburg paradox Status quo bias Sunk cost Uncertainty and risk Deep uncertainty Exploration–exploitation Info-gap Pignistic probability Robust decision-making Related fields Behavioral economics Game theory Operations research Social choice theory Utility theory Key people David Blackwell Bruno de Finetti Morris H. DeGroot Peter C. Fishburn Gerd Gigerenzer Itzhak Gilboa Daniel Kahneman R. Duncan Luce Oskar Morgenstern Howard Raiffa Leonard J. Savage David Schmeidler Herbert Simon Amos Tversky John von Neumann Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Disposition_effect&oldid=1300569407 " Categories : Behavioral finance Decision-making paradoxes Cognitive biases Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 03:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Disposition effect 6 languages Add topic

