Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Immigration policies before federation Toggle Immigration policies before federation subsection 1.1 Gold rush era 1.2 Support from the Australian Labour Movement 2 From the Federation to World War II Toggle From the Federation to World War II subsection 2.1 Federation Convention and Australia's first government 2.1.1 Immigration Restriction Act 1901 2.1.2 Pacific Island Labourers Act 1901 2.1.3 Exemption for Māori 2.2 Paris Peace Conference 3 Abolition of the policy Toggle Abolition of the policy subsection 3.1 World War II 3.2 Post-war immigration 3.3 Relaxation of restrictions 3.4 End of the White Australia Policy 3.5 Aftermath 3.6 Legacy 3.7 Contemporary demographics 3.8 Political and social legacy 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Informational notes 5.2 Citations 6 Sources 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents White Australia policy 26 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Historical racial policies in Australia The Australian Natives' Association , comprising Australian-born whites , produced this badge in 1911. Prime Minister Edmund Barton was a member of the association.

[ 1 ] The badge shows the use of the slogan "White Australia" at that time.

[ 2 ] Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Part of a series on Racial segregation Jim Crow sign, anti-Hispanic Overview Anti-miscegenation laws Crime of apartheid Allegations Caste Xenophobia Environmental / Institutional racism Ethnic nationalism Forced displacement Housing discrimination Exclusionary zoning Redlining Historical examples Australia Canada Pass system Separate schools Indian hospitals Fascist Italy French colonial empire Code Noir Indigénat Greek–Turkish population exchange Jewish ghettos in Europe Pale of Settlement Partition of India Portugal & Spain Nazi Germany Nuremberg Laws Rhodesia South Africa Bantustans Pass laws United Kingdom United States Black Codes Jim Crow laws Separate but equal Contemporary examples Anti-Romanyism Italy Romania Slovenia Roma walls Bosnia–Herzegovina Schools Cyprus Gulf states Saudi Arabia UAE South Asian labourers India Uthapuram Muslims Israel Palestinian enclaves Hafrada West Bank settlement law / barriers Malaysia Mauritania Morocco Myanmar Northern Ireland Sudan United States Academies Housing Schools Residential Xinjiang Yemen Related Citizenship Statelessness Forced assimilation Gender apartheid Income inequality One-drop rule Race Ethnicity Racial discrimination Category Commons v t e The White Australia policy was a set of racial policies that aimed to forbid people of non-European ethnic origins – Asians (primarily Chinese ) and Pacific Islanders – from immigrating to Australia , [ 3 ] in order to create a "white/British" ideal focused on but not exclusively Anglo-Celtic peoples. Pre-Federation, the Australian colonies passed many anti-Chinese immigration laws mainly using Poll Taxes. With Federation in 1901 came discrimination based on the Dictation Test, which effectively gave power to immigration officials to racially discriminate without mentioning race.

[ 4 ] The policy also affected immigrants from Germany, Italy, and other European countries, especially in wartime.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Governments progressively dismantled such policies between 1949 and 1973, when the Whitlam government removed the last racial elements of Australia's immigration laws.

[ 9 ] [ 4 ] Competition in the gold fields between European and Chinese miners, and labour union opposition to the importation of Pacific Islanders (primarily South Sea Islanders ) into the sugar plantations of Queensland , reinforced demands to eliminate or minimize low-wage immigration from Asia and the Pacific Islands. From the 1850s colonial governments imposed restrictions on Chinese arrivals, including poll taxes and tonnage restrictions. The colonial authorities levied a special tax on Chinese immigrants which other immigrants did not have to pay. Towards the end of the 19th century, labour unions pushed to stop Chinese immigrants from working in the furniture and market garden industries. Some laws were passed regarding the labelling of Chinese made furniture in Victoria and Western Australia but not in New South Wales. Chinese people dominated market gardening until their numbers declined as departures were not replaced.

[ 10 ] Soon after Australia became a federation in January 1901, the federal government of Edmund Barton passed the Immigration Restriction Act of 1901 ; this was drafted by Alfred Deakin , who eventually became Australia's second prime minister. The passage of this bill marked the commencement of the White Australia Policy as Australian federal government policy. The key feature of this legislation was the dictation test , which was used to bar non-white immigrants from entry. Subsequent acts further strengthened the policy.

[ 11 ] These policies effectively gave British migrants preference over all others through the first half of the 20th century. During World War II, Prime Minister John Curtin reinforced the policy, saying "This country shall remain forever the home of the descendants of those people who came here in peace in order to establish in the South Seas an outpost of the British race." [ 9 ] Successive governments dismantled the policy in stages after the conclusion of World War II, with the Chifley and Menzies governments encouraging non-British Europeans to immigrate to Australia. The Migration Act 1958 abolished the dictation test, while the Holt government removed discrimination against non-white applicants for citizenship in 1966.

[ 12 ] The Whitlam government passed laws to ensure that race would be totally disregarded as a component for immigration to Australia in 1973. In 1975, the Whitlam government passed the Racial Discrimination Act , which made racially-based selection criteria unlawful. In the decades since, Australia has maintained large-scale multi-ethnic immigration. As of 2018 [update] , Australia's migration program allows people from any country to apply to immigrate to Australia, regardless of their nationality, ethnicity, culture, religion, or language, provided that they meet the criteria set out in law.

[ 9 ] Prior to 2011, the United Kingdom was the largest source country for immigration to Australia but, since then, China and India have provided the highest number of permanent migrants. These results exclude the many settlers from New Zealand unless they choose to apply through the permanent resident program.

[ 13 ] The National Museum of Australia describes the White Australia Policy as openly racist, stating that it "existed because many white Australians feared that non-white immigrants would threaten Australian society".

[ 14 ] Immigration policies before federation [ edit ] Further information: Immigration history of Australia Gold rush era [ edit ] Camp Hill (Lambing Flat) at time of the riots, 1860–61. Now the town of Young, New South Wales The discovery of gold in Australia in 1851 led to an influx of immigrants from all around the world. The colony of Victoria had a population of only 77,000 in 1851 and New South Wales just 200,000, but the huge influx of settlers spurred by the Australian gold rushes transformed the Australian colonies economically, politically and demographically. Over the next 20 years, 40,000 Chinese men but very few women, nearly all from the province of Guangdong (then known as Canton) but divided by language and dialect nevertheless, immigrated to the goldfields seeking prosperity.

[ 15 ] Gold brought great wealth but also new social tensions. Multi-ethnic migrants came to Victoria and New South Wales in large numbers for the first time. Competition on the goldfields, particularly resentment among white miners towards the successes of Chinese miners, led to tensions between groups and eventually a series of significant racist protests and riots, including the Buckland riot in 1857 and the Lambing Flat riots between 1860 and 1861.

Governor Hotham , on 16 November 1854, appointed a Royal Commission on Victorian goldfields problems and grievances. This led to restrictions being placed on Chinese immigration and residency taxes levied from Chinese residents in Victoria from 1855. New South Wales following suit with poll taxes and tonnage restrictions only in 1861. These restrictions remained in force only until 1867.

[ 16 ] [ failed verification ] Support from the Australian Labour Movement [ edit ] Eight-hour day march c.

1900 , outside Parliament House in Spring Street, Melbourne Melbourne Trades Hall was opened in 1859 with trades and labour councils and trades halls opening in all cities and most regional towns in the following forty years. During the 1880s, trade unions developed among shearers , miners , and stevedores (wharf workers), but soon spread to cover almost all blue-collar jobs. Shortages of labour led to high wages for a prosperous skilled working class, whose unions demanded and got an eight-hour day and other benefits unheard of in Europe.

[ citation needed ] Australia gained a reputation as "the working man's paradise". Some employers hired Chinese labourers, who were cheaper and more hard working. This produced a reaction which led eventually to all the colonies restricting Chinese immigration by 1888 and subsequently other Asian immigration. This was the genesis of the White Australia Policy. The "Australian compact", based around centralised industrial arbitration, a degree of government assistance particularly for primary industries, and White Australia, was to continue for many years before gradually dissolving in the second half of the 20th century.

[ citation needed ] Kanakas workers in a sugarcane plantation, c.

1870 The growth of the sugar industry in Queensland in the 1870s led to searching for labourers prepared to work in a tropical environment. During this time, thousands of " Kanakas " (Pacific Islanders) were brought into Australia as indentured workers .

[ 17 ] This and related practices of bringing in non-white labour to be cheaply employed was commonly termed " blackbirding " and refers to the recruitment of people, often through trickery and kidnappings, to work on plantations, particularly the sugar cane plantations of Queensland (Australia) and Fiji .

[ 18 ] In the 1870s and 1880s, the trade union movement began a series of protests against foreign labour. Their arguments were that Asians and Chinese took jobs away from white men, worked for "substandard" wages, lowered working conditions, were harder workers and refused unionisation.

[ 15 ] Objections to these arguments came largely from wealthy land owners in rural areas.

[ 15 ] It was argued that without Asiatics to work in the tropical areas of the Northern Territory and Queensland, the area would have to be abandoned.

[ 17 ] Despite these objections to restricting immigration, between 1875 and 1888 all Australian colonies enacted legislation which excluded all further Chinese immigration.

[ 17 ] Asian immigrants already residing in the Australian colonies were not expelled and retained the same rights as their Anglo and southern compatriots, although they faced significant discrimination.

Agreements were made to further increase these restrictions in 1895 following an inter-colonial premiers' conference where all colonies agreed to extend entry restrictions to all non-white races . However, in attempting to enact this legislation, the governors of New South Wales, South Australia and Tasmania reserved the bills, due to a treaty with Japan , and they did not become law. Instead, the Natal Act of 1897 was introduced, restricting "undesirable persons" who could not fill in a set form rather than by naming any specific race.

[ 15 ] The British government in London was not pleased with legislation that discriminated against certain subjects of its empire, but decided not to disallow the laws that were passed. Colonial Secretary Joseph Chamberlain explained in 1897: We quite sympathize with the determination...of these colonies...that there should not be an influx of people alien in civilisation, alien in religion, alien in customs, whose influx, moreover, would seriously interfere with the legitimate rights of the existing labouring population.

[ 19 ] From the Federation to World War II [ edit ] In writing about the preoccupations of the Australian population in early Federation Australia before World War I in ANZAC to Amiens , the official historian of the war, Charles Bean , considered the White Australia Policy and defined it as follows: "White Australia Policy" – a vehement effort to maintain a high Western standard of economy, society and culture (necessitating at that stage, however it might be camouflaged, the rigid exclusion of Oriental peoples).

Federation Convention and Australia's first government [ edit ] Immigration was a prominent topic of discussion in the lead up to the establishment of the Australian Federation. At the third session of the Australasian Federation Convention of 1898, Western Australian premier and future federal cabinet member John Forrest summarised the feeling of the Anglo-Saxon people in Australia: [ 18 ] It is of no use to shut our eyes to the fact that there is a great feeling all over Australia against the introduction of coloured persons. It goes without saying that we do not like to talk about it, but it is so.

[ 20 ] The Barton government which came to power following the first elections of the Commonwealth parliament in 1901 was formed by the Protectionist Party with the support of the Australian Labor Party . The support of the Labor Party was contingent upon restricting non-white immigration, reflecting the attitudes of the Australian Workers Union and other labour organisations at the time, upon whose support the Labor Party was founded. The Australian historian James Jupp wrote that it was not true that the White Australia policy was exclusively a right-wing cause as the strongest support for the White Australia policy was on the left-side of Australian politics with both the trade unions and the Labour Party being the most militant opponents of Asian immigration well into the 1960s.

[ 21 ] Many Australians in the early 20th century tended to define being white as being the same as Australian with a majority of Australian states passing laws banning marriage and/or sex between whites and Aboriginals as part of an effort to maintain Australia's white character.

[ 22 ] The first Parliament of Australia quickly moved to restrict immigration to maintain Australia's "British character", and the Pacific Island Labourers Bill and the Immigration Restriction Bill were passed shortly before parliament rose for its first Christmas recess. The colonial secretary in Britain had, however, made it clear that a race-based immigration policy would run "contrary to the general conceptions of equality which have ever been the guiding principle of British rule throughout the Empire". The Barton government therefore conceived of the "Education test", later called the "Dictation Test", which would allow the government, at the discretion of Customs Officers, to block unwanted migrants by forcing them to sit a test in "any European language".

[ 22 ] At the time, Anglo-Japanese relations were improving, and in 1902 Britain and Japan were to sign a defensive alliance directed implicitly against Russia.

[ 22 ] The White Australia policy led to vigorous protests from the Japanese government, and led to complaints from London that Australia was gratuitously straining relations with Japan, which Britain viewed as a prospective ally against Russia.

[ 22 ] For the Labor Party this was a compromise of principles, so the main question for the debate on the Immigration Restriction Act just how openly racist to be, with the Labor Party preferring to openly bar "aboriginal natives of Asia, Africa, or the islands thereof". However in the end the preferred option of the British, the Education Test was passed. There was also opposition from Queensland and its sugar industry to the proposals of the Pacific Islanders Bill to exclude "Kanaka" labourers, however Barton argued that the practice was "veiled slavery" that could lead to a "negro problem" similar to that in the United States, and the bill was passed.

[ 23 ] Immigration Restriction Act 1901 [ edit ] Main article: Immigration Restriction Act 1901 The new Federal Parliament, as one of its first pieces of legislation, passed the Immigration Restriction Act 1901 (1 Edward VII 17 1901) to "place certain restrictions on immigration and... for the removal... of prohibited immigrants".

[ 24 ] The act drew on similar legislation in the South African colony of Natal.

Edmund Barton , the prime minister, argued in support of the bill with the following statement: "The doctrine of the equality of man was never intended to apply to the equality of the Englishman and the Chinaman." [ 25 ] The attorney general tasked with drafting the legislation was Alfred Deakin . Deakin supported Barton's position over that of the Labor Party in drafting the bill (the ALP wanted more direct methods of exclusion than the dictation test) and redacted the more vicious racism proposed for the text in his second reading of the Bill.

[ 26 ] In seeking to justify the policy, Deakin said he believed that the Japanese and Chinese [ 27 ] might be a threat to the newly formed federation and it was this belief that led to legislation to ensure they would be kept out: It is not the bad qualities, but the good qualities of these alien races that make them so dangerous to us. It is their inexhaustible energy, their power of applying themselves to new tasks, their endurance and low standard of living that make them such competitors.

[ 28 ] Early drafts of the act explicitly banned non-Europeans from migrating to Australia but objections from the British government, which feared that such a measure would offend British subjects in India and Britain's allies in Japan, caused the Barton government to remove this wording. Instead, a "dictation test" was introduced as a device for excluding unwanted immigrants. Immigration officials were given the power to exclude any person who failed to pass a 50-word dictation test. At first this was to be in any European language, but was later changed to include any language.  The tests were given in such a way as to make them impossible to pass. If a person seemed likely to pass in English then a test in another language could be given. Attlee Hunt, the first administrator of the Immigration Restriction Act expressed it clearly in a 1903 memo to all Customs Officers: "It is not desirable that persons should be allowed to past the test, and before putting it to anyone the Officer should be satisfied that he will fail. If he is considered likely to pass the test if put in English, it should be applied in some other language of which he is ignorant." [ 29 ] The legislation found strong support in the new Australian Parliament , with arguments ranging from economic protection to outright racism. The Labor Party wanted to protect "white" jobs and pushed for more explicit restrictions. A few politicians spoke of the need to avoid hysterical treatment of the question. Member of Parliament Bruce Smith said he had "no desire to see low-class Indians, Chinamen or Japanese...swarming into this country... But there is obligation...not (to) unnecessarily offend the educated classes of those nations" [ 30 ] Norman Cameron , a Free Trade Party member from Tasmania, expressed a rare note of dissension: [N]o race on... this earth has been treated in a more shameful manner than have the Chinese.... They were forced at the point of a bayonet to admit Englishmen... into China. Now if we compel them to admit our people... why in the name of justice should we refuse to admit them here?

[ 31 ] Outside parliament, Australia's first Catholic cardinal , Patrick Francis Moran was politically active and denounced anti-Chinese legislation as "un-Christian".

[ 32 ] The popular press mocked the Cardinal's position and the small European population of Australia generally supported the legislation and remained fearful of being overwhelmed by an influx of non-British migrants from the vastly different cultures of the highly populated nations to Australia's north.

The Immigration Restriction Act 1901 imposed a dictation test, in any European language, for any non-European migrant to Australia. The immigration officer (Customs until 1949) could choose any language, which effectively meant that the officer had the power to restrict the immigration of any individual.

[ 33 ] Further discriminatory legislation was the Postal and Telegraph Services Act 1901 (1 Edward VII 12 1901), which required any ship carrying mail to and from Australia to only have a white crew.

[ 34 ] Pacific Island Labourers Act 1901 [ edit ] In 1901, there were approximately 9,800 Pacific Islander labourers in Queensland. In 1901, the Australian parliament passed the Pacific Island Labourers Act 1901 (1 Edward VII 16 1901).

[ 24 ] The result of these statutes was that 7,500 Pacific Islanders (called " Kanakas ") working mostly on plantations in Queensland were deported, and entry into Australia by Pacific Islanders was prohibited after 1904.

[ 35 ] Those exempted from repatriation, along with a number of others who escaped deportation, remained in Australia to form the basis of what is today Australia's largest non-indigenous black ethnic group. Today, the descendants of those who remained are officially referred to as South Sea Islanders .

[ 36 ] Exemption for Māori [ edit ] Māori generally benefited from the same immigration and voting rights as European New Zealanders in Australia, making them a notable exception to the White Australia Policy. In 1902, with the Commonwealth Franchise Act , Māori residents in Australia were granted the right to vote , a right denied to Indigenous Australians . During that same period, their right to settle in Australia was facilitated by their shared status as British subjects .

[ 37 ] The Australian government granted equal rights to Māori only reluctantly. In 1905, the New Zealand government made a formal complaint about the exclusion of two Māori shearers, after which the Australian government changed its customs regulations to allow Māori to freely enter the country. Other Pacific Islanders were still subject to the White Australia Policy.

[ 38 ] Paris Peace Conference [ edit ] "Keep Australia White" poster used during the 1917 conscription referendum . The "No" campaign claimed that conscripted soldiers sent overseas would be replaced by non-white labour.

At the 1919 Paris Peace Conference following the First World War , Japan sought to include a racial equality clause in the Covenant of the League of Nations . Japanese policy reflected their desire to remove or to ease the immigration restrictions against Japanese (especially in the United States and Canada), which Japan regarded as a humiliation and affront to its prestige.

[ 39 ] Australian Prime Minister Billy Hughes was already concerned by the prospect of Japanese expansion in the Pacific. Australia, Japan and New Zealand had seized the Germany's Pacific territories in the early stages of the war and Hughes was concerned to retain German New Guinea as vital to the defence of Australia.

[ 40 ] The treaty ultimately granted Australia a League of Nations Mandate over German New Guinea and Japan to the South Seas Mandate immediately to its north – thus bringing Australian and Japanese territory to a shared border – a situation altered only by Japan's Second World War invasion of New Guinea.

Hughes vehemently opposed Japan's racial equality proposition. Hughes recognised that such a clause would be a threat to White Australia and made it clear to British prime minister David Lloyd George that he would leave the conference if the clause was adopted. Hughes wrote in 1919: "No Govt. could live for a day in Australia if it tempered with a White Australia".

[ 41 ] Hughes wrote a note to Colonel Edward M. House of the American delegation: "It may be all right. But sooner than agree to it I would walk into the Seine-or the Folies Bergeres-with my clothes off".

[ 41 ] Hughes did offer the compromise that he would support the Racial Equality Clause provided that it did not affect immigration, an offer the Japanese rejected.

[ 41 ] When the proposal failed, Hughes reported in the Australian parliament: The White Australia is yours. You may do with it what you please, but at any rate, the soldiers have achieved the victory and my colleagues and I have brought that great principle back to you from the conference, as safe as it was on the day when it was first adopted.

[ 42 ] Abolition of the policy [ edit ] World War II [ edit ] Australian anxiety at the prospect of Japanese expansionism and war in the Pacific continued through the 1930s. Hughes, by then a minister in the United Australia Party 's Lyons government , made a notable contribution to Australia's attitude towards immigration in a 1935 speech in which he argued that "Australia must ... populate or perish." Between the Great Depression starting in 1929 and the end of World War II in 1945, global conditions kept immigration to very low levels.

[ 43 ] At the start of the war, Prime Minister John Curtin ( ALP ) reinforced the message of the White Australia Policy by saying: "This country shall remain forever the home of the descendants of those people who came here in peace in order to establish in the South Seas an outpost of the British race." [ 44 ] Following the 1942 Fall of Singapore , Australians feared invasion by Imperial Japan . Australian cities were bombed by the Japanese airforce and Navy and Axis naval forces menaced Australian shipping, while the Royal Navy remained pre-occupied with the battles of the Atlantic and Mediterranean in the face of Nazi aggression in Europe. A Japanese invasion fleet headed for the Australian Territory of New Guinea was only halted by the intervention of the United States Navy in the Battle of the Coral Sea .

[ 45 ] Australia received thousands of refugees from territories falling to advancing Japanese forces – notably thousands of Chinese men and women as well as many Chinese  seamen. There were also Dutch who fled the Dutch East Indies (now Indonesia).

[ 46 ] Aboriginal Australians , Torres Strait Islanders , Papua New Guineans and Timorese served in the frontline of the defence of Australia, bringing Australia's racially discriminatory immigration and political rights policies into focus and wartime service gave many Indigenous Australians confidence in demanding their rights upon return to civilian life.

[ 47 ] During the war, talk arose about the possibility of abolishing the policy. Hostility to this idea was one reason Australia never signed a treaty with China as it was feared the Chinese government would request the abolition of the White Australian policy as an ally. A spokesman for the Labor Party demanded that it be continued, stating: [ 48 ] The policy of White Australia is now, perhaps, the most outstanding political characteristic of this country, and it has been accepted not only by those closely associated with it, but also by those who watched and studied "this interesting experiment" from afar. Only those who favor the exploitation of a servile coloured race for greed of gain, and a few professional economists and benighted theologians, are now heard in serious criticism of a White Australia; but ... they are encouraged by the ill-timed and inappropriate pronouncements of what are, after all, irresponsible officials.

Post-war immigration [ edit ] Main article: Post-war immigration to Australia Dutch migrants arriving in Australia in 1954. Australia embarked upon a massive immigration programme following the Second World War and gradually dismantled the preferential treatment afforded to British migrants.

Following the trauma of the Second World War, Australia's vulnerability during the Pacific War and its relatively small population compared to other nations led to policies summarised by the slogan, "populate or perish." According to author Lachlan Strahan, this was an ethnocentric slogan that in effect was an admonition to fill Australia with Europeans or else risk having it overrun by Asians.

[ 49 ] Immigration Minister Arthur Calwell stated in 1947 to critics of the government's mass immigration programme: "We have 25 years at most to populate this country before the yellow races are down on us." During the war, many non-white refugees, Chinese, Malays, Indonesians and Filipinos, arrived in Australia, but Calwell controversially sought to have them all deported.

[ 50 ] Between 1945 and 1952, an Australian brigade served as part of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force in Japan. Until 1952, Australia did not permit Japanese women who had married Australian soldiers to enter Australia.

[ 51 ] The Chifley government introduced the Aliens Deportation Act 1948 , which had its weaknesses exposed by the High Court case O'Keefe v Calwell , and then passed the War-time Refugees Removal Act 1949 which gave the immigration minister sweeping powers of deportation.

[ 52 ] In 1948, Iranian Bahá'ís seeking to immigrate to Australia were classified as "Asiatic" by the policy and were denied entry.

[ 53 ] In 1949, Calwell's successor, Harold Holt , allowed the remaining 800 non-white refugees to apply for residency, and also allowed Japanese " war brides " to settle in Australia.

[ 44 ] In the meantime, Holt continued Calwell's policy of encouraging mass immigration from Europe, and Australia admitted large numbers of immigrants from mostly Italy, Poland, Greece and Yugoslavia , as well as its traditional source of immigration, the British Isles . The Australian Government promoted the assimilation of migrants to Australia from continental Europe, who were expected to become mainstream Australians.

[ 54 ] In 1947, Australian immigration law, which had until had been based on encouraging British immigration, was amended to take in more European immigration.

[ 55 ] The way that Australia took in a large number of European immigrants from countries that were previously considered undesirable weakened the case for Australia as a primarily "British" country and led to demands for the end of the White Australia policy.

[ 55 ] Given that the purpose of the White Australia policy was to preserve Australia as a British country, it is notable that some of the strongest critics of the White Australia policy in the 1950s were liberal British professors serving at Australian universities .

[ 55 ] In 1959, the Immigration Reform Group was founded at Melbourne University to champion for the abolition of the policy.

[ 55 ] Relaxation of restrictions [ edit ] Sir Robert Menzies . The Menzies government abolished the dictation test in 1958.

Australian policy began to shift towards significantly increasing immigration. Legislative changes over the next few decades continuously opened up immigration in Australia.

[ 43 ] Labor Party Chifley government : 1947: The Chifley Labor government relaxed the Immigration Restriction Act allowing non-Europeans the right to settle permanently in Australia for business reasons.

Liberal-Country Party Menzies government (1949–1966) : 1949: Immigration Minister Holt permitted 800 non-European refugees to stay, and Japanese war brides to be admitted.

[ 56 ] 1950: External Affairs Minister Percy Spender instigated the Colombo Plan , under which students from Asian countries were admitted to study at Australian universities, though many more came as privately sponsored students.

1957: Non-Europeans with 15 years' residence in Australia were allowed to become citizens.

1958: Migration Act 1958 abolished the dictation test and introduced a simpler system for entry. Immigration Minister Sir Alick Downer announced that "distinguished and highly qualified Asians" might immigrate.

1959: Australians were permitted to sponsor Asian spouses for citizenship.

1964: Conditions of entry for people of non-European origin were relaxed.

This was despite comments Menzies made in a discussion with radio 2UE 's Stewart Lamb in 1955, where he appeared to be a defender of the White Australia Policy.

Menzies: "I don't want to see reproduced in Australia the kind of problem they have in South Africa or in America or increasingly in Great Britain. I think it's been a very good policy and it's been of great value to us and most of the criticism of it that I've ever heard doesn't come from these oriental countries it comes from wandering Australians." Lamb: "For these years of course in the past Sir Robert you have been described as a racist." Menzies: "Have I?" Lamb: "I have read this, yes." Menzies: "Well if I were not described as a racist I'd be the only public man who hasn't been." [ 57 ] In 1963, a paper, "Immigration: Control or Colour Bar?", was published by a group of students and academics at Melbourne University. It proposed eliminating the White Australia policy and was influential towards this end.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] End of the White Australia Policy [ edit ] Harold Holt . The Holt government began dismantling the White Australia policy In July 1966, Prime Minister Harold Holt stated that Australia no longer had a White Australia policy, but instead had a "restricted immigration policy".

[ 60 ] Earlier in the year he and immigration minister Hubert Opperman had announced a significant liberalisation of immigration laws for non-whites. These included reducing the waiting time for non-whites to obtain citizenship from fifteen years to five years and allowed for family reunification . Non-white immigrants would be admitted on the basis that they were "well-qualified", rather than "highly qualified and distinguished" as had been the case since 1956. According to The Canberra Times the changes would allow around 5,000 non-whites to obtain citizenship.

[ 61 ] In January 1971, Prime Minister John Gorton stated that his government aimed to establish a multi-racial society in Australia and committed to abolishing racial discrimination. However he stated that there was still a need to restrict non-white immigration.

[ 62 ] He had earlier stated that the White Australia policy was not morally justifiable, but that "the unlimited influx of colored people would lead to stresses in Australia".

[ 63 ] Labor Party members Don Dunstan and Gough Whitlam set about removing the White Australia Policy from the Labor platform. Attempts in 1959 and 1961 failed, with Labor leader Arthur Calwell stating, "It would ruin the Party if we altered the immigration policy ... it was only cranks, long hairs, academics and do-gooders who wanted the change." [ 64 ] However, Dunstan persisted in his efforts, and in 1965, the White Australia Policy was removed from the Labor platform at their national conference; Dunstan personally took credit for the change.

[ 65 ] In 1966, the Holt Liberal government modified the White Australia policy in an effort to reduce the strong perception of Australia's anti-Asian racism. After a review of immigration policy in March 1966, Immigration Minister Hubert Opperman announced applications for migration would be accepted from well-qualified people "on the basis of their suitability as settlers, their ability to integrate readily and their possession of qualifications positively useful to Australia". At the same time, Holt's government decided to allow foreign non-whites to become permanent residents and citizens after five years (the same as for Europeans), and also removed discriminatory provisions in family reunification policies.

[ citation needed ] After the removal of official discrimination, preference was still given to Asian migrants of European or racially mixed appearance. A report on the Filipino community of Sydney in 1966 observed that its members – numbering approximately 100 – were all "white" looking, or in Filipino terms, "mestizos" of presumably Spanish descent. "The Filipino Consul General stated that he was the only 'colored Filipino' in Sydney." [ 66 ] Nevertheless, the annual non-European settler arrivals rose from 746 in 1966 to 2,696 in 1971, while annual part-European settler arrivals rose from 1,498 to 6,054.

[ 44 ] Leader of the Labor Party from 1960 to 1967 Arthur Calwell supported the White Australia policy. This is reflected by Calwell's comments in his 1972 memoirs, Be Just and Fear Not , in which he made it clear that he maintained his view that non-European people should not be allowed to settle in Australia. He wrote: I am proud of my white skin, just as a Chinese is proud of his yellow skin, a Japanese of his brown skin, and the Indians of their various hues from black to coffee-coloured. Anybody who is not proud of his race is not a man at all. And any man who tries to stigmatise the Australian community as racist because they want to preserve this country for the white race is doing our nation great harm... I reject, in conscience, the idea that Australia should or ever can become a multi-racial society and survive.

[ 67 ] [ full citation needed ] The Australian Workers' Union (AWU) abandoned its support for the White Australia policy in 1972.

[ 68 ] [ full citation needed ] [ 69 ] [ full citation needed ] The Whitlam Labor government brought about the comprehensive legal end of the White Australia policy in 1973 as prime minister .

[ 70 ] The Whitlam Labor government implemented a series of amendments preventing the enforcement of racial aspects of the immigration law.

[ 44 ] These amendments: Legislated that all migrants, regardless of origin, be eligible to obtain citizenship after three years of permanent residence.

Ratified all international agreements relating to immigration and race.

Issued policy to totally disregard race as a factor in selecting migrants.

The Racial Discrimination Act 1975 made the use of racial criteria for any official purpose illegal.

It was not until the Fraser Liberal government 's review of immigration law in 1978 that all selection of prospective migrants based on country of origin was entirely removed from official policy.

In 1981, the minister for immigration announced a special humanitarian assistance programme (SHP) for Iranians to seek refuge in Australia and by 1988 some 2,500 Bahá'ís and many more others had arrived in Australia through either SHP or refugee programmes.

[ 53 ] The last selective immigration policy, offering relocation assistance to British nationals, was finally removed in 1982.

[ 71 ] Aftermath [ edit ] Australia's contemporary immigration programme has two components: a programme for skilled and family migrants and a humanitarian programme for refugees and asylum seekers.

[ 72 ] By 2010, the post-war immigration programme had received more than 6.5 million migrants. The population tripled in the six decades to around 21 million in 2010, comprising people originating from 200 countries.

[ 73 ] Legacy [ edit ] Contemporary demographics [ edit ] Main articles: Immigration to Australia and Demography of Australia In 2019, Australia has the world's eighth-largest immigrant population, with immigrants accounting for 34% of the population, a higher proportion than in any other nation with a population of over 10 million.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] 162,417 permanent immigrants were admitted to Australia in 2017–18.

[ 76 ] Most immigrants are skilled, [ 77 ] but the immigration quota includes categories for family members and refugees .

[ 77 ] In 2018 the five largest immigrant groups were those born in England (4%), Mainland China (2.6%), India (2.4%), New Zealand (2.3%) and the Philippines (1.1%).

[ 74 ] In the 2016 Australian census, the most commonly nominated ancestries were: [ a ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] English (36.1%) Australian (33.5%) [ b ] Irish (11.0%) Scottish (9.3%) Chinese (5.6%) Italian (4.6%) German (4.5%) Indian (2.8%) Indigenous (2.8%) [ c ] Greek (1.8%) Dutch (1.6%) Filipino (1.4%) Vietnamese (1.4%) Lebanese (1%) Political and social legacy [ edit ] Part of a series on Far-right politics in Australia Principles Anti-communism Anti-LGBTQ Christian Identity Ethnic nationalism Familialism Gun rights Islamophobia Loyalism Monarchism Nationalism Australian White Ultra Nativism Patriarchy Populism Racism Jewish Chinese Social conservatism Supremacism Christian White Ultraconservatism White backlash History 2005 Cronulla riots COVID-19 protests Convoy to Canberra Australian frontier wars History wars Christchurch mosque shootings Genocide of Indigenous Australians Stolen Generations White Australia policy Active organisations Australia First Australian League of Rights Australia One Australian Protectionists Australian Ustaše European Australian Movement Freedom Party of Victoria The Great Australian Party My Place Australia National Socialist Network One Nation People First Soldiers of Odin True Blue Crew Trumpet of Patriots United Australia Defunct organisations Antipodean Resistance Australia First Movement Australian Defence League Australians Against Further Immigration Australian National Socialist Centre Party Confederate Action Party Conservative National Party Lads Society National Action National Socialist Nationalist Alternative New Guard Q Society of Australia Reclaim Australia Rise Up Australia United Patriots Front Yellow Vest Australia People Anning Boikov Bosi Campbell (Eric) Campbell (Graeme) Christensen Christou Cottrell Erikson Evans Fernando de Groot Hanson Hersant Kent Hughes Kelly Rennick Saleam Sewell Searby Smit Töben van Tongeren Yemini Related topics Conservatism in Australia Far-right terrorism in Australia Hansonism Neo-fascism Politics of Australia Trumpism Australia portal Politics portal v t e The story of Australia since the Second World War – and particularly since the final relegation of the White Australia Policy – has been one of ever-increasing ethnic and cultural diversity. Successive governments have sustained a large program of multi-ethnic immigration from all continents.

[ citation needed ] Discrimination on the basis of race or ethnicity was legally permitted until 1975. Australia's new official policy on racial diversity is: "to build on our success as a culturally diverse, accepting and open society, united through a shared future".

[ 81 ] The White Australia policy continues to be mentioned in modern contexts, although it is generally only mentioned by politicians when denouncing their opposition. As Leader of the Opposition, John Howard argued for restricting Asian immigration in 1988 as part of his One Australia policy ; in August 1988, he said: I do believe that if it is – in the eyes of some in the community – that it's too great, it would be in our immediate-term interest and supporting of social cohesion if it [Asian immigration] were slowed down a little, so the capacity of the community to absorb it was greater.

[ 82 ] Howard later retracted and apologised for the remarks, and was returned to the leadership of the Liberal Party in 1995. The Howard government (1996–2007) in turn ran a large programme of non-discriminatory immigration and, according to the Australian Bureau of Statistics , Asian countries became an increasingly important source of immigration over the decade from 1996 to 2006, with the proportion of migrants from Southern and Central Asian countries doubling from 7% to 14%. The proportion of immigrants from Sub-Saharan Africa also increased. By 2005–06, China and India were the third and fourth largest sources of all migration (after New Zealand and the United Kingdom). In 2005–06, there were 180,000 permanent additions of migrants to Australia (72% more than the number in 1996–97). This figure included around 17,000 through the humanitarian programme, of whom Iraqis and Sudanese accounted for the largest portions.

[ 83 ] China became Australia's biggest source of migrants for the first time in 2009, surpassing New Zealand and Britain.

[ 84 ] The Australian historian John Fitzgerald wrote that the White Australia policy, with its definition that to be Australian was to be white, had a powerful impact on forging the identity of the Chinese-Australian community as a marginalised community.

[ 85 ] Fitzgerald noted that even in the early 21st century, many Chinese-Australians who had been born and grew up in Australia automatically referred to white Australians as "the Australians" and to themselves as "the Chinese".

[ 86 ] Historian Geoffrey Blainey achieved mainstream recognition for the anti-multiculturalist cause when he wrote that multiculturalism threatened to transform Australia into a "cluster of tribes". In his 1984 book All for Australia , Blainey criticised multiculturalism for tending to "emphasise the rights of ethnic minorities at the expense of the majority of Australians" and also for tending to be "anti-British", even though "people from the United Kingdom and Ireland form the dominant class of pre-war immigrants and the largest single group of post-war immigrants." [ citation needed ] According to Blainey, such a policy, with its "emphasis on what is different and on the rights of the new minority rather than the old majority," was unnecessarily creating division and threatened national cohesion. He argued that "the evidence is clear that many multicultural societies have failed and that the human cost of the failure has been high" and warned that "we should think very carefully about the perils of converting Australia into a giant multicultural laboratory for the assumed benefit of the peoples of the world." [ 87 ] In one of his numerous criticisms of multiculturalism, Blainey wrote: For the millions of Australians who have no other nation to fall back upon, multiculturalism is almost an insult. It is divisive. It threatens social cohesion. It could, in the long-term, also endanger Australia's military security because it sets up enclaves which in a crisis could appeal to their own homelands for help.

Blainey remained a persistent critic of multiculturalism into the 1990s, denouncing multiculturalism as "morally, intellectually and economically ... a sham". The British historian Andrew Roberts , in his 2006 book A History of the English-Speaking Peoples Since 1900 praised the White Australia policy as being necessary to "protect Australia as an English-speaking nation".

[ 88 ] Roberts wrote the White Australia policy was the "right" immigration policy to pursue as he accused Asian immigrants of spreading infectious diseases and stated "Australia had the right (and duty) to protect herself" from Asian immigration.

[ 88 ] Views such as those expressed by Roberts have been in the minority. In 2009, the Australian historian Erin Ihde described the White Australia policy as "discredited" both within the historians' community and with the general public.

[ 89 ] Ihde wrote that the White Australia policy remains a difficult subject within the Australian popular memory of the past as it was the fear of the so-called " Yellow Peril " in the form of Asian immigration and the possibility of Asian nations such as China and Japan posing a military threat to Australia that played a major role in the formation of the Australian federation in 1901.

[ 89 ] Ihde argued the White Australia policy was not an aberration in Australian history, nor was it marginal, making it problematic to integrate into a positive view of Australian history.

[ 89 ] Despite the overall success and generally bipartisan support for Australia's multi-ethnic immigration programme, there remain voices of opposition to immigration within the Australian electorate. At its peak, Pauline Hanson's One Nation Party received 9% of the national vote at the 1998 Federal Election.

[ 90 ] Hanson was widely accused of trying to take Australia back to the days of the White Australia policy, particularly through reference to Arthur Calwell , one of the policy's strongest supporters. In her maiden address to the Australian Parliament following the 1996 election , Hanson said: I and most Australians want our immigration policy radically reviewed and that of multiculturalism abolished. I believe we are in danger of being swamped by Asians. Between 1984 and 1995, 40 per cent of all migrants coming into this country were of Asian origin. They have their own culture and religion, form ghettos and do not assimilate.

[ 91 ] Hanson's remarks generated wide interest in the media both nationally and internationally, but she herself did not retain her seat in Parliament at the 1998 election or subsequent 2001 and 2004 federal elections. Hanson also failed to win election in the 2003 and 2011 New South Wales state elections.

[ 92 ] In May 2007, Hanson, with her new Pauline's United Australia Party , continued her call for a freeze on immigration, arguing that African migrants carried disease into Australia.

[ 93 ] Hanson returned to politics in 2014 and ran in the Queensland election. She won a Queensland senate seat in the 2016 election, and retained it again in 2022.

Topics related to racism and immigration in Australia are still regularly connected by the media to the White Australia policy. Some examples of issues and events where this connection has been made include: reconciliation with Indigenous Australians ; mandatory detention and the "Pacific Solution" ; the 2005 Cronulla riots , and the 2009 attacks on Indians in Australia . Former opposition Labor party leader Mark Latham , in his book The Latham Diaries , described the ANZUS alliance as a legacy of the White Australia policy.

[ citation needed ] In 2007, the Howard government proposed an Australian Citizenship Test intended "to get that balance between diversity and integration correct in future, particularly as we now draw people from so many different countries and so many different cultures". The draft proposal contained a pamphlet introducing Australian history , Culture and Democracy . Migrants were to be required to correctly answer at least 12 out of 20 questions on such topics in a citizenship quiz. Migrants would also be required to demonstrate an adequate level of understanding of the English language.

[ 94 ] The Rudd government reviewed and then implemented the proposal in 2009.

[ 95 ] On 14 August 2018, Senator Fraser Anning delivered his maiden speech to the Senate. In it, he called for a plebiscite to reintroduce the White Australia Policy, especially with regard to excluding Muslims (even though Muslims come from different races). He was criticised by politicians from the left and the right, in particular for his choice of words (" final solution ").

[ 96 ] He was again criticised by politicians across the board after blaming Muslim immigration to New Zealand for the 2019 Christchurch mosque attacks .

[ 97 ] Surveys from 2018 and 2023 have found that over 15% polled have shown support for discrimination when it comes to immigration intake. Support for discrimination was higher on basis of religion then race or ethnicity.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-Chinese legislation in the United States Australian nationalism Black Codes and Jim Crow laws Blackbirding Casta Europeans in Oceania Head tax (Canada) (1885-1923) and Chinese Immigration Act, 1923 (1923-1947) Head tax (New Zealand) (1881-1944) Immigration Act of 1924 Natives Land Act, 1913 and Apartheid Racism in Australia Settler colonialism White demographic decline References [ edit ] Informational notes [ edit ] ^ As a percentage of 21,769,209 persons who nominated their ancestry at the 2016 census. The Australian Census collects information on ancestry, but not on race or ethnicity.

^ The Australian Bureau of Statistics has stated that most who nominate "Australian" as their ancestry are part of the Anglo-Celtic group.

[ 80 ] ^ Of any ancestry. Includes those identifying as Aboriginal Australians or Torres Strait Islanders . Indigenous identification is separate to the ancestry question on the Australian Census and persons identifying as Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander may identify any ancestry.

Citations [ edit ] ^ Design, UBC Web.

"Australian Natives Association Centenary – Monument Australia" .

monumentaustralia.org.au .

Archived from the original on 6 February 2016 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ See Museum Victoria description Archived 5 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ ABC Education 2024 .

^ a b Michael Williams (2021).

Australia's Dictation Test: The Test it was a Crime to Fail . Brill. p. passim.

ISBN 978-90-04-47110-8 .

^ "A history of the Department of Immigration:managing migration to Australia" (PDF) . Canberra: Australian Department of Home Affairs.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 October 2023 . Retrieved 2 October 2023 .

^ W. D. Borrie (1954).

Italians and Germans in Australia: a study of assimilation . Australian National University.

^ Catherine Dewhirst.

"Collaborating on whiteness: representing Italians in early White Australia" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 June 2023 . Retrieved 21 June 2023 .

^ Sparrow, Jeff (19 November 2018).

"Australia's history of anti-Italian racism echoes grotesquely in rhetoric about Sudanese people" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 21 June 2023 . Retrieved 12 July 2023 .

^ a b c "Fact Sheet – Abolition of the 'White Australia' Policy" .

Australian Immigration . Commonwealth of Australia: National Communications Branch, Department of Immigration and Citizenship. Archived from the original on 19 September 2015 . Retrieved 27 March 2013 .

^ Michael Williams (2021).

Australia's Dictation Test: The Test it was a Crime to Fail . Brill. p. 168.

ISBN 978-90-04-47110-8 .

^ Wendy Lewis , Simon Balderstone and John Bowan (2006).

Events That Shaped Australia . Wahroonga: New Holland. p. 102.

ISBN 978-1-74110-492-9 .

^ Michael Williams (2021).

Australia's Dictation Test: The Test it was a Crime to Fail . Leiden: Brill. p. 147.

ISBN 978-90-04-47110-8 .

^ Phillips, Janet; Simon-Davies, Joanne (18 January 2017).

"Migration to Australia: a quick guide to the statistics" .

Australian Parliament House . Archived from the original on 9 December 2022.

^ "End of the White Australia policy – Australia's Defining Moments Digital Classroom – National Museum of Australia" .

digital-classroom.nma.gov.au .

Archived from the original on 1 January 2023 . Retrieved 1 January 2023 .

^ a b c d Markey, Raymond (1 January 1996).

"Race and organized labor in Australia, 1850–1901" . The Historian. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017 . Retrieved 14 June 2006 .

^ Lockwood, R. (1964). "British Imperial Influences in the Foundation of the White Australia Policy".

Labour History (7): 23– 33.

doi : 10.2307/27507761 .

ISSN 0023-6942 .

JSTOR 27507761 .

^ a b c Griffiths, Phil (4 July 2002).

"Towards White Australia: The shadow of Mill and the spectre of slavery in the 1880s debates on Chinese immigration" (RTF) . 11th Biennial National Conference of the Australian Historical Association.

Archived from the original on 14 February 2015 . Retrieved 14 June 2006 .

^ a b Willoughby, Emma.

"Our Federation Journey 1901–2001" (PDF) . Museum Victoria. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 June 2006 . Retrieved 14 June 2006 .

^ Speech to Colonial Conference of 1897, quoted in J. Holland Rose et al., eds.

The Cambridge History of the British Empire: Volume VII: Part I: Australia (1933) p 411; full text Archived 28 September 2023 at the Wayback Machine ^ "ParlInfo – 1898 Australasian Federation Conference : Third Session: Debates – February 8" .

parlinfo.aph.gov.au .

Archived from the original on 25 May 2022 . Retrieved 2 February 2023 .

^ Jupp 1995 , p. 207-208.

^ a b c d Jupp 1995 , p. 208.

^ Brian Carroll; From Barton to Fraser; Cassell Australia; 1978 ^ a b Lawrence, David Russell (October 2014).

"Chapter 9 The plantation economy" (PDF) .

The Naturalist and his "Beautiful Islands": Charles Morris Woodford in the Western Pacific . ANU Press. p. 257.

ISBN 978-1-925022-03-2 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 March 2019 . Retrieved 31 March 2019 .

^ Kendall, Timothy.

"Within China's Orbit: China through the eyes of the Australian Parliament" (PDF) . Australian Parliamentary Library.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 April 2012 . Retrieved 24 October 2011 .

^ Norris, R. "Deakin, Alfred (1856–1919)".

Australian Dictionary of Biography . National Centre of Biography, Australian National University.

Archived from the original on 31 July 2012 . Retrieved 11 April 2018 – via Australian Dictionary of Biography.

^ Clancy, Laurie (2004).

Culture and Customs of Australia . Greenwood Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0-313-32169-6 .

Archived from the original on 12 August 2021 . Retrieved 22 November 2020 .

^ Schaffer, Kay (June 2001).

"Manne's Generation: White Nation Responses to the Stolen Generation Report" .

Australian Humanities Review . Archived from the original on 14 October 2008 . Retrieved 18 December 2008 .

( part 2 ) ^ Michael Williams (2021).

Australia's Dictation Test: The Test it was a Crime to Fail . Brill. p. 77.

ISBN 978-90-04-47110-8 .

^ Bruce Smith (Free Trade Party) Parliamentary Debates cited in D.M. Gibb (1973) The Making of White Australia .p.113. Victorian Historical Association. ISBN ^ Donald Norman Cameron (Free Trade Party) Parliamentary Debates, cited in D.M. Gibb (1973)p.112 ^ Cahill, A. E. "Moran, Patrick Francis (1830–1911)".

Australian Dictionary of Biography . National Centre of Biography, Australian National University.

Archived from the original on 25 May 2019 . Retrieved 11 April 2018 – via Australian Dictionary of Biography.

^ "The Immigration Restriction Act 1901 | naa.gov.au" .

www.naa.gov.au .

Archived from the original on 22 April 2022 . Retrieved 11 February 2022 .

^ Lawrence, David Russell (October 2014).

"Chapter 10 The critical question of labour" (PDF) .

The Naturalist and his "Beautiful Islands": Charles Morris Woodford in the Western Pacific . ANU Press. p. 287.

ISBN 978-1-925022-03-2 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 August 2019 . Retrieved 31 March 2019 .

^ Lawrence, David Russell (October 2014).

"Chapter 10 The critical question of labour" (PDF) .

The Naturalist and his "Beautiful Islands": Charles Morris Woodford in the Western Pacific . ANU Press. pp.

295– 296.

ISBN 978-1-925022-03-2 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 August 2019 . Retrieved 31 March 2019 .

^ Tracey Flanagan, Meredith Wilkie, and Susanna Iuliano.

"Australian South Sea Islanders: A Century of Race Discrimination under Australian Law" Archived 14 March 2011 at the Wayback Machine , Australian Human Rights Commission.

^ "Māori overseas: Emigration to Australia" .

Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand .

Archived from the original on 9 December 2008 . Retrieved 28 January 2020 .

^ Hamer, Paul (27 August 2015).

"Unsophisticated and unsuited" . National Library of New Zealand.

Archived from the original on 28 January 2020 . Retrieved 23 March 2019 .

^ Cochrane, Peter (2018).

Best We Forget. The War for White Australia,1914–1918 . Melbourne: TextPublishing. pp.

201– 210.

^ "Remembering the war in New Guinea – Why were the Japanese were in New Guinea" .

ajrp.awm.gov.au .

Archived from the original on 10 November 2013 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ a b c MacMillan, Margaret (2002). "Japan and Racial Equality".

Paris 1919: Six Months that changed the World . New York: Random House. p. 319.

ISBN 0-375-50826-0 .

^ "100 Years: The Australia Story. Episode 2: Rise and Fall of White Australia" . Australian Broadcasting Commission. 21 March 2001. Archived from the original on 1 January 2017 . Retrieved 29 January 2007 .

^ a b "Immigration to Australia During the 20th Century" (PDF) . Australian Department of Immigration. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 April 2006 . Retrieved 14 June 2006 .

^ a b c d "Abolition of the 'White Australia' Policy" . Australian Department of Immigration.

Archived from the original on 1 September 2006 . Retrieved 14 June 2006 .

^ "Second World War, 1939–45 – Australian War Memorial" .

awm.gov.au .

Archived from the original on 6 June 2011 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ "Allies in adversity, Australia and the Dutch in the Pacific War – Australian War Memorial" .

awm.gov.au .

Archived from the original on 15 February 2015 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ "Indigenous Australian servicemen – Australian War Memorial" .

awm.gov.au .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2009 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ editorial in Australian Worker [Sydney] 15 March 1944, in F. K. Crowley, Modern Australia in Documents: 1939–1970 (1973) 2:97–98.

^ Strahan, Lachlan (1996).

Australia's China: Changing Perceptions from the 1930s to the 1990s . Cambridge University Press. p. 146.

ISBN 978-0-521-48497-8 .

Archived from the original on 20 April 2023 . Retrieved 28 March 2023 .

^ Franklin, James ; Nolan, Gerry O (2023).

Arthur Calwell . Connor Court. pp.

44– 48.

ISBN 978-1-922815-81-1 .

Archived from the original on 22 October 2023 . Retrieved 20 October 2023 .

^ Jupp 1995 , p. 209.

^ Gone with hardly a trace: deportees in immigration policy Archived 3 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine , pp. 12–13.

^ a b Graham Hassall (1989). "Persian Baháʼís in Australia". In Abe Ata (ed.).

Religion and Ethnic Identity, An Australian Study . Melbourne: Victoria College & Spectrum.

Archived from the original on 17 February 2007 . Retrieved 20 July 2008 .

^ Egon F. Kunz (1988).

Displaced persons. Calwell's New Australians , Sydney, Australian National University Press.

ISBN 0-08-034406-2 ^ a b c d Jupp 1995 , p. 210.

^ "Australian Government Department of Immigration and Border Protection" .

www.immi.gov.au .

Archived from the original on 1 September 2006 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ Mason, Brett; Johansen, Kirsty (21 July 2017).

"What Menzies really thought of the Commonwealth" .

SBS News .

Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 10 August 2018 .

^ "At-a-glance: The White Australia Policy" .

SBS . 13 June 2013.

Archived from the original on 21 June 2013 . Retrieved 21 June 2013 .

^ Jeff Waters (20 June 2013).

"Academic Howard Nathan says Australia's race relations changed 'immeasurably for the better' " .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on 20 June 2013 . Retrieved 21 June 2013 .

^ "Holt, Wilson in weekend meeting" .

The Canberra Times . 11 July 1966.

^ "New migration policy will aid Japanese" .

The Canberra Times . 11 March 1966.

^ "Why Mr Gorton varied his stance at Singapore" .

The Canberra Times . 26 January 1971.

^ "Gorton's 'race stand' comes under attack" .

Papua New Guinea Post-Courier . 19 October 1970.

^ Hocking, Jenny (2008).

Gough Whitlam: The Early Years . Australia: The Miegunyah Press. p. 207.

^ "ABC News Obituary – Don Dunstan" .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . 10 May 2009. Archived from the original on 10 May 2009 . Retrieved 20 September 2021 .

^ Michael Williams (2021).

Australia's Dictation Test: The Test it was a Crime to Fail . Brill. p. 243.

ISBN 978-90-04-47110-8 .

^ Calwell, Be Just and Fear Not , 117 [ author missing ] [ ISBN missing ] [ publisher missing ] [ year missing ] ^ "AWU Timeline" .

[ author missing ] [ date missing ] [ publisher missing ] ^ "AWU TIMELINE/" .

AWU South Australia .

[ author missing ] [ date missing ] [ publisher missing ] ^ "Refugee Policies in an Election Campaign [Australian Fabian Society]" . 21 August 2006. Archived from the original on 21 August 2006 . Retrieved 20 September 2021 .

^ Jupp, James.

"Immigration and Citizenship" (PDF) . University of Melbourne. Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 June 2006 . Retrieved 14 June 2006 .

^ "Australian Government Department of Immigration and Border Protection" .

www.immi.gov.au .

Archived from the original on 1 October 2008 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ "About Australia" .

Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade .

Archived from the original on 16 February 2011 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ a b "3412.0 – Migration, Australia, 2017–18" . Australian Bureau of Statistics. 3 April 2019. Archived from the original on 31 May 2019.

^ United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, (2015). 'International Migration' in International migrant stock 2015. Accessed from International migrant stock 2015: maps Archived 29 March 2019 at the Wayback Machine on 24 May 2017 ^ 2017–18 Migration Program Report (PDF) (Report). Australian Government: Department of Home Affairs.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 December 2019 . Retrieved 16 June 2019 .

^ a b "Fact Sheet 20 – Migration Program Planning Levels" . Department of Immigration and Citizenship. 11 August 2009. Archived from the original on 7 May 2010 . Retrieved 17 June 2010 .

^ "Cultural Diversity In Australia, 2016" .

Commonwealth of Australia: Australian Bureau of Statistics . 28 June 2017.

Archived from the original on 5 April 2021 . Retrieved 16 June 2019 .

^ "2016 Census Community Profiles" . Australian Bureau of Statistics. 23 October 2017. Archived from the original on 20 April 2020 . Retrieved 16 June 2019 .

^ Jupp 1995 .

^ "Multicultural Australia: United in Diversity (Social Engineering and the Enforcement of Diversity)" (PDF) . The Australian Department of Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 April 2006 . Retrieved 14 June 2006 .

^ "Asian influence spices up contest" .

The Australian . 27 February 2007 . Retrieved 7 December 2016 .

^ "Chapter – Migration: permanent additions to Australia's population" .

www.abs.gov.au . Commonwealth of Australia: Australian Bureau of Statistics. 7 August 2007.

Archived from the original on 10 May 2008 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ Martin, Peter (8 December 2009).

"China top source of immigration" .

The Age . Melbourne.

Archived from the original on 30 April 2011 . Retrieved 30 April 2011 .

^ Fitzgerald, John Big White Lie: Chinese Australians in White Australia , Sydney, NSW: UNSW Press (2007), p.4-5, ISBN 0-86840-870-0 ^ Fitzgerald, John Big White Lie: Chinese Australians in White Australia , Sydney, NSW: UNSW Press (2007), p.5, ISBN 0-86840-870-0 ^ Blainey, G. (1984).

All For Australia , North Ryde, NSW: Methuen Haynes ( ISBN 0-454-00828-7 ) ^ a b Roberts, Andrew (2006).

A History of the English-Speaking Peoples Since 1900 . Weidenfeld & Nicolson. p. 45.

ISBN 978-0-297-85076-2 .

Archived from the original on 13 August 2021 . Retrieved 17 September 2020 .

^ a b c Ihde, Erin (2008). "Australia Federates, Australia Celebrates". In Roberts, David Andrew; Crotty, Martin (eds.).

Turning Points in Australian History . Sydney, NSW: UNSW Press. p. 95.

ISBN 978-1-921410-56-7 .

Archived from the original on 13 August 2021 . Retrieved 16 September 2020 .

^ Carr, Adam.

"Federal Election of 3 October 1998" . Archived from the original on 13 February 2006 . Retrieved 14 June 2006 .

^ Hanson, Pauline (1 September 1996).

"Maiden Speech" . Archived from the original on 23 August 2006 . Retrieved 14 June 2006 .

^ "Hanson fails to win seat in NSW" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . 12 April 2011.

Archived from the original on 5 July 2017 . Retrieved 20 February 2020 .

^ "Hanson launches campaign song" .

The Age . Melbourne. 5 October 2007.

Archived from the original on 14 June 2008 . Retrieved 19 November 2007 .

^ "Citizenship test unveiled" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . 26 August 2007.

Archived from the original on 15 August 2017 . Retrieved 20 February 2020 .

^ Berkovic, Nicola (18 September 2009).

"Citizen quiz tests facts, not figures" .

The Australian .

^ Graham, Ben; Farr, Malcolm (14 August 2018).

" 'While all Muslims are not terrorists, certainly all terrorists these days are Muslims,' Senator Anning said" .

News.com.au . News International.

Archived from the original on 14 August 2018 . Retrieved 3 April 2019 .

^ Baker, Nick (15 March 2019).

"Outrage as Fraser Anning blames NZ attacks on 'Muslim immigration' " .

SBS News .

Archived from the original on 31 March 2019 . Retrieved 3 January 2020 .

^ "Return to White Australia? Surveys say no" . 5 December 2018.

^ "Mapping social cohesion 2023" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 November 2023.

Sources [ edit ] ABC Education (23 October 2024).

"The White Australia policy" .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 16 May 2025 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: ref duplicates default ( link ) Jupp, James (1 January 1995).

"Ethnic and Cultural Diversity in Australia" .

Commonwealth of Australia: Australian Bureau of Statistics .

Archived from the original on 20 April 2016 . Retrieved 16 June 2019 .

Further reading [ edit ] Affeldt, Stefanie (2010) "A Paroxysm of Whiteness. 'White' Labour, 'White' Nation and 'White' Sugar in Australia" in Hund, Wulf D.; Krikler, Jeremy; and Roediger, David (eds.) Wages of Whiteness & Racist Symbolic Capital . Berlin.

ISBN 978-3-643-10949-1 Affeldt, Stefanie (2014).

Consuming Whiteness. Australian Racism and the 'White Sugar' Campaign . Berlin. LIT.

ISBN 978-3-643-90569-7 .

Bailey, John (2001).

The White Divers of Broome . Sydney, MacMillan.

ISBN 0-7329-1078-1 .

Dixon, Chris. "Confronting the 'Bulwark of White Supremacy': The African American Challenge to White Australia, 1941–1945." Journal of African American History 106.1 (2021): 78-102.

Doulman, Jane; Lee, David (2008).

Every Assistance & Protection: a History of the Australian Passport . Australian Government, Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade / Federation Press.

Duffield, Ian (1993).

Skilled Workers or Marginalised Poor? The African Population of the United Kingdom, 1812–1852 . Immigrants and Minorities Vol. 12, No. 3; Frank Cass.

Eldershaw, Philip S. "The Exclusion of Asiatic Immigrants in Australia." The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 34 (September 1909): 190–203.

Online Fitzgerald, John (2007).

Big White Lie: Chinese Australians in White Australia . Sydney.

ISBN 978-0-86840-870-5 .

Hund, Wulf D. (2006) "White Australia oder der Krieg der Historiker." In: Blätter für deutsche und internationale Politik , 3+.

Ishii, Yuka. (2021) "Transformation of the 'Mutual' Recognition between Australia and Asia in the Era of the White Australia Policy Geopolitics, Human Exchange, and Images in the Asia-Pacific Region." Journal of Australian Studies 34#1 (2021): 30–38.

online Jordan, Matthew (2017). " 'Not on Your Life': Cabinet and Liberalisation of the White Australia Policy, 1964–67".

The Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth History .

46 (1): 169– 201.

doi : 10.1080/03086534.2017.1391485 .

S2CID 158117024 .

Jupp, James (Spring 1995). "From 'White Australia' to 'Part of Asia': Recent Shifts in Australian Immigration Policy towards the Region".

The International Migration Review .

29 (1): 207– 228.

PMID 12319613 .

Laksiri Jayasuriya; Walker, David; and Gothard, Jan (eds.) (2003) Legacies of White Australia . Crawley, University of Western Australia Press.

Lee, Tim (29 March 2020).

"Immigrant who fought White Australia policy for right to vote leaves lasting legacy" .

ABC News .

– Story of Sikh hawker Siva Singh Jupp, James; Kabala, Maria (1993).

The Politics of Australian Immigration . Australian Government Publishing Service.

MacMiillan, Margaret (2001).

Paris 1919: Six Months that Changed the World . New York: Random House.

McDonald, Peter. (2019) "Migration to Australia: From Asian exclusion to Asian predominance." Revue Européenne des Migrations Internationales 35.1 et 2 (2019): 87–105.

[1] Stratton, Jon. "The Colour of Jews: Jews, Race and the White Australia Policy." Journal of Australian Studies 20.50-51 (1996): 51-65.

Tavan, Gwenda (2005).

The Long, Slow Death of White Australia . Scribe.

ISBN 1-920769-46-3 .

Walker, David. (2019) Stranded Nation: White Australia in an Asian Region (UWA Press, 2019) Willard, Myra (1923).

History of the White Australia Policy to 1920 . Melbourne University Press.

ISBN 0-522-83830-8 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Williams, Michael (2021).

Australia's Dictation Test: The Test it was a Crime to Fail . Brill. p. 168.

ISBN 978-90-04-47110-8 .

"Immigration Restriction Act 1901" .

National Archives of Australia: Documenting a Democracy . Archived from the original on 1 June 2011 . Retrieved 14 February 2006 .

(scan of the Act and information) Robertson, Kel; et al. (2005).

"Dictating to One of 'Us': the Migration of Mrs Freer" (PDF) .

Macquarie Law Journal .

5 : 241– 275. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 June 2007.

Newton Barton Diary, 1894–1895 – A shipboard diary kept by able seaman Newton Barton on one of his voyages to recruit South Sea Islanders for the Queensland cane fields. Digitised and held by the State Library of Queensland.

External links [ edit ] Educational Resources about the White Australia Policy Fact Sheet 8 – Abolition of the 'White Australia' Policy Portals : Australia Society White Australia policy at Wikipedia's sister projects : Media from Commons v t e Segregation in countries by type (in some countries, categories overlap) Religious Partition of India Northern Ireland Israel Serbia Greece and Turkey Partition of Bengal Portugal Saudi Arabia Spain Bahrain Myanmar Ethnic and racial Canada Bahrain Brazil Bulgaria and Romania Bulgaria Czechoslovakia and Hungary Dominican Republic Fiji France Germany Israel Malaysia Portugal Rhodesia Apartheid in South Africa Spain United Kingdom United States Civil War Separate but equal School segregation Brown v. Board of Education Massive resistance Anti-miscegenation laws Gender Islam Afghanistan Iran Saudi Arabia Judaism Sex segregation in public restrooms Separatist feminism Dynamics Auto-segregation Balkanization Ethnic cleansing Ethnic federalism Bantustan Ethnopluralism Ethnocracy Exclusionary zoning Forced migration Internment labor camps Residential segregation in the United States Segregation academy (United States) Social exclusion Related topics Apartheid laws Anti-miscegenation laws Black Codes Corporative federalism Discrimination Ghetto benches Hafrada Jim Crow laws Majority minority Nativism Nuremberg Laws Racism Rankism Religious intolerance Reservation in India Second-class citizen Separate school (Canada) Shunning Social apartheid White Australia policy Xenophobia See also: Pillarisation Category caste gender racial Commons v t e Anti-Chinese sentiment (Sinophobia) Background Anti-Han sentiment Coolie Yellow Peril Chinese emigration The Unparalleled Invasion Japanese nationalism Minzoku De-Sinicization By persecutor Adriaan Valckenier Andrew Jackson Bryant Denis Kearney Hideki Tojo Suharto Pol Pot Plaek Phibunsongkhram By country Hong Kong India Indonesia Japan Racism in Japan Korea Malaysia Racism in Malaysia Ketuanan Melayu Myanmar Nazi Germany Philippines Singapore Taiwan Thailand United States China Initiative Vietnam By institution Anti-Chinese Union Asiatic Exclusion League Canadian Brotherhood of Railway Employees Tsagaan Khas Uyoku dantai By incident 17th century Sangley Rebellion (1603) Sangley Rebellion (1639) Sangley Massacre (1662) 18th century 1740 Batavia massacre 1782 Saigon massacre 19th century Buckland riot (1857) Lambing Flat riots (1860–1861) Anti-Coolie Act (1862) Los Angeles Chinese massacre of 1871 Pigtail Ordinance (1873) Page Act of 1875 Trout Creek Outrage (1876) San Francisco riot of 1877 New Zealand head tax (1881–1944) Chinese Exclusion Act (1882–1943) Royal Commission on Chinese Immigration (1885) Chinese Immigration Act, 1885 Attack on Squak Valley Chinese laborers, 1885 Tacoma riot of 1885 Rock Springs massacre (1885) 1885 Chinese expulsion from Eureka Chinese head tax (1885–1923) Seattle riot of 1886 1886 Vancouver anti-Chinese riots Hells Canyon massacre (1887) Scott Act (1888) Geary Act (1892–1943) Union Colliery Co of British Columbia v Bryden (1899) 20th century White Australia policy (1901–1973) 1907 Vancouver anti-Asian riots Beipu uprising (1907) Torreón massacre (1911) 1918 Kudus riot Soviet deportations of Chinese people (1920s–1930s) Chinese Immigration Act, 1923 Wanpaoshan Incident (1931) Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945) Nanjing Massacre (1937–1938) Nanshitou massacre (1942–1945) Japanese war crimes Three Alls policy Sook Ching (1942) Changjiao massacre (1943) Home Office 213/926 (1945–1946) Bersiap (1945–1947) Mergosono massacre (1947) Legislation on Chinese Indonesians (1950s-) Chinese Confession Program (1956–1965) Internment of Chinese Indians (1962) 1964 race riots in Singapore Indonesian mass killings of 1965–66 1967 anti-Chinese riots in Burma Monosodium glutamate controversy (Chinese restaurant syndrome) 13 May incident (1969) 1969 race riots of Singapore Malari incident (1974) Cambodian genocide (1975–1979) 1997 Banjarmasin riot May 1998 riots of Indonesia 21st century 2006 Nukuʻalofa riots Abacus Bank prosecution 2008 Kunming bus bombings July 2009 Ürümqi riots 2011 Kashgar attacks Wolf Amendment 2013 Tiananmen Square attack 2014 Vietnam anti-China protests 2014 Kunming attack April 2014 Ürümqi attack May 2014 Ürümqi attack 2015 Plaza Low Yat riot 2015 Aksu colliery attack China Initiative COVID-19 pandemic incidents 2021 Atlanta spa shootings 2021 Solomon Islands unrest 2024 Papua New Guinean unrest Boycotts of Chinese products By victim 19th century Chae Chan Ping Fong Yue Ting Mary Tape Wong Kim Ark Yick Wo 20th century Vincent Chin Ita Martadinata Haryono Qian Xuesen Velma Demerson Wen Ho Lee 21st century Anming Hu Danny Chen Ee Lee Eileen Gu Feng "Franklin" Tao Gang Chen Haoyang Yu Jiansheng Chen Jiayang Fan Lee Chi-cheung Mi Gao Huang Chen Sherry Chen Teoh Beng Hock Xiaoxing Xi Yao Pan Ma Michelle Go Slurs Chinaman Chinaman's chance Chinese, Japanese, dirty knees Ching chong Chink Locust/Wongchung Shina/Zhina Sick man of Asia Related Anti-People's Republic of China Chinese imperialism Anti-Taiwanese sentiment Hong Kong nationalism v t e Ancestry of Australians Ancestral background of Australian citizens Indigenous Aboriginal Australians Torres Strait Islanders Africa Angolan Beninese Burundian Cameroonian Congolese Eritrean Ethiopian Gabonese Gambian Ghanaian Guinean Ivorian Kenyan Liberian Malawian Malian Mauritian Nigerian Rwandan Senegalese Sierra Leonean South African Tanzanian Togolese Ugandan Zambian Zimbabwean Americas American Canadian Caribbean and West Indian Australian Hispanic and Latin American Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Cuban Ecuadorian Guatemalan Honduran Mexican Panamanian Paraguayan Peruvian Puerto Rican Salvadoran Uruguayan Venezuelan Jamaican Trinidadian and Tobagonian Asia Afghan Hazara Pashtun Armenian Azerbaijani Bangladeshi Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Chin Karen Mon Cambodian Chinese Hong Kong Cantonese Taiwanese Hakka Fuzhou/Hokchiu Hoklo Hmong Mien Tibetan Uyghur East Timorese Filipino Georgian Indian Bengali Gujarati Indo-Fijian Malayali Punjabi Sindhi Tamil Telugu Indonesian Acehnese Balinese Javanese Madurese Sundanese Japanese Kazakh Korean Kyrgyz Laotian Malaysian Bruneian Kadazan Temoq Maldivian Mongolian Nepali Pakistani Baloch Hazara Pashtun Punjabi Sindhi Pathan Singaporean Sri Lankan Tamil Tajik Tatar Thai Turkmen Uzbek Vietnamese Hmong Mien Europe Albanian Anglo-Celtic Cornish English Irish Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Austrian Belgian Belarusian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch Estonian French Finnish German Greek Hungarian Icelandic Italian Latvian Lithuanian Macedonian Maltese Montenegrin Norwegian Polish Portuguese Romani Romanian Russian Serbian Slovak Slovene Spanish Swedish Swiss Ukrainian Middle East and North Africa Arab Algerian Bahraini Egyptian Emirati Iraqi Jordanian Kuwaiti Lebanese Libyan Moroccan Palestinian Saudi Somali Syrian Tunisian Assyrian Bari Berber Coptic Darfur Dinka Iranian Israeli / Jewish Kurdish Mandaean Nubian Nuer South Sudanese Sudanese Turkish Yezidi Oceania Fijian Indo-Fijian Niuean Ni-Vanuatu New Zealander Māori Papua New Guinean Samoan South Sea Islander Tongan according to Reflecting a Nation: Stories from the 2011 Census, 2012–2013 and Census of Population and Housing: Reflecting Australia - Stories from the Census, 2016 v t e White people Bold refers to countries, regions and territories in which the majority ethnic group is generally considered to be people of white European descent.

European emigration by location Africa Algeria Angola Botswana Democratic Republic of the Congo Kenya Malawi Morocco Namibia Reunion South Africa Tunisia Zambia Zimbabwe Asia China India Pakistan North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Bermuda Canada Caribbean Cayman Islands Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Panama Trinidad and Tobago United States California Hawaii Louisiana Maryland Baltimore Southern United States Puerto Rico South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Oceania Australia New Caledonia Hawaii New Zealand Historical concepts Apartheid Aryan Blanqueamiento Castas Peninsulares Criollos First white child Honorary whites Play the white man Pre-modern conceptions of whiteness Settler colonialism White Australia policy The White Man's Burden White gods Sociological phenomena and theories Acting white ( Passing as white ) Becoming white thesis Missing white woman syndrome Skin whitening White flight White guilt White privilege Whiteness studies Whitewashing in art Whitewashing in film White savior White demographic decline White people terms White supremacy Reverse racism Anti-white racism Negative stereotypes of Whites In the United States Appalachian stereotypes Hillbilly Mountain whites Poor Whites Redlegs Rednecks White trash Karen Angry white male Becky Basic Trixie White monkey White identity politics US definitions of whiteness One-drop rule Alt-right Christian Identity European New Right Great Replacement Identitarian movement Non-Hispanic whites Old Stock Americans Canadians Quebeckers White Anglo-Saxon Protestants White ethnic White genocide conspiracy theory White Hispanic White identity White nationalism White pride White supremacy Race Ethnic groups in Europe Commons Authority control databases International FAST National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=White_Australia_policy&oldid=1305958221 " Categories : White Australia policy History of immigration to Australia Politics and race Racial segregation 1901 establishments in Australia 1973 disestablishments in Australia Legal history of Australia Anti-Chinese sentiment in Australia Anti-immigration politics in Australia White nationalism in Australia 1901 in Australian law Anti-Asian sentiment in Australia White supremacy in Oceania Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages with missing ISBNs Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Australian English from April 2014 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from January 2020 Articles with excerpts Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2018 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from December 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from July 2025 Articles with incomplete citations from May 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 CS1 maint: ref duplicates default CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 02:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents White Australia policy 26 languages Add topic

