Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Usage and examples 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Dichotomy 39 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Splitting of a whole into exactly two non-overlapping parts; dyadic relations and processes This article is about dichotomy in logic and related topics. For usage of "dichotomous" in botany, see Glossary of botanical terms § dichotomous . For the album by Becoming the Archetype, see Dichotomy (album) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Dichotomy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In this image, the universal set U (the entire rectangle) is dichotomized into the two sets A (in pink) and its complement A c (in grey).

A dichotomy ( / d aɪ ˈ k ɒ t ə m i / ) is a partition of a whole (or a set) into two parts (subsets). In other words, this couple of parts must be jointly exhaustive : everything must belong to one part or the other, and mutually exclusive : nothing can belong simultaneously to both parts.

If there is a concept A, and it is split into parts B and not-B, then the parts form a dichotomy: they are mutually exclusive, since no part of B is contained in not-B and vice versa, and they are jointly exhaustive, since they cover all of A, and together again give A.

Such a partition is also frequently called a bipartition. The two parts thus formed are complements . In logic , the partitions are opposites if there exists a proposition such that it holds over one and not the other. Treating continuous variables or multi categorical variables as binary variables is called dichotomization . The discretization error inherent in dichotomization is temporarily ignored for modeling purposes.

Etymology [ edit ] The term dichotomy is from the Greek Greek : διχοτομία dichotomía "dividing in two" from δίχα dícha "in two, asunder" and τομή tomḗ "a cutting, incision".

Usage and examples [ edit ] In set theory , a dichotomous relation R is such that either aRb , bRa , but not both.

[ 1 ] A false dichotomy is an informal fallacy consisting of a supposed dichotomy which fails one or both of the conditions: it is not jointly exhaustive and/or not mutually exclusive. In its most common form, two entities are presented as if they are exhaustive, when in fact other alternatives are possible. In some cases, they may be presented as if they are mutually exclusive although there is a broad middle ground [ 2 ] (see also undistributed middle ).

One type of dichotomy is dichotomous classification – classifying objects by recursively splitting them into two groups. As Lewis Carroll explains, "After dividing a Class, by the Process of Dichotomy, into two smaller Classes, we may sub-divide each of these into two still smaller Classes; and this Process may be repeated over and over again, the number of Classes being doubled at each repetition. For example, we may divide "books" into "old" and "new" (i.e. "not-old"): we may then sub-divide each of these into "English" and "foreign" (i.e. "not-English"), thus getting four Classes." [ 3 ] In statistics , dichotomous data may only exist at first two levels of measurement , namely at the nominal level of measurement (such as "British" vs "American" when measuring nationality) and at the ordinal level of measurement (such as "tall" vs "short", when measuring height). A variable measured dichotomously is called a dummy variable .

In computer science , more specifically in programming-language engineering, dichotomies are fundamental dualities in a language's design. For instance, C++ has a dichotomy in its memory model (heap versus stack), whereas Java has a dichotomy in its type system (references versus primitive data types).

In astronomy dichotomy is when the Moon or an inferior planet is exactly half-lit as viewed from Earth. For the Moon, this occurs slightly before one quarter Moon orbit and slightly after the third quarter of the Moon's orbit at 89.85° and 270.15°, respectively. (This is not to be confused with quadrature which is when the Sun-Earth-Moon/superior planet angle is 90°.) In botany , branching may be dichotomous or axillary . In dichotomous branching, the branches form as a result of an equal division of a terminal bud (i.e., a bud formed at the apex of a stem) into two equal branches. This also applies to root systems as well.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Linguistics portal Philosophy portal Psychology portal The dictionary definition of dichotomy at Wiktionary Binary opposition Bipartite (disambiguation) Class (set theory) Dichotomy paradox Dilemma Law of excluded middle , which in logic asserts the existence of a dichotomy Taxonomy Trichotomy (disambiguation) References [ edit ] ^ Komjath, Peter; Totik, Vilmos (2006).

Problems and Theorems in Classical Set Theory . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 497.

ISBN 978-0-387-30293-5 .

^ Baronett, Stan (2013).

Logic . Oxford University Press. p. 134.

^ Carroll, Lewis (1897), Symbolic Logic , vol. 1.3.2 (4th ed.), London: Macmillan and Co., Ltd.

^ Hetherington, Alexander J.; Berry, Christopher M.; Dolan, Liam (2020).

"Multiple origins of dichotomous and lateral branching during root evolution" (PDF) .

Nature Plants .

6 (5): 454– 459.

doi : 10.1038/s41477-020-0646-y .

PMID 32366983 .

S2CID 218495278 .

^ Gola, Edyta M. (6 June 2014).

"Dichotomous branching: the plant form and integrity upon the apical meristem bifurcation" .

Frontiers in Plant Science .

5 : 263.

doi : 10.3389/fpls.2014.00263 .

PMC 4047680 .

PMID 24936206 .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dichotomies .

Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dichotomy&oldid=1274905410 " Categories : Dichotomies Logic Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2014 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Greek-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Broad-concept articles This page was last edited on 9 February 2025, at 22:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dichotomy 39 languages Add topic

