Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Characteristics 3 Featured examples Toggle Featured examples subsection 3.1 Mozarabic Art of León 3.2 Churches of Serrablo 3.3 Churches of repoblación of difficult classification or transitional 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Repoblación art and architecture 4 languages Español Euskara Français Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art style in medieval Spain San Miguel de Escalada (S.X), an example of Mozarabic leonese art with influences from the Caliphate of Cordoba The term " arte de repoblación " (literally, "art or architecture of repopulation")  refers to the pre-romanesque churches built in the Christian kingdoms of northern Spain between the late 9th and early 11th centuries. This was a time when these kingdoms were growing stronger after the Muslim occupation.

These churches show a mix of different styles, including Visigothic , Asturian , Mozarabic , Carolingian , and even Andalusian Muslim influences. This mix of styles reflects the different cultures that were living together at that time. Within this period, we can see different groups of churches, like Mozarabic churches in the Kingdom of León or the Serrablo group, each with its own unique style.

In the 10th century, Muslim influences can be seen in many buildings in northern Spain, even religious ones. This is because these Christian kingdoms were neighbors to the powerful Muslim caliphate of Córdoba . However, the term "repoblación art" emphasizes that these churches were not always built by the small groups of Mozarabic people who moved to these areas from Muslim-controlled lands.

The term "repoblación art" includes some of the buildings that were previously called "Mozarabic" by scholars following the work of Manuel Gómez-Moreno . However, there is still some debate about this term, and many authors use " Mozarabic art " to describe this period.

[ 1 ] In Spanish historiography, the Repoblación is the expansion of Christian settlement in the Duero basin and the Meseta Central in the 9th–10th centuries.

History [ edit ] The religious influences were inevitable given the presence of the  Islamic state of the Caliph of Córdoba , which was highly developed culturally, artistically and economically. However, it had long been suggested that the monumental buildings in northern Spain from this period were crafted by the modest groups of Mozarabic immigrants that settled in the areas of repopulation when the living conditions in Muslim al-Andalus became difficult to bear. As stated by professor Isidro Bango Torviso, suggesting that these immigrants were responsible for these buildings would be akin to suggesting that: when the Duero River Valley was repopulated under the auspices of the Asturian- Leonese kingdom, northerners settlers would have forsaken all their knowledge and experience and submitted themselves to the 'very rich and demonstrated creative capacity' of poor, rural southern immigrants.

The art and architecture of the Repoblación is identified as the third subset of the Hispanic Pre-Romanesque period, by the phases that correspond to the Visigothic art and architecture and Asturian architecture . Its architecture is a summary of elements of diverse extraction, irregularly distributed, in such a way that on occasion elements of paleo-Christian, Visigothic or Asturian origin come to predominate, while at other times Muslim characteristics come to the fore.

Characteristics [ edit ] This article is in list format but may read better as prose .

You can help by converting this article , if appropriate.

Editing help is available.

( January 2018 ) Some of the identifying characteristics of the Repoblación ecclesiastic architecture are: Basilica or centralized plan; sometimes with opposing apses .

Main chapel on a rectangular plan on the exterior and ultra-semicircular in the interior.

Use of the horseshoe arch of Muslim derivation, somewhat more closed and sloped than the Visigothic.

Generalized use of the horseshoe arch doorway or alfiz .

Use of the twin and triple windows of Asturian tradition.

Roofs composed of segmented vaults , including traditional barrel vaults .

Grouped columns forming composite pillars, with Corinthian capitals decorated with stylized elements and cinctures joining the capital to the columns.

Walls re-enforced by exterior buttresses.

Evolution of rafter ornaments to great lobed offsets that support very pronounced eaves.

Decoration similar to the Visigothic based on volutes, swastikas , and vegetable and animal themes forming projecting borders.

A great command of the technique in construction, employing principally ashlar by length and width .

Absence or sobriety of exterior decoration.

Diversity in the floor plans, with small proportions and discontinuous spaces covered by cupolas (groined, segmented, ribbed of horseshoe transept, etc.).

Featured examples [ edit ] Below is a classification of temples of repoblación art into different groups based on their characteristics: Mozarabic Art of León [ edit ] Murals in the style of the Caliphate of Córdoba in the interior of Santiago de Peñalba The Mozarabic art of the Kingdom of León is the ensemble of repoblación art characterized by being the most refined of this period, reflecting cultural and stylistic contributions from the Caliphate of Córdoba . These influences are manifested in the perfectly executed horseshoe arches , the elaborate spatial articulations, and in some cases, as in the church of Santiago de Peñalba (León), in the presence of murals that evidence the aesthetic relationship with Andalusian art.

[ 2 ] Church of Santiago de Peñalba ( León ) Monastery of San Miguel de Escalada ( León ) Church of San Salvador de Palat del Rey ( León ) Hermitage of Santo Tomás de las Ollas ( León ) Chapel of San Miguel of Celanova ( Orense ) Church of San Cipriano of San Cebrián de Mazote ( Valladolid ) Church of Santa María of Lebeña ( Cantabria ) Church of Santa María of Wamba ( Valladolid ) Churches of Serrablo [ edit ] The church of San Pedro de Lárrede is considered the prototype of the Serrablo architectural group The Churches of Serrablo , located in High Aragon and dated between the 10th and 11th centuries, bring together a group of churches with homogeneous characteristics and difficult classification, as they combine pre-Romanesque, Mozarabic, Lombard, and characteristics that anticipate the Romanesque, which is why it is also called Proto-Romanesque or Aragonese early Romanesque. These constructions usually have single-nave or simple division plans, horseshoe arches of Mozarabic influence, attached bell towers, and an incipient use of barrel vaults.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Church of San Pedro de Lárrede ( Huesca ) Church of San Juan de Busa ( Huesca ) Church of San Bartolomé de Gavín ( Huesca ) Church of San Martín de Oliván ( Huesca ) Church of San Andrés de Satué ( Huesca ) Hermitage of San Juan Bautista de Rasal ( Huesca ) Churches of repoblación of difficult classification or transitional [ edit ] San Baudelio de Berlanga Monastery of San Millán de Suso These churches present hybrid characteristics, combining Mozarabic contributions in temples of Visigothic origin and, in many cases, with later extensions during the Romanesque period. Notable examples include the Monastery of San Millán de Suso in La Rioja, which preserves Visigothic and Mozarabic traces along with Romanesque reforms, and the hermitage of San Baudelio de Berlanga in Soria, notable for its singular structure with a central column that supports a palm-shaped vault and its murals.

Monastery of San Millán de Suso ( La Rioja ) Hermitage of San Baudelio de Berlanga ( Caltojar , Soria ) Hermitage of San Román de Moroso ( Arenas de Iguña , Cantabria ) Hermitage of Santa Céntola y Santa Elena ( Siero , Burgos ) Church of San Vicente del Valle ( Burgos ) Monastery of San Juan de la Peña ( Jaca , Huesca ) Church of the Monastery of Leyre ( Navarre ) Monastery of San Salvador of Tábara ( Zamora ) Church of San Quirico de Pedret ( Barcelona ) Church of San Cristóbal of Cabrils ( Barcelona ) Hermitage of San Julián de Boada ( Gerona ) Church of Santa María de Matadars ( Barcelona ) See also [ edit ] Spain in the Middle Ages Reconquista Notes [ edit ] ^ Canellas López and San Vicente (1996), p. 93.

^ Villa del Castillo, Alejandro (2017-11-27), "Talleres escultóricos itinerantes en el Altomedievo hispano: el llamado 'Grupo Mozárabe Leonés' " , Arqueología y Territorio Medieval , 24 : 151– 184, doi : 10.17561/aytm.v24i0.5 , ISSN 2386-5423 , retrieved 2024-12-25 ^ "IGLESIAS RURALES COMARCA ALTO ARAGON - TIERRAS DE SERRABLO" , www.jdiezarnal.com [se quitó una URL no válida] , retrieved 2024-12-25 ^ "RUTAS ROMANICAS POR LA COMARCA DEL ALTO GÁLLEGO-A.Garcia Omedes" , www.romanicoaragones.com , retrieved 2024-12-25 References [ edit ] Bango Torviso, Isidro G. "Arquitectura de la decima centuria: ¿Repoblación o mozárabe?" Goya: Revista de arte 122 (1974), pp. 68–75.

Bango Torviso, Isidro G. "Arquitectura de repoblación", pp. 167–216. In Javier Rivera Blanco, Francisco Javier de la Plaza Santiago and Simón Marchán Fiz (eds.), Historia del arte de Castilla y León , Vol. 1, Prehistoria, Edad Antigua y arte prerrománico. Valladolid, 1994.

Camón Aznar, J. "Arquitectura española del siglo X: Mozárabe y de la repoblación".

Goya: Revista de arte 52 (1963), pp. 206–19.

Canellas López, Ángel; San Vicente, Ángel.

Rutas románicas de Aragón . Madrid, 1996.

Martínez Tejera, Artemio Manuel. "El contraábside en la arquitectura de la repoblación: el grupo castellano-leonés",  pp. 57–76.

III Curso de Cultura Medieval. Seminario: Repoblación y Reconquista (Centro de Estudios del Románico, Aguilar de Campoo, septiembre 1991) . Madrid, 1993.

Martínez Tejera, Artemio Manuel. "La arquitectura cristiana hispánica de los siglos IX y X en el Regnum Astur-leonés".

Argutorio 14 (2004), pp. 9–12 Monedero Bermejo, Miguel Ángel.

La arquitectura de la repoblación en la provincia de Cuenca . Cuenca, 1982.

Moreno, Manuel Gómez.

Iglesias mozárabes . Madrid, 1917.

Utrero Agudo, María de los Ángeles.

Iglesias tardoantiguas y altomedievales en la península ibérica: análisis arqueológico y sistemas de abovedamiento . Madrid, 2006.

Werckmeister, O. K.

"Art of the Frontier: Mozarabic Monasticism" , pp. 121–32. In Metropolitan Museum of Art , The Art of Medieval Spain, A.D. 500–1200 . New York, 1993.

v t e Architecture of Spain Styles Megalithic Iberian Celtic Celtiberian Roman Visigothic Asturian Andalusi Mozarabic Repoblación Mudéjar First Romanesque Romanesque Gothic Catalan Gothic Isabelline Valencian Gothic Cisneros Plateresque Renaissance Purism Herrerian Baroque Churrigueresque Neoclassical Rococo Modernisme Valencian Art Nouveau Noucentisme Neo-Mudéjar Buildings and structures Roman sites Alcázars Alcazabas Cantabrian defensive towers Castles Castros Cathedrals Hórreos Lighthouses Llotjes Monasteries Royal sites Windmills Airports Indoor arenas Museums Stadiums Tallest buildings and structures Destroyed heritage Other Architects Andalusian patio Andalusian White Towns Aragonese Mudéjar Catalan vault Gaudí buildings Spanish Colonial architecture Alhóndiga Alqueria Artesonado Azulejo Baserri Cabaña pasiega Casa montañesa Casona montañesa Corral de comedias Cortijo Finca Estipite Hacienda Masia Mirador Palloza Pazo Real Spanish garden Yeseria Category v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Repoblación_art_and_architecture&oldid=1278847625 " Categories : Mozarabic art and architecture Mozarabic architecture Reconquista Romanesque architecture in Spain Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from January 2018 All pages needing cleanup Articles with sections that need to be turned into prose from January 2018 This page was last edited on 4 March 2025, at 23:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Repoblación art and architecture 4 languages Add topic

