Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Definition and ideology 3 Jineology in practice 4 Criticism 5 See also 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Jineology 20 languages Azərbaycanca Català Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kurdî Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português کوردی Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of feminism advocated by PKK leader Abdullah Öcalan Asia Ramazan Antar (1998–2016) was a feminist and a Women's Protection Units (YPJ) fighter Jineology ( Kurdish : Jineolojî ) is a form of feminism and of gender equality advocated by Abdullah Öcalan , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] the representative leader of the Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) and the broader Kurdistan Communities Union (KCK) umbrella. From the background of honor-based religious and tribal rules that confine women in Middle East societies, Öcalan said that "a country can't be free unless the women are free", and that the level of women's freedom determines the level of freedom in society at large.

[ 2 ] Jineology is a component of democratic confederalism , a philosophy underpinning the governance of the Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria (also known as Rojava).

Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e History [ edit ] The Kurdistan Communities Union (KCK) is an umbrella organization that includes the Democratic Union Party (PYD) and PKK. In 2005, the KCK abandoned its goal of establishing a separate Kurdish state and instead advocated for democratic confederalism. In 2012, the PYD gained control over a large portion of northern Syria and declared autonomy, implementing self-governance under the model of democratic confederalism. This region, known as Rojava or the Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria, made up around one fifth of Syrian territory before the Turkish invasion of the region in 2016. The PYD's paramilitary force consists of the People's Protection Units (YPG) and the Women's Protection Units (YPJ).

[ 4 ] The Kurdish women's liberation movement draws heavily upon the theory of Abdullah Öcalan, founder of the PKK. Öcalan coined the term ‘Jineoloji’ and invented democratic confederalism, the system of government implemented in Rojava.

Definition and ideology [ edit ] Kurdish YPG & PKK Fighters (16287816336) In Kurdish , the word jin ( ژن ) means "woman". Jineology is sometimes translated into English as the science of women or women's science . In the PKK's statement "Women's Liberation Ideology", the use of "a fundamental scientific term" is meant to "fill the gaps that the current social sciences are incapable of doing." [ 5 ] In Liberating life: Women's Revolution (2013), Abdullah Öcalan writes: The extent to which society can be thoroughly transformed is determined by the extent of the transformation attained by women. Similarly, the level of woman’s freedom and equality determines the freedom and equality of all sections of society. . . . For a democratic nation, woman’s freedom is of great importance too, as liberated woman constitutes liberated society. Liberated society in turn constitutes democratic nation. Moreover, the need to reverse the role of man is of revolutionary importance.

[ 6 ] Öcalan has said "a country can't be free unless the women are free", and echoed Charles Fourier , saying that the level of woman's freedom determines the level of freedom in society at large.

[ 2 ] Additionally, the PKK's "Women's Liberation Ideology" statement asserts that "Jineology is built on the principle that without the freedom of women within society and without a real consciousness surrounding women no society can call itself free." [ 5 ] Jineology, a set of principles that includes the rejection of the nation-state system, governance through democratic confederalism, and the promotion of self-sustainability through ecological awareness and collective armament, has been embraced by Kurdish women. While these principles are seen as a means of challenging patriarchy, they are also viewed in contrast to Western feminism, which is associated with capitalism and statism. Despite this, the Jineological principles embraced by Kurdish women are concerned with challenging patriarchy and the intersection of patriarchy with other forms of hegemony.

[ 4 ] Jineology is a discipline that seeks to recover and study knowledge about women in order to challenge the belief that women are inferior or "defective" versions of men and to address the exclusion of women from intellectual history. It aims to rehabilitate and value traditionally belittled aspects of female existence, such as "women's work". Jineology recognizes that the nation-state is closely linked to patriarchy and reproduces it because it is inherently hegemonic and masculinist. To describe this interconnectedness, Jineologists use the term "statism-sexism-powerism" to emphasize the inseparability of these forms of hegemony.

Member of the Women's Protection Units (YPJ) with a standard uniform Jineology in practice [ edit ] Jineology is a fundamental tenet of the KCK's democratic confederalism [ 7 ] and as such central to the Kurds ' social revolution taking place in Rojava , their de facto autonomous region in northern Syria, led by the KCK-affiliated Democratic Union Party (PYD).

[ 7 ] Consequently, women make up 40% of the Kurdish militia fighting in the Rojava conflict [ 7 ] against the Bashar al-Assad regime and Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) in the Syrian Civil War .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Women fight alongside men in the People's Protection Units (YPG) as well as in their own Women's Protection Units (YPJ).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In the YPJ, women study the political theories of Öcalan, [ 1 ] on whose ideology the foundations of the group were laid.

[ 2 ] For female participants in the reconstruction of northern Syria, Jineology is seen as superior to Western feminism because it aims to reject all forms of hegemony, including patriarchy and positivism, in order to establish a more sustainable peace. This is because Jineology is seen as more holistic and inclusive of all members of society. During the Rojava revolution, both men and women were required to study Jineology and ecology, and Jineology is integrated into the region's governance model rather than being treated as a separate issue focused on women's rights.

[ 4 ] The Jineology-based agenda of "trying to break the honor-based religious and tribal rules that confine women" is controversial and overcoming controversy in conservative quarters of society in northern Syria.

[ 8 ] The development of Jineology is one of five pillars in the Kurdish women 's movement in Rojava with the Kongreya Star umbrella organization, focused "on protecting each other, resisting ISIL and building an egalitarian community in the middle of a warzone." [ 9 ] In the instance of ISIL, the YPG/YPJ resisted the organization's sexism, who in the mid-2010s became more permissive of its members committing sexual violence against their captors, a break from original jihadist attitudes towards women.

[ 10 ] In the context of the Turkish invasion of the area, the YPG/YPJ has engaged in sporadic combat against these state attacks. Self-defense extends into the intellectual domain with Rojava participants claiming the right to protect themselves from epistemic attacks by making decisions and generating awareness about themselves. It is for this reason that Women's and Youth Committees were established, with veto power over decisions affecting them; it is also for this reason that women's and Asayish academies exist, as well as Jineology.

[ 4 ] Jineology is one of many courses offered at Kongreya Star's women's academy.

[ 9 ] Criticism [ edit ] Somayeh Rostampour argues that Jineology is a difficult ideology for academics to analyze because of discrepancies between academic circles and Jineologist spaces. Many texts related to Jineology are not signed and Öcalan is not required to cite sources for his claims. Because it is a combination of Western and Eastern philosophies, it is difficult to categorize Jineology under a singular theoretical framework.

[ 11 ] Furthermore, Rostampour claims Jineology is one-dimensional, merely focusing on what the PKK deems important, namely “democracy and mobilization”, because of its proponents’ isolation from both local and international academic and activist circles. In Turkey, state pressure has limited the PKK’s budget for addressing sexism and many revolutionaries, including women, are imprisoned for their activism. Many of these activists also come from low-income and rural backgrounds where they do not have access to a global education or dialogues with international women’s rights advocates . The lack of “multidimensional data and analyses” means that the current iteration of Jineology cannot address issues beyond the PKK’s scope of attention, such as queer studies.

[ 12 ] The centrality of Öcalan in Jineology limits Jineologists’ ability to form a philosophy separate from him. Despite Öcalan’s promotion of women being central to PKK ideology and the upsurge of female membership in the 1990s, Jineology in the 1990s arguably did not revolutionize Kurdish gender hierarchy, it merely changed discourse surrounding women’s role in the PKK as a recruitment tactic.

[ 13 ] In his declaration "Woman and Family Question", Öcalan maintained the patriarchal rhetoric of Kurdish men as ‘protectors’ , but proposed they shift their focus from protecting “women’s honor” to protecting “the honor of the homeland”.

[ 14 ] Because of these superficial shifts, Kurdish women in the 1990s only occupied low-level positions within the party and lacked any decision-making power.

[ 15 ] Women’s sexuality was also heavily policed within the party in lieu of conservative families’ policing.

[ 16 ] Because women were considered weak and therefore a liability to the PKK’s cause, they were expected to perform extreme acts of loyalty, accounting for the high number of female suicide bombers .

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Uprisings led by women Rojava–Islamist conflict Woman, Life, Freedom References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Argentieri, Benedetta (30 July 2015).

"These female Kurdish soldiers wear their femininity with pride" .

Quartz . Retrieved 24 November 2016 .

^ a b c d e f Argentieri, Benedetta (3 February 2015).

"One group battling Islamic State has a secret weapon – female fighters" .

Reuters . Archived from the original on 3 February 2015 . Retrieved 24 November 2016 .

^ Argentieri, Benedetta (8 February 2015).

"Women vs. the Islamic State: The Kurds have a secret weapon against brutal jihadists — female fighters" .

Pittsburgh Post-Gazette . Retrieved 26 November 2016 .

^ a b c d MacKenzie, Megan; Wegner, Nicole (2021).

Feminist Solutions for Ending War .

Pluto Press .

ISBN 9780745342863 .

^ a b Düzgün, Meral (July 2016).

"Jineoloji: The Kurdish Women's Movement" .

Journal of Middle East Women's Studies .

12 (2).

Duke University Press : 284.

^ Öcalan, Abdullah (2013).

Liberating life: Women's Revolution (PDF) . International Initiative Edition. p. 57.

ISBN 978-3-941012-82-0 .

^ a b c Lau, Anna; Baran, Erdelan; Sirinathsingh, Melanie (18 November 2016).

"A Kurdish response to climate change" .

openDemocracy . Archived from the original on 12 November 2017 . Retrieved 24 November 2016 .

^ "Syrian Kurds tackle conscription, underage marriages and polygamy" .

ARA News . 15 November 2016. Archived from the original on November 16, 2016.

^ a b Clarke-Billings, Lucy (6 October 2016).

"The Women Leading a Social Revolution in Syria's Rojava" .

Newsweek . New York City . Retrieved 24 November 2016 .

^ Ahmad, Aisha (2019).

" "We Have Captured Your Women": Explaining Jihadist Norm Change" .

International Security .

44 (1): 80 . Retrieved 19 May 2025 .

^ Rostampour, Somayeh (2024).

"Jineolojî Confronting Hierarchical Knowledge: (Il)legitimacy of a Decolonial Science of Women in Kurdistan" .

Appartenances & Altérités .

5 .

^ Rostampour, Somayeh (2024).

"Jineolojî Confronting Hierarchical Knowledge: (Il)legitimacy of a Decolonial Science of Women in Kurdistan" .

Appartenances & Altérités .

5 .

^ Novellis, Andrea (Summer 2018).

"The Rise of Feminism in the PKK: Ideology or Strategy?" .

Zanj: The Journal of Critical Global South Studies .

2 (1): 121.

^ Novellis, Andrea (Summer 2018). "The Rise of Feminism in the PKK: Ideology or Strategy?".

Zanj: The Journal of Critical Global South Studies .

2 (1): 118.

^ Novellis, Andrea (Summer 2018). "The Rise of Feminism in the PKK: Ideology or Strategy?".

Zanj: The Journal of Critical Global South Studies .

2 (1): 117-118.

^ Novellis, Andrea (Summer 2018). "The Rise of Feminism in the PKK: Ideology or Strategy?".

Zanj: The Journal of Critical Global South Studies .

2 (1): 120.

^ Novellis, Andrea (Summer 2018). "The Rise of Feminism in the PKK: Ideology or Strategy?".

Zanj: The Journal of Critical Global South Studies .

2 (1): 122.

Bibliography [ edit ] Liberating life: Woman's Revolution.

Cologne, Germany: International Initiative Edition, 2013. Abdullah Öcalan.

ISBN 978-3-941012-82-0 . A PDF of the book is available here at the International Initiative website .

Killing the Male.

1997/98. Mahir Sayın, Abdullah Öcalan (interviewee).

External links [ edit ] "Crackdown in Turkey Threatens a Haven of Gender Equality Built by Kurds", The New York Times , December 2016 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jineology&oldid=1295588167 " Categories : Abdullah Öcalan Democratic confederalism Feminist movements and ideologies Politics of the Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria Women in the Syrian civil war Kurdistan Workers' Party Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Kurdish-language text Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 18:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jineology 20 languages Add topic

