Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Depictions in Abrahamic texts 2 Mary 3 In popular culture 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Handmaiden 7 languages فارسی 한국어 Italiano עברית 日本語 Simple English 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Female personal servant This article is about the historic type of domestic servant. For other uses, see Handmaiden (disambiguation) .

The examples and perspective in this article may not include all significant viewpoints .

Please improve the article or discuss the issue .

( July 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Annunciation by Murillo , 1655–1660, Hermitage Museum , Saint Petersburg A handmaiden (nowadays less commonly handmaid or maidservant ) is a personal maid or female servant .

[ 1 ] The term is also used metaphorically for something whose primary role is to serve or assist.

[ 1 ] Depending on culture or historical period, a handmaiden may be of enslaved status or may be simply an employee. The terms handmaiden and handmaid are synonyms.

[ 1 ] Depictions in Abrahamic texts [ edit ] The Pharaoh's Handmaidens by John Collier , 1883 In the King James translation of the Hebrew Bible , the term handmaid is applied to a female servant who serves her mistress, as in the case of Hagar being described as Sarah 's handmaid, [ 2 ] Zilpah being Leah 's handmaid [ 3 ] and Bilhah as Rachel 's handmaid.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In each of these cases, the mistress "gave" their handmaid to their husbands "to wife", to bear his "seed" (children). The use in the Torah of the prefix "to", as in "gave to wife", may indicate that the wife is a concubine or inferior wife.

[ 6 ] The text repeats that these people remain handmaids of their mistress though they are also the concubine of the mistress's husband. They are referred to interchangeably by the Hebrew terms אָמָה ‎ ( ’āmāh ) and שִׁפְחָה ‎ ( šip̄ḥāh ). Other modern English bible translations use the word slave, slave-girl or servant.

[ 7 ] Mary [ edit ] In Christianity , Mary, the mother of Jesus is referred to as the "handmaid of the Lord" or "servant of the Lord", [ 8 ] both of which are titles of honour for the mother of Jesus .

[ 9 ] The Gospel of Luke describes Mary as the "handmaid of the Lord" ( Greek δούλη , doulē ) when she gives her consent to the message of the Angel (see Luke 1:38 ), and when she proclaims the greatness of the Lord because of "the great things" he has worked in her (see Luke 1:49 )." [ 9 ] In popular culture [ edit ] The Handmaid's Tale , а dystopian novel by Canadian author Margaret Atwood .

The Handmaid's Tale (1990 film adaptation of the novel) The Handmaid's Tale (2000 operatic adaptation of the novel) The Handmaid's Tale (2017 TV adaptation of the novel) The Handmaiden , a 2016 South Korean film directed by Park Chan-wook .

In the book series A Song of Ice and Fire by George R.R. Martin , which falls into the genres of both epic fantasy and dark fantasy, the female servants of a queen or a lady are referred to as "handmaidens" and the term is used to refer to many characters, most notably Queen Margaery Tyrell 's cousins, Elinor Tyrell and Megga Tyrell, who serve as Margaery's handmaidens upon her arrival in King's Landing.

In the sci-fi Star Wars franchise, the term refers to the female assistants of a reigning queen, most notably the Royal Naboo Handmaidens on the planet Naboo.

In Rapunzel’s Tangled Adventure , the penultimate episode is "Once a Handmaiden..." See also [ edit ] Domestic worker Henchman Lady's maid Lady-in-waiting Nurse stereotypes References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Handmaiden - Definition and More from the Free Merriam-Webster Dictionary" . Merriam-webster.com. 2012-08-31 . Retrieved 2013-09-17 .

^ "Genesis 16 / Hebrew - English Bible / Mechon-Mamre" .

www.mechon-mamre.org . Retrieved 2020-04-16 .

^ "Genesis 30 / Hebrew - English Bible / Mechon-Mamre" .

www.mechon-mamre.org . Retrieved 2020-04-16 .

^ "Genesis 30 / Hebrew - English Bible / Mechon-Mamre" .

www.mechon-mamre.org . Retrieved 2020-04-16 .

^ "This Biblical Story Is At The Heart Of The Handmaid's Tale " . Retrieved 2018-08-30 .

^ Women, similar to wives from vadimcherny.org ^ "Genesis 16:1 KJV;ESV;NIV;NRSV - Now Sarai Abram's wife bare him no - Bible Gateway" .

www.biblegateway.com . Retrieved 2022-02-11 .

^ Closs, Michael P. (29 June 2016).

The Book of Mary: A Commentary on the Protevangelium of James . FriesenPress. p. 27.

ISBN 9781460284872 .

^ a b Press, Liturgical (2012).

Collection of Masses of the Blessed Virgin Mary . Liturgical Press. p. 192.

ISBN 9780814634868 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Handmaiden&oldid=1296101035 " Categories : Concubinage Domestic work Female stock characters Gendered occupations Slavery by type Women by occupation Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing more viewpoints from July 2021 Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 20:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Handmaiden 7 languages Add topic

