Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nomenclature 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Pre–6th century 2.2 First dissemination (7th–9th centuries) 2.3 Era of fragmentation (9th–10th centuries) 2.4 Second dissemination (10th–12th centuries) 2.5 Mongol dominance (13th–14th centuries) 2.6 From family rule to Ganden Phodrang government (14th–18th centuries) 2.7 Qing rule (18th–20th centuries) 2.8 20th century 2.9 21st century 3 Teachings Toggle Teachings subsection 3.1 Buddhahood and Bodhisattvas 3.2 The Bodhisattva path 3.3 Lamrim 3.4 Vajrayāna 3.5 Philosophy 4 Texts and study Toggle Texts and study subsection 4.1 Sutras 4.2 Treatises of the Indian masters 4.3 Other important texts 4.4 Tantric literature 4.5 Transmission and realization 5 Practices Toggle Practices subsection 5.1 Pāramitā 5.2 Samatha and Vipaśyanā 5.3 Preliminary practices 5.3.1 Guru yoga 5.4 Esotericism and vows 5.5 Ritual 5.6 Mantra 5.7 Tantric sadhana and yoga 5.8 Dzogchen and Mahamudra 6 Institutions and clergy Toggle Institutions and clergy subsection 6.1 Women in Tibetan Buddhism 6.1.1 Eastern nuns 6.1.2 Western nuns and lamas 7 Major lineages 8 Tibetan Buddhist schools 9 Glossary of terms used 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References Toggle References subsection 12.1 Citations 12.2 Works cited 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Tibetan Buddhism 80 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Български བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Кыргызча Ladino Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy मराठी Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Rumantsch Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of Buddhism practiced in Tibet and around the world Part of a series on Tibetan Buddhism Schools Nyingma Kadam Sakya Bodong Kagyu Jonang Gelug Rimé Key personalities First dissemination Padmasambhāva Śāntarakṣita Kamalaśīla Songtsen Gampo Trisong Detsen Ralpacan Second dissemination Atiśa Talika Abhayakirti Niguma Sukhasiddhi Milarepa Nyingma Yeshe Tsogyal Longchenpa Jigme Lingpa Patrul Rinpoche Dudjom Lingpa Mipham Kagyu Marpa Rangjung Dorje Jonang Dolpopa Taranatha Sakya Sakya Pandita Gorampa Bodongpa Samding Dorje Phagmo Gelugpa Je Tsongkhapa 5th Dalai Lama 13th Dalai Lama 14th Dalai Lama 10th Panchen Lama Teachings General Buddhist Three marks of existence Skandha Cosmology Saṃsāra Rebirth Bodhisattva Dharma Dependent origination Karma Tibetan Four Tenets system Five Pure Lights Rangtong-Shentong Svatantrika-Prasaṅgika distinction Nyingma Dzogchen Pointing-out instruction Practices and attainment Lamrim Pāramitās Bodhicitta Avalokiteśvara Meditation Laity Vajrayana Tantra techniques Deity yoga Guru yoga Dream yoga Thukdam Buddhahood Major monasteries Tradruk Drepung Dzogchen Ganden Jokhang Kumbum Labrang Mindrolling Namgyal Narthang Nechung Pabonka Palcho Ralung Ramoche Rato Sakya Samye Sanga Sera Shalu Tashi Lhunpo Tsurphu Yerpa Institutional roles Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Lama Karmapa Rinpoche Geshe Tertön Tulku Western tulku Festivals Chotrul Duchen Dajyur Galdan Namchot Losar Dosmoche Monlam Sho Dun Losoong Texts Kangyur Tengyur Tibetan Buddhist canon Mahayana sutras Nyingma Gyubum Art Sand mandala Thangka Wall paintings Ashtamangala Tree of physiology Festival thangka Mani stone History and overview History Timeline Outline Culture Index of articles v t e Part of a series on Vajrayana Buddhism Traditions Historical traditions: Ari-Acharya Burmese-Bengal † Yunnan Indonesian Esoteric Buddhism † Filipino Esoteric Buddhism † East Asian Chinese Japanese Nepalese Inner Asian Altaic ( o , x , y ) Bhutanese Eurasian ( b , t , k ) Tibetan New branches: Gateway of the Hidden Flower Shambhala Buddhism History Tantrism Mahasiddha Sahaja Pursuit Buddhahood Bodhisattva Kalachakra Practices Generation stage Completion stage Phowa Tukdam Tantric techniques : Fourfold division: Kriyayoga Charyayoga Yogatantra Anuttarayogatantra Twofold division: Inner Tantras Outer Tantras Thought forms and visualisation: Mandala Mantra Mudra Thangka Yantra Yoga : Ngöndro Guru yoga Deity yoga Six yogas : Inner heat Luminosity yoga Dream yoga Death yoga Sex yoga Festivals Ganachakra Ullambana Puja Tantric texts Anuttarayoga Tantra Cakrasaṃvara Tantra Guhyagarbha Tantra Kulayarāja Tantra Mahāmāyā Tantra Mañjuśrī-mūla-kalpa Mañjuśrīnāmasamgīti Tattvasaṃgraha Tantra Vajrasekhara Sutra Yuthok Nyingthig Symbols and tools Damaru Ghanta Melong Phurba Vajra Yab-Yum Ordination and transmission Esoteric transmission Pointing-out instruction Samaya Vajracharya v t e Part of a series on Buddhism Glossary Index Outline History Timeline The Buddha Pre-sectarian Buddhism Councils Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Decline in the Indian subcontinent Later Buddhists Buddhist modernism Dharma Concepts Four Noble Truths Noble Eightfold Path Dharma wheel Five Aggregates Impermanence Suffering No-self Dependent Origination Middle Way Mettā Emptiness Morality Karma Rebirth Saṃsāra Cosmology Buddhist texts Buddhavacana Early Texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana Sutras Pāli Canon Sanskrit literature Tibetan canon Chinese canon Post-canon Practices Three Jewels Buddhist paths to liberation Five precepts Perfections Meditation Philosophical reasoning Devotional practices Merit making Recollections Mindfulness Wisdom Sublime abidings Aids to Enlightenment Monasticism Lay life Buddhist chant Pilgrimage Vegetarianism Nirvāṇa Awakening Four Stages Arhat Pratyekabuddhayāna Bodhisattva Buddha Traditions Theravāda Pāli Mahāyāna Hinayana Chinese Vajrayāna Tibetan Navayana Newar Buddhism by country Bhutan Brazil Cambodia China India Indonesia Japan Korea Laos Malaysia Mongolia Myanmar New Zealand Russia Singapore US Sri Lanka Taiwan Thailand Tibet Vietnam Buddhism portal v t e Inside of a Tibetan Buddhist monastery Tibetan Buddhism [ a ] is a form of Buddhism practiced in Tibet , Bhutan and Mongolia . It also has a sizable number of adherents in the areas surrounding the Himalayas , including the Indian regions of Ladakh , Darjeeling , Sikkim , and Arunachal Pradesh , as well as in Nepal . Smaller groups of practitioners can be found in Central Asia , some regions of China such as Northeast China , Xinjiang , Inner Mongolia and some regions of Russia , such as Tuva , Buryatia , and Kalmykia .

Tibetan Buddhism evolved as a form of Mahayana Buddhism stemming from the latest stages of Buddhism (which included many Vajrayana elements). It thus preserves many Indian Buddhist tantric practices of the post- Gupta early medieval period (500–1200 CE), along with numerous native Tibetan developments.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In the pre-modern era, Tibetan Buddhism spread outside of Tibet primarily due to the influence of the Mongol -led Yuan dynasty , founded by Kublai Khan , who ruled China, Mongolia, and parts of Siberia. In the Modern era, Tibetan Buddhism has spread outside of Asia because of the efforts of the Tibetan diaspora (1959 onwards). As the Dalai Lama escaped to India, the Indian subcontinent is also known for its renaissance of Tibetan Buddhism monasteries, including the rebuilding of the three major monasteries of the Gelug tradition.

Apart from classical Mahāyāna Buddhist practices like the ten perfections , Tibetan Buddhism also includes tantric practices, such as deity yoga and the Six Dharmas of Naropa , as well as methods that are seen as transcending tantra, like Dzogchen . Its main goal is Buddhahood .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The primary language of scriptural study in this tradition is classical Tibetan .

Tibetan Buddhism has four major schools, namely Nyingma (8th century), Kagyu (11th century), Sakya (1073), and Gelug (1409). The Jonang is a smaller school that exists, and the Rimé movement (19th century), meaning "no sides", [ 5 ] is a more recent non-sectarian movement that attempts to preserve and understand all the different traditions. The predominant spiritual tradition in Tibet before the introduction of Buddhism was Bon , which has been strongly influenced by Tibetan Buddhism (particularly the Nyingma school). While each of the four major schools is independent and has its own monastic institutions and leaders, they are closely related and intersect with common contact and dialogue.

Nomenclature [ edit ] The native Tibetan term for Buddhism is "The Dharma of the insiders" ( nang chos ) or "The Buddha Dharma of the insiders" ( nang pa sangs rgyas pa'i chos ).

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] "Insider" means someone who seeks the truth not outside but within the nature of mind. This is contrasted with other forms of organized religion, which are termed chos lugs (dharma system) .

For example, Christianity is termed Yi shu'i chos lugs (Jesus dharma system) .

[ 7 ] Westerners unfamiliar with Tibetan Buddhism initially turned to China for understanding. In Chinese, the term used is Lamaism (literally, "doctrine of the lamas": 喇嘛教 lama jiao ) to distinguish it from a then-traditional Chinese Buddhism ( 佛教 fo jiao ). The term was taken up by western scholars, including Hegel , as early as 1822.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Insofar as it implies a discontinuity between Indian and Tibetan Buddhism, the term has been discredited.

[ 10 ] Another term, " Vajrayāna " (Tibetan: dorje tegpa ) is occasionally misused for Tibetan Buddhism. More accurately, Vajrayāna signifies a certain subset of practices and traditions that are not only part of Tibetan Buddhism but also prominent in other Buddhist traditions such as Chinese Esoteric Buddhism [ 11 ] and Shingon in Japan .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] In the west, the term "Indo-Tibetan Buddhism" has become current in acknowledgement of its derivation from the latest stages of Buddhist development in northern India.

[ 14 ] " Northern Buddhism " is sometimes used to refer to Indo-Tibetan Buddhism, for example, in the Brill Dictionary of Religion.

Another term, "Himalayan" Buddhism is sometimes used to indicate how this form of Buddhism is practiced not just in Tibet but throughout the Himalayan Regions .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] The Provisional Government of Russia, by a decree of 7 July 1917, prohibited the appellation of Buryat and Kalmyk Buddhists as "Lamaists" in official papers. After the October revolution the term "Buddho-Lamaism" was used for some time by the Bolsheviks with reference to Tibetan Buddhism, before they finally reverted, in the early 1920s, to a more familiar term "Lamaism", which remains in official and scholarly usage in Russia to this day.

[ 17 ] History [ edit ] Main article: History of Tibetan Buddhism Pre–6th century [ edit ] Centuries after Buddhism originated in India , the Mahayana Buddhism arrived in China through the Silk Route in 1st century CE via Tibet .

[ 18 ] During the 3rd century CE, Buddhism began to spread into the Tibetan region, and its teachings affected the Bon religion in the Kingdom of Zhangzhung .

[ 19 ] First dissemination (7th–9th centuries) [ edit ] Main article: Tibetan Empire Map of the Tibetan Empire at its greatest extent between the 780s and the 790s CE Samye was the first gompa (Buddhist monastery) built in Tibet (775–779).

While some stories depict Buddhism in Tibet before this period, the religion was formally introduced during the Tibetan Empire (7th–9th century CE).

Sanskrit Buddhist scriptures from India were first translated into Tibetan under the reign of the Tibetan king Songtsän Gampo (618–649 CE).

[ 20 ] This period also saw the development of the Tibetan writing system and classical Tibetan .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] In the 8th century, King Trisong Detsen (755–797 CE) established it as the official religion of the state [ 23 ] and commanded his army to wear robes and study Buddhism. Trisong Detsen invited Indian Buddhist scholars to his court, including Padmasambhāva (8th century CE) and Śāntarakṣita (725–788), who are considered the founders of Nyingma ( The Ancient Ones) , the oldest tradition of Tibetan Buddhism.

[ 24 ] Padmasambhava, who is considered by the Tibetans as Guru Rinpoche ("Precious Master"), is also credited with building the first monastery building named "Samye" around the late 8th century. According to some legend, it is noted that he pacified the Bon demons and made them the core protectors of Dharma.

[ 25 ] Modern historians also argue that Trisong Detsen and his followers adopted Buddhism as an act of international diplomacy, especially with the major power of those times such as China, India, and states in Central Asia that had strong Buddhist influence in their culture.

[ 26 ] Yeshe Tsogyal , the most important female in the Nyingma Vajrayana lineage, was a member of Trisong Detsen's court and became Padmasambhava's student before gaining enlightenment. Trisong Detsen also invited the Chan master Moheyan [ b ] to transmit the Dharma at Samye Monastery . Some sources state that a debate ensued between Moheyan and the Indian master Kamalaśīla , without consensus on the victor, and some scholars consider the event to be fictitious.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ c ] [ d ] Era of fragmentation (9th–10th centuries) [ edit ] A reversal in Buddhist influence began under King Langdarma (r. 836–842), and his death was followed by the so-called Era of Fragmentation , a period of disunity during the 9th and 10th centuries. During this era, the political centralization of the earlier Tibetan Empire collapsed and civil wars ensued.

[ 31 ] In spite of this loss of state power and patronage however, Buddhism survived and thrived in Tibet. According to Geoffrey Samuel this was because "Tantric (Vajrayana) Buddhism came to provide the principal set of techniques by which Tibetans dealt with the dangerous powers of the spirit world [...] Buddhism, in the form of Vajrayana ritual, provided a critical set of techniques for dealing with everyday life. Tibetans came to see these techniques as vital for their survival and prosperity in this life." [ 32 ] This includes dealing with the local gods and spirits ( sadak and shipdak), which became a specialty of some Tibetan Buddhist lamas and ngagpas ( mantrikas , mantra specialists).

[ 33 ] Second dissemination (10th–12th centuries) [ edit ] The Indian master Atiśa The Tibetan householder and translator Marpa (1012–1097) The late 10th and 11th centuries saw a revival of Buddhism in Tibet with the founding of "New Translation" ( Sarma ) lineages as well as the appearance of " hidden treasures " ( terma ) literature which reshaped the Nyingma tradition.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] In 1042 the Bengali saint, Atiśa (982–1054) arrived in Tibet at the invitation of a west Tibetan king and further aided dissemination of Buddhist values in Tibetan culture and in consequential affairs of state.

His erudition supported the translation of major Buddhist texts, which evolved into the canons of Bka'-'gyur (Translation of the Buddha Word) and Bstan-'gyur (Translation of Teachings). The Bka'-'gyur has six main categories: (1) Tantra , (2) Prajñāpāramitā , (3) Ratnakūṭa Sūtra , (4) Avataṃsaka Sūtra , (5) Other sutras, and (6) Vinaya . The Bstan-'gyur comprises 3,626 texts and 224 volumes on such things as hymns, commentaries and supplementary tantric material.

Atiśa's chief disciple, Dromtön founded the Kadampa school of Tibetan Buddhism, one of the first Sarma schools.

[ 36 ] The Sakya ( Grey Earth ) school, was founded by Khön Könchok Gyelpo (1034–1102), a disciple of the great scholar , Drogmi Shākya. It is headed by the Sakya Trizin , and traces its lineage to the mahasiddha Virūpa .

[ 24 ] Other influential Indian teachers include Tilopa (988–1069) and his student Nāropā (probably died ca. 1040). Their teachings, via their student Marpa , are the foundations of the Kagyu ( Oral lineage ) tradition , which focuses on the practices of Mahāmudrā and the Six Dharmas of Nāropā . One of the most famous Kagyu figures was the hermit Milarepa , an 11th-century mystic. The Dagpo Kagyu was founded by the monk Gampopa who merged Marpa's lineage teachings with the monastic Kadam tradition.

[ 24 ] All the sub-schools of the Kagyu tradition of Tibetan Buddhism surviving today, including the Drikung Kagyu, the Drukpa Kagyu and the Karma Kagyu, are branches of the Dagpo Kagyu. The Karma Kagyu school is the largest of the Kagyu sub-schools and is headed by the Karmapa .

[ 37 ] Mongol dominance (13th–14th centuries) [ edit ] Main article: Tibet under Yuan rule Tibetan Buddhism exerted a strong influence from the 11th century CE among the peoples of Inner Asia , especially the Mongols , and Tibetan and Mongolian Buddhism influenced each other. This was done with the help of Kublai Khan and Mongolian theologians influenced by the Church of the East .

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] The Mongols invaded Tibet in 1240 and 1244.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] They eventually annexed Amdo and Kham and appointed the great scholar and abbot Sakya Pandita (1182–1251) as Viceroy of Central Tibet in 1249.

[ 45 ] In this way, Tibet was incorporated into the Mongol Empire , with the Sakya hierarchy retaining nominal power over religious and regional political affairs, while the Mongols retained structural and administrative [ 46 ] rule over the region, reinforced by the rare military intervention. Tibetan Buddhism was adopted as the de facto state religion by the Mongol Yuan dynasty (1271–1368) of Kublai Khan .

[ 47 ] It was also during this period that the Tibetan Buddhist canon was compiled, primarily led by the efforts of the scholar Butön Rinchen Drup (1290–1364). A part of this project included the carving of the canon into wood blocks for printing , and the first copies of these texts were kept at Narthang monastery .

[ 48 ] Tibetan Buddhism in China was also syncretized with Chinese Buddhism and Chinese folk religion .

[ 49 ] From family rule to Ganden Phodrang government (14th–18th centuries) [ edit ] The Potala Palace in Lhasa, chief residence and political center of the Dalai Lamas .

With the decline and end of the Mongol Yuan dynasty, Tibet regained independence and was ruled by successive local families from the 14th to the 17th century.

[ 50 ] Jangchub Gyaltsän (1302–1364) became the strongest political family in the mid 14th century.

[ 51 ] During this period the reformist scholar Je Tsongkhapa (1357–1419) founded the Gelug school which would have a decisive influence on Tibet's history. The Ganden Tripa is the nominal head of the Gelug school, though its most influential figure is the Dalai Lama. The Ganden Tripa is an appointed office and not a reincarnation lineage. The position can be held by an individual for seven years and this has led to more Ganden Tripas than Dalai Lamas.

[ 52 ] Internal strife within the Phagmodrupa dynasty , and the strong localism of the various fiefs and political-religious factions, led to a long series of internal conflicts. The minister family Rinpungpa , based in Tsang (West Central Tibet), dominated politics after 1435.

[ 53 ] In 1565, the Rinpungpa family was overthrown by the Tsangpa Dynasty of Shigatse , which expanded its power in different directions of Tibet in the following decades and favoured the Karma Kagyu sect. They would play a pivotal role in the events which led to the rise of power of the Dalai Lama's in the 1640s.

[ citation needed ] See also: Ming–Tibet relations In China, Tibetan Buddhism continued to be patronized by the elites of the Ming Dynasty. According to David M. Robinson , during this era, Tibetan Buddhist monks "conducted court rituals, enjoyed privileged status and gained access to the jealously guarded, private world of the emperors".

[ 54 ] The Ming Yongle Emperor (r. 1402–1424) promoted the carving of printing blocks for the Kangyur , now known as "the Yongle Kanjur", and seen as an important edition of the collection.

[ 55 ] The Ming Dynasty also supported the propagation of Tibetan Buddhism in Mongolia during this period. Tibetan Buddhist missionaries also helped spread the religion in Mongolia. It was during this era that Altan Khan the leader of the Tümed Mongols, converted to Buddhism, and allied with the Gelug school, conferring the title of Dalai Lama to Sonam Gyatso in 1578.

[ 56 ] During a Tibetan civil war in the 17th century, Sonam Choephel (1595–1657 CE), the chief regent of the 5th Dalai Lama , conquered and unified Tibet to establish the Ganden Phodrang government with the help of the Güshi Khan of the Khoshut Mongols . The Ganden Phodrang and the successive Gelug tulku lineages of the Dalai Lamas and Panchen Lamas maintained regional control of Tibet from the mid-17th to mid-20th centuries.

[ 57 ] Qing rule (18th–20th centuries) [ edit ] Yonghe Temple , a temple of the Gelug tradition in Beijing established in the Qing Dynasty.

The Qing dynasty (1644–1912) established a Chinese rule over Tibet after a Qing expeditionary force defeated the Dzungars (who controlled Tibet) in 1720, and lasted until the fall of the Qing dynasty in 1912.

[ 58 ] The Manchu rulers of the Qing dynasty supported Tibetan Buddhism, especially the Gelug sect, during most of their rule.

[ 47 ] The reign of the Qianlong Emperor (respected as the Emperor Manjushri ) was the high mark for this promotion of Tibetan Buddhism in China, with the visit of the 6th Panchen Lama to Beijing, and the building of temples in the Tibetan style, such as Xumi Fushou Temple , the Puning Temple and Putuo Zongcheng Temple (modeled after the potala palace).

[ 59 ] This period also saw the rise of the Rimé movement , a 19th-century nonsectarian movement involving the Sakya , Kagyu and Nyingma schools of Tibetan Buddhism, along with some Bon scholars.

[ 60 ] Having seen how the Gelug institutions pushed the other traditions into the corners of Tibet's cultural life, scholars such as Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo (1820–1892) and Jamgön Kongtrül (1813–1899) compiled together the teachings of the Sakya , Kagyu and Nyingma , including many near-extinct teachings.

[ 61 ] Without Khyentse and Kongtrul's collecting and printing of rare works, the suppression of Buddhism by the Communists would have been much more final.

[ 62 ] The Rimé movement is responsible for a number of scriptural compilations, such as the Rinchen Terdzod and the Sheja Dzö .

[ 63 ] During the Qing, Tibetan Buddhism also remained the major religion of the Mongols under Qing rule (1635–1912), as well as the state religion of the Kalmyk Khanate (1630–1771), the Dzungar Khanate (1634–1758) and the Khoshut Khanate (1642–1717).

[ citation needed ] 20th century [ edit ] Autochrome photo of Gandantegchinlen Monastery in 1913, Ulaanbaatar , Mongolia In 1912, following the fall of the Qing Dynasty, Tibet became de facto independent under the 13th Dalai Lama government based in Lhasa , maintaining the current territory of what is now called the Tibetan Autonomous Region .

[ 64 ] During the Republic of China (1912–1949) , the "Chinese Tantric Buddhist Revival Movement" ( Chinese : 密教復興運動 ) took place, and important figures such as Nenghai ( 能海喇嘛 , 1886–1967) and Master Fazun ( 法尊 , 1902–1980) promoted Tibetan Buddhism and translated Tibetan works into Chinese.

[ 65 ] This movement was severely damaged during the Cultural Revolution , however.

[ citation needed ] After the Battle of Chamdo , Tibet was annexed by China in 1950. In 1959 the 14th Dalai Lama and a great number of clergy and citizenry fled the country, to settle in India and other neighbouring countries. The events of the Cultural Revolution (1966–76) saw religion as one of the main political targets of the Chinese Communist Party , and most of the several thousand temples and monasteries in Tibet were destroyed, with many monks and lamas imprisoned.

[ 66 ] During this time, private religious expression, as well as Tibetan cultural traditions, were suppressed. Much of the Tibetan textual heritage and institutions were destroyed, and monks and nuns were forced to disrobe.

[ 67 ] Outside of Tibet, however, there has been a renewed interest in Tibetan Buddhism in places such as Nepal and Bhutan.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] Meanwhile, the spread of Tibetan Buddhism in the Western world was accomplished by many of the refugee Tibetan Lamas who escaped Tibet, [ 66 ] such as Akong Rinpoche and Chögyam Trungpa who in 1967 were founders of Kagyu Samye Ling the first Tibetan Buddhist Centre to be established in the West.

[ 73 ] After the liberalization policies in China during the 1980s, the religion began to recover with some temples and monasteries being reconstructed.

[ 74 ] Tibetan Buddhism is now an influential religion in China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and overseas Chinese communities.

[ 74 ] However, the Chinese government retains strict control over Tibetan Buddhist Institutions in the PRC . Quotas on the number of monks and nuns are maintained, and their activities are closely supervised.

[ 75 ] Within the Tibetan Autonomous Region, violence against Buddhists has been escalating since 2008.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] Widespread reports document the arrests and disappearances [ 78 ] of nuns and monks, while the Chinese government classifies religious practices as "gang crime".

[ 79 ] Reports include the demolition of monasteries, forced disrobing, forced reeducation, and detentions of nuns and monks, especially those residing at Yarchen Gar 's center, the most highly publicized.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] 21st century [ edit ] The 14th Dalai Lama meeting with U.S. President Barack Obama in 2016. Due to his widespread popularity, the Dalai Lama has become the modern international face of Tibetan Buddhism.

[ 82 ] Today, Tibetan Buddhism is adhered to widely in the Tibetan Plateau , Mongolia , northern Nepal , Kalmykia (on the north-west shore of the Caspian), Siberia ( Tuva and Buryatia ), the Russian Far East and northeast China. It is the state religion of Bhutan .

[ 83 ] The Indian regions of Sikkim and Ladakh , both formerly independent kingdoms, are also home to significant Tibetan Buddhist populations, as are the Indian states of Himachal Pradesh (which includes Dharamshala and the district of Lahaul-Spiti), West Bengal (the hill stations of Darjeeling and Kalimpong ) and Arunachal Pradesh . Religious communities, refugee centers and monasteries have also been established in South India .

[ 84 ] The 14th Dalai Lama is the leader of the Tibetan government in exile which was initially dominated by the Gelug school, however, according to Geoffrey Samuel: The Dharamsala administration under the Dalai Lama has nevertheless managed, over time, to create a relatively inclusive and democratic structure that has received broad support across the Tibetan communities in exile. Senior figures from the three non-Gelukpa Buddhist schools and from the Bonpo have been included in the religious administration, and relations between the different lamas and schools are now on the whole very positive. This is a considerable achievement, since the relations between these groups were often competitive and conflict-ridden in Tibet before 1959, and mutual distrust was initially widespread. The Dalai Lama's government at Dharamsala has also continued under difficult circumstances to argue for a negotiated settlement rather than armed struggle with China.

[ 84 ] Kagyu-Dzong Buddhist center in Paris .

In the wake of the Tibetan diaspora , Tibetan Buddhism has also gained adherents in the West and throughout the world. Tibetan Buddhist monasteries and centers were first established in Europe and North America in the 1960s, and most are now supported by non-Tibetan followers of Tibetan lamas. Some of these westerners went on to learn Tibetan, undertake extensive training in the traditional practices and have been recognized as lamas.

[ 85 ] Fully ordained Tibetan Buddhist Monks have also entered Western societies in other ways, such as working academia.

[ 86 ] Samuel sees the character of Tibetan Buddhism in the West as ...that of a national or international network, generally centred around the teachings of a single individual lama. Among the larger ones are the FPMT, which I have already mentioned, now headed by Lama Zopa and the child-reincarnation of Lama Yeshe ; the New Kadampa, in origin a break-away from the FPMT ; the Shambhala Buddhist network , deriving from Chögyam Trungpa 's organization and now headed by his son; and the networks associated with Namkhai Norbu Rinpoche (the Dzogchen Community) and Sogyal Rinpoche (Rigpa).

[ 87 ] Teachings [ edit ] Part of a series on Mahāyāna Buddhism Teachings Bodhisattva Buddhahood Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Skillful Means Transcendent Wisdom Transcendent Virtues Emptiness Two truths Consciousness-only Three bodies Three vehicles Non-abiding Nirvana One Vehicle Bodhisattva Precepts Bodhisattva vow Bodhisattva stages Pure Lands Luminous mind Dharani Three Turnings Buddhas and Bodhisattvas Shakyamuni Amitabha Adi-Buddha Akshobhya Prajñāpāramitā Devī Bhaiṣajyaguru Vairocana Mañjuśrī Avalokiteśvara Vajrapāṇi Vajrasattva Maitreya Kṣitigarbha Ākāśagarbha Samantabhadra Tara Wrathful deities Mahayana sutras Prajñāpāramitā sūtras Lotus Sūtra Buddhāvataṃsaka Sūtra Mahāratnakūṭa Sūtra Mahāsaṃnipāta Sūtra Vimalakirtinirdeśa Pure Land Sutras Lalitavistara Sūtra Samādhirāja Sūtra Saṃdhinirmocana Sūtra Tathāgatagarbha sūtras Śrīmālādevī Sūtra Mahāparinirvāṇa Sūtra Śūraṅgama Samādhi Sūtra Laṅkāvatāra Sūtra Ghanavyūha sūtra Golden Light Sutra Tathāgataguhyaka Sūtra Kāraṇḍavyūha Sūtra Main traditions Mādhyamaka Yogācāra Tiantai Tendai Huayan Zen (Chan) Shingon Pure Land Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Nichiren Trúc Lâm Vajrayāna Newar Buddhism Tibetan Buddhism Dzogchen Bon Shugendō Humanistic Buddhism Key figures Nāgārjuna Aśvaghoṣa Āryadeva Lokakṣema Kumārajīva Asanga Vasubandhu Sthiramati Buddhapālita Dignāga Bhāvaviveka Dharmakīrti Candrakīrti Sengzhao Jizang Zhiyi Shandao Bodhidharma Huineng Xuanzang Fazang Amoghavajra Zhanran Chengguan Zongmi Saichō Kūkai Shāntideva Shāntarakshita Wohnyo Mazu Daoyi Linji Siming Zhili Jinul Dahui Zonggao Hongzhi Zhengjue Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Śaṅkaranandana Virūpa Ratnākaraśānti Abhayākaragupta Nāropā Atisha Sakya Pandita Dolpopa Rangjung Dorje Tsongkhapa Longchenpa Hakuin Hanshan Ouyi Zhuhong Taixu D. T. Suzuki Sheng-yen 14th Dalai Lama Thích Nhất Hạnh Regional traditions China Han Chinese Taiwan Japan Korea North Korea South Korea Vietnam Tibet Nepal Newar Bhutan Mongolia Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Malaysia Indonesia West v t e Tibetan Buddhism upholds classic Buddhist teachings such as the four noble truths (Tib.

pakpé denpa shyi ), anatman (not-self, bdag med ), the five aggregates ( phung po ) karma and rebirth , and dependent arising ( rten cing ’brel bar ’byung ba ).

[ 88 ] They also uphold various other Buddhist doctrines associated with Mahāyāna Buddhism ( theg pa chen po ) as well as the tantric Vajrayāna tradition.

[ 89 ] Buddhahood and Bodhisattvas [ edit ] Samantabhadra , surrounded by numerous peaceful and fierce deities .

The eleven faced and thousand armed form of the bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara .

The Mahāyāna goal of spiritual development is to achieve the enlightenment of Buddhahood in order to help all other sentient beings attain this state.

[ 90 ] This motivation is called bodhicitta (mind of awakening)—an altruistic intention to become enlightened for the sake of all sentient beings.

[ 91 ] Bodhisattvas (Tib.

jangchup semba, literally "awakening hero") are revered beings who have conceived the will and vow to dedicate their lives with bodhicitta for the sake of all beings.

[ citation needed ] Widely revered Bodhisattvas in Tibetan Buddhism include Avalokiteshvara , Manjushri , Vajrapani , and Tara . The most important Buddhas are the five Buddhas of the Vajradhatu mandala [ 92 ] as well as the Adi Buddha (first Buddha), called either Vajradhara or Samantabhadra.

[ citation needed ] Buddhahood is defined as a state free of the obstructions to liberation as well as those to omniscience ( sarvajñana ).

[ 93 ] When one is freed from all mental obscurations, [ 94 ] one is said to attain a state of continuous bliss mixed with a simultaneous cognition of emptiness , [ 95 ] the true nature of reality .

[ 96 ] In this state, all limitations on one's ability to help other living beings are removed.

[ 97 ] Tibetan Buddhism teaches methods for achieving Buddhahood more quickly (known as the Vajrayāna path).

[ 98 ] It is said that there are countless beings who have attained Buddhahood.

[ 99 ] Buddhas spontaneously, naturally and continuously perform activities to benefit all sentient beings.

[ 100 ] However it is believed that one's karma could limit the ability of the Buddhas to help them. Thus, although Buddhas possess no limitation from their side on their ability to help others, sentient beings continue to experience suffering as a result of the limitations of their own former negative actions.

[ 101 ] An important schema which is used in understanding the nature of Buddhahood in Tibetan Buddhism is the Trikaya (Three bodies) doctrine.

[ 102 ] The Bodhisattva path [ edit ] A central schema for spiritual advancement used in Tibetan Buddhism is that of the five paths (Skt.

pañcamārga ; Tib.

lam nga ) which are: [ 103 ] The path of accumulation – in which one collects wisdom and merit, generates bodhicitta , cultivates the four foundations of mindfulness and right effort (the "four abandonments") .

The path of preparation – Is attained when one reaches the union of calm abiding and higher insight meditations (see below) and one becomes familiar with emptiness .

The path of seeing – one perceives emptiness directly, all thoughts of subject and object are overcome, one becomes an arya .

The path of meditation – one removes subtler traces from one's mind and perfects one's understanding.

The path of no more learning – which culminates in Buddhahood.

The schema of the five paths is often elaborated and merged with the concept of the bhumis or the bodhisattva levels.

[ citation needed ] Lamrim [ edit ] Main article: Lamrim Lamrim ("stages of the path") is a Tibetan Buddhist schema for presenting the stages of spiritual practice leading to liberation . In Tibetan Buddhist history there have been many different versions of lamrim , presented by different teachers of the Nyingma, Kagyu and Gelug schools (the Sakya school uses a different system named Lamdre ).

[ 104 ] However, all versions of the lamrim are elaborations of Atiśa 's 11th-century root text A Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment ( Bodhipathapradīpa ).

[ 105 ] Atisha's lamrim system generally divides practitioners into those of lesser , middling and superior scopes or attitudes: The lesser person is to focus on the preciousness of human birth as well as contemplation of death and impermanence.

The middling person is taught to contemplate karma , dukkha (suffering) and the benefits of liberation and refuge.

The superior scope is said to encompass the four Brahmaviharas , the bodhisattva vow, the six paramitas as well as Tantric practices.

[ 106 ] Although lamrim texts cover much the same subject areas, subjects within them may be arranged in different ways and with different emphasis depending on the school and tradition it belongs to.

Gampopa and Tsongkhapa expanded the short root-text of Atiśa into an extensive system to understand the entire Buddhist philosophy. In this way, subjects like karma , rebirth , Buddhist cosmology and the practice of meditation are gradually explained in logical order.

[ citation needed ] Vajrayāna [ edit ] A depiction of the tantric figures Hevajra and Nairātmyā , Tibet, 18th century Tibetan Buddhism incorporates Vajrayāna ( Vajra vehicle ), "Secret Mantra" (Skt.

Guhyamantra ) or Buddhist Tantra , which is espoused in the texts known as the Buddhist Tantras (dating from around the 7th century CE onwards).

[ 107 ] Tantra (Tib.

rgyud , "continuum") generally refers to forms of religious practice which emphasize the use of unique ideas, visualizations, mantras, and other practices for inner transformation.

[ 107 ] The Vajrayana is seen by most Tibetan adherents as the fastest and most powerful vehicle for enlightenment because it contains many skillful means ( upaya ) and because it takes the effect ( Buddhahood itself, or Buddha nature ) as the path (and hence is sometimes known as the "effect vehicle", phalayana ).

[ 107 ] An important element of Tantric practice are tantric deities and their mandalas . These deities come in peaceful ( shiwa ) and fierce ( trowo ) forms .

[ 108 ] Tantric texts also generally affirm the use of sense pleasures and other defilements in Tantric ritual as a path to enlightenment, as opposed to non-Tantric Buddhism which affirms that one must renounce all sense pleasures.

[ 109 ] These practices are based on the theory of transformation which states that negative or sensual mental factors and physical actions can be cultivated and transformed in a ritual setting. As the Hevajra Tantra states: Those things by which evil men are bound, others turn into means and gain thereby release from the bonds of existence. By passion the world is bound, by passion too it is released, but by heretical Buddhists this practice of reversals is not known.

[ 110 ] Another element of the Tantras is their use of transgressive practices, such as drinking taboo substances such as alcohol or sexual yoga . While in many cases these transgressions were interpreted only symbolically, in other cases they are practiced literally.

[ 111 ] Philosophy [ edit ] A statue of one of the most important Buddhist philosophers for Tibetan Buddhist thought, Nagarjuna , at Samye Ling (Scotland) The Indian Buddhist Madhyamaka ("Middle Way" or "Centrism") philosophy, also called Śūnyavāda (the emptiness doctrine) is the dominant Buddhist philosophy in Tibetan Buddhism. In Madhyamaka, the true nature of reality is referred to as Śūnyatā , which is the fact that all phenomena are empty of inherent existence or essence ( svabhava ). Madhyamaka is generally seen as the highest philosophical view by most Tibetan philosophers, but it is interpreted in numerous different ways.

[ citation needed ] The other main Mahayana philosophical school, Yogācāra has also been very influential in Tibetan Buddhism, but there is more disagreement among the various schools and philosophers regarding its status. While the Gelug school generally sees Yogācāra views as either false or provisional (i.e. only pertaining to conventional truth), philosophers in the other three main schools, such as Ju Mipham and Sakya Chokden , hold that Yogācāra ideas are as important as Madhyamaka views.

[ 112 ] In Tibetan Buddhist scholasticism, Buddhist philosophy is traditionally propounded according to a hierarchical classification of four classical Indian philosophical schools, known as the "four tenets" (Tib.

drubta shyi , Sanskrit: siddhānta ).

[ 113 ] While the classical tenets-system is limited to four tenets (Vaibhāṣika, Sautrāntika, Yogācāra, and Madhyamaka), there are further sub-classifications within these different tenets (see below).

[ 114 ] This classification does not include Theravada , the only surviving of the 18 classical schools of Buddhism . It also does not include other Indian Buddhist schools, such as Mahasamghika and Pudgalavada .

[ citation needed ] Two tenets belong to the path referred to as the Hinayana ("lesser vehicle") or Sravakayana ("the disciples' vehicle"), and are both related to the north Indian Sarvastivada tradition: [ 115 ] Vaibhāṣika ( Wylie : bye brag smra ba ). The primary source for the Vaibhāṣika in Tibetan Buddhism is the Abhidharma-kośa of Vasubandhu and its commentaries. This Abhidharma system affirms an atomistic view of reality which states ultimate reality is made up of a series of impermanent phenomena called dharmas . It also defends eternalism regarding the philosophy of time , as well the view that perception directly experiences external objects.

[ 116 ] Sautrāntika ( Wylie : mdo sde pa ). The main sources for this view is the Abhidharmakośa , as well as the work of Dignāga and Dharmakīrti . As opposed to Vaibhāṣika, this view holds that only the present moment exists ( presentism ), as well as the view that we do not directly perceive the external world only the mental images caused by objects and our sense faculties.

[ 116 ] The other two tenets are the two major Indian Mahayana philosophies: Yogācāra , also called Vijñānavāda (the doctrine of consciousness) and Cittamātra ("Mind-Only", Wylie : sems-tsam-pa ). Yogacārins base their views on texts from Maitreya , Asaṅga and Vasubandhu . Yogacara is often interpreted as a form of Idealism due to its main doctrine, the view that only ideas or mental images exist ( vijñapti-mātra ).

[ 116 ] Some Tibetan philosophers interpret Yogācāra as the view that the mind ( citta ) exists in an ultimate sense, because of this, it is often seen as inferior to Madhyamaka. However, other Tibetan thinkers deny that the Indian Yogacāra masters held the view of the ultimate existence of the mind, and thus, they place Yogācāra on a level comparable to Madhyamaka. This perspective is common in the Nyingma school, as well as in the work of the Third Karmapa , the Seventh Karmapa and Jamgon Kongtrul .

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] Madhyamaka ( Wylie : dbu-ma-pa ) – The philosophy of Nāgārjuna and Āryadeva , which affirms that everything is empty of essence ( svabhava ) and is ultimately beyond concepts.

[ 116 ] There are various further classifications, sub-schools and interpretations of Madhymaka in Tibetan Buddhism and numerous debates about various key disagreements remain a part of Tibetan Buddhist scholasticism today. One of the key debates is that between the rangtong (self-empty) interpretation and the shentong (other empty) interpretation .

[ 119 ] Another major disagreement is the debate on the Svātantrika Madhyamaka method and the Prasaṅgika method.

[ 120 ] There are further disagreements regarding just how useful an intellectual understanding of emptiness can be and whether emptiness should only be described as an absolute negation (the view of Tsongkhapa ).

[ 121 ] Monks debating at Sera monastery , Tibet, 2013. Debate is seen as an important practice in Tibetan Buddhist education.

The tenet systems are used in monasteries and colleges to teach Buddhist philosophy in a systematic and progressive fashion, each philosophical view being seen as more subtle than its predecessor. Therefore, the four tenets can be seen as a gradual path from a rather easy-to-grasp, "realistic" philosophical point of view, to more and more complex and subtle views on the ultimate nature of reality, culminating in the philosophy of the Mādhyamikas, which is widely believed to present the most sophisticated point of view.

[ 122 ] Non-Tibetan scholars point out that historically, Madhyamaka predates Yogacara, however.

[ 123 ] Texts and study [ edit ] Main article: Tibetan Buddhist canon A leaf from a Prajñāpāramitā (Perfection of Wisdom) manuscript.

Study of major Buddhist Indian texts is central to the monastic curriculum in all four major schools of Tibetan Buddhism.

Memorization of classic texts as well as other ritual texts is expected as part of traditional monastic education. Another important part of higher religious education is the practice of formalized debate.

[ 124 ] The canon was mostly finalized in the 13th century, and divided into two parts, the Kangyur (containing sutras and tantras) and the Tengyur (containing shastras and commentaries). The Nyingma school also maintains a separate collection of texts called the Nyingma Gyubum , assembled by Ratna Lingpa in the 15th century and revised by Jigme Lingpa .

[ 125 ] Among Tibetans, the main language of study is classical Tibetan , however, the Tibetan Buddhist canon was also translated into other languages, such as Mongolian and Manchu .

[ 126 ] During the Yuan, Ming, and Qing dynasties, many texts from the Tibetan canon were also translated into Chinese.

[ 127 ] Numerous texts have also recently been translated into Western languages by Western academics and Buddhist practitioners.

[ 128 ] Sutras [ edit ] Buddhist monk Geshe Konchog Wangdu reads Mahayana sutras from an old woodblock copy of the Tibetan Kangyur . He is seated at a special sutra stool, wearing the traditional woolen Ladakhi hat and robe, allowed by Vinaya for extremely cold conditions.

Among the most widely studied sutras in Tibetan Buddhism are Mahāyāna sutras such as the Perfection of Wisdom or Prajñāpāramitā sutras, [ 129 ] and others such as the Saṃdhinirmocana-sūtra , and the Samādhirāja Sūtra .

[ 130 ] According to Tsongkhapa , the two authoritative systems of Mahayana Philosophy (viz. that of Asaṅga – Yogacara and that of Nāgārjuna – Madhyamaka) are based on specific Mahāyāna sūtras: the Saṃdhinirmocana Sūtra and the Questions of Akṣayamati ( Akṣayamatinirdeśa Sūtra ) respectively. Furthermore, according to Thupten Jinpa , for Tsongkhapa, "at the heart of these two hermeneutical systems lies their interpretations of the Perfection of Wisdom sūtras, the archetypal example being the Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines ." [ 131 ] Treatises of the Indian masters [ edit ] The study of Indian Buddhist treatises called shastras is central to Tibetan Buddhist scholasticism . Some of the most important works are those by the six great Indian Mahayana authors which are known as the Six Ornaments and Two Supreme Ones (Tib.

gyen druk chok nyi , Wyl.

rgyan drug mchog gnyis ), the six being: Nagarjuna, Aryadeva, Asanga, Vasubandhu, Dignaga, and Dharmakirti and the two being: Gunaprabha and Shakyaprabha (or Nagarjuna and Asanga depending on the tradition).

[ 132 ] Since the late 11th century, traditional Tibetan monastic colleges generally organized the exoteric study of Buddhism into "five great textual traditions" ( zhungchen-nga ).

[ 133 ] Abhidharma Asanga 's Abhidharma-samuccaya Vasubandhu 's Abhidharma-kośa Prajnaparamita Abhisamayalankara Shantideva 's Bodhisattvacaryāvatāra Madhyamaka Nagarjuna 's Mūlamadhyamakakārikā Aryadeva 's Four Hundred Verses ( Catuhsataka ) Candrakīrti 's Madhyamakāvatāra Śāntarakṣita 's Madhyamākalaṃkāra Shantideva 's Bodhisattvacaryāvatāra Pramana Dharmakirti 's Pramāṇavarttika Dignāga 's Pramāṇa-samuccaya Vinaya Gunaprabha's Vinayamula Sutra Other important texts [ edit ] Also of great importance are the " Five Treatises of Maitreya " including the influential Ratnagotravibhāga , a compendium of the tathāgatagarbha literature , and the Mahayanasutralankara , a text on the Mahayana path from the Yogacara perspective, which are often attributed to Asanga . Practiced focused texts such as the Yogācārabhūmi-Śāstra and Kamalaśīla 's Bhāvanākrama are the major sources for meditation.

[ citation needed ] While the Indian texts are often central, original material by key Tibetan scholars is also widely studied and collected into editions called sungbum .

[ 134 ] The commentaries and interpretations that are used to shed light on these texts differ according to tradition. The Gelug school for example, use the works of Tsongkhapa , while other schools may use the more recent work of Rimé movement scholars like Jamgon Kongtrul and Jamgon Ju Mipham Gyatso .

[ citation needed ] A corpus of extra-canonical scripture, the treasure texts ( terma ) literature is acknowledged by Nyingma practitioners, but the bulk of the canon that is not commentary was translated from Indian sources. True to its roots in the Pāla system of North India, however, Tibetan Buddhism carries on a tradition of eclectic accumulation and systematisation of diverse Buddhist elements, and pursues their synthesis. Prominent among these achievements have been the Stages of the Path and mind training literature, both stemming from teachings by the Indian scholar Atiśa .

[ citation needed ] Tantric literature [ edit ] Main articles: Tantras (Buddhism) and Classes of Tantra in Tibetan Buddhism In Tibetan Buddhism, the Buddhist Tantras are divided into four or six categories, with several sub-categories for the highest Tantras.

In the Nyingma, the division is into Outer Tantras ( Kriyayoga , Charyayoga , Yogatantra ); and Inner Tantras ( Mahayoga , Anuyoga , Atiyoga / Dzogchen ), which correspond to the "Anuttarayoga-tantra".

[ 135 ] For the Nyingma school, important tantras include the Guhyagarbha Tantra , the Guhyasamaja Tantra , [ 136 ] the Kulayarāja Tantra and the 17 Dzogchen Tantras .

In the Sarma schools, the division is: [ 137 ] Kriya-yoga – These have an emphasis on purification and ritual acts and include texts like the Mañjuśrīmūlakalpa .

Charya-yoga – Contain "a balance between external activities and internal practices", mainly referring to the Mahāvairocana Abhisaṃbodhi Tantra .

Yoga-tantra , is mainly concerned with internal yogic techniques and includes the Tattvasaṃgraha Tantra .

Anuttarayoga-tantra , contains more advanced techniques such as subtle body practices and is subdivided into: Father tantras, which emphasize illusory body and completion stage practices and includes the Guhyasamaja Tantra and Yamantaka Tantra .

Mother tantras, which emphasize the development stage and clear light mind and includes the Hevajra Tantra and Cakrasamvara Tantra .

Non-dual tantras, which balance the above elements, and mainly refers to the Kalacakra Tantra The root tantras themselves are almost unintelligible without the various Indian and Tibetan commentaries, therefore, they are never studied without the use of the tantric commentarial apparatus.

[ citation needed ] Transmission and realization [ edit ] There is a long history of oral transmission of teachings in Tibetan Buddhism. Oral transmissions by lineage holders traditionally can take place in small groups or mass gatherings of listeners and may last for seconds (in the case of a mantra , for example) or months (as in the case of a section of the Tibetan Buddhist canon ). It is held that a transmission can even occur without actually hearing, as in Asanga 's visions of Maitreya .

[ citation needed ] An emphasis on oral transmission as more important than the printed word derives from the earliest period of Indian Buddhism, when it allowed teachings to be kept from those who should not hear them.

[ 138 ] Hearing a teaching (transmission) readies the hearer for realization based on it. The person from whom one hears the teaching should have heard it as one link in a succession of listeners going back to the original speaker: the Buddha in the case of a sutra or the author in the case of a book. Then the hearing constitutes an authentic lineage of transmission. Authenticity of the oral lineage is a prerequisite for realization, hence the importance of lineages.

[ citation needed ] Practices [ edit ] See also: Tantra techniques (Vajrayana) In Tibetan Buddhism, practices are generally classified as either Sutra (or Pāramitāyāna ) or Tantra ( Vajrayāna or Mantrayāna ), though exactly what constitutes each category and what is included and excluded in each is a matter of debate and differs among the various lineages. According to Tsongkhapa for example, what separates Tantra from Sutra is the practice of Deity yoga.

[ 139 ] Furthermore, the adherents of the Nyingma school consider Dzogchen to be a separate and independent vehicle, which transcends both sutra and tantra.

[ 140 ] While it is generally held that the practices of Vajrayāna are not included in Sutrayāna, all Sutrayāna practices are common to Vajrayāna practice. Traditionally, Vajrayāna is held to be a more powerful and effective path, but potentially more difficult and dangerous and thus they should only be undertaken by the advanced who have established a solid basis in other practices.

[ 141 ] Pāramitā [ edit ] Main article: Pāramitā The pāramitās (perfections, transcendent virtues) is a key set of virtues which constitute the major practices of a bodhisattva in non-tantric Mahayana. They are: Dāna pāramitā : generosity, giving (Tibetan: སབྱིན་པ sbyin-pa ) Śīla pāramitā: virtue, morality, discipline, proper conduct (ཚུལ་ཁྲིམས tshul-khrims ) Kṣānti pāramitā : patience, tolerance, forbearance, acceptance, endurance (བཟོད་པ bzod-pa ) Vīrya pāramitā : energy, diligence, vigor, effort (བརྩོན་འགྲུས brtson-’grus ) Dhyāna pāramitā : one-pointed concentration, meditation, contemplation (བསམ་གཏན bsam-gtan ) Prajñā pāramitā : wisdom, knowledge (ཤེས་རབ shes-rab ) The practice of dāna (giving) while traditionally referring to offerings of food to the monastics can also refer to the ritual offering of bowls of water, incense, butter lamps and flowers to the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas on a shrine or household altar.

[ 142 ] Similar offerings are also given to other beings such as hungry ghosts, dakinis , protector deities, and local divinities.

Like other forms of Mahayana Buddhism, the practice of the five precepts and bodhisattva vows is part of Tibetan Buddhist moral ( sila ) practice. In addition to these, there are also numerous sets of Tantric vows, termed samaya , which are given as part of Tantric initiations.

Compassion ( karuṇā ) practices are also particularly important in Tibetan Buddhism. One of the foremost authoritative texts on the Bodhisattva path is the Bodhisattvacaryāvatāra by Shantideva . In the eighth section entitled Meditative Concentration , Shantideva describes meditation on Karunā as thus: Strive at first to meditate upon the sameness of yourself and others. In joy and sorrow all are equal; Thus be guardian of all, as of yourself. The hand and other limbs are many and distinct, But all are one—the body to kept and guarded. Likewise, different beings, in their joys and sorrows, are, like me, all one in wanting happiness. This pain of mine does not afflict or cause discomfort to another's body, and yet this pain is hard for me to bear because I cling and take it for my own. And other beings' pain I do not feel, and yet, because I take them for myself, their suffering is mine and therefore hard to bear. And therefore I'll dispel the pain of others, for it is simply pain, just like my own.  And others I will aid and benefit, for they are living beings, like my body. Since I and other beings both, in wanting happiness, are equal and alike, what difference is there to distinguish us, that I should strive to have my bliss alone?" [ 143 ] A popular compassion meditation in Tibetan Buddhism is tonglen (sending and taking love and suffering respectively). Practices associated with Chenrezig (Avalokiteshvara), also tend to focus on compassion.

Samatha and Vipaśyanā [ edit ] A Tibetan Buddhist Monk meditating using chanting and drumming.

The 14th Dalai Lama defines meditation ( bsgom pa ) as "familiarization of the mind with an object of meditation." [ 144 ] Traditionally, Tibetan Buddhism follows the two main approaches to meditation or mental cultivation ( bhavana ) taught in all forms of Buddhism, śamatha (Tib.

Shine ) and vipaśyanā ( lhaktong ).

The practice of śamatha (calm abiding) is one of focusing one's mind on a single object such as a Buddha figure or the breath. Through repeated practice one's mind gradually becomes more stable, calm and happy. It is defined by Takpo Tashi Namgyal as "fixing the mind upon any object so as to maintain it without distraction...focusing the mind on an object and maintaining it in that state until finally it is channeled into one stream of attention and evenness." [ 145 ] The nine mental abidings is the main progressive framework used for śamatha in Tibetan Buddhism.

[ 146 ] Once a meditator has reached the ninth level of this schema they achieve what is termed "pliancy" (Tib.

shin tu sbyangs pa , Skt.

prasrabdhi ), defined as "a serviceability of mind and body such that the mind can be set on a virtuous object of observation as long as one likes; it has the function of removing all obstructions." This is also said to be very joyful and blissful for the body and the mind.

[ 147 ] The other form of Buddhist meditation is vipaśyanā (clear seeing, higher insight), which in Tibetan Buddhism is generally practiced after having attained proficiency in śamatha .

[ 148 ] This is generally seen as having two aspects, one of which is analytic meditation , which is based on contemplating and thinking rationally about ideas and concepts. As part of this process, entertaining doubts and engaging in internal debate over them is encouraged in some traditions.

[ 149 ] The other type of vipaśyanā is a non-analytical, "simple" yogic style called trömeh in Tibetan, which means "without complication".

[ 150 ] A meditation routine may involve alternating sessions of vipaśyanā to achieve deeper levels of realization, and samatha to consolidate them.

[ 96 ] Preliminary practices [ edit ] See also: Ngöndro Buddhists performing prostrations in front of Jokhang Monastery .

Vajrayāna is believed by Tibetan Buddhists to be the fastest method for attaining Buddhahood but for unqualified practitioners it can be dangerous.

[ 151 ] To engage in it one must receive an appropriate initiation (also known as an "empowerment") from a lama who is fully qualified to give it. The aim of preliminary practices ( ngöndro ) is to start the student on the correct path for such higher teachings.

[ 152 ] Just as Sutrayāna preceded Vajrayāna historically in India, so sutra practices constitute those that are preliminary to tantric ones.

Preliminary practices include all Sutrayāna activities that yield merit like hearing teachings, prostrations, offerings, prayers and acts of kindness and compassion, but chief among the preliminary practices are realizations through meditation on the three principal stages of the path: renunciation, the altruistic bodhicitta wish to attain enlightenment and the wisdom realizing emptiness. For a person without the basis of these three in particular to practice Vajrayāna can be like a small child trying to ride an unbroken horse.

[ 153 ] The most widespread preliminary practices include: taking refuge , prostration , Vajrasattva meditation, mandala offerings and guru yoga .

[ 154 ] The merit acquired in the preliminary practices facilitates progress in Vajrayāna. While many Buddhists may spend a lifetime exclusively on sutra practices, an amalgam of the two to some degree is common. For example, in order to train in calm abiding , one might visualize a tantric deity.

Guru yoga [ edit ] Main article: Guru yoga See also: Guru § In Buddhism As in other Buddhist traditions, an attitude of reverence for the teacher, or guru, is also highly prized.

[ 155 ] At the beginning of a public teaching, a lama will do prostrations to the throne on which he will teach due to its symbolism, or to an image of the Buddha behind that throne, then students will do prostrations to the lama after he is seated. Merit accrues when one's interactions with the teacher are imbued with such reverence in the form of guru devotion, a code of practices governing them that derives from Indian sources.

[ 156 ] By such things as avoiding disturbance to the peace of mind of one's teacher, and wholeheartedly following his prescriptions, much merit accrues and this can significantly help improve one's practice.

There is a general sense in which any Tibetan Buddhist teacher is called a lama . A student may have taken teachings from many authorities and revere them all as lamas in this general sense. However, he will typically have one held in special esteem as his own root guru and is encouraged to view the other teachers who are less dear to him, however more exalted their status, as embodied in and subsumed by the root guru.

[ 157 ] One particular feature of the Tantric view of teacher student relationship is that in Tibetan Buddhist Tantra, one is instructed to regard one's guru as an awakened Buddha.

[ 158 ] Esotericism and vows [ edit ] The 14th Dalai Lama praying in the pavilion, closing the Kālacakra mandala and offering flowers, during a Kālacakra initiation in Washington, D.C.

, 2011.

In Vajrayāna particularly, Tibetan Buddhists subscribe to a voluntary code of self-censorship, whereby the uninitiated do not seek and are not provided with information about it. This self-censorship may be applied more or less strictly depending on circumstances such as the material involved. A depiction of a mandala may be less public than that of a deity. That of a higher tantric deity may be less public than that of a lower. The degree to which information on Vajrayāna is now public in western languages is controversial among Tibetan Buddhists.

Buddhism has always had a taste for esotericism since its earliest period in India.

[ 159 ] Tibetans today maintain greater or lesser degrees of confidentiality also with information on the vinaya and emptiness specifically. In Buddhist teachings generally, too, there is caution about revealing information to people who may be unready for it.

Practicing tantra also includes the maintaining of a separate set of vows, which are called Samaya (dam tshig) . There are various lists of these and they may differ depending on the practice and one's lineage or individual guru. Upholding these vows is said to be essential for tantric practice and breaking them is said to cause great harm.

[ 160 ] Ritual [ edit ] There has been a "close association" between the religious and the secular, the spiritual and the temporal [ 161 ] in Tibet. The term for this relationship is chos srid zung 'brel.

Traditionally Tibetan lamas have tended to the lay populace by helping them with issues such as protection and prosperity. Common traditions have been the various rites and rituals for mundane ends, such as purifying one's karma, avoiding harm from demonic forces and enemies, and promoting a successful harvest.

[ 162 ] Divination and exorcism are examples of practices a lama might use for this.

[ 163 ] Ritual musical instruments from Tibet; MIM Brussels.

Ritual is generally more elaborate than in other forms of Buddhism, with complex altar arrangements and works of art (such as mandalas and thangkas ), many ritual objects, hand gestures ( mudra ), chants, and musical instruments.

[ 109 ] The reading of the text – the 'lung' – during an empowerment for Chenrezig .

A special kind of ritual called an initiation or empowerment (Sanskrit: Abhiseka , Tibetan: Wangkur ) is central to Tantric practice. These rituals consecrate a practitioner into a particular Tantric practice associated with individual mandalas of deities and mantras. Without having gone through initiation, one is generally not allowed to practice the higher Tantras.

[ 164 ] Another important ritual occasion in Tibetan Buddhism is that of mortuary rituals which are supposed to assure that one has a positive rebirth and a good spiritual path in the future.

[ 165 ] Of central importance to Tibetan Buddhist Ars moriendi is the idea of the bardo (Sanskrit: antarābhava ), the intermediate or liminal state between life and death.

[ 165 ] Rituals and the readings of texts such as the Bardo Thodol are done to ensure that the dying person can navigate this intermediate state skillfully.

Cremation and sky burial are traditionally the main funeral rites used to dispose of the body.

[ 64 ] Mantra [ edit ] An elderly Tibetan woman with a prayer wheel inscribed with mantras Visualizing mantric syllables is a common form of meditation in Tibetan Buddhism.

The use of (mainly Sanskrit ) prayer formulas, incantations or phrases called mantras (Tibetan: sngags ) is another widespread feature of Tibetan Buddhist practice.

[ 158 ] So common is the use of mantras that Vajrayana is also sometimes called " Mantrayāna " (the mantra vehicle). Mantras are widely recited, chanted, written or inscribed, and visualized as part of different forms of meditation. Each mantra has symbolic meaning and will often have a connection to a particular Buddha or Bodhisattva.

[ 166 ] Each deity's mantra is seen as symbolizing the function, speech and power of the deity.

[ 167 ] Tibetan Buddhist practitioners repeat mantras like Om Mani Padme Hum in order to train the mind, and transform their thoughts in line with the divine qualities of the mantra's deity and special power.

[ 168 ] Tibetan Buddhists see the etymology of the term mantra as meaning "mind protector", and mantras is seen as a way to guard the mind against negativity.

[ 169 ] According to Lama Zopa Rinpoche : Mantras are effective because they help keep your mind quiet and peaceful,  automatically integrating it into one-pointedness.  They make your mind receptive to very subtle vibrations and thereby heighten your perception. Their recitation eradicates gross negativities and the true nature of things can then be reflected in your mind's resulting clarity. By practising a transcendental mantra, you can in fact purify all the defiled energy of your body, speech, and mind.

[ 170 ] Mantras also serve to focus the mind as a samatha (calming) practice as well as a way to transform the mind through the symbolic meaning of the mantra. In Buddhism, it is important to have the proper intention, focus and faith when practicing mantras, if one does not, they will not work. Unlike in Hinduism, mantras are not believed to have inherent power of their own, and thus without the proper faith, intention and mental focus, they are just mere sounds.

[ 171 ] Thus according to the Tibetan philosopher Jamgon Ju Mipham : if a mantra is thought to be something ordinary and not seen for what it is, it will not be able to perform its intended function. Mantras are like non-conceptual wish-fulfilling jewels. Infusing one's being with the blessings of mantra, like the form of a moon reflected on a body of water, necessitates the presence of faith and other conditions that set the stage for the spiritual attainments of mantra. Just as the moon's reflection cannot appear without water, mantras cannot function without the presence of faith and other such factors in one's being.

[ 172 ] Mantras are part of the highest tantric practices in Tibetan Buddhism, such as Deity Yoga and are recited and visualized during tantric sadhanas . Thus, Tsongkhapa says that mantra "protects the mind from ordinary appearances and conceptions".

[ 173 ] This is because in Tibetan Buddhist Tantric praxis, one must develop a sense that everything is divine.

Tantric sadhana and yoga [ edit ] See also: Deity yoga Chöd sadhana, showing the use of Damaru drum and hand-bell, as well as the Kangling (thighbone trumpet) A section of the Northern wall mural at the Lukhang Temple depicting completion stage practice In what is called higher yoga tantra the emphasis is on various spiritual practices, called yogas ( naljor ) and sadhanas ( druptap ) which allow the practitioner to realize the true nature of reality.

[ 111 ] Deity Yoga (Tibetan: lha'i rnal 'byor ; Sanskrit: Devata-yoga ) is a fundamental practice of Vajrayana Buddhism involving visualization of mental images consisting mainly of Buddhist deities such as Buddhas, Bodhisattvas and fierce deities , along mantra repetition. According to Geoffrey Samuel: If Buddhahood is a source of infinite potentiality accessible at any time, then the Tantric deities are in a sense partial aspects, refractions of that total potentiality. Visualizing one of these deities, or oneself identifying with one of them, is not, in Tibetan Tantric thought, a technique to worship an external entity. Rather, it is a way of accessing or tuning into something that is an intrinsic part of the structure of the universe—as of course is the practitioner him or herself.

[ 174 ] Deity yoga involves two stages, the generation stage ( utpattikrama ) and the completion stage ( nispannakrama ). In the generation stage, one dissolves the mundane world and visualizes one's chosen deity ( yidam ), its mandala and companion deities, resulting in identification with this divine reality.

[ 175 ] In the completion stage, one dissolves the visualization of and identification with the yidam in the realization ultimate reality. Completion stage practices can also include subtle body energy practices, [ 176 ] such as tummo (lit. "Fierce Woman", Skt.

caṇḍālī, inner fire), as well as other practices that can be found in systems such as the Six Yogas of Naropa (like Dream Yoga , Bardo Yoga and Phowa ) and the Six Vajra-yogas of Kalacakra .

Dzogchen and Mahamudra [ edit ] Another form of high level Tibetan Buddhist practice are the meditations associated with the traditions of Mahāmudrā ("Great Seal") and Dzogchen ("Great Perfection"). These traditions focus on direct experience of the very nature of reality, which is variously termed dharmakaya , buddha nature , or the "basis' ( gzhi ) . These techniques do not rely on deity yoga methods but on direct pointing-out instruction from a master and are often seen as the most advanced form of Buddhist practice.

[ 177 ] The instructions associated with these approaches to meditation and realization are collectively referred to as mind teachings since both provide practical guidance on the "recognition of the nature of mind." [ 178 ] The views and practices associated with Dzogchen and Mahāmudrā are also often seen as the culmination of the Buddhist path.

[ 179 ] In some traditions, they are seen as a separate vehicle to liberation. In the Nyingma school (as well as in Bon), Dzogchen is considered to be a separate and independent vehicle (also called Atiyoga), as well as the highest of all vehicles.

[ 180 ] Similarly, in Kagyu, Mahāmudrā is sometimes seen as a separate vehicle, the "Sahajayana" (Tibetan: lhen chig kye pa ), also known as the vehicle of self-liberation.

[ 181 ] Institutions and clergy [ edit ] Rangjung Rigpe Dorje , the 16th Karmapa , with Freda Bedi (the first Western nun in Tibetan Buddhism), at Rumtek Monastery , Sikkim A small gompa (religious building) in Ladakh Chagdud Tulku Rinpoche , a tulku and a ngagpa (note the white and red robes) Buddhist monasticism is an important part of the Tibetan Buddhist tradition, all the major and minor schools maintain large monastic institutions based on the Mulasarvastivada Vinaya (monastic rule) and many religious leaders come from the monastic community. That being said, there are also many religious leaders or teachers (called Lamas and Gurus ) which are not celibate monastics . According to Geoffrey Samuel this is where "religious leadership in Tibetan Buddhism contrasts most strongly with much of the rest of the Buddhist world." [ 182 ] According to Namkhai Norbu, in Tibet, Tibetan lamas had four main types of lifestyles: those who were monks, living in monasteries; those who lived a lay life, with their homes in villages; lay masters who lived as tent-dwelling nomads, travelling with their disciples, in some cases following their herds; and those who were yogis, often living in caves.

[ 183 ] Lamas are generally skilled and experienced tantric practitioners and ritual specialists in a specific initiation lineage and may be laypersons or monastics. They act not just as teachers, but as spiritual guides and guardians of the lineage teachings that they have received through a long and intimate process of apprenticeship with their Lamas.

[ 184 ] Tibetan Buddhism also includes a number of lay clergy and lay tantric specialists, such as Ngagpas (Skt.

mantrī ), Gomchens , Serkyims , and Chödpas (practitioners of Chöd ). According to Samuel, in the more remote parts of the Himalayas, communities were often led by lay religious specialists.

[ 185 ] Thus, while the large monastic institutions were present in the regions of the Tibetan plateau which were more centralized politically, in other regions they were absent and instead smaller gompas and more lay oriented communities prevailed.

[ 186 ] Samuel outlines four main types of religious communities in Tibet: [ 187 ] Small communities of lay practitioners attached to a temple and a lama. Lay practitioners might stay in the gompa for periodic retreats.

Small communities of celibate monastics attached to a temple and a lama, often part of a village.

Medium to large communities of celibate monastics. These could maintain several hundred monks and might have extensive land holdings, be financially independent, and sometimes also act as trading centers.

Large teaching monasteries with thousands of monks, such as the big Gelug establishments of Sera (with over 6000 monks in the first half of the 20th century) and Drepung (over 7000).

[ 188 ] In some cases a lama is the leader of a spiritual community. Some lamas gain their title through being part of particular family which maintains a lineage of hereditary lamas (and are thus often laypersons). One example is the Sakya family of Kon, who founded the Sakya school and another is the hereditary lamas of Mindrolling monastery .

[ 189 ] In other cases, lamas may be seen as tülkus ("incarnations"). Tülkus are figures which are recognized as reincarnations of a particular bodhisattva or a previous religious figure. They are often recognized from a young age through the use of divination and the use of the possessions of the deceased lama, and therefore are able to receive extensive training. They are sometimes groomed to become leaders of monastic institutions.

[ 190 ] Examples include the Dalai Lamas and the Karmapas , each of which are seen as key leaders in their respective traditions.

The system of incarnate lamas is popularly held to be a Tibetan alteration to Indian Buddhism.

Another title unique to Tibetan Buddhism is that of Tertön (treasure discoverer), who are considered capable of revealing or discovering special revelations or texts called Termas ( lit.

' hidden treasure ' ). They are also associated with the idea of beyul ("hidden valleys"), which are power places associated with deities and hidden religious treasures.

[ 191 ] Tibetan teachers, including the Dalai Lamas , occasionally consult oracles for advice.

Women in Tibetan Buddhism [ edit ] Further information: Women in Buddhism and Ordination of women in Buddhism Machig Labdrön , a famous female tantrika, teacher and founder of the Chöd lineage Painting of Ayu Khandro at Merigar West. The seat of Chogyal Namkhai Norbu and The Dzogchen Community in Italy Women in Tibetan society, though still unequal, tended to have a relatively greater autonomy and power than in surrounding societies. This might be because of the smaller household sizes and low population density in Tibet.

[ 192 ] Women traditionally took many roles in Tibetan Buddhism, from lay supporters, to monastics, lamas and tantric practitioners.

There is evidence for the importance of female practitioners in Indian Tantric Buddhism and pre-modern Tibetan Buddhism. At least one major lineage of tantric teachings, the Shangpa Kagyu , traces itself to Indian female teachers and there have been a series of important female Tibetan teachers, such as Yeshe Tsogyal and Machig Labdrön .

[ 193 ] It seems that even though it might have been more difficult for women to become serious tantric yoginis, it was still possible for them to find lamas that would teach them high tantric practices.

Some Tibetan women become lamas by being born in one of the hereditary lama families such as Mindrolling Jetsün Khandro Rinpoche and Sakya Jetsün Kushok Chimey Luding.

[ 194 ] There have also been cases of influential female lamas who were also tertöns, such as Sera Khandro , Tare Lhamo and Ayu Khandro .

Some of these figures were also tantric consorts ( sangyum, kandroma ) with male lamas, and thus took part in the sexual practices associated with the highest levels of tantric practice.

[ 195 ] Eastern nuns [ edit ] While monasticism is practiced there by women, it is much less common (2 percent of the population in the 20th century compared to 12 percent of men). Nuns were also much less respected by Tibetan society than monks and may receive less lay support than male monastics.

[ 196 ] Traditionally, Tibetan Buddhist nuns were also not "fully ordained" as bhikṣuṇīs (who take the full set of monastic vows in the Vinaya ). When Buddhism traveled from India to Tibet, apparently the quorum of bhikṣuṇīs required for bestowing full ordination never reached Tibet.

[ 197 ] [ e ] Despite an absence of ordination there, bhikṣuṇīs did travel to Tibet. A notable example was the Sri Lankan nun Candramālī , whose work with Śrījñāna ( Wylie : dpal ye shes ) resulted in the tantric text Śrīcandramāla Tantrarāja .

[ f ] [ 198 ] There are accounts of fully ordained Tibetan women, such as the Samding Dorje Phagmo (1422–1455), who was once ranked the highest female master and tulku in Tibet, but very little is known about the exact circumstances of their ordination.

[ 199 ] In the modern era, Tibetan Buddhist nuns have taken full ordinations through East Asian Vinaya lineages.

[ 200 ] The Dalai Lama has authorized followers of the Tibetan tradition to be ordained as nuns in traditions that have such ordination.

[ g ] The official lineage of Tibetan Buddhist bhikṣuṇīs recommenced on 23 June 2022 in Bhutan when 144 nuns, most of them Butanese, were fully ordained.

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] Western nuns and lamas [ edit ] Buddhist author Michaela Haas notes that Tibetan Buddhism is undergoing a sea change in the West, with women playing a much more central role.

[ 205 ] Freda Bedi [ h ] was a British woman who was the first Western woman to take ordination in Tibetan Buddhism, which occurred in 1966.

[ 206 ] Pema Chödrön was the first American woman to be ordained as a Buddhist nun in the Tibetan Buddhist tradition.

[ 207 ] [ 208 ] In 2010 the first Tibetan Buddhist nunnery in America, Vajra Dakini Nunnery in Vermont, was officially consecrated. It offers novice ordination and follows the Drikung Kagyu lineage of Buddhism. The abbot of the Vajra Dakini nunnery is Khenmo Drolma , an American woman, who is the first bhikṣuṇī in the Drikung lineage of Buddhism, having been ordained in Taiwan in 2002.

[ 209 ] [ 210 ] She is also the first westerner, male or female, to be installed as an abbot in the Drikung Kagyu lineage of Buddhism, having been installed as the abbot of the Vajra Dakini Nunnery in 2004.

[ 209 ] The Vajra Dakini Nunnery does not follow The Eight Garudhammas .

[ 211 ] In April 2011, the Institute for Buddhist Dialectical Studies (IBD) in Dharamsala, India, conferred the degree of geshe , a Tibetan Buddhist academic degree for monastics, on Kelsang Wangmo , a German nun, thus making her the world's first female geshe.

[ 212 ] [ 213 ] In 2013 Tibetan women were able to take the geshe exams for the first time.

[ 214 ] In 2016 twenty Tibetan Buddhist nuns became the first Tibetan women to earn geshe degrees.

[ 215 ] [ 216 ] Jetsunma Ahkon Lhamo gained international attention in the late 1980s as the first Western woman to be a Penor Rinpoche enthroned tulku within the Nyingma Palyul .

[ 217 ] Major lineages [ edit ] The Tibetan Rime (non-sectarian) scholar Jamgon Kongtrul , in his Treasury of Knowledge, outlines the "Eight Great Practice Lineages" which were transmitted to Tibet. His approach is not concerned with "schools" or sects, but rather focuses on the transmission of crucial meditation teachings. They are: [ 218 ] The Nyingma traditions, associated with the first transmission figures such as Shantarakshita , Padmasambhava and King Trisong Deutsen and with Dzogchen teachings.

The Kadam Lineage, associated with Atisha and his pupil Dromtön (1005–1064).

Lamdré , traced back to the Indian Mahasiddha Virupa , and today preserved in the Sakya school.

Marpa Kagyu, the lineage which stems from Marpa , Milarepa and Gampopa , practices Mahamudra and the Six Dharmas of Naropa , and includes the four major and eight minor Kagyu lineages.

Shangpa Kagyu , the lineage of Niguma Shyijé and Chöd which originate from Padampa Sangyé and Machig Labdrön .

Dorje Naljor Druk (the 'Six Branch Practice of Vajrayoga') which is derived from the Kalachakra lineage.

Dorje sumgyi nyendrup ('Approach and Accomplishment of the Three Vajras'), from the mahasiddha Orgyenpa Rinchen Pal.

Tibetan Buddhist schools [ edit ] There are various schools or traditions of Tibetan Buddhism. The four main traditions overlap markedly, such that "about eighty percent or more of the features of the Tibetan schools are the same".

[ 219 ] Differences include the use of apparently, but not actually, contradictory terminology, opening dedications of texts to different deities and whether phenomena are described from the viewpoint of an unenlightened practitioner or of a Buddha.

[ 219 ] On questions of philosophy, there has historically been disagreement regarding the nature of Yogacara and Buddha-nature teachings (and whether these are of expedient meaning or ultimate meaning), which still colours the current presentations of sunyata (emptiness) and ultimate reality .

[ 220 ] [ 221 ] [ 222 ] The 19th century Rimé movement downplayed these differences, as still reflected in the stance of the Fourteenth Dalai Lama, who states that there are no fundamental differences between these schools.

[ 223 ] However, there are still philosophical disagreements between the different traditions, such as the debate regarding rangtong and shentong interpretations of Madhyamaka philosophy.

[ 224 ] The four major schools are sometimes divided into the Nyingma (or "Old Translation") and Sarma (or "New Translation") traditions, which follow different canons of scripture (the Nyingma Gyubum along with Termas and the Tengyur - Kangyur respectively).

[ 225 ] Each school also traces itself to a certain lineage going back to India as well as certain important Tibetan founders. While all the schools share most practices and methods, each school tends to have a certain preferred focus (see table below). Another common but trivial differentiation is into the Yellow Hat (Gelug) and Red Hat (non-Gelug) sects.

The features of each major school (along with one influential minor school, Jonang) is as follows: [ 226 ] School Nyingma Kadam (defunct) Kagyu Sakya Gelug Jonang Traditions Old Translation New Translation New Translation New Translation New Translation New Translation Origin Developed from the 8th century onwards Founded in the 11th century by Atiśa and his students. Ceased to exist as an independent school by the 16th century.

Transmitted by Marpa in the 11th century.

Dagpo Kagyu was founded in the 12th century by Gampopa.

Sakya Monastery founded in 1073.

Dates to 1409 with the founding of Ganden monastery Dates to the 12th century Emphasis Emphasizes Dzogchen and its texts, as well as the Guhyagarbha Tantra Emphasizes classic Mahayana study and practice in a monastic setting, source of lojong and lamrim Emphasizes Mahamudra and the Six Dharmas of Naropa Favors the Hevajra Tantra as the basis of their Lamdre system Focuses on Guhyasamāja Tantra , the Cakrasamvara Tantra , and the Kalacakra Tantra Focuses on Kalacakra Tantra and Ratnagotravibhāga Key figures Śāntarakṣita , Garab Dorje , Vimalamitra , Padmasambhava , Rongzom Chökyi Zangpo , Longchenpa , and Jamgön Ju Mipham Gyatso .

Atiśa , Dromtön , Ngog Legpai Sherab, Ngog Loden Sherab , Chaba Chokyi Senge, and Patsab Nyima Drakpa .

Maitripada , Naropa , Tilopa , Marpa , Milarepa , and Gampopa .

Naropa , Ratnākaraśānti , the founder Drogmi , Khon Konchog Gyalpo , Sakya Pandita and Gorampa .

Atisa , his disciple Dromtön , the founder of Gelug Je Tsongkhapa , and the Dalai Lamas .

Yumo Mikyo Dorje , Dolpopa , and Taranatha In his work, The Four Dharma Traditions of the Land of Tibet , Mipham Rinpoche described the four main schools as follows: Nyingma followers of Secret Mantra emphasize the actual tantra.

They pursue the highest view and delight in conduct that is stable.

Many reach the vidyādhara levels and attain accomplishment, And many are mantrins, whose power is greater than others.

Kagyü followers, the protectors of beings, emphasize devotion.

Many find that receiving the lineage's blessings is sufficient.

And many gain accomplishment through perseverance in the practice They are similar to, and mix together with, the Nyingmapas.

The Riwo Gendenpas (i.e. Gelugpas) emphasize the ways of the learned.

They are fond of analytical meditation and delight in debate.

And they impress all with their elegant, exemplary conduct.

They are popular, prosperous, and put effort into learning.

The glorious Sakyapas emphasize approach and accomplishment.

Many are blessed through the power of recitation and visualisation, They value their own ways and their regular practice is excellent.

When compared to any other school, they have something of them all.

Ema! All four dharma traditions of this land of Tibet Have but one real source, even if they arose individually.

Whichever one you follow, if you practise it properly It can bring the qualities of learning and accomplishment.

There is another minor sect, the Bodong school. This tradition was founded in 1049 by the Kadam teacher Mudra Chenpo, who also established the Bodong E Monastery. Its most famous teacher was Bodong Penchen Lénam Gyelchok (1376–1451) who authored over one hundred and thirty-five volumes. This tradition is also known for maintaining a female tulku lineage of incarnated lamas called the Samding Dorje Phagmo .

While Yungdrung Bon considers itself a separate religion with pre-Buddhist origins, and it is considered as non-Buddhist by the main Tibetan traditions, it shares so many similarities and practices with mainstream Tibetan Buddhism that some scholars such as Geoffrey Samuel see it as "essentially a variant of Tibetan Buddhism".

[ 227 ] Yungdrung Bon is closely related to Nyingma Buddhism, and includes Dzogchen teachings, similar deities, rituals and forms of monasticism.

Glossary of terms used [ edit ] English spoken Tibetan Wylie Tibetan Sanskrit transliteration affliction nyönmong nyon-mongs kleśa analytic meditation jegom dpyad-sgom yauktika dhyāna calm abiding shiné zhi-gnas śamatha devotion to the guru lama-la tenpa bla-ma-la bsten-pa guruparyupāsati fixation meditation joggom 'jog-sgom nibandhita dhyāna foundational vehicle t’ek män theg sman hīnayāna incarnate lama tülku sprul-sku nirmānakāya inherent existence rangzhingi drubpa rang-bzhin-gyi grub-pa svabhāvasiddha mind of enlightenment changchub sem byang-chhub sems bodhicitta motivational training lojong blo-sbyong autsukya dhyāna omniscience t’amcé k’yempa thams-cad mkhyen-pa sarvajña preliminary practices ngöndro sngon-'gro prārambhika kriyāni root guru zawé lama rtsa-ba'i bla-ma mūlaguru stages of the path lamrim lam-rim pātheya transmission and realisation lungtok lung-rtogs āgamādhigama See also [ edit ] Buddhism in China Debates in ancient India Death horoscopes in Tibetan Buddhism – Tibetan death astrology and rituals Derge Parkhang – Chinese printing house Kum Nye Prayer flag – Tibetan religious item Pure Land Buddhism – School of Mahāyāna Buddhism Songs of realization Tibetan Buddhist spiritual teachers Traditional Tibetan medicine – Tibetan medical system Sowa Rigpa Tukdam – Buddhist post-mortem meditation Notes [ edit ] ^ Also known as Tibeto-Mongol Buddhism , Indo-Tibetan Buddhism , Lamaism , Lamaistic Buddhism , Himalayan Buddhism , and Northern Buddhism ^ 和尚摩訶衍; his name consists of the same Chinese characters used to transliterate " Mahayana " (Tibetan: Hwa shang Mahayana ) ^ Kamalaśīla wrote the three Bhāvanākrama texts (修習次第三篇) after that.

^ However, a Chinese source found in Dunhuang written by Mo-ho-yen says their side won, and some scholars conclude that the entire episode is fictitious.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] ^ Under the Mulasarvastivadin Vinaya, as with the two other extant Vinaya lineages today ( Theravada and Dharmaguptaka ), in order to ordain bhikṣuṇīs, there must be quorums of both bhikṣuṇīs and bhikṣus; without both, a woman cannot be ordained as a nun ( Tibetan : དགེ་སློང་མ་ , THL : gélongma ).

^ Tibetan : དཔལ་ཟླ་བའི་ཕྲེང་བའི་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་རྒྱལ་པོ , Chinese : 吉祥月鬘本續王 ^ According to Thubten Chodron , the current Dalai Lama has said on this issue: [ 201 ] In 2005, the Dalai Lama repeatedly spoke about the bhikṣuṇī ordination in public gatherings. In Dharamsala, he encouraged, "We need to bring this to a conclusion. We Tibetans alone can't decide this. Rather, it should be decided in collaboration with Buddhists from all over the world. Speaking in general terms, were the Buddha to come to this 21st century world, I feel that most likely, seeing the actual situation in the world now, he might change the rules somewhat...." Later, in Zürich during a 2005 conference of Tibetan Buddhist Centers, he said, "Now I think the time has come; we should start a working group or committee" to meet with monks from other Buddhist traditions. Looking at the German bhikṣuṇī Jampa Tsedroen , he instructed, "I prefer that Western Buddhist nuns carry out this work… Go to different places for further research and discuss with senior monks (from various Buddhist countries). I think, first, senior bhikshunis need to correct the monks' way of thinking.

"This is the 21st century. Everywhere we are talking about equality….Basically Buddhism needs equality. There are some really minor things to remember as a Buddhist—a bhikshu always goes first, then a bhikshuni….The key thing is the restoration of the bhikshuni vow." Alexander Berzin referred to the Dalai Lama having said on occasion of the 2007 Hamburg congress: Sometimes in religion there has been an emphasis on male importance. In Buddhism, however, the highest vows, namely the bhikshu and bhikshuni ones, are equal and entail the same rights. This is the case despite the fact that in some ritual areas, due to social custom, bhikshus go first. But Buddha gave the basic rights equally to both sangha groups. There is no point in discussing whether or not to revive the bhikshuni ordination; the question is merely how to do so properly within the context of the Vinaya.

[ 202 ] ^ Sometimes spelled Frida Bedi, also named Sister Palmo, or Gelongma Karma Kechog Palmo References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ White, David Gordon, ed. (2000).

Tantra in Practice . Princeton University Press. p. 21.

ISBN 0-691-05779-6 .

^ Davidson, Ronald M. (2004).

Indian Esoteric Buddhism: Social History of the Tantric Movement . Motilal Banarsidass. p. 2.

^ Powers (2007) , pp. 392–3, 415.

^ Compare: Tiso, Francis V.

(2016). "Later Developments in Dzogchen History".

Rainbow Body and Resurrection: Spiritual Attainment, the Dissolution of the Material Body, and the Case of Khenpo A Chö . Berkeley, California: North Atlantic Books.

ISBN 9781583947968 . Retrieved 11 September 2020 .

The attainment of the rainbow body ('ja' lus) as understood by the Nyingma tradition of Tibetan Buddhism is always connected to the practice of the great perfection [...]. The Nyingma tradition describes a set of nine vehicles, the highest of which is that of the great perfection, considered the swiftest of the tantric methods for attaining supreme realization, identified with buddhahood.

^ "A Brief History of Nyingma Buddhism" . Palri Pema Od Ling. 23 May 2019.

^ Dzogchen Ponlop. "Glossary".

Wild Awakening: The Heart of Mahamudra and Dzogchen .

[ full citation needed ] ^ a b Powers, John; Templeman, David (2012).

Historical Dictionary of Tibet . Scarecrow Press. p. 566.

^ Lopez, Donald S. Jr.

(1999).

Prisoners of Shangri-La: Tibetan Buddhism and the West . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp.

6, 19f .

ISBN 0-226-49311-3 .

^ Damien Keown, ed., "Lamaism", A Dictionary of Buddhism (Oxford, 2004): "an obsolete term formerly used by Western scholars to denote the specifically Tibetan form of Buddhism due to the prominence of the lamas in the religious culture. . . should be avoided as it is misleading as well as disliked by Tibetans." Robert E. Buswell Jr. and David S. Lopez Jr., eds., "Lamaism", The Princeton Dictionary of Buddhism (Princeton, 2017): "an obsolete English term that has no correlate in Tibetan. . . Probably derived from the Chinese term lama jiao , or "teachings of the lamas", the term is considered pejorative by Tibetans, as it carries the negative connotation that the Tibetan tradition is something distinct from the mainstream of Buddhism." John Bowker, ed., "Lamaism", The Concise Oxford Dictionary of World Religions (Oxford, 2000): "a now antiquated term used by early W[estern] commentators (as L. A. Waddell, The Buddhism of Tibet, or Lamaism , 1895) to describe Tibetan Buddhism. Although the term is not accurate [it] does at least convey the great emphasis placed on the role of the spiritual teacher by this religion." ^ Conze (1993) .

^ "T'ang Dynasty Esoteric School, Buddha, China" .

www.tangmi.com . Retrieved 7 September 2023 .

^ "Shingon Buddhist Intl. Institute: History" .

www.shingon.org . Retrieved 7 September 2023 .

^ "What is the Koyasan Shingon Sect? | Koyasan Shingon Sect Main Temple Kongobu-ji" .

www.koyasan.or.jp . Retrieved 7 September 2023 .

^ Snellgrove (1987) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ see for example the title of Suchandana Chatterjee's Trans-Himalayan Buddhism: Reconnecting Spaces, Sharing Concerns (2019), Routledge.

^ Ehrhard (2005) .

^ Andreyev, Alexandr E. (1 January 2003).

Soviet Russia and Tibet The Debacle of Secret Diplomacy, 1918-1930s (Brill's Tibetan Studies Library, Volume: 4 ed.). Brill.

ISBN 9789004487871 . Retrieved 11 April 2024 .

^ Lee Injae, Owen Miller, Park Jinhoon, Yi Hyun-Hae, 2014, Korean History in Maps, Cambridge University Press, pp. 44–49, 52–60.

^ "Timeline of Tibetan Buddhist History - Major Events" . 29 February 2024. Archived from the original on 29 February 2024 . Retrieved 16 May 2025 .

^ "The Empire of the Early Kings of Tibet" .

studybuddhism.com .

^ William Woodville Rockhill, Annual Report of the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution , p. 671, at Google Books , United States National Museum, page 671 ^ Berzin, Alexander.

A Survey of Tibetan History - Reading Notes Taken by Alexander Berzin from Tsepon, W. D. Shakabpa, Tibet: A Political History. New Haven, Yale University Press, 1967: http://studybuddhism.com/web/en/archives/e-books/unpublished_manuscripts/survey_tibetan_history/chapter_1.html Archived 2016-06-17 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Beckwith, C. I. (2003). "The revolt of 755 in Tibet". In McKay, Alex (ed.).

The History of Tibet . Vol. 1. London: RoutledgeCurzon. pp.

273– 285.

ISBN 9780700715084 .

OCLC 50494840 .

(discusses the political background and the motives of the ruler).

^ a b c Berzin, Alexander (2000).

"How Did Tibetan Buddhism Develop?" .

StudyBuddhism.com .

^ "How Buddhism Came to Tibet" .

Learn Religion . Retrieved 13 April 2022 .

^ Van Schaik, Sam (July 2009).

"Buddhism and Empire IV: Converting Tibet" .

Early Tibet . Retrieved 13 April 2022 .

^ 定解宝灯论新月释 Archived 2013-11-02 at the Wayback Machine ^ Yamaguchi, Zuihō (n.d.).

"The Core Elements of Indian Buddhism Introduced into Tibet: A Contrast with Japanese Buddhism" (PDF) .

Thezensite.com . Retrieved 20 October 2007 .

^ "敦煌唐代写本顿悟大乘正理决" . Archived from the original on 1 November 2013.

^ Encyclopedia of Buddhism . Vol. 1. Macmillan. p. 70.

^ Shakabpa (1967) , pp. 53, 173.

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 10.

^ Samuel (2012) , pp. 12–13, 32.

^ "How Did Tibetan Buddhism Develop?" .

studybuddhism.com .

^ Conze (1993) , pp. 104ff.

^ Dickson, Alnis.

"Organizing religion: situating the three-vow texts of the Tibetan Buddhist renaissance" .

escholarship.mcgill.ca . Lara E. Braitstein . Retrieved 31 August 2024 .

^ Olderr, Steven (2020).

Dictionary of World Monasticism . McFarland. p. 101.

ISBN 978-1476683096 .

^ Jenott, Lance (7 May 2002).

"The Eastern (Nestorian) Church" .

Silk Road Seattle .

University of Washington . Retrieved 1 March 2023 .

^ "Nestorians" .

McClintock and Strong Biblical Cyclopedia Online .

StudyLamp Software . Retrieved 1 March 2023 .

^ Chua, Amy (2007).

Day of Empire: How Hyperpowers Rise to Global Dominance–and Why They Fall (1st ed.).

New York : Doubleday . pp.

116– 119, 121.

ISBN 978-0-385-51284-8 .

OCLC 123079516 .

^ Shakabpa (1967) , p. 61: 'thirty thousand troops, under the command of Leje and Dorta, reached Phanpo, north of Lhasa.' ^ Sanders (2003) , p. 309: his grandson Godan Khan invaded Tibet with 30000 men and destroyed several Buddhist monasteries north of Lhasa ^ Buell (2011) , p. 194.

^ Shakabpa (1967) , pp. 61–62.

^ "How Tibet Emerged Within the Wider Chinese Power-Political Zone" .

Long Revolution . 18 April 2015 . Retrieved 23 March 2018 .

^ Wylie (1990) , p. 104.

^ a b Huntington, John C.; Bangdel, Dina; Thurman, Robert A. F.

The Circle of Bliss: Buddhist Meditational Art . p. 48.

^ Powers (2007) , p. 162.

^ Wood, Michael (2020).

The Story of China: The Epic History of a World Power from the Middle Kingdom to Mao and the China Dream (First U.S. ed.). New York: St. Martin's Press . p. 363.

ISBN 978-1-250-20257-4 .

^ Rossabi (1983) , p. 194.

^ Petech, L. (1990).

Central Tibet and The Mongols . Serie Orientale Roma. Vol. 65. Rome: Instituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente. pp.

85– 143.

^ Berzin, Alexander.

"Gelug Monasteries: Ganden" .

Study Buddhism . Retrieved 13 April 2022 .

^ Czaja, Olaf (17 September 2013).

"On the History of Refining Mercury in Tibetan Medicine" .

Asian Medicine .

8 (1): 75– 105.

doi : 10.1163/15734218-12341290 .

ISSN 1573-420X .

^ Robinson, David M. (2008).

"The Ming Court and the Legacy of the Yuan Mongols" (PDF) .

Culture, Courtiers and Competition, The Ming Court (1368–1644) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 October 2016.

^ Silk, Jonathan.

Notes on the history of the Yongle Kanjur.

Indica et Tibetica 28, Suhrllekhah. Festgabe für Helmut Eimer, 1998.

^ Taveirne, Patrick (2004).

Han-Mongol Encounters and Missionary Endeavors: A History of Scheut in Ordos (Hetao) 1874–1911 . Leuven University Press. pp. 67ff.

ISBN 978-90-5867-365-7 .

^ Dudeja, Jai Paul (2023).

Profound Meditation Practices in Tibetan Buddhism . Bluerose Publisher Pvt. Ltd. p. 5.

ISBN 978-93-5741-206-3 .

^ Vollmer, John E.; Simcox, Jacqueline.

Emblems of Empire: Selections from the Mactaggart Art Collection . p. 154.

^ Weidner, Marsha Smith.

Cultural Intersections in Later Chinese Buddhism . p. 173.

[ full citation needed ] ^ Lopez, Donald S. (1998).

Prisoners of Shangri-La: Tibetan Buddhism and the West . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 190.

^ Van Schaik (2011) , pp. 165–169.

^ Van Schaik (2011) , p. 169.

^ Buswell, R.E.; Lopez, D.S.; Ahn, J.; et al. (et al.) (2014).

The Princeton Dictionary of Buddhism . Princeton University Press. pp. 379, 714– 715, 802.

ISBN 9780691157863 .

^ a b Kapstein (2014) , p.

100 .

^ Bianchi, Ester (2004).

"The Tantric Rebirth Movement in Modern China, Esoteric Buddhism re-vivified by the Japanese and Tibetan traditions" (PDF) .

Acta Orientalia Academiae Scientiarum Hung .

57 (1): 31– 54.

doi : 10.1556/AOrient.57.2004.1.3 .

^ a b Kapstein (2014) , p. 108.

^ Cantwell, Cathy; Kawanami, Hiroko (2016).

Religions in the Modern World (3rd ed.). New York: Routledge. p. 91.

ISBN 978-0-415-85881-6 .

^ "Opinion | Nepal is the birthplace of Buddhism" .

Washington Post . 24 May 2023.

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 2 December 2023 .

^ Marks, Thomas A. (1977).

"Historical Observations on Buddhism in Bhutan" .

The Tibet Journal .

2 (2): 74– 91.

ISSN 0970-5368 .

JSTOR 43299858 .

^ "Bhutan's Religious History in a Thousand Words | Mandala Collections - Texts" .

texts.mandala.library.virginia.edu . Retrieved 2 December 2023 .

^ "A Brief Historical Background of the Religious Institutions of Bhutan" .

buddhism.lib.ntu.edu.tw . Retrieved 2 December 2023 .

^ "Bhutan" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 2 December 2023 .

^ "A Brief History of Kagyu Samye Ling | SamyeLing.org" .

www.samyeling.org .

^ a b Kapstein (2014) , p. 110.

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 238.

^ Freedom In The World 2020: Tibet (Report). Freedom House.

^ "Self-Immolations" .

International Campaign for Tibet .

^ "Monk from Tibet's Amdo Ngaba arrested over social media posts on Tibetan Language" .

Central Tibetan Administration . 5 October 2019.

^ "China: Tibet Anti-Crime Campaign Silences Dissent" .

Human Rights Watch . 14 May 2020.

^ "Further Evictions and Repression at Yarchen Gar" .

Free Tibet . 8 July 2019.

^ Lewis, Craig (6 September 2019).

"New Images Reveal Extent of Demolitions at Yarchen Gar Buddhist Monastery" .

The Buddhist Door .

^ Kapstein (2014) , p. 109.

^ The 2007 U.S. State Department report on religious freedom in Bhutan notes that "Mahayana Buddhism is the state religion..." and that the Bhutanese government supports both the Kagyu and Nyingma sects.

State.gov ^ a b Samuel (2012) , p. 240.

^ Samuel (2012) , pp. 242–243.

^ Bruce A (ed). One World – Many Paths to Peace ANU E-Press 2009 (launched by the 14th Dalai Lama) (accessed 11 May 2013) ^ Samuel, Geoffrey.

Tantric Revisionings: New Understandings of Tibetan Buddhism and Indian Religion . pp.

303– 304.

[ full citation needed ] ^ Powers (2007) , pp. 65, 71, 75.

^ Powers (2007) , p. 102.

^ Cf.

Dhargyey (1978) , p. 111; Pabongkhapa Déchen Nyingpo , 533f; Tsong-kha-pa (2002) , pp. 48–9.

^ Thurman (1997) , p. 291.

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 75.

^ Cf.

Dhargyey (1978) , pp. 64ff; Dhargyey (1982) , pp. 257ff; Pabongkhapa Déchen Nyingpo , 364f; Tsong-kha-pa (2002) , pp. 183ff. The former are the afflictions, negative states of mind, and the three poisons – desire, anger, and ignorance. The latter are subtle imprints, traces or "stains" of delusion that involves the imagination of inherent existence.

^ Pabongkhapa Déchen Nyingpo , 152f ^ Pabongkhapa Déchen Nyingpo , 243, 258 ^ a b Hopkins (1996) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Dhargyey (1978) , pp. 61ff; Dhargyey (1982) , pp. 242–266; Pabongkhapa Déchen Nyingpo , 365 ^ Thurman (1997) , pp. 2–3.

^ Pabongkhapa Déchen Nyingpo , 252f ^ Pabongkhapa Déchen Nyingpo , 367 ^ Dhargyey (1978) , p. 74; Dhargyey (1982) , pp. 3, 303ff; Pabongkhapa Déchen Nyingpo , 13f, 280f; Berzin, Alexander (2002).

Hinayana and Mahayana: Comparison ^ Samuel (2012) , p. 54.

^ Powers (2007) , pp. 93–96.

^ The Sakya school, too, has a somewhat similar textual form, the lamdré .

^ "Stages of the Path (Lamrim)" .

Bhikshuni Thubten Chodron .

^ Kapstein (2014) , pp. 52–53.

^ a b c Powers (2007) , p. 250.

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 69.

^ a b Kapstein (2014) , p. 82.

^ Snellgrove (1987) , pp. 125–126.

^ a b Kapstein (2014) , p. 83.

^ Shantarakshita & Mipham (2005) , pp. 117–122.

^ Shantarakshita & Mipham (2005) , p. 26.

^ Cornu (2001) , p. 145, 150.

^ Cornu (2001) , p. 135.

^ a b c d Kapstein (2014) , p. 67.

^ Shantarakshita & Mipham (2005) , pp. 27–28.

^ Asanga; Brunnholzl, Karl (2019). "Preface".

A Compendium of the Mahayana: Asanga's Mahayanasamgraha and Its Indian and Tibetan Commentaries . Vol. I. Shambhala Publications.

^ Cornu (2001) , p. 146-147.

^ Cornu (2001) , p. 138.

^ Cornu (2001) , p. 145.

^ Sopa & Hopkins (1977) , pp. 67–69; Hopkins (1996) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Cf.

Conze (1993) .

^ Kapstein (2014) , p. 63.

^ Samuel (2012) , pp. 19–20.

^ Badaraev, Damdin D.; Dyrkheeva, Galina; Antonova, Nadezhda S. (February 2021).

"The Language Situation among Buryat Schoolchildren of Russia, Mongolia and China" .

Sotsiologicheskie Issledovaniya (2): 146– 151.

doi : 10.31857/s013216250014005-8 .

ISSN 0132-1625 .

^ Orzech, Charles D., ed. (2011).

Esoteric Buddhism and the Tantras in East Asia . Brill. p. 540.

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 21.

^ Powers (2007) , pp. 103–104.

^ Gomez, Luis O.; Silk, Jonathan A. (1989).

Studies in the Literature of the Great Vehicle: Three Mahayana Buddhist Texts . Michigan studies in Buddhist literature. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan. p. viii.

ISBN 9780891480549 .

OCLC 20159406 .

^ Thupten Jinpa (2019).

Tsongkhapa A Buddha in the Land of Snows . Lives of the Masters. Shambhala. pp.

219– 220.

^ Ringu Tulku (2006) , ch. 3.

^ Kapstein (2014) , p. 64.

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 20.

^ "Yoginitantras are in the secondary literature often called Anuttarayoga. But this is based on a mistaken back translation of the Tibetan translation (rnal byor bla med kyi rgyud) of what appears in Sanskrit texts only as Yogānuttara or Yoganiruttara (cf. SANDERSON 1994: 97–98, fn.1)."

Isabelle Onians, "Tantric Buddhist Apologetics, or Antinomianism as a Norm," D.Phil. dissertation, Oxford, Trinity Term 2001. pg 70 ^ Samuel (2012) , p. 32.

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 78.

^ Conze (1993) , p. 26.

^ Powers (2007) , p. 271.

^ Germano, David (1994). "Architecture and Absence in the Secret Tantric History of the Great Perfection (rdzogs chen)".

JIABS .

17 (2).

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 50.

^ Kapstein (2014) , pp. 45–46.

^ Shantideva.

The Way of the Bodhisattva . Shambhala Publications. pp.

122– 123.

^ Powers (2007) , p. 81.

^ Powers (2007) , p. 86.

^ Powers (2007) , p. 88.

^ Powers (2007) , p. 90.

^ Powers (2007) , p. 91.

^ Rinpoche & Rinpoche (2006) , p. 66, 212f.

^ Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche (1994).

The Practice of Tranquillity & Insight: A Guide to Tibetan Buddhist Meditation . Shambhala Publications. pp.

91– 93.

ISBN 0-87773-943-9 .

^ Pabongkha, p.649 ^ Kalu Rinpoche (1986).

The Gem Ornament of Manifold Instructions . Snow Lion. p. 21.

^ Pabongkhapa Déchen Nyingpo , 649 ^ Powers (2007) , p. 295.

^ Lama is the literal Tibetan translation of the Sanskrit guru . For a traditional perspective on devotion to the guru, see Tsong-kha-pa (2000) , pp. 77–87. For a current perspective on the guru-disciple relationship in Tibetan Buddhism, see Berzin, Alexander.

Relating to a Spiritual Teacher: Building a Healthy Relationship ^ notably, Gurupancasika , Tib.: Lama Ngachupa , Wylie: bla-ma lnga-bcu-pa , "Fifty Verses of Guru-Devotion" by Aśvaghoṣa ^ Indian tradition (Cf.

Saddharmapundarika Sutra II, 124) encourages the student to view the guru as representative of the Buddha himself.

^ a b Kapstein (2014) , p. 80.

^ Conze (1993) , pp. 26 and 52f.

^ Powers (2007) , p. 315.

^ Cueppers, Christoph.

"The Relationship Between Religion and State (chos srid zung 'brel) In Traditional Tibet" .

Proceedings of a Seminar Held in Lumbini, Nepal, March 2008 .

^ Kapstein (2014) , p. 2.

^ Kapstein (2014) , p. 5.

^ Kapstein (2014) , p. 81.

^ a b Kapstein (2014) , p. 94.

^ Powers (2007) , pp. 23–24.

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 74.

^ Powers (2007) , p. 265.

^ Buswell, Robert E. Jr.; Lopez, Donald S. Jr.

The Princeton Dictionary of Buddhism .

[ full citation needed ] ^ Powers (2007) , pp. 266–267.

^ Powers (2007) , p. 267.

^ Jamgon Mipham.

Luminous Essence: A Guide to the Guhyagarbha Tantra . p. 147.

[ full citation needed ] ^ Tsoṅ-kha-pa Blo-bzaṅ-grags-pa (1987).

Tantra in Tibet: The Great Exposition of Secret Mantra . Motilal Banarsidass. p. 47.

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 71.

^ Garson (2004) , p. 52.

^ Garson (2004) , p. 45.

^ Ray, Reginald A.

Secret of the Vajra World, The Tantric Buddhism of Tibet . Shambhala. pp.

112– 113.

^ Khenchen Thrangu Rinpoche (2003).

Pointing Out the Dharmakaya: Teachings on the Ninth Karmapa's Text . Ithaca, New York: Snow Lion Publications. p. 5.

ISBN 978-1-59030-055-8 .

^ Kapstein (2014) , p. 87.

^ Keown, Damien (2003).

A Dictionary of Buddhism . Oxford University Press. p. 82.

ISBN 978-0-19-860560-7 .

^ Traleg Kyabgon Rinpoche.

Mind at Ease: Self-liberation Through Mahamudra Meditation . pp.

7– 11.

[ full citation needed ] ^ Samuel (2012) , p. 130.

^ Norbu, Namkhai (2000).

The Crystal and the Way of Light: Sutra, Tantra, and Dzogchen . Snow Lion Publications. p. 63.

^ Samuel (2012) , pp. 131–134.

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 141.

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 158.

^ Samuel (2012) , pp. 159–162.

^ Spencer, Chapman F.

Lhasa the Holy City . London: Readers Union Ltd. p. 195.

^ Samuel (2012) , pp. 140–141.

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 146.

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 144.

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 206.

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 214.

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 216.

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 215.

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 211.

^ Tsomo (1999) , p. 22.

^ Tsomo (1999) , p. 76.

^ Haas, Michaela (2013).

Dakini Power: Twelve Extraordinary Women Shaping the Transmission of Tibetan Buddhism in the West . Shambhala Publications. p. 6.

ISBN 978-1559394079 .

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 213.

^ "A New Possibility: Introducing Full Ordination for Women into the Tibetan Buddhist Tradition" . Archived from the original on 28 September 2007 . Retrieved 28 June 2015 .

^ "Summary of Speeches at the Bhikshuni Congress: Day 3" .

studybuddhism.com .

^ Mackenzie, Vicki (22 July 2024).

"Making the Sangha Whole" .

Tricycle: The Buddhist Review .

^ DAMCHÖ DIANA FINNEGAN and CAROLA ROLOFF (BHIKṢUṆĪ JAMPA TSEDROEN). "Women Receive Full Ordination in Bhutan For First Time in Modern History", Lion's Roar , JUNE 27, 2022.

^ "A Female Dalai Lama? Why It Matters" .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved 4 May 2013 .

Of all these changes that we are watching Buddhism undergo in the West, the most momentous may be that women are playing an equal role.

^ "Nonfiction Book Review: The Revolutionary Life of Freda Bedi: British Feminist, Indian Nationalist, Buddhist Nun by Vicki Mackenzie. Shambhala, $16.95 trade paper (208p) ISBN 978-1-61180-425-6" . Publishersweekly.com. 28 March 2017 . Retrieved 10 June 2017 .

^ "Works by Chögyam Trungpa and His Students" .

Dharma Haven . 23 June 1999 . Retrieved 14 October 2013 .

^ "Ani Pema Chödrön" . Gampoabbey.org. Archived from the original on 17 November 2010 . Retrieved 19 November 2010 .

^ a b "Women Making History" . Vajradakininunnery.org. Archived from the original on 1 June 2010 . Retrieved 19 November 2010 .

^ "Khenmo Drolma" . Vajradakininunnery.org. Archived from the original on 1 June 2010 . Retrieved 19 November 2010 .

^ "Vajra Dakini Nunnery" . Vajra Dakini Nunnery . Retrieved 19 November 2010 .

^ Haas, Michaela (18 May 2011).

"2,500 Years After The Buddha, Tibetan Buddhists Acknowledge Women" .

Huffington Post .

^ "Geshe Kelsang Wangmo, An Interview with the World's First Female Geshe « Mandala Publications" . Mandalamagazine.org. Archived from the original on 15 April 2013 . Retrieved 25 August 2014 .

^ Haas, Michaela.

"Buddhist nun professors or none? – OnFaith" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 7 June 2013.

^ Nuns, Tibetan (14 July 2016).

"Tibetan Buddhist Nuns Make History: Congratulations Geshema Nuns! – The Tibetan Nuns Project" . Tnp.org . Retrieved 4 October 2016 .

^ "Twenty Tibetan Buddhist nuns are first ever to earn Geshema degrees – Lion's Roar" . Lionsroar.com. 15 July 2016. Archived from the original on 5 October 2016 . Retrieved 4 October 2016 .

^ Stevens, William K. (26 October 1988).

"U.S. Woman Is Named Reborn Buddhist Saint" .

New York Times . Retrieved 26 July 2008 .

^ Kongtrul, Jamgon (2009).

The Treasury of Knowledge: Book Eight, Part Four: Esoteric Instructions . Translated by Sarah Harding. Shambhala. pp.

27– 28.

^ a b How Do the Tibetan Buddhist Traditions Differ?

, Study Buddhism, Berzin Archives, Retrieved 04.06.2016 ^ Hookham (1991) .

^ Brunnhölzl (2004) .

^ Cornu (2001) .

^ "The four main schools of Tibetan Buddhism" .

Rigpa Wiki . Retrieved 31 July 2013 .

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 56.

^ Arya, T.G. (2022).

The Ancient Tibetan Civilization . Tibetan Historical Studies. Library of Tibetan Works and Archives. p. 155.

ISBN 978-93-90752-72-0 . Retrieved 11 March 2024 .

^ Powers, John (October–November 2007).

"Getting to know the Four Schools of Tibetan Buddhism" (PDF) .

Mandala . pp.

18– 21 – via FPMT website.

^ Samuel (2012) , p. 232.

Works cited [ edit ] Brunnhölzl, Karl (2004).

The Center of the Sunlit Sky: Madhyamaka in the Kagyu Tradition . Shambhala.

ISBN 1-55939-218-5 .

Buell, Paul D. (2011). "Tibetans, Mongols and the Fusion of Eurasian Cultures". In Akasoy, Anna; Burnett, Charles; Yoeli-Tlalim, Ronit (eds.).

Islam and Tibet: Interactions Along the Musk Routes . Ashgate Publishing. pp.

188– 208.

Conze, Edward (1993).

A Short History of Buddhism (2nd ed.). Oneworld.

ISBN 1-85168-066-7 .

Cornu, Philippe (2001). "Nawoord".

Schijn en werkelijkheid. De twee waarheden in de vier boeddhistische leerstelsels . KunchabPublicaties.

Dhargyey, Geshe Ngawang (1978). Alexander Berzin (ed.).

Tibetan Tradition of Mental Development . Translated by Sharpa Tulku (3rd ed.). Dharmsala: Library of Tibetan Works and Archives.

[A pithy lam-rim by a geshe appointed in 1973 by the Dalai Lama as head of the translation team at the Tibetan Library.] Dhargyey, Geshe Ngawang (1982). Alexander Berzin (ed.).

An Anthology of Well-Spoken Advice on the Graded Paths of the Mind, Vol. I . Translated by Sharpa Tulku. Dharmsala: Library of Tibetan Works and Archives.

ISBN 81-86470-29-8 .

[The first part of a more extensive lam-rim by a geshe appointed in 1973 by the Dalai Lama as head of the translation team at the Tibetan Library. The language of this publication is very different from that of the 1978 work by the same lama due to widespread changes in choice of English terminology by the translators.] Ehrhard, Franz-Karl (2005). "Buddhism, Schools of: Himalayan Buddhism".

Encyclopedia of Religion (2nd ed.). Detroit: Macmillan Reference USA.

ISBN 0-02-865733-0 .

Garson, Nathaniel DeWitt (1 May 2004).

Penetrating the Secret Essence Tantra: Context and Philosophy in the Mahayoga System of rNying-ma Tantra (PhD dissertation). University of Virginia.

doi : 10.18130/V3V80T .

Hookham, S.K.

(1991).

The Buddha within : Tathagatagarbha doctrine according to the Shentong interpretation of the Ratnagotravibhaga . Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.

ISBN 978-0791403587 .

Hopkins, Jeffrey (1996).

Meditation on Emptiness . Boston: Wisdom.

ISBN 0-86171-110-6 .

[Definitive treatment of emptiness according to the Prasaṅgika-Madhyamaka school.] Kapstein, Matthew T. (2014).

Tibetan Buddhism: A Very Short Introduction . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-973512-9 .

LCCN 2013006676 .

Rinpoche, Pabongka ; Rinpoche, Trijang (3 November 2006).

Liberation in the Palm of Your Hand: A Concise Discourse on the Path to Enlightenment . Translated by Richards, Michael. Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-86171-500-8 .

Powers, John (2007).

Introduction to Tibetan Buddhism (Rev. ed.).

Ithaca, New York : Snow Lion Publications.

ISBN 978-1-55939-282-2 .

Ringu Tulku (2006).

The Ri-Me Philosophy of Jamgon Kongtrul the Great: A Study of the Buddhist Lineages of Tibet . Shambhala.

ISBN 978-1-59030-286-6 .

Rossabi, Morris (1983).

China Among Equals: The Middle Kingdom and Its Neighbors, 10th-14th Centuries . University of California Press.

ISBN 0-520-04383-9 .

Samuel, Geoffrey (2012).

Introducing Tibetan Buddhism . Routledge (World Religions).

ISBN 978-0415456654 .

Sanders, Alan (9 April 2003).

Historical Dictionary of Mongolia . Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 978-0-8108-6601-0 .

Shantarakshita; Mipham, Ju (2005).

The Adornment of the Middle Way Shantarakshita's Madhyamakalankara with Commentary by Jamgon Mipham . Translated by Padmakara Translation Group. Shambala.

Shakabpa, Tsepon W. D. (1967).

Tibet: A Political History . Yale University Press.

Sopa, Geshe Lhundup; Hopkins, Jeffrey (1977).

Practice and Theory of Tibetan Buddhism . New Delhi: B.I. Publications.

ISBN 0-09-125621-6 .

[Part Two of this book, ‘’Theory: Systems of Tenets’’ is an annotated translation of ‘’Precious Garland of Tenets (Grub-mtha’ rin-chhen phreng-ba)’’ by Kön-chok-jik-may-wang-po (1728-1791).] Snellgrove, David (1987).

Indo-Tibetan Buddhism. Indian Buddhists & Their Tibetan Successors . Vol. 2. Boston: Shambala Publications.

ISBN 0-87773-379-1 .

Thurman, Robert (1997).

Essential Tibetan Buddhism . Castle Books.

Tsomo, Karma Lekshe (1999).

Buddhist Women Across Cultures: Realizations . State University of New York Press.

ISBN 978-0-7914-4138-1 .

Tsong-kha-pa (2000). Cutler, Joshua; Newland, Guy (eds.).

The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment . Vol. I. Snow Lion.

ISBN 1-55939-152-9 .

Tsong-kha-pa (2002). Cutler, Joshua; Newland, Guy (eds.).

The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment . Vol. II. Snow Lion.

ISBN 1-55939-168-5 .

Van Schaik, Sam (2011).

Tibet: A History . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-15404-7 .

Wylie, Turnell (1990). "The First Mongol Conquest of Tibet Reinterpreted".

Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies .

37 (1). Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Yenching Institute: 103– 133.

doi : 10.2307/2718667 .

ISSN 0073-0548 .

JSTOR 2718667 .

OCLC 6015211726 .

Further reading [ edit ] Cabezón, José Ignacio (26 October 2006).

"Tibetan Buddhist Society" . In Juergensmeyer, Mark (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of Global Religions .

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195137989.003.0010 .

Chagdud Tulku Rinpoche (1993).

Gates to Buddhist Practice: Essential Teachings of a Tibetan Master . Padma Publishing.

ISBN 1-881847-02-0 .

Coleman, Graham, ed. (1993).

A Handbook of Tibetan Culture . Boston: Shambhala Publications.

ISBN 1-57062-002-4 .

Mullin, Glenn H.

(2008).

Living in the Face of Death: The Tibetan Tradition . Snow Lion Publications.

ISBN 978-1-55939-908-1 .

Powers, John (2004).

History as Propaganda: Tibetan Exiles versus the People's Republic of China . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-517426-7 .

Powers, John (2008).

A Concise Introduction to Tibetan Buddhism . Snow Lion Publications.

Smith, E. Gene (2001).

Among Tibetan Texts: History and Literature of the Himalayan Plateau . Boston: Wisdom Publications.

ISBN 0-86171-179-3 .

Wallace, B. Alan (1993).

Tibetan Buddhism From the Ground Up: A Practical Approach for Modern Life . Wisdom Publications.

ISBN 978-0-86171-075-1 .

Yeshe, Lama Thubten (2001).

The Essence of Tibetan Buddhism . Lama Yeshe Wisdom Archive.

ISBN 1-891868-08-X .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tibetan Buddhism .

Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Lāmāism ".

A Day In The Life Of A Tibetan Monk – article and slideshow by National Geographic v t e Tibetan Buddhism Traditions Bodong Bön Gelug Kadam Jonang Kagyu Nyingma Rimé Sakya Practice systems Chöd Dzogchen Kālacakra Lamdre Lamrim Mahamudra Pure Land Vajrayana Individual practices Deity yoga Empowerment Guru yoga Mandala Mantra Mudra Phowa Preparatory practices Refuge Sadhana Six Dharmas Tibetan tantric practice Transfer of merit Tukdam Institutional roles Lama Khenpo Ngakpa Rigdzin Rinpoche Tertön Tulku Western tulku Vajracharya Vidyadhara Key figures Nyingma Padmasambhava Yeshe Tsogyal Longchenpa Jigme Lingpa Patrul Rinpoche Dudjom Lingpa Mipham Dudjom Rinpoche Sakya Khön Könchok Gyalpo Sakya Trizin Sakya Pandita Drogön Chögyal Phagpa Kagyu Milarepa Karmapa Thang Tong Gyalpo Gelug Je Tsongkhapa Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Other Trisong Detsen Akong Rinpoche Anagarika Govinda Arija Rinpoche Atiśa Chagdud Tulku Rinpoche Chatral Rinpoche Chetsang Rinpoche Chögyam Trungpa Chökyi Nyima Rinpoche Dampa Sangye Dezhung Rinpoche Dilgo Khyentse Dolpopa Sherab Gyaltsen Drukpa Kunley Dzigar Kongtrul Rinpoche Dzogchen Ponlop Rinpoche Dzongsar Jamyang Khyentse Rinpoche Dzongsar Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö Gampopa Ganden Tripa Gorampa Sonam Sengye Gyalwang Drukpa Jamgon Kongtrul Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo Kalu Rinpoche Karma Thinley Rinpoche Khamtrul Rinpoche Khandro Rinpoche Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche Lama Jampa Thaye Ling Rinpoche Marpa Lotsawa Mikyö Dorje, 8th Karmapa Lama Namkhai Norbu Nyoshul Khenpo Rinpoche Orgyen Chokgyur Lingpa Orgyen Tobgyal Phabongkha Pema Lingpa Penor Rinpoche Phagmo Drupa Dorje Gyalpo Rangjung Dorje, 3rd Karmapa Lama Ratna Vajra Sakya Rechung Dorje Drakpa Reting Rinpoche Sakya Chokden Second Beru Khyentse Shamarpa Sogyal Rinpoche Tai Situpa Taranatha Tarthang Tulku Tenga Rinpoche Tenzin Palmo Tenzin Wangyal Rinpoche Tenzin Ösel Hita Thinley Norbu Thrangu Rinpoche Thubten Yeshe Thubten Zopa Rinpoche Traleg Kyabgon Rinpoche Trijang Rinpoche Trulshik Rinpoche Tsangnyön Heruka Tsele Natsok Rangdröl Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche Vairotsana Vimalamitra Yudra Nyingpo Zong Rinpoche Texts Gyubum Kangyur Tengyur Terma Tibetan canon Ritual objects Chöda Damaru Ghanta Phurba Serkyem Stupa Thangka Vajra Yidam Monasteries Drepung Monastery Dzogchen Monastery Dzongsar Monastery Ganden Monastery Jokhang Monastery Kathok Monastery Namdroling Monastery Palyul Monastery Ramoche Temple Sakya Monastery Sanga Monastery Sera Monastery Shechen Monastery Tashilhunpo Monastery Places Bhutan Buryatia Dharamshala Himachal Pradesh Kalmykia Ladakh Lhasa Mongolia Shambhala Tibet Tuva v t e Topics in Buddhism Outline Glossary Index Foundations Four Noble Truths Three Jewels Buddha Dharma Sangha Noble Eightfold Path Nirvana Middle Way The Buddha Tathāgata Birthday Four sights Eight Great Events Great Renunciation Physical characteristics Life of Buddha in art Footprint Relics Iconography in Laos and Thailand Films Miracles Family Suddhodāna (father) Māyā (mother) Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother) Yaśodharā (wife) Rāhula (son) Ānanda (cousin) Devadatta (cousin) Bodhi tree Places where the Buddha stayed Buddha in world religions Bodhisattvas Avalokiteśvara Guanyin Mañjuśrī Mahāsthāmaprāpta Ākāśagarbha Kṣitigarbha Samantabhadra Vajrapāṇi Skanda Tārā Metteyya/Maitreya Disciples Kaundinya Assaji Sāriputta Mahamoggallāna Ānanda Mahākassapa Aṅgulimāla Anuruddha Mahākaccana Nanda Subhūti Puṇṇa Mantānīputta Upāli Mahapajapati Gotamī Khema Uppalavanna Asita Channa Yasa Key concepts Avidyā (Ignorance) Bardo Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Dhamma theory Dharma Enlightenment Five hindrances Indriya Karma Kleshas Mental factors Mindstream Parinirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Rebirth Saṃsāra Saṅkhāra Skandha Śūnyatā Taṇhā (Craving) Tathātā Ten Fetters Three marks of existence Anicca Dukkha Anattā Two truths doctrine Cosmology Ten spiritual realms Six Paths Deva realm Human realm Asura realm Hungry Ghost realm Animal realm Naraka Three planes of existence Branches Mahayana Zen Chinese Chan Japanese Zen Korean Seon Vietnamese Thiền Pure Land Tiantai Huayan Risshū Nichiren Madhyamaka Yogachara Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhism Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Shingon Dzogchen Theravada Southern Esoteric Buddhism Navayana Early Buddhist schools Pre-sectarian Buddhism Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna Southern, Eastern and Northern Buddhism Practices Bhavana Bodhipakkhiyādhammā Brahmavihara Mettā Karuṇā Mudita Upekkha Buddhābhiṣeka Dāna Devotion Deity yoga Dhyāna Faith Five Strengths Iddhipada Meditation Mantras Kammaṭṭhāna Recollection Smarana Anapanasati Samatha-vipassanā ( Vipassana movement ) Shikantaza Zazen Tukdam Koan Ganana Mandala Tonglen Tantra Tertön Terma Merit Mindfulness Mindful Yoga Satipatthana Nekkhamma Nianfo Pāramitā Paritta Puja Offerings Prostration Music Refuge Sādhu Satya Sacca Seven Factors of Enlightenment Sati Dhamma vicaya Pīti Passaddhi Śīla Five precepts Eight precepts Bodhisattva vow Pratimokṣa Threefold Training Śīla Samadhi Prajñā Vīrya Four Right Exertions Twenty-two vows of Ambedkar Yujia Yankou Shuilu Fahui Nirvana Bodhi Bodhisattva Buddhahood Pratyekabuddhayāna Four stages of awakening Sotāpanna Sakadagami Anāgāmi Arhat Monasticism Bhikkhu Bhikkhunī Śrāmaṇera Śrāmaṇerī Anagārika Ajahn Sayadaw Zen master Rōshi Lama Rinpoche Geshe Tulku Western tulku Kappiya Donchee Householder Upāsaka and Upāsikā Achar Śrāvaka Ten principal disciples Shaolin Monastery Major figures The Buddha Nagasena Aśvaghoṣa Nagarjuna Asanga Vasubandhu Kumārajīva Buddhaghosa Buddhapālita Dignāga Bodhidharma Zhiyi Emperor Wen of Sui Songtsen Gampo Xuanzang Shandao Padmasambhava Saraha Atiśa Naropa Karmapa Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Shamarpa Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Ajahn Mun B. R. Ambedkar Ajahn Chah Thích Nhất Hạnh Texts Early Buddhist texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana sutras Pali Canon Chinese Buddhist canon Tibetan Buddhist canon Dhammapada Sutra Vinaya Madhyamakālaṃkāra Abhidharmadīpa Countries Afghanistan Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bhutan Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Canada China Costa Rica Croatia Czech Republic Denmark England Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Korea Kyrgyzstan Laos Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Maldives Malaysia Mexico Middle East Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Scotland Senegal Singapore Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Tibet Ukraine United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela Vietnam Wales Zimbabwe History Timeline Ashoka Kanishka Buddhist councils History of Buddhism in India Decline of Buddhism in India Huichang persecution of Buddhism Greco-Buddhism Gandharan Buddhism Texts Menander I Buddhism and the Roman world Buddhism in the West Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Persecution of Buddhists In Afghanistan In Vietnam Rimé movement Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal Dalit Buddhist movement Chinese invasion of Tibet 1959 Tibetan uprising Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist modernism Vipassana movement 969 Movement Engaged Buddhism Women in Buddhism Philosophy Abhidharma Atomism Buddhology Creator Buddhism and democracy Economics Eight Consciousnesses Engaged Buddhism Eschatology Ethics Evolution Humanism Logic Reality Secular Buddhism Socialism The unanswerable questions Culture Architecture Temple Vihāra Kyaung Wat Ordination hall Stupa Pagoda Burmese pagoda Candi Dzong architecture List of Buddhist architecture in China Japanese Buddhist architecture Buddhist temples in Korea Thai temple art and architecture Tibetan Buddhist architecture Art Greco-Buddhist Budai Buddha in art Calendar Cuisine Funeral Holidays Vesak Uposatha Māgha Pūjā Asalha Puja Vassa Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Kasaya Mahabodhi Temple Mantra Om mani padme hum Mudra Music Pilgrimage Lumbini Maya Devi Temple Bodh Gaya Sarnath Kushinagar Poetry Prayer beads Hama yumi Prayer wheel Symbolism Dharmachakra Flag Bhavacakra Swastika Thangka Temple of the Tooth Vegetarianism Miscellaneous Abhijñā Amitābha Brahmā Dharma talk Hinayana Iddhi Kalpa Koliya Lineage Māra Siddhi Sacred languages Pāḷi Sanskrit Comparison Baháʼí Faith Christianity Influences Comparison East Asian religions Gnosticism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Psychology Science Theosophy Violence Western philosophy Lists Bodhisattvas Buddhas Buddhists American Korean Indian Suttas Sutras Temples Festivals Category Buddhism portal v t e Tibet articles History Overviews Timeline List of rulers European exploration Historical money Chronology Prehistory (Neolithic) Zhangzhung Yarlung dynasty Empire (7th–9th century) Timeline List of emperors Lönchen Relations with Tang (618–907) Era of Fragmentation (9th–13th century) Guge kingdom Tsongkha Relations with Song (960–1279) Yuan dynasty rule (1270–1350) Bureau of Buddhist and Tibetan Affairs Phagmodrupa dynasty Relations with Ming (1368–1644) Rinpungpa dynasty Tsangpa dynasty Ganden Phodrang Kashag Khoshut Khanate Qing dynasty rule (1720–1912) Lifan Yuan List of Qing ambans Post-Qing to 1950 Tibetan Army People's Republic of China (PRC) rule PRC annexation political leaders Wars and conflicts Tibetan attack on Songzhou Battle of Dafei River Battle of Shenchuan Mongol invasions of Tibet Tibet–Ladakh–Mughal war Battle of Dartsedo Battle of the Salween River Chinese expedition to Tibet (1720) Jinchuan campaigns Lhasa riot of 1750 Sino-Nepalese War Dogra–Tibetan War Nepal–Tibet War (1855–1856) Sikkim expedition British expedition to Tibet Batang uprising Chinese expedition to Tibet (1910) Xinhai Lhasa turmoil Sino-Tibetan War Qinghai–Tibet War 1938–1939 German expedition to Tibet 1939 Japanese expedition to Tibet Battle of Chamdo Protests and uprisings since 1950 1959 Tibetan uprising 1987–1989 Tibetan unrest 2008 Tibetan unrest Self-immolation protests by Tibetans in China Special Frontier Force Documents Treaty of Tingmosgang (1684) 13-Article Ordinance for the More Effective Governing of Tibet (1751) 29-Article Ordinance for the More Effective Governing of Tibet (1793) Treaty of Chushul (1842) Treaty of Thapathali (1856) Convention of Calcutta (1890) Treaty of Lhasa (1904) Convention Between Great Britain and China Respecting Tibet (1906) Anglo-Russian Convention (1907) Treaty of friendship and alliance with Mongolia (1913) Simla Accord (1914) Seventeen Point Agreement (1951) Sino-Indian Trade Agreement over Tibetan Border (1954) 70,000 Character Petition (1962) Memorandum on Genuine Autonomy (2008) Geography Flora Fauna Environment Mountains Kailash Lhotse / Changtse Namcha Barwa Tanggula Rivers Yarlung Tsangpo Grand Canyon Rongbuk Glacier Tibetan Plateau Changtang Nature Reserve Valleys Traditional regions Amdo Kham Ü-Tsang Ngari Politics Tibet Autonomous Region (TAR) Tibet Autonomous Regional Committee of the Chinese Communist Party People's Government of the Tibet Autonomous Region Etymology of Tibet Foreign relations Patron and priest relationship Golden Urn Tibet Area Serfdom controversy Serfs' Emancipation Day Sovereignty debate CIA Tibetan program India–Tibet relations Government Central Tibetan Administration Regional Government TAR People's Government TAR People's Congress Economy Postage and postal history Qinghai-Tibet Highway Qinghai–Tibet railway Society Education Languages Religion Bon Tibetan Buddhism Sakya Imperial Preceptor Dpon-chen Nyingma Kagyu Jonang Gelug Ganden Tripa Dalai Lama list Lhamo La-tso Panchen Lama list Catholicism Islam Sinicization Social classes Tibetan people Changpa Yolmo Diaspora Names Culture Art rugs thangka tsakli sand mandala wall paintings wall murals Calendar Cuisine Dzong architecture Emblem Festivals Flag Historical and cultural sites Khata (ceremonial scarf) Literature Annals Chronicle writers Music Tibetology Traditional medicine Outline Index Category Authority control databases : National Germany Japan Czech Republic Latvia NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐2pt49
Cached time: 20250818055520
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.296 seconds
Real time usage: 2.576 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 24028/1000000
Revision size: 137737/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 569234/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 50990/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 42/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 575749/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.307/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19168573/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1973.284      1 -total
 31.89%  629.300      2 Template:Reflist
 22.13%  436.769     76 Template:Cite_book
 15.34%  302.621    100 Template:Sfnp
  9.32%  183.886      4 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.88%  155.461     39 Template:Cite_web
  7.81%  154.090      1 Template:Tibetan_Buddhism_sidebar
  7.62%  150.303     25 Template:Fix
  4.97%   98.072     15 Template:Citation_needed
  4.00%   78.873      7 Template:IAST Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:30988:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818055520 and revision id 1304739992. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tibetan_Buddhism&oldid=1304739992 " Categories : Tibetan Buddhism Himalayan Buddhism History of Buddhism in Asia Religious faiths, traditions, and movements Hidden categories: Articles containing Standard Tibetan-language text Articles containing Chinese-language text All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from March 2024 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2024 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 21:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tibetan Buddhism 80 languages Add topic

