Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Full-time bloggers Toggle Full-time bloggers subsection 2.1 Allahpundit 2.2 Ed Morrissey 3 Viewpoints 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Hot Air Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Conservative blog For the 2019 film, see Hot Air (film) .

Hot Air The logo of Hot Air Type of site Political blog Available in English Owner Salem Communications Created by Michelle Malkin URL hotair .com Registration Optional, required to comment Launched 2006 ( 2006 ) Current status Online This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Hot Air is a conservative American political blog .

[ 1 ] It is written by Ed Morrissey , John Sexton, and David Strom . Karen Townsend and Jazz Shaw wrote for the blog until their deaths in 2024.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The pseudonymous Allahpundit was a major contributor until September 2022.

[ 4 ] Hot Air was founded by Michelle Malkin , a conservative author and blogger, in 2006, taking over hotair.com from a defunct personal website. Although Malkin served as the publisher and CEO of Hot Air, she exercised little editorial control over the site's various commentators. Morrissey, a Roman Catholic , is the more socially conservative (though gay-friendly) of the current bloggers, whereas Allahpundit is more libertarian and an atheist . Hot Air carried posts from a selection of conservative and libertarian bloggers in its "Green Room", which closed in May 2014.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In February 2010, Salem Communications purchased Hot Air.

[ 7 ] History [ edit ] Malkin launched Hot Air on April 24, 2006. The site's original logo showed an angry man videotaping himself while yelling at the lens. At the time of its founding, the site was to primarily feature video-blogging by Malkin, but this was eventually phased out in favor of the more traditional written blog format due to the more demanding production requirements for video-blogging back then.

When founding Hot Air, Malkin stated an intention to provide "content and analysis you can't get anywhere else on a daily basis–both on the blog and in our original video features".

[ citation needed ] In 2008, Malkin recruited Ed Morrissey as AllahP's co-blogger. At that time Morrissey was a full-time, profit-making blogger at Captain's Quarters, which he folded in order to join the Hot Air team (though its archives are still available). Morrissey maintains the podcast that started at his original website ("The Ed Morrissey Show"). This is promoted at and embedded on the Hot Air website.

In 2008, Hot Air added a separate site-within-the site called "The Green Room", inviting select professional and free-lance bloggers to contribute their posts. The Green Room provided bloggers with an opportunity to have their work distributed to the Hot Air audience. Green Room posts were often promoted to Hot Air's main page, in a fashion similar to that of other major political news/commentary sites such as the Daily Kos and RedState . The Green Room was closed in March 2014.

[ 5 ] Full-time bloggers [ edit ] Allahpundit [ edit ] Main article: Allahpundit Allahpundit's first site, Allah Is in the House was founded on August 27, 2003. The author wrote in the persona of Allah , using similar language to that of terrorist organizations but assuming the viewpoint of the God such organizations follow. (The author distinguished between the viewpoint being satirized and that of mainstream Muslims , and provided a disclaimer to the effect that his moniker was not, in fact, anti-Muslim, as casual visitors sometimes assumed.) [ citation needed ] The blog specialized in written and Photoshop -based political satire. After a hiatus in May 2004, the blog reemerged, continuing its satiric nature while largely abandoning the "Allah voice". After October 2004 the blog was updated more sporadically, and  the web address allahpundit.com was eventually abandoned. After occasional entries at allahakbar.blogspot.com, Allahpundit shut down his individual blogging operations altogether.

In September 2004, Allahpundit was a key player in debunking the Killian documents hoax.

Mary Mapes , producer of 60 Minutes , blamed Allahpundit and others for "working anonymously in what appeared to be huge numbers, in unison, to destroy the Bush-Guard story".

[ 8 ] Largely due to this controversy, the website was among the Top Blogs Cited in Political Postings for the 2004 United States presidential election .

[ 9 ] The text of posts from Allahpundit's old Allah Is in the House blog are archived at the Internet Archive , although the image files that include AllahP's Photoshopped pictures are not.

[ 10 ] AllahPundit stated that he was unlikely to do PhotoShops in the future, due to his grueling writing/posting schedule.

Allahpundit's last day at Hot Air was September 2, 2022.

[ 11 ] Ed Morrissey [ edit ] Main article: Ed Morrissey Morrissey's previous blog, "Captain's Quarters", was very popular among conservatives.

[ 12 ] He may be best known for helping expose the Canadian Adscam scandal in 2005. When Canadians were barred from reporting on the Gomery commission 's hearings, Morrissey published detailed reports on his blog, which became a key source of information about Adscam for Canadians. This episode imparted some bipartisan "street cred" to Morrissey within the libertarian community in the U.S. and in Canada, and elevated his profile.

[ citation needed ] Viewpoints [ edit ] Allahpundit's prominence on Hot Air is a contentious issue for some of the site's most conservative readers. He is often criticized for his comments and posts promoting atheism , such as once telling a critical commenter "Your children will be atheists", [ 13 ] as well as for his frequent criticisms of former Governor Sarah Palin and some "hard-right" figures. Allahpundit is also known for his frequent posts on pop culture, including various viral videos and internet memes , and his self-deprecating humor (he often refers to himself, for example, as a " beta male "). The fact that Allahpundit's appearance and geographical location is unknown to the public is often used as an in-joke , with website commentators offering deliberately farcical and imaginative explanations. During the Michelle Malkin era, Malkin received significant pushback for keeping "Allahpundit" on her payroll, particularly from the more socially conservative readers at Hot Air.

Michelle Malkin posted infrequently on Hot Air during the time she owned the site, but she was occasionally referenced there as "the Boss" (now "Boss Emeritus"). Both Allahpundit and Morrissey publicly disagreed with Malkin's take on the affairs of the day in Hot Air posts, and each has political positions that are significantly different from hers. The team also appears to be fairly independent of the socially conservative Salem Communications, as a spate of gay-friendly posts — and endorsement by Morrissey of the group GOProud — seems to attest.

[ 14 ] Editorial cartoonist Sarjex of the GayPatriot blog has satirized the controversy by drawing an LGBT version of HotAir, [ 15 ] using bright pink colors and cheesecake images of Florida Senator Marco Rubio .

See also [ edit ] Conservatism portal Protein Wisdom References [ edit ] ^ "About - Hot Air" .

hotair.com . Retrieved April 16, 2018 .

^ Shaw, Jazz (July 17, 2024).

"R.I.P. Karen Townsend, 1955-2024" .

hotair.com .

^ Morrisey, Ed (October 31, 2024).

"RIP, Jazz Shaw, 1959-2024" .

hotair.com .

^ " "My Farewell to Hot Air Reader" " . September 2, 2022.

^ a b "Greenroom Posts - Hot Air" .

Hot Air . Retrieved April 16, 2018 .

^ Portnoy, Howard (March 23, 2014).

"End of an era: The Hot Air Green Room is no more" .

Liberty Unyielding .

^ "Exclusive: Hot Air Acquired By Salem Communications" .

Mediaite . February 17, 2010.

^ Mary Mapes, Truth and Duty , p. 201.

^ Blogpulse Campaign Radar 2004 .

^ Archives of Allah Is in the House .

^ @allahpundit (August 3, 2022).

"Personal news: My last day at Hot Air will be Friday, September 2" ( Tweet ) – via Twitter .

^ Carrie Budoff (June 13, 2007).

"GOP issues rules to avoid Macaca moments" .

Politico .

five of the best-read national conservative bloggers [...]: Instapundit , Michelle Malkin, Captain's Quarters, Power Line and Hugh Hewitt .

^ "100,000 Brits download certificates of "de-baptism" " .

hotair.com . March 30, 2009 . Retrieved April 16, 2018 .

^ Patrick Ishmael (February 20, 2010).

"Gays at CPAC: The Sharon Statement, Sorba, and a curious reversal of roles" . HotAir.com.

^ Sarjex (February 23, 2010).

" "Gay Air" or "All Queer, All the Time" " . HotAir.com.

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Salem Media Group AM radio stations KBJD KCBQ KDIA KDIZ KDOW KDYA KDZR KFAX KFIA KGNW KGU KHCM KHNR KKOL KKMS KKNT KLUP KNTH KNUS KPAM KPDQ KPRZ KPXQ KRKS KRLA KSKY KSLR KTIE KTKZ KTNO KTRB KXXT KYCR KZNT WAVA WDTK WDWD WEZE WFIL WGKA WHK WHKW WIND WLCC WLQV WLSS WLTA WMCA WMYM WNIV WNTP WNYM WORL WPGP WPIT WRFD WRHC WROL WTBN WTLN WTWD WWFE WWRC WWTC WYLL FM radio stations KDAR KDIS-FM KDXE KGFT KGU-FM KHCM-FM KKHT-FM KKLA-FM KKOL-FM KPDQ-FM KRKS-FM KRYP KWRD-FM WAVA-FM WORD-FM WTOH Satellite radio stations FamilyTalk Salem Radio Network Singing News Radio The Word In Praise Townhall Media Hot Air PJ Media RedState Townhall Twitchy Salem Web Network CCMmagazine.com Christianity.com Crosswalk.com Godtube.com NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐8bkl6
Cached time: 20250817110931
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.608 seconds
Real time usage: 0.764 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3566/1000000
Revision size: 11022/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 111678/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6522/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 62790/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.337/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8137751/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  595.146      1 -total
 25.24%  150.214      1 Template:Reflist
 23.97%  142.628      1 Template:Conservatism_US
 17.69%  105.275      8 Template:Cite_web
 14.41%   85.766      1 Template:Infobox_website
 12.52%   74.519      1 Template:Infobox
 10.23%   60.858      1 Template:Short_description
  7.61%   45.296      3 Template:Citation_needed
  6.68%   39.756      3 Template:Fix
  5.88%   35.007      1 Template:Salem_Communications Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:24008750:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817110931 and revision id 1297114726. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hot_Air&oldid=1297114726 " Categories : American bloggers American columnists American political writers American political commentators Mass media in New York (state) American political blogs Internet properties established in 2006 Salem Media Group properties 21st-century American non-fiction writers American conservative websites Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2010 This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 06:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hot Air Add languages Add topic

