Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Study 2 Anatomy in visual arts 3 Approaches Toggle Approaches subsection 3.1 Regional groups 3.2 Internal organs (by region) 3.3 Major organ systems 3.4 Surface anatomy 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Human anatomy 83 languages Acèh Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego ГӀалгӀай 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ / inuktitut IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano Jawa Kapampangan Қазақша Kurdî Кырык мары Latviešu Lietuvių La .lojban.

Magyar Македонски मराठी မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Олык марий پښتو Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла Shqip සිංහල Slovenčina Slovenščina Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Fɔ̀ngbè Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific study of the morphology of the human body This article is about general aspects of human anatomy. For terminology, see Human anatomical terms .

The skeleton The nervous system The muscles The internal organs and their contents Human anatomy (gr. ἀνατομία, "dissection", from ἀνά, "up", and τέμνειν, "cut") is primarily the scientific study of the morphology of the human body .

[ 1 ] Anatomy is subdivided into gross anatomy and microscopic anatomy.

[ 1 ] Gross anatomy (also called macroscopic anatomy, topographical anatomy, regional anatomy, or anthropotomy) is the study of anatomical structures that can be seen by the naked eye.

[ 1 ] Microscopic anatomy is the study of minute anatomical structures assisted with microscopes , which includes histology (the study of the organization of tissues), [ 1 ] and cytology (the study of cells).

Anatomy , human physiology (the study of function), and biochemistry (the study of the chemistry of living structures) are complementary basic medical sciences that are generally together (or in tandem) to students studying medical sciences .

In some of its facets human anatomy is closely related to embryology , comparative anatomy and comparative embryology , [ 1 ] through common roots in evolution ; for example, much of the human body maintains the ancient segmental pattern that is present in all vertebrates with basic units being repeated, which is particularly obvious in the vertebral column and in the ribcage, and can be traced from very early embryos.

The human body consists of biological systems , that consist of organs , that consist of tissues , that consist of cells and connective tissue .

The history of anatomy has been characterized, over a long period of time, by a continually developing understanding of the functions of organs and structures of the body. Methods have also advanced dramatically, advancing from examination of animals through dissection of fresh and preserved cadavers (corpses) to technologically complex techniques developed in the 20th century.

Study [ edit ] Anatomical study by Leonardo da Vinci Generally, physicians , dentists , physiotherapists , nurses , paramedics , radiographers , and students of certain biological sciences , learn gross anatomy and microscopic anatomy from anatomical models, skeletons, textbooks, diagrams, photographs, lectures, and tutorials. The study of microscopic anatomy (or histology ) can be aided by practical experience examining histological preparations (or slides) under a microscope ; and in addition, medical and dental students generally also learn anatomy with practical experience of dissection and inspection of cadavers (dead human bodies). A thorough working knowledge of anatomy is required for all medical doctors , especially surgeons , and doctors working in some diagnostic specialities, such as histopathology and radiology .

Human anatomy, physiology , and biochemistry are basic medical sciences, which are generally taught to medical students in their first year at medical school. Human anatomy can be taught regionally or systemically; [ 1 ] that is, respectively, studying anatomy by bodily regions such as the head and chest, or studying by specific systems, such as the nervous or respiratory systems. The major anatomy textbook, Gray's Anatomy , has recently been reorganized from a systems format to a regional format, which is in line with the modern teaching.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Anatomy in visual arts [ edit ] Gross anatomy has become a key part of visual arts. Basic concepts of how muscles and bones function and deform with movement is key to drawing, painting or animating a human figure. Many books such as Human Anatomy for Artists: The Elements of Form , are written as a guide to drawing the human body anatomically correctly.

[ 4 ] Leonardo da Vinci sought to improve his art through a better understanding of human anatomy. In the process he advanced both human anatomy and its representation in art.

Because the structure of a living organism is complex, anatomy is organized by levels, from the smallest components of cells to the largest organs and their relationship to other organs.

Approaches [ edit ] Regional groups [ edit ] Head and neck – includes everything above the thoracic inlet Upper limb – includes the hand , wrist , forearm , elbow , arm , shoulder Thorax – the region of the chest from the thoracic inlet to the thoracic diaphragm Human abdomen to the pelvic brim or to the pelvic inlet The back – the spine and its components, the vertebrae , sacrum , coccyx , intervertebral disks Pelvis and perineum – the pelvis consists of everything from the pelvic inlet to the pelvic diaphragm ; the perineum is the region between the sex organs and the anus Lower limb – everything below the inguinal ligament , including the hip , the thigh , the knee , the leg , the ankle , the foot Internal organs (by region) [ edit ] Head and neck Brain Basal ganglia Brain stem Medulla Midbrain Pons Cerebellum Cerebrum Cerebral cortex Hypothalamus Limbic system Amygdala Eyes (2) Pineal gland Pituitary gland Thyroid gland Parathyroid glands (4) Thorax Heart Lungs (2) Esophagus Thymus gland Pleura Abdomen and pelvis (both sexes) Adrenal glands (2) Appendix Bladder Gallbladder Large intestine Small intestine Kidneys (2) Liver Pancreas – gland Spleen Stomach Male pelvis Prostate gland Testes – glands (2) Female pelvis Ovaries – glands (2) Uterus Major organ systems [ edit ] Main article: Biological system Circulatory system : pumping and channeling blood to and from the body and lungs with heart , blood , blood vessels Digestive system : digestion and processing food with salivary glands , esophagus , stomach , liver , gallbladder , pancreas , intestines , rectum , anus Endocrine system : communication within the body using hormones made by endocrine glands such as the hypothalamus , pituitary gland, pineal gland, thyroid , parathyroid glands, adrenal glands Immune system : the system that fights off disease; composed of leukocytes , tonsils , adenoids , thymus , spleen Integumentary system : skin , hair , nails Lymphatic system : structures involved in the transfer of lymph between tissues and the blood stream, the lymph and the nodes and vessels that transport it Musculoskeletal system : muscles provide movement and a skeleton provides structural support and protection with bones , cartilage , ligaments , tendons Nervous system : collecting, transferring and processing information with brain , spinal cord , nerves Reproductive system : the sex organs; in the female; ovaries , fallopian tubes , uterus , vagina , mammary glands , and in the male; testicles , vas deferens , seminal vesicles , prostate , penis Respiratory system : the organs used for breathing, the pharynx , larynx , trachea , bronchi , lungs , diaphragm Urinary system : kidneys , ureters , bladder , urethra involved in fluid balance, electrolyte balance, and excretion of urine Surface anatomy [ edit ] Main article: List of human anatomical features Superficial anatomy of female and male human body Surface projections of the major organs of the trunk , using the vertebral column and rib cage as main reference points of superficial anatomy Surface anatomy , or superficial anatomy, is the study of anatomical landmarks that can be identified readily from the contours or other reference points on the surface of the body.

[ 1 ] It is important in human anatomy: with knowledge of superficial anatomy, physicians gauge the position and anatomy of deeper structures.

Common names of parts of the human body, from top to bottom: Head – face – forehead – jaw – cheek – chin Neck – shoulder Arm – elbow – wrist – hand – finger – thumb Spine – chest Abdomen – groin Hip – buttocks – leg – thigh – knee – calf – ankle – foot – heel – toe Eyes , ears , nose , mouth , teeth , tongue , throat , Adam's apple , breasts , penis , scrotum , vulva , and navel are also superficial structures.

See also [ edit ] Main article: Outline of human anatomy Anatomic variation Anatomy Body orifices Death Human Human biology Human body List of human anatomical features List of human anatomical parts named after people List of bones of the human skeleton List of distinct cell types in the adult human body List of muscles of the human body List of regions in the human brain Terminologia Anatomica Terms for anatomical location Visible Human Project References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g "Introduction page, "Anatomy of the Human Body". Henry Gray. 20th edition. 1918" . Retrieved 27 March 2007 .

^ "Publisher's page for Gray's Anatomy. 39th edition (UK). 2004. ISBN 0-443-07168-3" . Archived from the original on 20 February 2007 . Retrieved 27 March 2007 .

^ "Publisher's page for Gray's Anatomy. 39th edition (US). 2004. ISBN 0-443-07168-3" . Archived from the original on 9 February 2007 . Retrieved 27 March 2007 .

^ Goldfinger , Eliot (1991).

Human Anatomy for Artists: The Elements of Form . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-505206-4 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Human anatomy .

Integrative Biology 131: General Human Anatomy (Fall 2005) by Professor Marian Diamond . Complete videos of the 40 lectures at Anatomy & Physiology (UC-Berkeley) "Anatomy of the Human Body". 20th edition. 1918. Henry Gray.

In public domain.

Human anatomy in photo Human Anatomy Lectures on Video and Other Learning Resouces Terminologia Anatomica (names of anatomical features) on FIPAT site v t e Anatomy and morphology Fields Gross anatomy Superficial anatomy Neuroanatomy brain morphometry Comparative anatomy Microscopic anatomy histology molecular Morphometrics Bacteria and fungi Bacterial cell structure cellular morphologies morphological plasticity Colonial morphology Lichen morphology Protists Structures Plants Plant anatomy fruit Plant habit Plant life-form Plant morphology reproductive Soil morphology Invertebrates Decapod anatomy Gastropod anatomy Insect morphology Diptera Odonata Spider anatomy Arthropod cuticle Mammals Human anatomy Neanderthal anatomy Cat anatomy Dog anatomy Horse anatomy Elephant anatomy Giraffe anatomy Other vertebrates Amphibian anatomy Bird anatomy Fish anatomy Shark anatomy Glossaries Anatomical terminology Anatomical terms of location Glossary of dinosaur anatomy Glossary of plant morphology leaf morphology Related topics Allometry Anatomical variation Anatomical plane Body plan Form classification Gracility Hertwig rule History of anatomy 19th century Physiognomy Standard anatomical position Transcendental anatomy Category Portal Index of anatomy articles v t e Human regional anatomy Body Skin Head Hair Face Forehead Cheek Chin Eyebrow Eye Eyelid Nose Mouth Lip Tongue Tooth Ear Jaw Mandible Occiput Scalp Temple Neck Adam's apple Throat Nape Torso (Trunk) Abdomen Waist Midriff Navel Vertebral column Back Thorax Breast Nipple Pelvis Genitalia Penis Scrotum Vulva Buttocks Anus Limbs Arm Shoulder Axilla Elbow Forearm Wrist Hand Finger Fingernail Thumb Index Middle Ring Little Leg Hip Thigh Knee Calf Foot Ankle Heel Toe Toenail Sole v t e Human systems and organs Musculoskeletal system Skeletal system Bone Carpus Collar bone (clavicle) Thigh bone (femur) Fibula Humerus Mandible Metacarpus Metatarsus Ossicles Patella Phalanges Radius Skull Tarsus Tibia Ulna Rib Vertebra Pelvis Sternum Cartilage Joints Fibrous joint Cartilaginous joint Synovial joint Muscular system Muscle Tendon Diaphragm Circulatory system Cardiovascular system peripheral Artery Vein Lymphatic vessel Heart Lymphatic system primary Bone marrow Thymus secondary Spleen Lymph node CNS equivalent Glymphatic system Nervous system Brain Spinal cord Nerve Sensory system Ear Eye Somatic system Tissue Integumentary system Skin Subcutaneous tissue Breast Mammary gland Haematopoietic and immune systems Myeloid Myeloid immune system Lymphoid Lymphoid immune system Respiratory system Upper Nose Nasopharynx Larynx Lower Trachea Bronchus Lung Digestive system Mouth Salivary gland Tongue Lip Tooth upper GI Oropharynx Laryngopharynx Esophagus Stomach lower GI Small intestine Appendix Colon Rectum Anus accessory Liver Biliary tract Pancreas Urinary system Genitourinary system Kidney Ureter Bladder Urethra Reproductive system Male Scrotum Penis Prostate Testicle Seminal vesicle Female Uterus Vagina Vulva Ovary Placenta Endocrine system Pituitary Pineal Thyroid Parathyroid Adrenal Islets of Langerhans NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐b55jz
Cached time: 20250811235757
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.338 seconds
Real time usage: 0.480 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1425/1000000
Revision size: 14152/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 69153/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1141/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 47273/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.191/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5459236/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  344.331      1 -total
 29.68%  102.194      6 Template:Navbox
 25.45%   87.643      1 Template:Anatomy
 25.22%   86.853      1 Template:Reflist
 20.01%   68.906      3 Template:Cite_web
 16.43%   56.557      1 Template:Short_description
 12.05%   41.505      1 Template:Commons_category
 11.68%   40.212      1 Template:Sister_project
 11.38%   39.181      1 Template:Side_box
  9.07%   31.218      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:13268:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235757 and revision id 1293568406. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Human_anatomy&oldid=1293568406 " Category : Human anatomy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 12:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Human anatomy 83 languages Add topic

