Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Epithets 3 Mythology Toggle Mythology subsection 3.1 Birth 3.2 Education and adventures 3.3 Marriage and family 3.4 Death and immortality 4 Sacred places and practices 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Primary sources 7.2 Secondary sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Asclepius 82 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Արեւմտահայերէն অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek god of medicine This article is about the Greek god. For the Hermetic text, see Asclepius (treatise) . For other uses, see Asclepius (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Asclepias .

Asclepius God of medicine, healing, rejuvenation and physicians Asclepius with his serpent-entwined staff , Archaeological Museum of Epidaurus Abode Mount Olympus Symbol Serpent-entwined staff Genealogy Parents Apollo and Coronis Siblings half-siblings of Asclepius Consort Epione Children Iaso Panacea Hygieia Aceso Aegle Machaon Podalirius Telesphoros Aratus Part of a series on Ancient Greek religion Origins Ancient Greek religion Mycenaean Greece , Mycenaean religion and Mycenaean deities Minoan Civilization , Minoan religion Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece , Hellenistic religion Sacred places Sacred islands Delos Ithaca Naxos Kythira Samothrace Crete Lemnos Sacred mountains Mount Lykaion Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Olympus Mount Kyllini Mount Othrys Sanctuaries Aornum Delphi Didyma Dion Dodona Eleusis Olympia Other Cave of Zeus Troy Deities Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Chthonic deities Hades Persephone Erinyes Gaia Hecate Iacchus Melinoë Triptolemus Trophonius Lesser deities Alpheus Amphitrite Asclepius Boreas Circe Cybele Deimos Eileithyia Enyo Eos Eris Eros Harmonia Hebe Hecate Helios Heracles Iris Leto Maia Metis Nemesis Nereus Nike Nyx Pan Persephone Phobos Priapus Proteus Rhea Scamander Selene Thanatos Themis Thetis Triton Zephyrus Concepts Worldview Greek mythology Orphic Egg Underworld and afterlife Miasma Daimon Ages of Man , Golden Age , Heroic Age Divine and reality Apeiron Monism Polytheism Pantheism Form of the Good Theory of forms Mind Anamnesis Ataraxia Apatheia Episteme Epoche Eudaimonia Katalepsis Logos Nous Phronesis Soul Anima mundi Metempsychosis Henosis Plato's theory of soul Ethics Agape Arete Asebeia Eusebeia Hubris Xenia Ethic of Reciprocity Delphic maxims Adiaphora Kathekon Oikeiosis Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Orphism Dionysian Mysteries Practices Worship Agalma Dithyramb Paean Orgion Hiera Orgas Hero Cult Oracle and Pythia Sacrifices and offerings Holokaustos Libation Votive offering Animal Sacrifice Temples and holy sites Temple Temenos Priesthood and religious service Hiereia Meditation and charity Eusebeia Meditation Euergetism Rites of passage Amphidromia Marriage Funeral Rites Festivals Thesmophoria Dionysia Daphnephoria Anthesteria Arrephoria Kronia Genesia Elaphebolia Pyanopsia Khalkeia Haloa Halieia Thargelia Monthly festivals Noumenia Religious games Panathenaia Herakleia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Nemean Games Pythian Games Isthmian Games Philosophy Pythagoreanism Neopythagoreanism Platonism Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Philosophers Ancient Hesiod Homer Pherecydes of Syros Pythagoras Xenophanes Parmenides Empedocles Socrates Plato Aratus Plutarch Plotinus Iamblichus Julian (emperor) Texts Argonautica Bibliotheca Corpus Hermeticum Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Epic Cycle Homeric Hymns Iliad Odyssey Orphic Hymns Theogony Works and Days Other topics Pilgrimage sites Calendar Decline of Greco-Roman polytheism Julian restoration Modern Restoration Religion portal Ancient Greece portal v t e Asclepius ( / æ s ˈ k l iː p i ə s / ; Ancient Greek : Ἀσκληπιός Asklēpiós [asklɛːpiós] ; Latin : Aesculapius ) is a hero and god of medicine in ancient Greek religion and mythology . He is the son of Apollo and Coronis , or Arsinoe , or of Apollo alone. Asclepius represents the healing aspect of the medical arts; his daughters, the "Asclepiades", are: Hygieia ("Health, Healthiness"), Iaso (from ἴασις "healing, recovering, recuperation", the goddess of recuperation from illness), Aceso (from ἄκεσις "healing", the goddess of the healing process), Aegle (the goddess of good health) and Panacea (the goddess of universal remedy). He has several sons as well. He was associated with the Roman/Etruscan god Vediovis and the Egyptian Imhotep .

[ 1 ] The rod of Asclepius , a snake-entwined staff similar to the caduceus , remains a symbol of medicine today. Those physicians and attendants who served this god were known as the Therapeutae of Asclepius .

Etymology [ edit ] The etymology of the name is unknown. In his revised version of Frisk's Griechisches etymologisches Wörterbuch ( Greek Etymological Dictionary ), R. S. P. Beekes gives this summary of the different attempts: "H. Grégoire (with R. Goossens and M. Mathieu) in Asklépios, Apollon Smintheus et Rudra 1949 (Mém. Acad. Roy. de Belgique. Cl. d. lettres. 2. sér. 45), explains the name as "the mole-hero", connecting σκάλοψ, ἀσπάλαξ ' mole ' and refers to the resemblance of the Tholos in Epidauros and the building of a mole . (Thus Puhvel , Comp. Mythol . 1987, 135.) But the variants of Asklepios and those of the word for "mole" do not agree.

The name is typical for Pre-Greek words; apart from minor variations ( β for π , αλ(α) for λα ) we find α/αι (a well known variation; Fur.

335–339) followed by -γλαπ- or -σκλαπ-/-σχλαπ/β- , i.e. a voiced velar (without -σ- ) or a voiceless velar (or an aspirated one: we know that there was no distinction between the three in the substr. language ) with a -σ- . I think that the -σ- renders an original affricate , which (prob. as δ ) was lost before the -γ- (in Greek the group -σγ- is rare, and certainly before another consonant).

Szemerényi's etymology ( JHS 94, 1974, 155) from Hitt.

assula(a)- "well-being" and piya- "give" cannot be correct, as it does not explain the velar ." [ 2 ] Beekes suggested a Pre-Greek proto-form *(a)-s y klap- .

[ 3 ] His name may mean "to cut open" from a story about his birth.

[ 4 ] Epithets [ edit ] He shared with Apollo the epithet Paean ("the Healer").

[ 5 ] He was called Aulonius , derived from a temple he had in Aulon , a valley in ancient Messenia .

[ 6 ] Mythology [ edit ] Birth [ edit ] Asclepius was the son of Apollo and, according to the earliest accounts, a mortal woman named Koronis (Coronis), who was a princess of Tricca in Thessaly.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] When she displayed infidelity by sleeping with a mortal named Ischys , Apollo found out with his prophetic powers and killed Ischys. Coronis was killed by Artemis for being unfaithful to Apollo and was laid out on a funeral pyre to be consumed, but Apollo rescued the child by cutting him from Coronis' womb.

[ 9 ] According to Delphian tradition, Asclepius was born in the temple of Apollo, with Lachesis acting as a midwife and Apollo relieving the pains of Coronis. Apollo named the child after Coronis' nickname, Aegle.

[ 10 ] Phoenician tradition maintains that Asclepius was born of Apollo without any woman involved.

[ 11 ] According to the Roman version, Apollo, having learned about Coronis' betrayal with the mortal Ischys through his raven Lycius , killed her with his arrows. Before breathing her last breath, she revealed to Apollo that she was pregnant with his child. He repented his actions and unsuccessfully tried to save her. At last, he removed their son safely from her belly before she was consumed by the fire.

[ 12 ] In yet another version, Coronis who was already pregnant with Apollo's child, had to accompany her father to Peloponnesos . She had kept her pregnancy hidden from her father. In Epidaurus , she bore a son and exposed him on a mountain called Tittheion (from τίτθη "wet nurse", τιτθεύω "to suckle, breastfeed"). The child was given milk by one of the goats that pastured about the mountain, and was guarded by the watch-dog of the herd. Aresthanas, the owner of goats and the guard dogs found the child. As he came near, he saw lightning that flashed from the child, and thinking of it to be a sign of the divine, he left the child alone. Asclepius was later taken by Apollo.

[ 13 ] According to Strabo and other traditions, the birthplace of Asclepius is considered to be Tricca (modern Trikala city in Thessaly ).

[ 8 ] [ 14 ] Education and adventures [ edit ] Zeus-like facial features of Asclepius (Melos) Apollo named the rescued baby "Asclepius" and reared him for a while and taught him many things about medicine.

[ 15 ] However, like his half-brother, Aristaeus , Asclepius had his formal education under the centaur Chiron who instructed him in the art of medicine.

[ 16 ] It is said that in return for some kindness rendered by Asclepius, a snake licked Asclepius's ears clean and taught him secret knowledge (to the Greeks snakes were sacred beings of wisdom, healing, and resurrection). Asclepius bore a rod wreathed with a snake, which became associated with healing. Another version states that when Asclepius (or in another myth Polyidus ) was commanded to restore the life of Glaucus , he was confined in a secret prison. While pondering on what he should do, a snake crept near his staff. Lost in his thoughts, Asclepius unknowingly killed it by hitting it again and again with his staff. Later, another snake came there with an herb in its mouth, and placed it on the head of a dead snake, which soon came back to life. Seeing this, Asclepius used the same herb, which brought Glaucus back.

[ 17 ] A species of non-venomous pan-Mediterranean serpent, the Aesculapian snake ( Zamenis longissimus ) is named for the god.

He was originally called Hepius but received his popular name of Asclepius after he cured Ascles, ruler of Epidaurus who suffered an incurable ailment in his eyes.

[ 18 ] Asclepius became so proficient as a healer that he surpassed both Chiron and his father, Apollo. Asclepius was therefore able to evade death and to bring others back to life from the brink of death and beyond. This caused an excessive abundance of human beings, and Zeus resorted to killing him to maintain balance in the numbers of the human population.

At some point, Asclepius was among those who took part in the Calydonian Boar hunt. Also, he was one of the Argonauts .

Roman coin from Odessos showing Asclepius with Hygieia on one side and Gordian III's portrait on the other side (35mm, 28g) Marriage and family [ edit ] Asclepius was married to Epione , with whom he had five daughters: Iaso , Panacea , Hygieia , Aceso , and Aegle , [ 19 ] and three sons: Machaon , Podaleirios and Telesphoros . He also sired a son, Aratus , with Aristodeme .

[ 20 ] Death and immortality [ edit ] Asclepius once started bringing back to life the dead people like Tyndareus , Capaneus , Glaucus , Hymenaeus , Lycurgus and others.

[ 21 ] Others say he brought Hippolytus back from the dead on Artemis's request, and accepted gold for it, [ 22 ] or maybe he did it for love.

[ 23 ] It is the only mention of Asclepius resurrecting the dead.

[ clarification needed ] In all other accounts he is said to use his skills simply as a physician.

However, Hades accused Asclepius of stealing his subjects and complained to his brother Zeus about it.

[ 24 ] According to others, Zeus was afraid that Asclepius would teach the art of resurrection to other humans as well.

[ 25 ] Concerning the fate of Asclepius, Ovid writes that "the youth [Asclepius] blasted by ancestral bolts [of Zeus] soars from earth [rising as the constellation Ophiuchus] and flings his hands coiled with double snakes." [ 26 ] Later accounts read "The Serpent-Holder. Many astronomers have imagined that he is Aesculapius [Asclepius], whom Jupiter [Zeus], for the sake of Apollo, put among the stars." [ 27 ] Asclepius was killed by Zeus, and by Apollo 's request, was subsequently immortalized as a star.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Sacred places and practices [ edit ] Asclepius (center) arrives in Kos and is greeted by Hippocrates (left) and a citizen (right), mosaic , 2nd–3rd century AD The most ancient and the most prominent asclepeion (or healing temple) according to the geographer of the 1st century BC, Strabo, was situated in Trikala .

[ 31 ] The 1st century AD Pool of Bethesda , described in the Gospel of John , chapter 5, was found by archaeologists in 1964 to be part of an asclepeion.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] One of the most famous temples of Asclepius was at Epidaurus in north-eastern Peloponnese , dated to the fourth century BC.

[ 34 ] Another famous asclepeion was built approximately a century later on the island of Kos , [ 34 ] where Hippocrates , the legendary "father of medicine", may have begun his career. Other asclepieia were situated in Gortys (in Arcadia), and Pergamum in Asia .

Votive relief of Asclepius, Epione and Hygieia. Mid-4th cent. BC, Acropolis Museum , Athens .

From the fifth century BC onwards, [ 35 ] the cult of Asclepius grew very popular and pilgrims flocked to his healing temples ( Asclepieia ) to be cured of their ills. Ritual purification would be followed by offerings or sacrifices to the god (according to means), and the supplicant would then spend the night in the holiest part of the sanctuary—the abaton (or adyton). Any dreams or visions would be reported to a priest who would prescribe the appropriate therapy by a process of interpretation.

[ 36 ] Some healing temples also used sacred dogs to lick the wounds of sick petitioners.

[ 37 ] In honor of Asclepius, a particular type of non-venomous snake was often used in healing rituals, and these snakes—the Aesculapian Snakes —slithered around freely on the floor in dormitories where the sick and injured slept. These snakes were introduced at the founding of each new temple of Asclepius throughout the classical world.

The original Hippocratic Oath began with the invocation "I swear by Apollo the Physician and by Asclepius and by Hygieia and Panacea and by all the gods ...".

[ 37 ] Epidauria (τὰ Ἐπιδαύρια) was a festival at Athens in honour of Asclepius.

[ 38 ] A Visit to Aesculapius by Edward Poynter , 1880 Some later religious movements claimed links to Asclepius. In the 2nd century AD the controversial miracle-worker Alexander claimed that his god Glycon , a snake with a "head of linen" [ 39 ] was an incarnation of Asclepius. The Greek language rhetorician and satirist Lucian produced the work Alexander the False Prophet to denounce the swindler for future generations. He described Alexander as having a character "made up of lying, trickery, perjury, and malice; [it was] facile, audacious, venturesome, diligent in the execution of its schemes, plausible, convincing, masking as good, and wearing an appearance absolutely opposite to its purpose." [ 39 ] In Rome, the College of Aesculapius and Hygia was an association ( collegium ) that served as a burial society and dining club that also participated in the Imperial cult .

The botanical genus Asclepias (commonly known as milkweed) is named after him and includes the medicinal plant A. tuberosa or "Pleurisy root".

Asclepius was depicted on the reverse of the Greek 10,000 drachmas banknote of 1995–2001.

[ 40 ] At the city of Miletus , archaeologists discovered a cave under the city's theatre which was associated with Asclepius cult.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] At Hyperteleatum , Hypsi and Hyettus there were temples of Asclepius.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] See also [ edit ] Rod of Asclepius Darrhon 1027 Aesculapia Notes [ edit ] ^ Pinch, Geraldine (1 January 2002).

Handbook of Egyptian Mythology . ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 9781576072424 .

^ Greek etymology database (online source requires login and is located at iedo.brillonline.nl Archived 29 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine ). Originally: "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on 28 September 2007 . Retrieved 11 April 2009 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) Also in: R.S.P. Beekes , Etymological Dictionary of Greek , Brill, 2009, p. 151.

^ R.S.P. Beekes , Etymological Dictionary of Greek , Brill, 2009, p. xxv.

^ "Asklepios" .

Theoi.com . Retrieved 25 November 2020 .

^ Mitchell-Boyask, p. 141 ^ Pausanias , Description of Greece 4.36.5 ^ Homeric Hymn to Asclepius (16), 1–4 ; Diodorus Siculus , 5.74.6 ^ a b "ASCLEPIUS (Asklepios) - Greek God of Medicine & Doctors" .

^ Pindar , Pythian Odes 3.5 ^ Isyllus, Hymn to Asclepius ^ Pausanias , 7.23.7 ^ Ovid , Metamorphoses 2.620 ^ Pausanias, 2.26.1–7 ^ "Asclepius" .

^ Diodorus Siculus, 5.64.6 ^ Pindar, Pythian Ode 3.5 ff. (trans. Conway) ^ Hyginus , De astronomia 2.14 ^ Tzetzes , Chiliades 10.49, p. 712–714 ^ Greek Lyric V Anonymous, fr. 939 (Inscription from Erythrai) (trans. Campbell); Suida , s.v.

Epione (trans. Suda On Line) ^ Homer , Iliad 2.730 ff.; 4.193, 217 ff. & 11.518 ff. (trans. Lattimore); Diodorus Siculus, 4.71.3 (trans. Oldfather); Pausanias, 2.29.1; Lycophron , 1047 ff. (trans. Mair); Suida, s.v.

Epione (trans. Suda On Line) ^ Stesichorus , fr. 147 from Sextus Empricicus, Against the Professors ) ^ Pindar, Pythian Ode 3; Plato , Republic 408b; Philodemus, On Piety (trans. Campbell, Vol.); Greek Lyric IV; Stesichorus, fr. 147 and Cinesias , fr. 774) ^ Clement of Alexandria , Clementina Homilia , V, 15 .

^ Diodorus Siculus, 4.71.3 ^ Apollodorus , 3.121 ^ Ovid , Fasti 6 , 735–762 (Translation by Boyle, A. J. & Woodard, R. D.) ^ Pseudo-Hyginus, Astronomica 2.14 ^ Emma and Ludwig Edelstein, Asclepius: Collection and Interpretation of the Testimonies, Volume 1, Page 51 ^ Sabine G. MacCormack Concise Encyclopedia of Greek and Roman Mythology p.47 ^ Theony Condos, Star Myths of the Greeks and Romans , p.141 ^ "Asclepeion of ancient Trikki | Municipality of Trikala" .

Municipality of Trikala . 14 June 2017.

^ An archaeological diagram of the layout – the diagram displayed at the location itself – is visible at this link Archived 4 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Jerome Murphy-O'Connor , The Holy Land , (2008), page 29 ^ a b Edelstein, Ludwig and Emma Edelstein.

Asclepius: a Collection and Interpretation of the Testimonies . Vol. 2. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1998. p. 243 ^ Wickkiser, Bronwen.

Asklepios, Medicine, and the Politics of Healing in Fifth-century Greece: Between Craft and Cult . Johns Hopkins Press, 2008. p. 106 ^ Sigerist 1987 , pp. 63ff ^ a b Farnell, Chapter 10, "The Cult of Asklepios" (pp. 234–279) ^ Harry Thurston Peck, Harpers Dictionary of Classical Antiquities (1898), Epidauria ^ a b Lucian, Alexander the False Prophet (trans A.M. Harmon) (Cambridge: Loeb Classical Library, 1936), Lucian, vol IV. Accessible online at http://www.tertullian.org/rpearse/lucian/lucian_alexander.htm ^ Bank of Greece Archived 28 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine .

Drachma Banknotes Archived 11 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine .

10,000 drachma note (pdf) Archived 11 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine – Retrieved 26 July 2010.

^ "Sacred Cave" in ancient Miletos awaits visitors ^ The Ancient City of Miletos's "Sacred Cave" Opened to Visitors ^ Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography (1854), Hyperteleatum ^ Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography (1854), Hypsi ^ Dictionary of Greek and Roman Geography (1854), Hyettus References [ edit ] Primary sources [ edit ] Apollodorus , The Library with an English Translation by Sir James George Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S. in 2 Volumes, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1921. ISBN 0-674-99135-4.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.

Greek text available from the same website .

Apollonius Rhodius , Argonautica translated by Robert Cooper Seaton (1853–1915), R. C. Loeb Classical Library Volume 001. London, William Heinemann Ltd, 1912.

Online version at the Topos Text Project.

Apollonius Rhodius, Argonautica . George W. Mooney. London. Longmans, Green. 1912.

Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library .

Diodorus Siculus , The Library of History translated by Charles Henry Oldfather . Twelve volumes.

Loeb Classical Library . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann, Ltd. 1989. Vol. 3. Books 4.59–8.

Online version at Bill Thayer's Web Site Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca Historica. Vol 1-2 . Immanel Bekker. Ludwig Dindorf. Friedrich Vogel. in aedibus B. G. Teubneri. Leipzig. 1888-1890.

Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library .

Gaius Julius Hyginus , Astronomica from The Myths of Hyginus translated and edited by Mary Grant. University of Kansas Publications in Humanistic Studies.

Online version at the Topos Text Project.

Homer , The Iliad with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, Ph.D. in two volumes. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924.

ISBN 978-0674995796 .

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.

Homer, Homeri Opera in five volumes. Oxford, Oxford University Press. 1920.

ISBN 978-0198145318 .

Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White. Homeric Hymns. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.

Greek text available from the same website .

Lycophron , The Alexandra translated by Alexander William Mair. Loeb Classical Library Volume 129. London: William Heinemann, 1921.

Online version at the Topos Text Project.

Lycophron, Alexandra translated by A.W. Mair. London: William Heinemann; New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons. 1921.

Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library.

Marcus Tullius Cicero , Nature of the Gods from the Treatises of M.T. Cicero translated by Charles Duke Yonge (1812–1891), Bohn edition of 1878.

Online version at the Topos Text Project.

Marcus Tullius Cicero, De Natura Deorum.

O. Plasberg. Leipzig. Teubner. 1917.

Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library .

Pausanias , Description of Greece with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918.

ISBN 0-674-99328-4 .

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library Pausanias, Graeciae Descriptio.

3 vols . Leipzig, Teubner. 1903.

Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library .

Pindar , Odes translated by Diane Arnson Svarlien. 1990.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library.

Pindar, The Odes of Pindar including the Principal Fragments with an Introduction and an English Translation by Sir John Sandys, Litt.D., FBA. Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1937.

Greek text available at the Perseus Digital Library .

Publius Ovidius Naso , Fasti translated by James G. Frazer.

Online version at the Topos Text Project.

Publius Ovidius Naso, Fasti.

Sir James George Frazer. London; Cambridge, MA. William Heinemann Ltd.; Harvard University Press. 1933.

Latin text available at the Perseus Digital Library .

Tzetzes, John , Book of Histories, Book IX-X translated by Jonathan Alexander from the original Greek of T. Kiessling's edition of 1826.

Online version at theoi.com Secondary sources [ edit ] Edelstein, Ludwig and Emma Edelstein.

Asclepius: Collection and Interpretation of the Testimonies , Baltimore, The Johns Hopkins Press, 1945.

von Ehrenheim, Hedvig.

Greek Incubation Rituals in Classical and Hellenistic Times. Kernos. Supplément, 29.

Liège:  Presses Universitaires de Liège, 2015.

Farnell, Lewis Richard.

Greek Hero Cults and Ideas of Immortality , (Oxford Clarendon Press,1921).

Grimal, Pierre, The Dictionary of Classical Mythology , Wiley-Blackwell, 1996, ISBN 978-0-631-20102-1 .

"Asclepius" pp. 62–63 Hart, Gerald D. MD.

Asclepius: The God of Medicine (Royal Society of Medicine Press, 2000) Kool, S. "The Soother of Evil Pains: Asclepius and Freud." Akroterion 60, 2015, pp. 13–32.

LiDonnici, Lynn R.

The Epidaurian Miracle Inscriptions: Text, Translation, and Commentary.

Atlanta: Scholars, 1995.

Mitchell-Boyask, Robin, Plague and the Athenian Imagination: Drama, History and the Cult of Asclepius , Cambridge University Press, 2008, ISBN 978-0-521-87345-1 .

Oberhelman, Steven M. (ed.), Dreams, Healing, and Medicine in Greece: From Antiquity to the Present.

Farnham; Burlington, VT:  Ashgate, 2013.

Renberg, Gil H. "Public and Private Places of Worship in the Cult of Asclepius at Rome".

Memoirs of the American Academy in Rome , 51/52, 2006, pp. 87–172.

Riethmüller, Jürgen W.

Asklepios : Heiligtümer und Kulte , Heidelberg, Verlag Archäologie und Geschichte, 2005, ISBN 3-935289-30-8 Sigerist, Henry E. (1987).

A History of Medicine Volume 2: Early Greek, Hindu, and Persian Medicine (1st ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-505079-0 .

Wickkiser, Bronwen.

Asklepios, Medicine, and the Politics of Healing in Fifth-century Greece: Between Craft and Cult . JHU Press, 2008.

External links [ edit ] Look up Asclepius in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (images of Aesculapius) v t e Ancient Greek deities Primal elements Aether Chaos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx The Ourea Pontus Tartarus Uranus Titans Twelve Titans Coeus Crius Cronus Dione Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Descendants of the Titans Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Olympian deities Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Olympian Gods Asclepius Eileithyia Enyo Eris Iris Harmonia Hebe Heracles Paean Pan Muses Daughters of Zeus Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Daughters of Apollo Apollonis Borysthenis Cephisso Boeotian Muses Aoide Melete Mneme Muses of the Lyre Hypate Mese Nete Muses at Sicyon Polymatheia Charites (Graces) Aglaia Euphrosyne Hegemone Pasithea Thalia Horae (Hours) Dike Eirene Eunomia Children of Styx Bia Kratos Nike Zelus Water deities Sea deities Amphitrite Benthesikyme Brizo Calliste Calypso Ceto Eurybia Glaucus Leucothea Melicertes Nereus Nerites Oceanus Phorcys Pontus Poseidon Proteus Rhodos Tethys Thalassa Thaumas Thetis Triton Oceanids Acaste Admete Asia Callirhoe Ceto Clymene (consort of Helios) Clymene (wife of Iapetus) Clytie Dione Dodone Doris Electra Eurynome Idyia Melia (consort of Apollo) Melia (consort of Inachus) Metis Perse Philyra Pleione Plouto Styx Telesto Theia Zeuxo Nereids Amatheia Amphithoe Amphitrite Arethusa Cymatolege Cymo Dynamene Galatea Galene Protomedeia Psamathe Sao Spio Thalia Thetis River gods Achelous Alpheus Anapus Asopus Asterion Axius Caanthus Cebren Cephissus Enipeus Kladeos Meander Nilus Numicus Phyllis Peneus Sangarius Scamander Selemnus Simoeis Strymon Naiads Aegina Achiroe Aganippe The Anigrides Argyra Bistonis Bolbe Caliadne Cassotis Castalia Cleocharia Creusa Daphne Drosera Harpina The Ionides Ismenis Larunda Lilaea Liriope Melite Metope Minthe Moria Nana Nicaea Orseis Pallas Pirene Salmacis Stilbe The Thriae Corycia Cleodora Melaina Tiasa Personifications Children of Eris Algos Amphillogiai The Androktasiai Atë Dysnomia Horkos Hysminai Lethe Logoi Limos Machai Neikea Phonoi Ponos Pseudea Children of Nyx Apate Eris Geras Hesperides Hypnos The Keres The Moirai Atropos Clotho Lachesis Momus Moros Nemesis Oizys The Oneiroi Philotes Thanatos Others Achlys Adephagia Aergia Aidos Aion Alala Alastor Aletheia Alke Amechania Anaideia Ananke Angelia Anteros Apheleia Arete The Arae Astraea Caerus Chronos Chrysus Corus Deimos Dikaiosyne Dyssebeia Eiresione Ekecheiria Eulabeia Eupraxia Eusebeia Ersa Eros Erotes Gelos Hedone Hedylogos Heimarmene Hermaphroditus Homados Homonoia Horme Hymen Iacchus Ioke Kakia Koalemos Kydoimos The Litae Lyssa The Maniae Methe Nomos Palioxis Peitharchia Peitho Penia Penthus Pepromene Pheme Phobos Phrike Phthonus Poine Polemos Poros Praxidice Proioxis Prophasis Soter Soteria Thrasos Tyche Other deities Sky The Anemoi Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Hesperus Phosphorus Phaethon Astrape and Bronte Aura The Hesperides The Hyades Nephele The Pleiades Alcyone Sterope Celaeno Electra Maia Merope Taygete Sirius Tritopatores Agriculture Aphaia Demeter Despoina Eunostus Opora Philomelus Plutus Health Asclepius Aceso Epione Iaso Hygieia Paean Panacea Telesphorus Rustic deities Aetna Agdistis The Alseids Amphictyonis Aristaeus Attis Britomartis The Cabeiri Comus The Dryades Erato The Hamadryades Chrysopeleia The Epimelides Hecaterus Leuce The Maenades The Meliae Hyperborean maidens The Oreads Echo Priapus Rhapso Silenus Telete Others Aphroditus Arke Auxesia Enodia Circe Enyalius Hecate Orthanes Palaestra Pasiphaë Phanes Sosipolis v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Religion and religious practice Main beliefs Ages of Man Golden Age Heroic Age Ancient accounts of Homer Apotheosis Arete Daemon Destiny Eudaimonia Euhemerism Eunoia Eusebeia Golden mean Golden Rule Greek words for love Hemitheos Hero cult Hubris Interpretatio graeca Katabasis Kleos Know thyself Metamorphosis Metempsychosis Nympholepsy Paradoxography Patron gods Pederasty Phronesis Polytheism Sophrosyne Soter Theia mania Xenia Texts / odes / epic poems Epic Cycle Aethiopis Cypria Iliad Iliupersis Little Iliad Nostoi Odyssey Telegony Theban Cycle Oedipodea Thebaid Epigoni Alcmeonis Others Aesop's Fables Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Catalogue of Women Cyranides Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Golden Verses of Pythagoras Greek Magical Papyri Homerica Homeric Hymns Interpretation of Dreams Oneirocritica Orphic Hymns Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Sortes Astrampsychi Stories from Plato Atlantis Myth of Er Ring of Gyges Theogony Works and Days Religions Antecedents Minoan religion Mycenaean religion List of Mycenaean deities Paleo-Balkan mythology Proto-Indo-European mythology Religions of the ancient Near East Expressions Atheism Henotheism Monotheism Polytheism Hellenistic religions Early Christianity Christianization Relationship with Greek philosophy Esoteric systems Early alchemy Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Hellenistic Judaism God-fearers Syncretic religions Alexander Ptolemaic cult Etruscan religion Greco-Buddhism Roman religion Imperial cult Religious views of emperor Julian Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Arcadian Mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Orphism Samothracian Mysteries New religious movements Discordianism Feraferia Gaianism Hellenism Religious practice Worship / rituals Amphidromia Arotoi Hieroi Astragalomancy Baptes Cult of Artemis at Brauron Daduchos Divination Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Greco-Roman mysteries Hero cult Heroön Hierophany Hieros gamos Hymns Incubation Komos Nekyia Omophagia Orgia Panegyris Prayer Sacrifice Animal sacrifice Hecatomb Holocaust Libation Pharmakos Votive offering Theatre Religious offices Amphictyonic league Archon basileus Basilinna Gerarai Hiereia Hierophant Hierophylakes Iatromantis Kanephoros Mystagogue Oracle Sibyl Thiasus Religious objects Baetyl Cult image Chryselephantine sculpture Xoanon Greek terracotta figurines Kernos Kykeon Loutrophoros Omphalos Panathenaic amphora Rhyton Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Thymiaterion Magic Apotropaic magic Curse tablet Divination Greek Magical Papyri Hermeticism Hermetica Necromancy Philia Events Festivals / feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Halieia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Leucophryna Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Ptolemaieia Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Heraean Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Actia Sacred places Temples / sanctuaries Asclepieion Delphinion Mithraeum Necromanteion of Acheron Nymphaeum Panionium Parthenon Ploutonion Telesterion Temenos Temple of Artemis, Ephesus Temple of Zeus, Olympia Oracles Amphiareion of Oropos Aornum Claros Delphi Didyma Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Apollo at Ptoion Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros Oracle of Menestheus Sanctuary of the Great Gods Tegyra Mountains Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Caves of Pan Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Island of Achilles Delos Islands of Diomedes Springs Castalian Spring Hippocrene Pierian Spring Others Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Theatre of Dionysus Myths and mythology Deities ( Family tree ) Primordial deities Aether Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Water deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Proteus River gods Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Charon Hermes Hermanubis Thanatos Angelos Cabeiri The Erinyes (Furies) Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Darrhon Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Pasiphaë Art and beauty deities Aphrodite Apollo The Charites (Graces) Aglaea Euphrosyne Thalia Dionysus The Muses Calliope Clio Polyhymnia Euterpe Terpsichore Erato Melpomene Thalia Urania Other major deities The Anemoi (Winds) Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Azone Chrysaor Cybele Eileithyia Glycon Harmonia Nemesis Pan Pegasus Zelus Heroes / heroines Individuals Abderus Achilles Actaeon Adonis Aeneas Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Polydeuces) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Menelaus Narcissus Nestor Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Otrera Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Groups Argonauts Calydonian hunters Epigoni Seven against Thebes Oracles / seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyls Cimmerian Cumaean Delphic Erythraean Hellespontine Libyan Persian Phrygian Samian Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Other mortals Aegeus Aegisthus Agamemnon Andromache Andromeda Antigone Augeas Briseis Cassiopeia Creon of Thebes Chryseis Chrysothemis Clytemnestra Damocles Deidamia Deucalion Electra Eteocles Europa Gordias Hecuba Helen of Troy Hellen The Heracleidae Hermione Hippolyta Io Iphigenia Ismene Jocasta Laius Lycian peasants Lycaon The Maenads Memnon Messapian shepherds Midas Minos Myrrha Neoptolemus Niobe Orestes Paris Patroclus Penelope Philomela Phoenix Polybus of Corinth Polynices Priam Procne Pylades Pyrrha Telemachus Troilus Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Necromanteion (necromancy temple) Necromanteion of Acheron Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Isles of the Blessed Mourning Fields Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Residents Anticlea Danaïdes Eurydice Ixion Ocnus Salmoneus The Shades Sisyphus Tantalus Tiresias Titans Tityos Visitors Dionysus Heracles Hermes Odysseus Orpheus Pirithous Psyche Theseus Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Charon's obol Animals, daemons, and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Menoetius Mythical Beings Lists Deities Mythological creatures Mortals Minor figures Trojan War characters Minor spirits Daemon Agathodaemon Cacodaemon Eudaemon Nymph Satyr Beasts / creatures Centaur Centaurides Ichthyocentaur Cyclops Dragon Drakaina Echidna Giant Gorgon Harpy Hecatonchires Hippocampus Horses of Helios Lamia Phoenix Python Siren Scylla and Charybdis Sphinx Typhon Captured / slain by heroes Calydonian boar Cerberus Cerynian Hind Chimera Cretan Bull Crommyonian Sow Erymanthian boar Khalkotauroi Lernaean Hydra Mares of Diomedes Medusa Minotaur Nemean lion Orthrus Polyphemus Stymphalian birds Talos Teumessian fox Tribes Achaeans Amazons Anthropophagi Bebryces Cicones Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Laestrygonians Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Spartoi Telchines Places / Realms Aethiopia Ara Colchis Erytheia Hyperborea Ismarus Ithaca Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Phlegra Scheria Scythia Symplegades Tartessos Themiscyra Thrinacia Troy Events Apollo and Daphne Calydonian boar hunt Eros and Psyche Judgment of Paris Labours of Heracles Orpheus and Eurydice Returns from Troy Odyssey Wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Gigantomachy Indian War Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Argo Dragon's teeth Diipetes Eidolon Galatea Girdle of Aphrodite Golden apple Golden Fleece Gordian knot Harpe Ichor Labyrinth Lotus tree Milk of Hera Moly Necklace of Harmonia Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos ( Winged helmet ) Phaeacian ships Philosopher's stone Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thyrsus Trident of Poseidon Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of fire Symbols Bowl of Hygieia Caduceus Cornucopia Gorgoneion Kantharos Labrys Orphic egg Ouroboros Owl of Athena Phallus Rod of Asclepius Swan song Wind East West North South Modern treatments Classical mythology in western art and literature Classicism Classics Greek mythology in popular culture Modern understanding of Greek mythology Portals : Ancient Greece Myths Asclepius at Wikipedia's sister projects : Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Asclepius&oldid=1306421194 " Categories : Health gods Greek gods Greek mythological heroes Mythological Greek physicians Argonauts Children of Apollo Deeds of Zeus Metamorphoses characters Asclepius Ancient Greek medicine Snakes in religion Kourotrophoi Olympian deities Iliad Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2020 Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages with Greek IPA Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2024 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 17:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Asclepius 82 languages Add topic

