Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 History 3 Production 4 Storage 5 Military applications Toggle Military applications subsection 5.1 Armor plate 5.2 Nuclear weapons 5.3 Ammunition 5.4 Legal status in weapons 5.5 Requests for a moratorium on military use 6 Civilian applications Toggle Civilian applications subsection 6.1 Energy 6.2 Radiation shielding 6.3 Coloring in consumer products 6.4 Trim weights in aircraft 6.5 US NRC general license 6.6 Sailboat keel 6.7 Sampling calorimeters for detectors in high-energy particle physics 7 Health considerations Toggle Health considerations subsection 7.1 Chemical toxicity 7.2 Radiological hazards 7.3 Studies indicating negligible effects 7.4 Gulf War syndrome and soldier complaints 7.5 Iraqi population 7.6 The Balkans 7.7 Okinawa, Japan 7.8 Sardinia, Italy 7.9 Afghan War 7.10 Remscheid, Germany 7.11 Atmospheric contamination 7.12 Other contamination cases 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 Cited sources 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Depleted uranium 42 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Magyar Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Uranium with lower content of 235 U The DU penetrator of a 30 mm round [ 1 ] Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Depleted uranium ( DU ), also referred to in the past as Q-metal , depletalloy , or D-38 , is uranium with a lower content of the fissile isotope 235 U than natural uranium.

[ 2 ] The less radioactive and non-fissile 238 U is the main component of depleted uranium.

Uranium is notable for the extremely high density of its metallic form: at 19.1 grams per cubic centimetre (0.69 lb/cu in ), uranium is 68.4% more dense than lead . Because depleted uranium has nearly the same density as natural uranium but far less radioactivity, it is desirable for applications that demand high mass without added radiation hazards. Civilian uses include counterweights in aircraft, radiation shielding in medical radiation therapy , research and industrial radiography equipment, and containers for transporting radioactive materials.  Military uses include armor plating and armor-piercing projectiles .

The use of DU in munitions is controversial because of concerns about potential long-term health effects.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Normal functioning of the kidney , brain , liver , heart , and numerous other systems can be affected by exposure to uranium, a toxic metal .

[ 5 ] It is only weakly radioactive because of the long radioactive half-life of 238 U (4.468 billion years) and the low amounts of 234 U (half-life about 246,000 years) and 235 U (half-life 700 million years). The biological half-life (the average time it takes for the human body to eliminate half the amount in the body) for uranium is about 15 days.

[ 6 ] The aerosol or spallation frangible powder produced by impact and combustion of depleted uranium munitions (or armour) can potentially contaminate wide areas around the impact sites, leading to possible inhalation by human beings.

[ 7 ] The actual level of acute and chronic toxicity of DU is also controversial. Several studies using cultured cells and laboratory rodents suggest the possibility of leukemogenic , genetic , reproductive , and neurological effects from chronic exposure.

[ 3 ] According to Al Jazeera , DU from American artillery is suspected to be one of the major causes of an increase in the general mortality rate in Iraq since 1991.

[ 8 ] A 2005 epidemiology review concluded "In aggregate the human epidemiological evidence is consistent with increased risk of birth defects in offspring of persons exposed to DU." [ 9 ] A 2021 study concluded that DU from exploding munitions did not lead to Gulf War illness in American veterans deployed in the Gulf War .

[ 10 ] According to a 2013 study, despite the use of DU by coalition forces in Fallujah , Iraq , no DU has been found in soil samples taken from the city, [ 11 ] although another study of 2011 had indicated elevated levels of uranium in tissues of the city inhabitants.

[ 12 ] Definition [ edit ] Natural uranium contains about 0.72% 235 U. Depleted uranium has lower mass fractions —up to three times less—of 235 U and 234 U than natural uranium. Since 238 U has a much longer half-life than the lighter isotopes, DU is about 40% less radioactive than natural uranium.

[ 2 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Most of the alpha radiation comes from 238 U and 234 U [ notes 1 ] whereas beta radiation comes from decay products 234 Th and 234 Pa that are formed within a few weeks.

[ clarification needed ] [ citation needed ] The United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) defines depleted uranium as uranium with a percentage of the 235 U isotope that is less than 0.711% by weight (see 10 CFR 40.4 ). The military specifications designate that the DU used by the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) contain less than 0.3% 235 U.

[ 15 ] In actuality, DoD uses only DU that contains approximately 0.2% 235 U.

[ 15 ] History [ edit ] Enriched uranium was first manufactured in the early 1940s when the United States and Great Britain began their nuclear weapons programs. Later in the decade, France and the Soviet Union began their nuclear weapons and nuclear power programs. Depleted uranium was originally stored as an unusable waste product ( uranium hexafluoride ) in the hope that improved enrichment processes could extract additional quantities of the fissionable 235 U isotope . This re-enrichment recovery of the residual uranium-235 is now in practice in some parts of the world; e.g. in 1996 over 6,000 tonnes (6,600 short tons) were upgraded in a Russian plant.

[ 16 ] In the 1970s, the Pentagon reported that the Soviet military had developed armor plating for Warsaw Pact tanks that NATO ammunition could not penetrate.

[ citation needed ] The Pentagon began searching for material to make denser armor-piercing projectiles . After testing various metals, ordnance researchers settled on depleted uranium.

[ citation needed ] The US and NATO militaries used DU penetrator rounds in the 1991 Gulf War , the Bosnia war , [ 17 ] bombing of Serbia , the 2003 invasion of Iraq , [ 18 ] and 2015 airstrikes on ISIS in Syria.

[ 19 ] It is estimated that between 315 and 350 short tons (286 and 318 t) of DU were used in the 1991 Gulf War.

[ 20 ] Production [ edit ] Most depleted uranium arises as a by-product of the production of enriched uranium for use as fuel in nuclear reactors and in the manufacture of nuclear weapons . Enrichment processes generate uranium with a higher-than-natural concentration of lower- mass-number uranium isotopes (in particular 235 U, which is the uranium isotope supporting the fission chain reaction ) with the bulk of the feed ending up as depleted uranium.

Natural uranium metal contains about 0.71% 235 U, 99.28% 238 U, and about 0.0054% 234 U. The production of enriched uranium using isotope separation creates depleted uranium containing only 0.2% to 0.4% 235 U. Because natural uranium begins with such a low percentage of 235 U, enrichment produces large quantities of depleted uranium. For example, producing 1 kilogram (2.2 lb) of 5% enriched uranium requires 11.8 kilograms (26 lb) of natural uranium, and leaves about 10.8 kilograms (24 lb) of depleted uranium having only 0.3% 235 U.

Depleted uranium is further produced by recycling spent nuclear fuel , [ 21 ] in which case it contains traces of neptunium and plutonium .

[ 22 ] These quantities are so small that they are not considered to be of serious radiological significance by the European Committee on Radiation Risk .

[ 23 ] DU from nuclear reprocessing has different isotopic ratios from enrichment-by-product DU, from which it can be distinguished by the presence of 236 U .

[ 24 ] The only known natural source of uranium with a 235 U content significantly different from 0.71% is found in the natural nuclear fission reactor at Oklo, Gabon . It can be "fingerprinted" as different in origin from manmade depleted uranium by the 234 U content, which is 55 ppm in uranium from the Oklo Mine as well as all other natural sources, but will be lower in depleted uranium in accordance with the degree of depletion.

Storage [ edit ] A typical DUF 6 cylinder storage yard DUF 6 cylinders: painted (left) and corroded (right) Uranium hexafluoride tank leaking About 95% of the depleted uranium produced until now is stored as uranium hexafluoride , or (D) UF 6 , in steel cylinders in open air storage yards close to enrichment plants. Each cylinder typically holds up to 12.7 tonnes (14.0 short tons) of UF 6 . In the U.S. 560,000 tonnes (620,000 short tons) of depleted UF 6 had accumulated by 1993. In 2008, 686,500 tonnes (756,700 short tons) in 57,122 storage cylinders were located near Portsmouth , Ohio; Oak Ridge , Tennessee; and Paducah , Kentucky.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] The storage of (D) UF 6 presents environmental, health, and safety risks because of its chemical instability. When UF 6 is exposed to water vapor in the air, it reacts with the moisture to produce UO 2 F 2 (uranyl fluoride), a solid, and HF (hydrogen fluoride), a gas, both of which are highly soluble and toxic. The uranyl fluoride solid acts to plug the leak, limiting further escape of depleted UF 6 . Release of the hydrogen fluoride gas to the atmosphere is also slowed by the plug formation.

[ 27 ] Like any other uranium compound, it is radioactive, and precautions should be taken. It is also highly toxic. Whether ingested, inhaled, or absorbed through the skin , uranyl fluoride is corrosive and may harm internal organs, potentially resulting in death. Effects of exposure may be delayed.

[ 28 ] The U.S. government has been converting depleted UF 6 to solid uranium oxides for use or disposal.

[ 29 ] Such disposal of the entire D UF 6 inventory could cost anywhere from US$15 million to US$450 million.

[ 30 ] The vulnerability of DUF 6 storage cylinders to terrorist attack is also a matter of concern.

World depleted-uranium inventory [ 31 ] Country Organization Estimated DU stocks tonnes ( short tons ) Reported United States DOE 480,000 (530,000) 2002 Russia Rosatom 460,000 (510,000) 1996 France Areva NC 190,000 (210,000) 2001 United Kingdom BNFL 30,000 (33,000) 2001 United Kingdom Germany Netherlands URENCO 16,000 (18,000) 1999 Japan JNFL 10,000 (11,000) 2001 China CNNC 2,000 (2,200) 2000 South Korea KAERI 200 (220) 2002 South Africa NECSA 73 (80) 2001 Singapore DSO National Laboratories 60 (66) 2007 Total 1,188,273 (1,309,847) 2008 Military applications [ edit ] Depleted uranium is very dense; at 19,050 kg/m 3 , it is 1.67 times as dense as lead , only slightly less dense than tungsten and gold , and only 16% less than osmium or iridium , which are the densest known substances under standard (i.e., Earth-surface) pressures. Consequently, a DU projectile of given mass has a smaller diameter than an equivalent lead projectile with the same kinetic energy , with less aerodynamic drag and deeper penetration because of a higher pressure at point of impact. DU projectiles are inherently incendiary because they become pyrophoric upon impact with the target.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Armor plate [ edit ] Because of its high density, depleted uranium can also be used in tank armor, sandwiched between sheets of steel armor plate. For instance, some late-production M1A1 and M1A2 Abrams tanks built after 1998 have DU modules integrated into their Chobham armor , as part of the armor plating in the front of the turret, and there is a program to upgrade older tanks.

Nuclear weapons [ edit ] Main article: Nuclear weapons design Depleted uranium can be used as a tamper , or neutron reflector , in fission bombs . A high density tamper like DU makes for a longer-lasting, more energetic, and more efficient explosion.

Ammunition [ edit ] Most military use of depleted uranium has been as 30 mm ordnance, primarily the 30 mm PGU-14/B armor-piercing incendiary round from the GAU-8 Avenger cannon of the A-10 Thunderbolt II used by the United States Air Force . 25 mm DU rounds have been used in the M242 gun mounted on the U.S. Army's Bradley Fighting Vehicle and the Marine Corps 's LAV-25 .

The U.S. Marine Corps uses DU in the 25 mm PGU-20 round fired by the GAU-12 Equalizer cannon of the AV-8B Harrier , and also in the 20 mm M197 gun mounted on AH-1 Cobra helicopter gunships. The United States Navy 's Phalanx CIWS 's M61 Vulcan Gatling gun used 20 mm armor-piercing penetrator rounds with discarding plastic sabots and a core made using depleted uranium, however they later changed to using tungsten penetrators.

Mark 149 Mod 2 20mm depleted uranium ammunition for the Phalanx CIWS aboard the battleship USS Missouri , November 1987.

Another use of depleted uranium is in kinetic energy penetrators , anti-armor rounds such as the 120 mm sabot rounds fired from the British Challenger 1 , Challenger 2 , [ 34 ] M1A1 and M1A2 Abrams.

[ 35 ] Kinetic energy penetrator rounds consist of a long, relatively thin penetrator surrounded by a discarding sabot.

Staballoys are metal alloys of depleted uranium with a very small proportion of other metals, usually titanium or molybdenum . One formulation has a composition of 99.25% by mass of depleted uranium and 0.75% by mass of titanium . Staballoys are approximately 1.67 times as dense as lead and are designed for use in kinetic energy penetrator armor-piercing ammunition. The US Army uses DU in an alloy with around 3.5% titanium.

Depleted uranium is favored for the penetrator because it is self-sharpening [ 36 ] and flammable .

[ 32 ] On impact with a hard target, such as an armored vehicle, the tip of the projectile will be "mushroomed", [ 37 ] while the back of the projectile is still a rigid solid, this leads to adiabatic shearing and together with the spin of the projectile results in a shedding of the mushroomed plastic phase in such a way that it forms a new sharp tip. This shedding of the mushroomed tip improves penetration properties compared to the complete dispersal that takes place with tungsten penetrators, [ 38 ] therefore DU penetrators are 20% more effective than tungsten rounds.

[ 39 ] The impact and subsequent release of heat energy causes it to ignite when in contact with oxygen.

[ 32 ] When a DU penetrator reaches the interior of an armored vehicle, it catches fire, often igniting ammunition and fuel and possibly causing the vehicle to explode.

[ 39 ] DU is used by the U.S. Army in 120 mm or 105 mm cannons employed on the M1 Abrams tank .

The DU content in various ammunition is 180 grams (6.3 oz) in 20 mm, 200 grams (7.1 oz) in 25 mm, 280 grams (9.9 oz) in 30 mm, 3.5 kilograms (7.7 lb) in 105 mm, and 4.5 kilograms (9.9 lb) in 120 mm penetrators. DU was used during the mid-1990s in the U.S. to make hand grenades , and land mines , but those applications have been discontinued, according to Alliant Techsystems .

[ citation needed ] The US Navy used DU in its 20 mm Phalanx CIWS guns, but switched in the late 1990s to armor-piercing tungsten.

Only the US and the UK have acknowledged using DU weapons.

[ as of?

] [ 40 ] The Soviet Union and Russia have used DU weaponry since the 3BM-32 Vant, designed for the 125 mm tank cannons.

[ 41 ] In 2018, TASS reported that Russia was arming some of its T-80 models with 3BM60 Svinets-2 DU rounds.

[ 41 ] 782,414 DU rounds were fired during the 1991 war in Iraq, mostly by US forces.

[ 42 ] In a three-week period of conflict in Iraq during 2003, it was estimated that between 1,000 and 2,000 tonnes of depleted uranium munitions were used.

[ 43 ] More than 300,000 DU rounds were fired during the 2003 war, the vast majority by US troops.

[ 42 ] The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) estimates that between 170 and 1,700 tonnes of depleted uranium was dropped in Iraq by the US military since 2003, whereas the UK reported firing 1.9 tonnes of depleted uranium weapons in Iraq [ 44 ] In March 2023, the UK government confirmed it was sending DU rounds to Ukraine along with its Challenger 2 tanks with its 120mm ammunition during the Russian invasion .

[ 45 ] Legal status in weapons [ edit ] In 1996, the International Court of Justice (ICJ) gave an advisory opinion on the " legality of the threat or use of nuclear weapons ".

[ 46 ] This made it clear, in paragraphs 54–56, that international law on poisonous weapons—the Second Hague Declaration of 29 July 1899, Hague Convention IV of 18 October 1907 and the Geneva Protocol of 17 June 1925—did not cover nuclear weapons, because their prime or exclusive use was not to poison or asphyxiate. This ICJ opinion was about nuclear weapons, but the sentence "The terms have been understood, in the practice of States, in their ordinary sense as covering weapons whose prime, or even exclusive, effect is to poison or asphyxiate," also removes depleted uranium weaponry from coverage by the same treaties as their primary use is not to poison or asphyxiate, but to destroy materiel and kill soldiers through kinetic energy .

The Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities of the United Nations Human Rights Commission , [ 47 ] passed two motions [ 48 ] —the first in 1996 [ 49 ] and the second in 1997.

[ 50 ] They listed weapons of mass destruction , or weapons with indiscriminate effect, or of a nature to cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering and urged all states to curb the production and the spread of such weapons. Included in the list was weaponry containing depleted uranium. The committee authorized a working paper, in the context of human rights and humanitarian norms, of the weapons.

The requested UN working paper was delivered in 2002 [ 51 ] by Y. K. J. Yeung Sik Yuen in accordance with Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights resolution 2001/36. He argues that the use of DU in weapons, along with the other weapons listed by the Sub‑Commission, may breach one or more of the following treaties: the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , the Charter of the United Nations , the Genocide Convention , the United Nations Convention Against Torture , the Geneva Conventions including Protocol I , the Convention on Conventional Weapons of 1980, and the Chemical Weapons Convention . Yeung Sik Yuen writes in Paragraph 133 under the title " Legal compliance of weapons containing DU as a new weapon ": Annex II to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material 1980 (which became operative on 8 February 1997) classifies DU as a category II nuclear material. Storage and transport rules are set down for that category which indicates that DU is considered sufficiently "hot" and dangerous to warrant these protections. But since weapons containing DU are relatively new weapons no treaty exists yet to regulate, limit or prohibit its use. The legality or illegality of DU weapons must therefore be tested by recourse to the general rules governing the use of weapons under humanitarian and human rights law which have already been analysed in Part I of this paper, and more particularly at paragraph 35 which states that parties to Protocol I to the Geneva Conventions of 1949 have an obligation to ascertain that new weapons do not violate the laws and customs of war or any other international law. As mentioned, the International Court of Justice considers this rule binding customary humanitarian law.

Louise Arbour , chief prosecutor for the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia led a committee of staff lawyers to investigate possible treaty prohibitions against the use of DU in weapons. Their findings were that: [ 52 ] There is no specific treaty ban on the use of DU projectiles. There is a developing scientific debate and concern expressed regarding the impact of the use of such projectiles and it is possible that, in future, there will be a consensus view in international legal circles that use of such projectiles violate general principles of the law applicable to use of weapons in armed conflict. No such consensus exists at present.

[ 53 ] According to the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research , depleted uranium does not meet the legal definitions of nuclear, radiological, toxin, chemical, poison or incendiary weapons, as far as DU ammunition is not designed nor intended to kill or wound by its chemical or radiological effects.

[ 54 ] Requests for a moratorium on military use [ edit ] A number of anti-war activists specializing in international humanitarian law have questioned the legality of the continued use of depleted uranium weapons, highlighting that the effects may breach the principle of distinction (between civilians and military personnel).

[ 55 ] Some states and the International Coalition to Ban Uranium Weapons , a coalition of more than 155 non-governmental organizations , have asked for a ban on the production and military use of depleted uranium weapons.

[ 56 ] The European Parliament has repeatedly passed resolutions requesting an immediate moratorium on the further use of depleted uranium ammunition, [ 57 ] [ 58 ] but France and Britain – the only European states that are permanent members of the United Nations Security Council —have consistently rejected calls for a ban, [ 59 ] maintaining that its use continues to be legal, and that the health risks are unsubstantiated.

[ 60 ] In 2007, France, Britain, the Netherlands, and the Czech Republic voted against a United Nations General Assembly resolution to hold a debate in 2009 about the effects of the use of armaments and ammunitions containing depleted uranium. All other European Union nations voted in favour or abstained.

[ 61 ] The ambassador from the Netherlands explained his negative vote as being due to the reference in the preamble to the resolution "to potential harmful effects of the use of depleted uranium munitions on human health and the environment [which] cannot, in our view, be supported by conclusive scientific studies conducted by relevant international organizations." [ 62 ] None of the other permanent members of the United Nations Security Council supported the resolution as China was absent for the vote, Russia abstained and the United States voted against the resolution.

[ 61 ] In September 2008, and in response to the 2007 General Assembly resolution, the UN Secretary General published the views of 15 states alongside those of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and World Health Organization (WHO). The IAEA and WHO evidence differed little from previous statements on the issue.

[ 63 ] The report was largely split between states concerned about depleted uranium's use, such as Finland , Cuba , Japan , Serbia , Argentina , and predominantly NATO members, who do not consider the use of depleted uranium munitions problematic.

[ 63 ] In December 2008, 141 states supported a resolution requesting that three UN agencies: United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), WHO and IAEA update their research on the impact of uranium munitions by late 2010—to coincide with the General Assembly's 65th Session, four voted against, 34 abstained and 13 were absent.

[ 64 ] As before Britain and France voted against the resolution. All other European Union nations voted in favour or abstained: the Netherlands, which voted against a resolution in 2007, voted in favour, as did Finland and Norway , both of which had abstained in 2007, while the Czech Republic, which voted against the resolution in 2007, abstained. The two other states that voted against the resolution were Israel and the United States (both of which voted against in 2007), while as before China was absent for the vote, and Russia abstained.

[ 64 ] In June 2009, Belgium became the first country in the world to ban: "inert ammunition and armour that contains depleted uranium or any other industrially manufactured uranium." [ 65 ] The move followed a unanimous parliamentary vote on the issue on 22 March 2007. The text of the 2007 law allowed for two years to pass until it came into force.

[ 66 ] In April 2009, the Belgian Senate voted unanimously to restrict investments by Belgian banks into the manufacturers of depleted uranium weapons.

[ 67 ] In September 2009, the Latin American Parliament passed a resolution calling for a regional moratorium on the use, production and procurement of uranium weapons. It also called on the Parlatino's members to work towards an international uranium weapons treaty.

[ 68 ] In November 2010 the Irish Senate passed a bill seeking to outlaw depleted uranium weapons, [ 69 ] but it lapsed before approval by the Dáil .

[ 70 ] In December 2010, 148 states supported a United Nations' General Assembly resolution calling for the states that use depleted uranium weapons in conflict to reveal where the weapons have been fired when asked to do so by the country upon whose territory they have been used.

In April 2011, the Congress of Costa Rica passed a law prohibiting uranium weapons in its territories, becoming the second country in the world to do so.

[ 71 ] In December 2012, 155 states supported a United Nations' General Assembly resolution that recalled that, because of the ongoing uncertainties over the long-term environmental impacts of depleted uranium identified by the United Nations Environment Programme, states should adopt a precautionary approach to its use.

[ 72 ] In December 2014, 150 states supported a United Nations' General Assembly resolution encouraging states to provide assistance to states affected by the use of depleted uranium weapons, in particular in identifying and managing contaminated sites and material.

[ 73 ] In contrast to the previous biennial resolutions, Germany moved to an abstention from supporting to the resolutions.

[ 74 ] Prior to the vote, in a report to the United Nations Secretary General requested by 2012's resolution published in June 2014, Iraq had called for a global treaty ban on depleted uranium weapons.

[ 75 ] Civilian applications [ edit ] Depleted uranium has a very high density and is primarily used as shielding material for other radioactive material, and as ballast . Examples include sailboat keels , as counterweights and as shielding in industrial radiography cameras.

Energy [ edit ] Most civilian nuclear reactors , as well as all naval reactors , require fuel containing concentrated 235 U, and production of that fuel generates depleted uranium as residue. Some power-generating reactors design are able to use unenriched fuel, for example the pressurized heavy-water reactors such as the CANDU design. However, as of 2013, about 10% of those built use that technology.

[ 76 ] Travelling wave reactors are a proposed type of reactor which can use depleted uranium as fuel.

Radiation shielding [ edit ] Depleted uranium is the best radiation shielding by weight, due to the high atomic weight of the uranium atoms; materials are more able to block radioactivity the higher their atomic weight, and uranium is one of the heaviest natural elements.

Lead , the heaviest stable element, is the most common low-cost alternative, but a lead shield needs to be about three times as thick as a DU shield to provide the equivalent protection. Uranium also has by far a higher melting point 2,070 °F (1,130 °C), and its tensile strength is similar to that of steel.

[ 77 ] Industrial radiography cameras include a very high activity gamma radiation source (typically Ir-192 with an activity above 10 TBq). Depleted uranium is often used in the cameras as a shield to protect individuals from the gamma source. Typically, the uranium shield is supported and enclosed in polyurethane foam for thermal, mechanical and oxidation protection.

[ 78 ] Coloring in consumer products [ edit ] Consumer product uses have included incorporation into dental porcelain , used for false teeth to simulate the fluorescence of natural teeth, and uranium-bearing reagents used in chemistry laboratories (e.g.

uranyl acetate , used in analytical chemistry and as a stain in electron microscopy ). Uranium (both depleted uranium and natural uranium) was widely used as a coloring matter for porcelain and glass in the 19th and early-to-mid-20th century. The practice was largely discontinued in the late 20th century. In 1999, concentrations of 10% depleted uranium were being used in "jaune no.17" a yellow enamel powder that was being produced in France by Cristallerie de Saint-Paul, a manufacturer of enamel pigments . The depleted uranium used in the powder was sold by Cogéma 's Pierrelatte facility. In February 2000, Cogema discontinued the sale of depleted uranium to producers of enamel and glass.

[ 79 ] Trim weights in aircraft [ edit ] Aircraft that contain depleted uranium trim weights for stabilizing wings and control surfaces (such as the Boeing 747–100 ) may contain between 652 and 1,059 pounds (296 and 480 kg) of DU.

[ 80 ] This application is controversial because the DU might enter the environment if the aircraft crashes. The metal can also oxidize to a fine powder in a fire. Its use has been phased out in many newer aircraft.

Boeing and McDonnell-Douglas discontinued using DU counterweights in the 1980s. Depleted uranium was released during the crash of El Al Flight 1862 on 4 October 1992, in which 152 kilograms (335 lb) was lost, but a case study concluded that there was no evidence to link depleted uranium from the plane to any health problems.

[ 81 ] DU counterweights manufactured with cadmium plating are considered non-hazardous as long as the plating is intact.

[ 82 ] US NRC general license [ edit ] US Nuclear Regulatory Commission regulations at 10 CFR 40.25 establish a general license for the use of depleted uranium contained in industrial products or devices for mass-volume applications. This general license allows anyone to possess or use depleted uranium for authorized purposes. Generally, a registration form is required, along with a commitment to not abandon the material. Agreement states may have similar, or more stringent, regulations.

Sailboat keel [ edit ] Pen Duick VI , a boat designed by André Mauric [ fr ] and used for racing, was equipped with a keel of depleted uranium.

[ 83 ] The benefit is that, because of the very high density of uranium, the keel could be thinner for a given weight, and so have less resistance than a normal keel. It was later replaced by a standard lead keel.

[ 84 ] Sampling calorimeters for detectors in high-energy particle physics [ edit ] Depleted uranium has been used in a number of sampling calorimeters (such as in the D0 [ 85 ] and ZEUS [ 86 ] detectors) because of its high density and natural radioactivity.

[ citation needed ] Health considerations [ edit ] Normal functioning of the kidney , brain , liver , heart , and numerous other systems can be affected by uranium exposure because uranium is a toxic metal , [ 5 ] although less toxic than other heavy metals , such as arsenic and mercury .

[ 87 ] It is weakly radioactive and is 'persistently' so because of its very long half-life . The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry states that: "to be exposed to radiation from uranium, you have to eat, drink, or breathe it, or get it on your skin." [ 88 ] If DU particles do enter an individual, the type of danger presented—toxic vs. radiological—and the organ most likely to be affected depend on the solubility of the particles.

[ 89 ] In military conflicts involving DU munitions, the major concern is inhalation of DU particles in aerosols arising from the impacts of DU-enhanced projectiles with their targets.

[ 89 ] When depleted uranium munitions penetrate armor or burn, they create depleted uranium oxides in the form of dust that can be inhaled or contaminate wounds. The Institute of Nuclear Technology-Radiation Protection of Attiki , Greece , has noted that "the aerosol produced during impact and combustion of depleted uranium munitions can potentially contaminate wide areas around the impact sites or can be inhaled by civilians and military personnel".

[ 7 ] The use of DU in incendiary ammunition is controversial because of potential adverse health effects and its release into the environment.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] [ 94 ] [ 95 ] The U.S. Department of Defense claims that no human cancer of any type has been seen as a result of exposure to either natural or depleted uranium.

[ 96 ] Militaries have long had risk-reduction procedures for their troops to follow, [ 97 ] and studies are in consistent agreement that veterans who used DU-enhanced munitions have not suffered, so far, from an increased risk of cancer (see the Gulf War and Balkans sections below). The effects of DU on civilian populations are, however, a topic of intense and ongoing controversy.

As early as 1997, British Army doctors warned the Ministry of Defence that exposure to depleted uranium increased the risk of developing lung, lymph and brain cancer, and recommended a series of safety precautions.

[ 98 ] According to a report issued summarizing the advice of the doctors, "Inhalation of insoluble uranium dioxide dust will lead to accumulation in the lungs with very slow clearance—if any. ... Although chemical toxicity is low, there may be localised radiation damage of the lung leading to cancer." The report warns that "All personnel ... should be aware that uranium dust inhalation carries a long-term risk ... [the dust] has been shown to increase the risks of developing lung, lymph and brain cancers." [ 98 ] In 2003, the Royal Society called, again, for urgent attention to be paid to the possible health and environmental impact of depleted uranium, and added its backing to the United Nations Environment Programme 's call for a scientific assessment of sites struck with depleted uranium.

[ notes 2 ] In early 2004, the UK Pensions Appeal Tribunal Service attributed birth defect claims from a February 1991 Gulf War combat veteran to depleted uranium poisoning .

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] A 2005 epidemiology review concluded: "In aggregate the human epidemiological evidence is consistent with increased risk of birth defects in offspring of persons exposed to DU." [ 9 ] Studies using cultured cells and laboratory rodents continue to suggest the possibility of leukemogenic , genetic , reproductive , and neurological effects from chronic exposure.

[ 3 ] Chemical toxicity [ edit ] The chemical toxicity of depleted uranium is identical to that of natural uranium and about a million times greater in vivo than DU's radiological hazard, [ 101 ] with the kidney considered to be the main target organ.

[ 102 ] Health effects of DU are determined by factors such as the extent of exposure and whether it was internal or external. Three main pathways exist by which internalization of uranium may occur: inhalation , ingestion , and embedded fragments or shrapnel contamination.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] Properties such as phase (e.g. particulate or gaseous), oxidation state (e.g. metallic or ceramic), and the solubility of uranium and its compounds influence their absorption, distribution , translocation, elimination and the resulting toxicity. For example, metallic uranium is less toxic compared to hexavalent uranium(VI) uranyl compounds such as uranium trioxide ( UO 3 ).

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] Compilation of 2004 review [ 5 ] information regarding uranium toxicity Body system Human studies Animal studies In vitro Renal Elevated levels of protein excretion, urinary catalase and diuresis Damage to proximal convoluted tubules, necrotic cells cast from tubular epithelium, glomerular changes No studies Brain/CNS Decreased performance on neurocognitive tests Acute cholinergic toxicity; Dose-dependent accumulation in cortex, midbrain, and vermis; Electrophysiological changes in hippocampus No studies DNA Increased reports of cancers Increased DNA adducts, single strand breaks, and mutagenisis via uranium binding to DNA, with the increased potential for tumor formation Binucleated cells with micronuclei, Inhibition of cell cycle kinetics and proliferation; Sister chromatid induction, tumorigenic phenotype Bone/muscle No studies Inhibition of periodontal bone formation; and alveolar wound healing No studies Reproductive Uranium miners have more first born female children Moderate to severe focal tubular atrophy; vacuolization of Leydig cells No studies Lungs/respiratory No adverse health effects reported Severe nasal congestion and hemorrhage, lung lesions and fibrosis, edema and swelling, lung cancer No studies Gastrointestinal Vomiting, diarrhea, albuminuria No Studies N/A Liver No effects seen at exposure dose Fatty livers, focal necrosis No studies Skin No exposure assessment data available Swollen vacuolated epidermal cells, damage to hair follicles and sebaceous glands No studies Tissues surrounding embedded DU fragments Elevated uranium urine concentrations Elevated uranium urine concentrations, perturbations in biochemical and neuropsychological testing No studies Immune system Chronic fatigue, rash, ear and eye infections, hair and weight loss, cough. May be due to combined chemical exposure rather than DU alone No studies No studies Eyes No studies Conjunctivitis, irritation inflammation, edema, ulceration of conjunctival sacs No studies Blood No studies Decrease in RBC count and hemoglobin concentration No studies Cardiovascular Myocarditis resulting from the uranium ingestion, which ended 6 months after ingestion No effects No studies Uranium is pyrophoric when finely divided.

[ 107 ] It will corrode under the influence of air and water producing insoluble uranium(IV) and soluble uranium(VI) salts. Soluble uranium salts are toxic. Uranium slowly accumulates in several organs, such as the liver , spleen , and kidneys. The World Health Organization has established a daily "tolerated intake" of soluble uranium salts for the general public of 0.5 micrograms per kilogram (3.5 × 10 −6 gr/lb) body weight, or 35 micrograms (0.00054 gr) for a 70 kilograms (150 lb) adult.

Epidemiological studies and toxicological tests on laboratory animals point to it as being immunotoxic , [ 108 ] teratogenic , [ 109 ] [ 110 ] neurotoxic , [ 111 ] with carcinogenic and leukemogenic potential.

[ 112 ] A 2005 report by epidemiologists concluded: "the human epidemiological evidence is consistent with increased risk of birth defects in offspring of persons exposed to DU." [ 9 ] Early studies of depleted uranium aerosol exposure assumed that uranium combustion product particles would quickly settle out of the air [ 113 ] and thus could not affect populations more than a few kilometers from target areas, [ 7 ] and that such particles, if inhaled, would remain undissolved in the lung for a great length of time and thus could be detected in urine.

[ 114 ] Violently burning uranium droplets produce a gaseous vapor comprising about half of the uranium in their original mass.

[ 115 ] Uranyl ion contamination in uranium oxides has been detected in the residue of DU munitions fires.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] Approximately 90 micrograms (0.0014 gr) of natural uranium, on average, exist in the human body as a result of normal intake of water, food and air. Most is in the skeleton . The biochemistry of depleted uranium is the same as natural uranium.

Radiological hazards [ edit ] Available evidence suggests that the radiation risk is small relative to the chemical hazard.

[ 101 ] The primary radiation from pure depleted uranium is due to alpha particles , which do not travel far through air and do not penetrate clothing and skin. However, as uranium-238 decays into its daughter nuclei from its decay series , pure depleted uranium will generate thorium-234 (half-life of ~24 days) followed by protactinium-234 (half life of ~7 hours), which emit more penetrating beta particles at almost the same rate as the uranium emits alpha particles. Total activity then settles to a plateau as the more stable isotope uranium-234 accumulates. A quasi-steady state of roughly 3 times the initial activity is reached within months.

[ notes 3 ] Once an equilibrium level of uranium-234 (and its 11 shorter-lived daughter nuclei) has built up after about a million years there will be another radiation plateau at about 14 times the initial activity, finally reaching levels comparable to natural uranium.

[ 118 ] According to the World Health Organization , radiation dose from DU would be about 60% of that from purified natural uranium with the same mass; the radiological dangers are lower due to its longer half-life and the removal of the more radioactive isotopes.

Surveying the veteran-related evidence pertaining to the Gulf War, a 2001 editorial in the BMJ concluded that it was not possible to justify claims of radiation-induced lung cancer and leukaemia in veterans of that conflict.

[ 2 ] While agreeing with the editorial's conclusion, a reply noted that its finding in the negative was guaranteed, given that "global dose estimates or results of mathematical modelling are too inaccurate to be used as dose values for an individual veteran", and that, as of April 2001, no practical method of measuring the expected small doses that each individual veteran would receive had been suggested.

[ notes 4 ] The author of the reply, a radiation scientist, went on to suggest a method that had been used several times before, including after the 1986 Chernobyl accident.

[ notes 4 ] Despite the widespread use of DU in the Iraq War , at least a year after the conflict began, testing of UK troops was still only in the discussion phase.

[ notes 5 ] The Royal Society Working Group on the Health Hazards of Depleted Uranium Munitions (RSDUWG) concluded in 2002 that there were "very low" health risks associated with the use of depleted uranium, though it also ventured that, "[i]n extreme conditions and under worst-case assumptions" lung and kidney damage could occur, and that in "worst-case scenarios high local levels of uranium could occur in food or water that could have adverse effects on the kidney".

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] In 2003, the Royal Society issued another urgent call to investigate the actual health and environmental impact of depleted uranium.

[ notes 2 ] The same year, a cohort study of Gulf War veterans found no elevated risks of cancer generally, nor of any specific cancers in particular, though recommended follow up studies.

[ 121 ] Studies indicating negligible effects [ edit ] Studies in 2005 and earlier have concluded that DU ammunition has no measurable detrimental health effects.

A 1999 literature review conducted by the Rand Corporation stated: "No evidence is documented in the literature of cancer or any other negative health effect related to the radiation received from exposure to depleted or natural uranium, whether inhaled or ingested, even at very high doses," [ 122 ] and a RAND report authored by the U.S. Defense department undersecretary charged with evaluating DU hazards considered the debate to be more political than scientific.

[ 123 ] A 2001 oncology study concluded that "the present scientific consensus is that DU exposure to humans, in locations where DU ammunition was deployed, is very unlikely to give rise to cancer induction ".

[ 124 ] Former NATO Secretary General Lord Robertson stated in 2001 that "the existing medical consensus is clear. The hazard from depleted uranium is both very limited, and limited to very specific circumstances".

[ 125 ] A 2002 study from the Australian defense ministry concluded that "there has been no established increase in mortality or morbidity in workers exposed to uranium in uranium processing industries... studies of Gulf War veterans show that, in those who have retained fragments of depleted uranium following combat related injury, it has been possible to detect elevated urinary uranium levels, but no kidney toxicity or other adverse health effects related to depleted uranium after a decade of follow-up." [ 126 ] Pier Roberto Danesi, then-director of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Seibersdorf +Laboratory, stated in 2002 that "There is a consensus now that DU does not represent a health threat".

[ 127 ] The IAEA reported in 2003 that, "based on credible scientific evidence, there is no proven link between DU exposure and increases in human cancers or other significant health or environmental impacts," although "Like other heavy metals , DU is potentially poisonous. In sufficient amounts, if DU is ingested or inhaled it can be harmful because of its chemical toxicity. High concentration could cause kidney damage." The IAEA concluded that, while depleted uranium is a potential carcinogen , there is no evidence that it has been carcinogenic in humans.

[ 128 ] A 2005 study by the U.S.

Sandia National Laboratories' Al Marshall used mathematical models to analyze potential health effects associated with accidental exposure to depleted uranium during the 1991 Gulf War. Marshall's study concluded that the reports of cancer risks from DU exposure are not supported by his analysis nor by veteran medical statistics. Marshall also examined possible genetic effects due to radiation from depleted uranium.

[ 129 ] Chemical effects, including potential reproductive issues, associated with depleted uranium exposure were discussed in some detail in a subsequent journal paper.

[ 130 ] Gulf War syndrome and soldier complaints [ edit ] The approximate area and major clashes in which DU bullets and rounds were used in the Gulf War Birth defect statistics in Basra , Iraq.

[ 9 ] [ 131 ] Main article: Gulf War syndrome Since 1991, the year the Gulf War ended, veterans and their families voiced concern about subsequent health problems.

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] In 1999, an assessment of the first 1,000 veterans involved in the Ministry of Defence 's Gulf War medical assessment programme found "no evidence" of a single illness, physical or mental, that would explain the pattern of symptoms observed in the group.

[ 134 ] [ 132 ] In 1999, MEDACT petitioned for the WHO to conduct an investigation into illnesses in veterans and Iraqi civilians.

[ 135 ] A major 2006 review of peer-reviewed literature by a US Institute of Medicine (IOM) committee concluded that, "[b]ecause the symptoms vary greatly among individuals", they do not point to a syndrome unique to Gulf War veterans, though their report conceded that the lack of objective pre-deployment health data meant definitive conclusions were effectively impossible.

[ notes 6 ] [ 136 ] Simon Wessely praised the IOM's review, and noted that, despite its central conclusion that no novel syndrome existed, its other findings made it "equally clear that service in the Gulf war did aversely affect health in some personnel".

[ notes 7 ] Aside from the lack of baseline data to guide analysis of the veterans' postwar health, because no detailed health screening was carried out when the veterans entered service, another major stumbling block with some studies, like the thousand-veteran one, is that the subjects are self-selected, rather than a random sample, making general conclusions impossible.

[ 134 ] [ 132 ] Increased rates of immune system disorders and other wide-ranging symptoms, including chronic pain, fatigue and memory loss, have been reported in over one quarter of combat veterans of the 1991 Gulf War .

[ 137 ] Combustion products [ 120 ] from depleted uranium munitions are being considered [ needs update ] as one of the potential causes by the Research Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans' Illnesses, as DU was used in 30 mm and 25 mm cannon rounds on a large scale for the first time in the Gulf War. Veterans of the conflicts in the Persian Gulf , Bosnia and Kosovo have been found to have up to 14 times the usual level of chromosome abnormalities in their genes.

[ 109 ] [ 138 ] Serum-soluble genotoxic teratogens produce congenital disorders , and in white blood cells causes immune system damage.

[ 139 ] A 2005 epidemiology review concluded: "In aggregate the human epidemiological evidence is consistent with increased risk of birth defects in offspring of persons exposed to DU." [ 9 ] A 2001 study of 15,000 February 1991 U.S. Gulf War combat veterans and 15,000 control veterans found that the Gulf War veterans were 1.8 (fathers) to 2.8 (mothers) times as likely to have children with birth defects.

[ 140 ] After examination of children's medical records two years later, the birth defect rate increased by more than 20%: Dr. Kang found that male Gulf War veterans reported having infants with likely birth defects at twice the rate of non-veterans. Furthermore, female Gulf War veterans were almost three times more likely to report children with birth defects than their non-Gulf counterparts. The numbers changed somewhat with medical records verification. However, Dr. Kang and his colleagues concluded that the risk of birth defects in children of deployed male veterans still was about 2.2 times that of non-deployed veterans.

[ 141 ] In early 2004, the UK Pensions Appeal Tribunal Service attributed birth defect claims from a February 1991 Gulf War combat veteran to depleted uranium poisoning.

[ 142 ] [ 143 ] Looking at the risk of children of UK Gulf War veterans suffering genetic diseases such as congenital malformations , commonly called "birth defects", one study found that the overall risk of any malformation was 50% higher in Gulf War veterans as compared to other veterans.

[ 144 ] Excerpt from a 1998 evaluation of environmental exposure to depleted uranium in the Persian Gulf by the US Department of Defense The U.S. Army has commissioned ongoing research into potential risks of depleted uranium and other projectile weapon materials like tungsten, which the U.S. Navy has used in place of DU since 1993. Studies by the U.S. Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute conclude that moderate exposures to either depleted uranium or uranium present a significant toxicological threat.

[ 145 ] In 2003, Professor Brian Spratt FRS, chairman of the Royal Society 's working group on depleted uranium, said: "The question of who carries out the initial monitoring and clean-up is a political rather than scientific question," and " the coalition needs to acknowledge that depleted uranium is a potential hazard and make in-roads into tackling it by being open about where and how much depleted uranium has been deployed." [ 43 ] A 2008 review of all relevant articles appearing in the peer-reviewed journals on MEDLINE through to the end of 2007, including multiple cohort studies of veterans, found no consistent evidence of excess risks of neoplasms that could have some link to DU, and that "[t]he overall incidence of cancers is not increased in the cohort studies of Gulf war and Balkans veterans".

[ 146 ] One particular subgroup of veterans that may be at higher risk comprises those who have internally retained fragments of DU from shrapnel wounds. A laboratory study on rats produced by the Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute showed that, after a study period of 6 months, rats treated with depleted uranium coming from implanted pellets, comparable to the average levels in the urine of Desert Storm veterans with retained DU fragments, had developed a significant tendency to lose weight with respect to the control group.

[ 147 ] Substantial amounts of uranium were accumulating in their brains and central nervous systems , and showed a significant reduction of neuronal activity in the hippocampus in response to external stimuli. The conclusions of the study show that brain damage from chronic uranium intoxication is possible at lower doses than previously thought. Results from computer-based neurocognitive tests performed in 1997 showed an association between uranium in the urine and "problematic performance on automated tests assessing performance efficiency and accuracy." [ 148 ] A 2021 report concluded that uranium from exploding munitions did not lead to Gulf War illness (GWI) in veterans deployed in the 1991 Persian Gulf War. The study found no differences in secretion of uranium isotopic ratios from those meeting the standard-case definitions of GWI and control veterans without GWI. The researchers say that the most likely remaining causes for GWI are widespread low-level exposure to sarin nerve gas released by the destruction of Iraqi chemical weapons storage facilities in January 1991. This was possibly compounded by the use of anti-nerve agent medications and the use of pesticides to prevent insect-borne diseases in coalition forces.

[ 10 ] Iraqi population [ edit ] Since 2001, medical personnel working for the Iraqi state health service controlled by Saddam Hussein at the Basra hospital in southern Iraq have reported a sharp increase in the incidence of child leukemia and genetic malformation among babies born in the decade following the Gulf War. Iraqi doctors attributed these malformations to possible long-term effects of DU, an opinion that was echoed by several newspapers.

[ 94 ] [ 149 ] [ 150 ] [ 151 ] In 2004, Iraq had the highest mortality rate due to leukemia of any country.

[ 152 ] [ 153 ] In 2003, the Royal Society called for Western militaries to disclose where and how much DU they had used in Iraq so that rigorous, and hopefully conclusive, studies could be undertaken in affected areas.

[ 154 ] The International Coalition to Ban Uranium Weapons (ICBUW) likewise urged that an epidemiological study be made in the Basra region, as requested by Iraqi doctors, [ 155 ] but no peer-reviewed study has yet been undertaken in Basra.

A medical survey, " Cancer , Infant Mortality and Birth Sex Ratio in Fallujah , Iraq 2005–2009" published in July 2010, states that the "...increases in cancer and birth defects ...are alarmingly high" and that infant mortality 2009/2010 has reached 13.6%. The group compares the dramatic increase, five years after wartime exposure in 2004, with the lymphoma that Italian peacekeepers [ 156 ] developed after the Balkan wars and the increased cancer risk in certain parts of Sweden because of the Chernobyl fallout. The origin and time of introduction of the carcinogenic agent causing the genetic stress was expected to be addressed by the group in a separate report.

[ 157 ] The report mentions depleted uranium as one "potentially relevant exposure" but makes no conclusions on the source.

Four studies investigating links between the use of depleted uranium by Coalition forces during the Second Battle of Fallujah were conducted in 2012, one of which described the people of Fallujah as having "the highest rate of genetic damage in any population ever studied." In response to these studies, Ross Caputi, a former U.S. Marine who participated in the battle, wrote a Guardian newspaper article calling for the United States government to conduct its own study into the matter.

[ 158 ] The Balkans [ edit ] Sites in Kosovo and southern Central Serbia where NATO aviation used depleted uranium during the 1999 Kosovo War .

In 2001, the World Health Organization reported that data from Kosovo was inconclusive and called for further studies.

[ 159 ] That same year, governments of several European countries, particularly Italy, reported an increase in illnesses and developments of cancers among veterans that served in Balkan peacekeeping missions.

[ 160 ] A 2003 study by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) in Bosnia and Herzegovina stated that low levels of contaminant were found in drinking water and air particulate at DU penetrator impact points. The levels were stated as not a cause for alarm. Yet, Pekka Haavisto , chairman of the UNEP DU projects stated, "The findings of this study stress again the importance of appropriate clean-up and civil protection measures in a post-conflict situation." [ 161 ] A team of Italian scientists from the University of Siena reported in 2005 that, although DU was "clearly" added to the soil in the study area, "the phenomenon was very limited spatially and the total uranium concentrations fell within the natural range of the element in soils. Moreover, the absolute uranium concentrations indicate that there was no contamination of the earthworm species studied." [ 162 ] Though a more comprehensive assessment is possible, a 2011 update on a cancer scare regarding Italian soldiers who had served in the Balkans found lower than expected incidence rates for all cancers, a finding "consistent with lacking evidence of an increased cancer incidence among troops of other countries deployed in the areas of Iraq, Bosnia, and Kosovo, where armour-penetrating depleted uranium shells have been used." [ 163 ] In 2018, Serbia set up a commission of inquiry into the consequences of the use of depleted uranium during the 1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia in southern Serbia and its link to the rise of diseases and tumors among citizens, particularly in young children born after 1999. Zoran Radovanovic, an epidemiologist and the chairman of the Serbian Medical Association's ethics committee, denied that there had been a rise in cancer cases in areas where bombings had taken place. He continued by saying that Serbians frequently worry about a cancer epidemic that does not exist.

[ 164 ] NATO has repeatedly claimed that depleted uranium found in the ammunition used in the 1999 bombardments cannot be linked to adverse health effects.

[ 165 ] Okinawa, Japan [ edit ] Between 1995 and 1996, U.S. Marine AV-8B Harrier jets accidentally fired more than 1,500 DU rounds at the Tori Shima gunnery range. The military did not notify the Japanese government until January 1997.

[ 166 ] Sardinia, Italy [ edit ] Depleted uranium has been named as a possible contributing factor to a high incidence of birth defects and cancer near the Salto di Quirra weapons testing range on the Italian island of Sardinia .

[ 167 ] Afghan War [ edit ] The Canadian Uranium Medical Research Centre obtained urine samples from bombed civilian areas in Jalalabad that showed concentrations of 80 to 400 nanograms per litre (5.6 × 10 −6 to 2.81 × 10 −5 gr/imp gal) of undepleted uranium, far higher than the typical concentration in the British population of ≈5 nanograms per litre (3.5 × 10 −7 gr/imp gal).

[ 168 ] Remscheid, Germany [ edit ] Main article: 1988 Remscheid A-10 crash On 8 December 1988, an A-10 Thunderbolt II attack jet of the United States Air Force crashed onto a residential area in the city of Remscheid , West Germany . The aircraft crashed into the upper floor of an apartment complex. In addition to the pilot, five people were killed. Fifty others were injured, many of them seriously. When the number of cancer cases in the vicinity of the accident rose disproportionately in the years after, suspicion rose that the depleted uranium ballast in the jet may have been the cause.

[ 9 ] This was denied by the US military. However, 70 tons of top soil from the accident scene was removed and taken away to a depot.

[ 169 ] Film material taken during the top-soil removal show radiation warning signs.

[ 170 ] 120 residents and rescue workers reported skin diseases. Medical diagnosis concluded that these symptoms related to toxic irritative dermatitis.

[ 171 ] Atmospheric contamination [ edit ] Elevated radiation levels consistent with very low level atmospheric depleted uranium contamination have been found in air samples taken by the UK Atomic Weapons Establishment at several monitoring sites in Britain. These elevated readings appear to coincide with Operation Anaconda in Afghanistan, and the Shock and Awe bombing campaign at the start of the Second Gulf War.

[ 172 ] [ 173 ] Other contamination cases [ edit ] On 4 October 1992, an El Al Boeing 747-F cargo aircraft ( Flight 1862 ) crashed into an apartment building in Amsterdam , Netherlands. Local residents and rescue workers complained of various unexplained health issues, which were being attributed to the release of hazardous materials during the crash and subsequent fires. Authorities conducted an epidemiological study in 2000 of those believed to be affected by the accident. The study concluded that there was no evidence to link depleted uranium (used as counterbalance weights on the elevators of the plane) to any of the reported health complaints.

[ 81 ] There have been accidents involving uranium hexafluoride in the United States, including one in which 32 workers were exposed to a cloud of UF 6 and its reaction products in 1986 at a Gore , Oklahoma, commercial uranium conversion facility. One person died; while a few workers with higher exposure experienced short-term kidney damage (e.g., protein in the urine ), none of them showed lasting damage from the exposure to uranium.

[ 174 ] See also [ edit ] Environmental impact of war Radiological warfare Notes [ edit ] ^ In natural uranium, about 49% of the radiation comes from 238 U, 49% from 234 U, and 2% from 235 U. In depleted uranium the amounts of 235 U and 234 U are both reduced, but there is still much more radiation from the 234 U than from the 235 U.

[ citation needed ] ^ a b Moszynski 2003 . The article quotes Professor Brian Spratt of the Royal Society's DU working group: "It is highly unsatisfactory to deploy a large amount of material that is weakly radioactive and chemically toxic without knowing how much soldiers and civilians have been exposed to." ^ The amounts of both thorium-234 and protactinium-234 after the first days and for millions of years thereafter will be approximately proportional to 1–2 −t / (24 days) . See Krane, Kenneth S. (1988).

Introductory Nuclear Physics . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-0-471-80553-3 .

^ a b Mould 2001 . Mould's suggestion was electron paramagnetic resonance dosimetry using tooth enamel. He also wrote that the US National Institute of Standards and Technology was able, using this method, to measure doses as low as 20 mSv, and that, if it were asked to, the NIST would be able to get involved, meaning at least one centre could help undertake a screening programme for veterans.

^ Greenberg et al. 2004 , which found that perhaps a quarter of all UK troops would have been interested in undergoing DU-related monitoring, although "the desire for DU screening is more closely linked to current health status rather than plausible exposure to DU." Confusingly, Moszynski 2003 reports that "testing is now available to all troops that served in Iraq", and does not say if this is testing à la Mould.

^ Charatan 2006 . The quote is of Lynn Goldman , who chaired the IOM committee that carried out the review.

^ Charatan 2006 . The quote is of Wessely himself.

References [ edit ] ^ "Figure 1. DU penetrator from the A-10 30mm round" . 12 April 2007. Archived from the original on 12 April 2007 . Retrieved 4 September 2013 .

^ a b c McDiarmid, Melissa A. (2001).

"Depleted uranium and public health: Fifty years' study of occupational exposure provides little evidence of cancer" .

BMJ .

322 (7279): 123– 124.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.322.7279.123 .

JSTOR 25466001 .

PMC 1119402 .

PMID 11159557 .

Depleted uranium possesses only 60% of the radioactivity of natural uranium, having been 'depleted' of much of its most highly radioactive U 234 and U 235 isotopes.

^ a b c Miller, A. C.; McClain, D. (2007). "A Review of Depleted Uranium Biological Effects: In Vitro and in Vivo Studies".

Reviews on Environmental Health .

22 (1): 75– 89.

doi : 10.1515/REVEH.2007.22.1.75 .

PMID 17508699 .

S2CID 25156511 .

^ Pattison, John E.; Hugtenburg, Richard P.; Green, Stuart (2010).

"Enhancement of Natural Background Gamma-radiation Dose around Uranium Micro-particles in the Human Body" .

Journal of the Royal Society Interface .

7 (45): 603– 611.

doi : 10.1098/rsif.2009.0300 .

PMC 2842777 .

PMID 19776147 .

^ a b c Craft ES, Abu-Qare AW, Flaherty MM, Garofolo MC, Rincavage HL, Abou-Donia MB (2004).

"Depleted and natural uranium: chemistry and toxicological effects" (PDF) .

Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health Part B: Critical Reviews .

7 (4): 297– 317.

Bibcode : 2004JTEHB...7..297C .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.535.5247 .

doi : 10.1080/10937400490452714 .

PMID 15205046 .

S2CID 9357795 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ "Biological Half Lives" . Georgia State University, US.

^ a b c Mitsakou, C.; Eleftheriadis, K.; Housiadas, C.; Lazaridis, M. (2003). "Modeling of the dispersion of depleted uranium aerosol".

Health Physics .

84 (4): 538– 544.

doi : 10.1097/00004032-200304000-00014 .

PMID 12705453 .

S2CID 3244650 .

^ Jamail, Dahr (16 March 2013).

"Iraq's wars, a legacy of cancer" . Al Jazeera . Retrieved 29 November 2018 .

^ a b c d e f Hindin R, Brugge D, Panikkar B (2005).

"Teratogenicity of depleted uranium aerosols: A review from an epidemiological perspective" .

Environmental Health .

4 (1) 17.

Bibcode : 2005EnvHe...4...17H .

doi : 10.1186/1476-069X-4-17 .

PMC 1242351 .

PMID 16124873 .

^ a b "New Research Shows Gulf War Illness Not Caused by Depleted Uranium From Munitions" .

SciTechDaily . 18 February 2021 . Retrieved 19 February 2021 .

^ Fathi, R. A.; Matti, L. Y.; Al-Salih, H. S.; Godbold, D. (2013). "Environmental pollution by depleted uranium in Iraq with special reference to Mosul and possible effects on cancer and birth defect rates".

Medicine, Conflict and Survival .

29 (1): 7– 25.

doi : 10.1080/13623699.2013.765173 .

PMID 23729095 .

S2CID 45404607 .

^ Alaani, Samira; Tafash, Muhammed; Busby, Christopher; Hamdan, Malak; Blaurock-Busch, Eleonore (December 2011).

"Uranium and other contaminants in hair from the parents of children with congenital anomalies in Fallujah, Iraq" .

Conflict and Health .

5 (1): 15.

doi : 10.1186/1752-1505-5-15 .

PMC 3177876 .

PMID 21888647 .

^ Sztajnkrycer, Matthew D. (March 2004).

"Chemical and Radiological Toxicity of Depleted Uranium" .

Military Medicine .

169 (3): 212– 216.

doi : 10.7205/milmed.169.3.212 .

PMID 15080241 .

By its very nature, DU contains only 50% to 60% of the radioactivity of naturally occurring uranium.

^ "Properties and Characteristics of DU" Archived 18 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine U.S. Office of the Secretary of Defense ^ a b Shelton S, Daxon E, Oxenberg T, Kowalski RT, Lindsay DO, O'Brien GP, Rael JE, Silva DG, Smith RA, Stone SJ, Strickland L, Thomson BM, Tomei Torres F (June 1995). Health and Environmental Consequences of Depleted Uranium Use in the U.S. Army (Technical Report). U.S. Army Environmental Policy Institute (AEPI).

doi : 10.13140/2.1.3468.3201 .

^ Diehl, Peter (1999).

"Depleted Uranium: A By-product of the Nuclear Chain" . International Network of Engineers and Scientists Against Proliferation. Archived from the original on 13 January 2013.

^ Hamilton, Douglas (25 January 2001).

"NATO: 50 Countries See No Depleted Uranium Illness" . Reuters Health Information. Archived from the original on 20 February 2001 . Retrieved 12 December 2013 .

^ Hastings, Deborah (12 August 2006).

"Is an Armament Sickening U.S. Soldiers?" . Associated Press. Archived from the original on 3 July 2014 . Retrieved 30 March 2015 .

^ Oakford, Samuel (14 February 2017).

"The United States Used Depleted Uranium in Syria" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved 3 March 2017 .

^ "History of Depleted Uranium and What It Is Used For" . Energy Solutions. Archived from the original on 21 July 2015 . Retrieved 7 August 2015 .

^ "Depleted Uranium" . WHO Fact sheet N°257, Revised. 24 January 2003. Archived from the original on 24 January 2003 . Retrieved 4 June 2024 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Plutonium in DU Weapons, a Chronology Archived 10 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine Dr.

Michael Repacholi , WHO.

^ Busby, Chris (2010).

"Uranium and Health: The Health Effects of Exposure to Uranium and Uranium Weapons Fallout" (PDF) . The European Committee on Radiation Risk. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 November 2011.

Documents of the ECRR 2010 No. 2, Brussels, Belgium, 2010.

^ "UN Environment Programme Confirms Uranium 236 found in depleted uranium penetrators" (Press release). United Nations. 16 January 2001. UNEP/81. Archived from the original on 17 July 2001 . Retrieved 28 April 2020 .

^ "FAQ 16 – How much depleted uranium hexafluoride is stored in the United States?" .

Depleted UF 6 Management Information Network . Archived from the original on 25 November 2021 . Retrieved 22 January 2022 .

^ "Depleted UF 6 Management Program Documents" .

Depleted UF 6 Management Information Network . Archived from the original on 1 November 2021 . Retrieved 22 January 2022 .

^ "What happens if a cylinder of uranium hexafluoride leaks?" .

Depleted UF 6 Management Information Network . Archived from the original on 22 January 2022 . Retrieved 22 January 2022 .

^ Overview of Depleted Uranium Hexafluoride Management Program (PDF) (Report).

U.S. Department of Energy Office of Environmental Management . Fall 2001. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 February 2013 . Retrieved 13 June 2024 .

^ "FAQ 22 – What is going to happen to the uranium hexafluoride stored in the United States?" .

Depleted UF 6 Management Information Network . Archived from the original on 22 January 2022 . Retrieved 22 January 2022 .

^ "FAQ 27 – Are there any currently-operating disposal facilities that can accept all of the depleted uranium oxide that would be generated from conversion of DOE's depleted UF6 inventory?" .

Depleted UF 6 Management Information Network . Archived from the original on 1 November 2021 . Retrieved 22 January 2022 .

^ "Depleted Uranium Inventories" . Retrieved 26 February 2016 .

^ a b c Peacock, H. B. (March 1992).

"Pyrophoricity of Uranium" (PDF) . Westinghouse Savannah River Company. p. 2.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 3 May 2015 .

^ "Primer on Spontaneous Heating and Pyrophoricity" (PDF) . United States Department of Energy. 6 January 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2015 . Retrieved 3 May 2015 .

^ McManners, Hugh , Gulf War One Real Voices From the Front Line, Ebury Publishing, 2010, ISBN 9780091935986 , p. 91.

^ Fahey, D. (12 March 2003).

"Science or Science Fiction? Facts, Myths and Propaganda In the Debate Over Depleted Uranium Weapons" (PDF) . Table 1 on p. 13. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 June 2005.

^ Franzen, Harald (5 March 2001).

"The Science of the Silver Bullet" .

Scientific American . Retrieved 7 April 2023 .

^ Bo Wang ID; Yongxiang Dong; Guangyan Huang (2018).

"An Investigation on the Adiabatic Shear Bands in Depleted U-0.75 wt % Ti Alloy under Dynamic Loading" .

Metals .

8 (2): 145.

doi : 10.3390/met8020145 .

^ Faulconbridge, Guy (24 March 2023).

"Explainer: What are depleted uranium weapons – and what are the risks?" .

Reuters . Retrieved 7 April 2023 .

^ a b "Depleted uranium tank shells: Why are they used and how do they work?" .

Forces Network . 28 March 2023 . Retrieved 7 April 2023 .

^ McDonald, Avril; Kleffner, Jann K. and Toebes, Brigit eds. (2003) The International Legality of the Use of Depleted Uranium Weapons: A Precautionary Approach . TMC Asser Press.

^ a b Peck, Michael (24 December 2018).

"Russia Is Arming Its Tanks with a Controversial New 'Bullet' " .

The National Interest . Retrieved 22 March 2023 .

^ a b Edwards, Rob (19 June 2014).

"US fired depleted uranium at civilian areas in 2003 Iraq war, report finds" .

The Guardian . London, England.

^ a b Brown, Paul (25 April 2003).

"Gulf troops face tests for cancer" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 29 August 2013 .

^ Surdyk, Shelby; Itani, Moustapha (2021).

"Weaponised uranium and adverse health outcomes in Iraq: a systematic review" .

BMJ Global Health .

6 (2): e004166.

doi : 10.1136/bmjgh-2020-004166 .

PMC 7903104 .

PMID 33619039 .

^ "M1A1 Abrams Variant Will Be Given To Ukraine To Expedite Tank Deliveries" . The Drive. 21 March 2023. Archived from the original on 30 March 2023 . Retrieved 21 March 2023 .

^ Advisory Opinion 1996 8 July 8; General List No. 95 (req: UNGA) Archived 22 May 2014 at the Wayback Machine . Cornnet.nl. Retrieved 16 January 2011.

^ "Citizen Inspectors Foiled in Search for DU Weapons" .

HOUSTON PROGRESSIVE . Archived from the original on 1 September 2015 . Retrieved 16 January 2011 .

^ "Depleted Uranium UN Resolutions" .

www.prop1.org . Retrieved 5 June 2024 .

^ International peace and security as an . Unhchr.ch. Retrieved 16 January 2011.

^ "Opendocument Sub-Commission resolution 1997/36" .

^ "Human rights and weapons of mass destruction, or with indiscriminate effect, or of a nature to cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering" (PDF) . United Nations Economic and Social Council. 27 June 2002. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 March 2017 . Retrieved 31 October 2016 .

( backup ) "In its decision 2001/36 of 16 August 2001, the Sub-Commission, recalling its resolutions 1997/36 and 1997/37 of 28 August 1997, authorized Mr. Y. K. J. Yeung Sik Yuen to prepare, without financial implications, in the context of human rights and humanitarian norms, the working paper originally assigned to Ms. Forero Ucros." ^ Sills, Joe et al.

(April 2002) Environmental Crimes in Military Actions and the International Criminal Court (ICC) – United Nations Perspectives (PDF) ( HTML ) of American Council for the UN University. p. 28 ^ "ii. Use of Depleted Uranium Projectiles".

Final Report to the Prosecutor by the Committee Established to Review the NATO Bombing Campaign Against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Report). Archived from the original on 6 August 2009.

^ McDonald, Avril (October 2008).

"Depleted uranium weapons: the next target for disarmament?" (PDF) .

Disarmament Forum .

3 . United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research: 19– 20.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ Gibbons, O. T. (December 2004). "Uses and Effects of Depleted Uranium Munitions: Towards a Moratorium on Use".

Yearbook of International Humanitarian Law .

7 : 191– 232.

doi : 10.1017/S1389135904001916 .

^ "ICBUW's membership includes 85 groups in 22 countries worldwide" . The International Coalition to Ban Uranium Weapons. 27 September 2006. Archived from the original on 7 December 2006 . Retrieved 22 March 2007 .

^ "Session Document: European Parliament resolution on the harmful effects of unexploded ordnance (landmines and cluster submunitions) and depleted uranium ammunition" (PDF) . 10 February 2003.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 22 March 2007 .

^ "European Parliament Makes Fourth Call for DU Ban" . The International Coalition to Ban Uranium Weapons. 22 November 2006. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007 . Retrieved 22 March 2007 .

^ "DU: Some NATO Countries Reject Moratorium" . UN Wire. 11 January 2001 . Retrieved 22 March 2007 .

^ "Depleteduranium – epetition reply" . The Prime Minister's Office. 22 March 2007. Archived from the original on 14 May 2007 . Retrieved 22 March 2007 .

^ a b United Nations General Assembly Session 62 Verbotim Report 61 .

A/62/PV.61 page 14.  The Acting President  5 December 2007.  Retrieved accessdate.

^ United Nations General Assembly Session 62 Verbotim Report 61 .

A/62/PV.61 page 25.  Mr. De Klerk Netherlands 5 December 2007.  Retrieved accessdate.

^ a b Staff.

UN Secretary General Publishes Report on Uranium Weapons [ usurped ] , ICBUW [ usurped ] , 17 September 2008.

^ a b "UN Department of Public Information: Effects of the use of Armaments and Ammunitions Containing Depleted Uranium (A/C.1/63/L.26)" (Press release). UN. 2 December 2008. GA/10792.

See draft XIV and Annex XIII.

^ UK Uranium Weapons Network launched as Belgium becomes first country to ban depleted uranium weapons [ usurped ] . Bandepleteduranium.org (22 June 2009). Retrieved 16 January 2011.

^ "English translation of Belgian text banning uranium weapons and armour" (PDF) . Archived from the original on 19 July 2011 . Retrieved 4 September 2013 .

^ "Belgian Senate votes to ban investments by Belgian financial institutions into uranium weapon manufacturers" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 4 September 2013 .

^ "Resolución Latinoamericana de la Comision de Derechos Humanos, Justicia y Politicas Carcelarias: Prohibición de las armas de uranio" (PDF) . Archived from the original on 1 March 2012 . Retrieved 4 September 2013 .

^ ICBUW.

"Irish depleted uranium ban bill sails through Senate with cross party support" . Bandepleteduranium.org. Archived from the original on 27 January 2012 . Retrieved 4 September 2013 .

^ "Oireachtas Web site: Prohibition of Depleted Uranium Weapons Bill 2009" . Oireachtas.ie. 2 July 2009. Archived from the original on 8 May 2013 . Retrieved 4 September 2013 .

^ ICBUW.

"Costa Rica bans depleted uranium weapons" . Bandepleteduranium.org. Archived from the original on 1 May 2011 . Retrieved 4 September 2013 .

^ "UNGA (2012) A/RES/67/36 Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 3 December 2012, Effects of the use of armaments and ammunitions containing depleted uranium" .

^ "UNGA (2014) A/RES/69/57 Effects of the use of armaments and ammunitions containing depleted uranium" .

^ "ICBUW (2014) The politics behind the vote on 2014's UN depleted uranium resolution" . Archived from the original on 3 December 2014.

^ "UNGA (2014) Effects of the use of armaments and ammunitions containing depleted uranium. Report of the Secretary-General" .

^ Proceedings of American Nuclear Society 2013 Wilmington, North Carolina . ANS American Nuclear Society. 2013.

OCLC 864923078 .

^ Vaziri, Kamran.

"Radiation Basics – Radiation Shielding" .

Health Physics Society . Retrieved 26 January 2023 .

^ "The INC IR-100 Gamma Ray Camera" . Archived from the original on 30 September 2007.

^ "Depleted Uranium found as Coloring Matter in Enamel (France)" .

^ Gallacher, Thomas (8 September 1994).

"Boeing Use of Depleted Uranium Counterweights in Aircraft" (PDF) .

nrc.gov . Retrieved 27 June 2023 .

^ a b Uijt de Haag, P. A.; Smetsers, R. C.; Witlox, H. W.; Krus, H. W.; Eisenga, A. H. (2000). "Evaluating the risk from depleted uranium after the Boeing 747-258F crash in Amsterdam, 1992".

Journal of Hazardous Materials .

76 (1): 39– 58.

Bibcode : 2000JHzM...76...39U .

doi : 10.1016/S0304-3894(00)00183-7 .

PMID 10863013 .

^ "AC20-123 Avoiding or Minimizing Encounters with Aircraft Equipped with Depleted Uranium Balance Weights during Accident Investigations" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ "Pen Duick heading for Bass Strait" The Sydney Morning Herald , 4 December 1973, p. 17 .

^ "Roaring Forties, chapter 22: France's inspiration" .

Volvo Ocean Race . 19 August 2013.

Archived from the original on 19 August 2013 . Retrieved 26 February 2016 .

^ Pifer, B. (1983). An Experiment at D0 to Study anti-Proton – Proton Collisions at 2-TeV: Design Report (Report). Office of Scientific and Technical Information (OSTI).

doi : 10.2172/1131090 .

^ "The ZEUS detector: Status Report 1993" .

^ "2007 CERCLA Priority List of Hazardous Substances" . Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry. Archived from the original on 4 September 2011.

^ Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (1999).

"Toxicological profile for uranium" . Washington, DC: US Public Health Service. Archived from the original on 18 July 2001.

^ a b RSDUWG 2002 , p. 1. Briefly, inhaled and insoluble means that the DU particles will stick around in the lungs and attendant lymph nodes, presenting a radiological risk; highly soluble means those particles are off to the kidneys, where toxicity is the issue.

^ Johnson, Larry.

"Iraqi cancers, birth defects blamed on U.S. depleted uranium" .

Seattle Post-Intelligencer . Archived from the original on 20 November 2008.

^ Kirby, Alex (7 June 1999).

"Depleted uranium: the lingering poison" . BBC.

^ Richardson, J. J. (23 June 1999).

"Depleted Uranium: The Invisible Threat" .

Mother Jones .

^ O'Callaghan, John (30 July 1999).

"Panel says depleted uranium shells leave birth defects, death" . Reuters. Archived from the original on 7 March 2008 . Retrieved 7 November 2007 .

^ a b Taylor Martin, Susan (25 May 2003).

"How harmful is depleted uranium?" .

The St. Petersburg Times .

^ Gonzalez, Juan (29 September 2004).

"The War's Littlest Victim" . N.Y. Daily News. Archived from the original on 12 July 2007.

^ "Health Effects of Uranium".

Toxicological profile for uranium . Archived from the original on 23 November 2007.

^ Zwijnenburg, Wim (2012).

Hazard Aware: Lessons learned from military field manuals on depleted uranium and how to move forward for civilian protection norms (PDF) . Utrecht: IKV Pax Christi.

ISBN 978-9-070-44327-6 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 July 2013 . Retrieved 8 June 2013 .

^ a b Norton-Taylor, Richard (11 January 2001).

"MoD knew shells were cancer risk" .

The Guardian . London, England . Retrieved 29 August 2013 .

^ Williams, M. (9 February 2004) "First Award for Depleted Uranium Poisoning Claim," The Herald Online, (Edinburgh, Scotland: Herald Newspapers, Limited).

^ Campaign Against Depleted Uranium (Spring 2004) "MoD Forced to Pay Pension for DU Contamination," CADU News 17.

^ a b Miller, A. C.; Stewart, M.; Brooks, K.; Shi, L.; Page, N. (2002).

"Depleted uranium-catalyzed oxidative DNA damage: absence of significant alpha particle decay" .

Journal of Inorganic Biochemistry .

91 (1): 246– 252.

doi : 10.1016/S0162-0134(02)00391-4 .

PMID 12121782 .

^ RSDUWG 2002 , p. 2.

^ Livengood, David R. (1996).

"Introduction to the Problem" (PDF) . In David R. Livengood (ed.).

Health Effects of Embedded Depleted Uranium Fragments . Bethesda, Maryland: Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute . p. 3.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ RSDUWG 2002 , p. 19.

^ Gmelin Handbuch der anorganischen Chemie» 8th edition, English translation, Gmelin Handbook of Inorganic Chemistry, vol. U-A7 (1982) pp. 300–322.

^ Harley, Naomi H.; Foulkes, Earnest C.; Hilborne, Lee H.; Hudson, Arlene; Anthony, C. Ross (1999).

A Review of the Scientific Literature as it Pertains to Gulf War Illnesses, Vol. 7 – Depleted Uranium (PDF) . Washington, DC: National Defense Research Institute, RAND. pp.

1– 12.

ISBN 978-0-8330-2681-1 . MR-1018/7-OSD.

^ Chapter: "PYROPHORIC METALS: Uranium" . Archived from the original on 7 March 2008.

in Primer on Spontaneous Heating and Pyrophoricity . DOE Handbook. US Dept. of Energy. Archived from the original on 3 May 2008.

^ Wan B, Fleming J, Schultz T, Sayler G (2006).

"In vitro immune toxicity of depleted uranium: effects on murine macrophages, CD4+ T cells, and gene expression profiles" .

Environmental Health Perspectives .

114 (1): 85– 91.

Bibcode : 2006EnvHP.114...85W .

doi : 10.1289/ehp.8085 .

PMC 1332661 .

PMID 16393663 .

^ a b Arfsten DP, Still KR, Ritchie GD (2001). "A review of the effects of uranium and depleted uranium exposure on reproduction and fetal development".

Toxicology and Industrial Health .

17 ( 5– 10): 180– 191.

Bibcode : 2001ToxIH..17..180A .

doi : 10.1191/0748233701th111oa .

PMID 12539863 .

S2CID 25310165 .

^ Domingo JL (2001). "Reproductive and developmental toxicity of natural and depleted uranium: a review".

Reproductive Toxicology .

15 (6): 603– 9.

Bibcode : 2001RepTx..15..603D .

doi : 10.1016/S0890-6238(01)00181-2 .

PMID 11738513 .

S2CID 38317769 .

^ Briner W, Murray J (2005). "Effects of short-term and long-term depleted uranium exposure on open-field behavior and brain lipid oxidation in rats".

Neurotoxicology and Teratology .

27 (1): 135– 44.

Bibcode : 2005NTxT...27..135B .

doi : 10.1016/j.ntt.2004.09.001 .

PMID 15681127 .

^ Miller, A. C.; Beltran, D.; Rivas, R.; Stewart, M.; Merlot, R. J.; Lison, P. B. (June 2005).

Radiation- and Depleted Uranium-Induced Carcinogenesis Studies: Characterization of the Carcinogenic Process and Development of Medical Countermeasures (PDF) . Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute. NATO RTG-099 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2012.

^ Rostker, B. (2000). "Research Report Summaries".

Depleted Uranium in the Gulf (II) (Technical Report). Environmental Exposure Reports. Office of the Special Assistant for Gulf War Illnesses, Department of Defense. No. 2000179-2. Archived from the original on 14 June 2006.

^ Horan, P.; Dietz, L.; Durakovic, A. (August 2002).

"The quantitative analysis of depleted uranium isotopes in British, Canadian, and U.S. Gulf War veterans" .

Military Medicine .

167 (8): 620– 627.

doi : 10.1093/milmed/167.8.620 .

PMID 12188230 .

^ Carter, R. F.; Stewart, K. (1970). "On the oxide fume formed by the combustion of plutonium and uranium".

Inhaled Particles .

2 : 819– 38.

PMID 5527739 .

^ Salbu B, Janssens K, Lind OC, Proost K, Gijsels L, Danesi PR (2005). "Oxidation states of uranium in depleted uranium particles from Kuwait".

Journal of Environmental Radioactivity .

78 (2): 125– 135.

Bibcode : 2005JEnvR..78..125S .

doi : 10.1016/j.jenvrad.2004.04.001 .

PMID 15511555 .

^ Rostker, B.

(2000).

Depleted Uranium in the Gulf (II) (Technical Report). Environmental Exposure Reports. Office of the Special Assistant for Gulf War Illnesses, Department of Defense. No. 2000179-2. Archived from the original on 12 April 2007.

^ "Uranium Radiation Properties" .

WISE Uranium Project . 26 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 June 2024 .

^ Patel, Amit (2006).

"No strong link between depleted uranium and cancer" .

BMJ .

333 (7575): 970– 971.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.333.7575.971-b .

JSTOR 40700763 .

PMC 1633807 .

PMID 17082557 .

[t]he majority evidence and expert opinion on the lack of a clear association between depleted uranium are quite consistent ^ a b Murphy, Dominic; Greenberg, Neil; Bland, Duncan (2009).

"Health concerns in UK Armed Forces personnel" .

Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine .

102 (4): 143– 147.

doi : 10.1258/jrsm.2009.080387 .

PMC 2666054 .

PMID 19349506 .

Metallic DU is weakly radioactive and therefore contact with unbroken skin is an extremely low risk to health. However, when a DU round strikes an armoured target, it undergoes spontaneous partial combustion resulting in a fine aerosol of largely insoluble uranium oxides. Presence of this aerosol elevates the risk of potentially chemotoxic or radiotoxic exposure via inhalation or ingestion.

[T]here is now a large body of evidence to suggest that, whatever the cause of the ill-health experienced by Gulf War veterans, neither DU nor vaccinations are likely to have caused them.

^ Macfarlane, Gary J.; Biggs, Anne-Marie; Maconochie, Noreen; Hotopf, Matthew; Doyle, Patricia; Lunt, Mark (2003).

"Incidence of cancer among UK Gulf War veterans: cohort study" .

BMJ .

327 (7428): 1373– 1375.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.327.7428.1373 .

JSTOR 25458017 .

PMC 292984 .

PMID 14670879 .

There is no current excess risk of cancer overall nor of site specific cancers in Gulf war veterans. Specific exposures during deployment have not resulted in a subsequent increased risk of cancer. The long latent period for cancer, however, necessitates the continued follow up of these cohorts.

^ " "A Review of the Scientific Literature as it Pertains to Gulf War Illnesses," Rand Report, 1999" . osd.mil. Archived from the original on 13 October 2007 . Retrieved 30 October 2007 .

^ Bernard D. Rostker , Depleted Uranium, A Case Study of Good and Evil . RAND Corporation.

^ Mc Laughin, James P.; Waligorski, Michael P. R. (2001).

"Depleted Uranium – A Health, Environmental or Societal Issue?" (PDF) .

Archive of Oncology .

9 (4): 213. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 March 2012.

^ "NATO Press Conference on Depleted Uranium" . Nato.int . Retrieved 4 September 2013 .

^ Military medical aspects of depleted uranium munitions Archived 19 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Stone, Richard (13 September 2002). "Environmental Radioactivity: New Findings Allay Concerns Over Depleted Uranium".

Science .

297 (5588): 1801.

doi : 10.1126/science.297.5588.1801 .

PMID 12228701 .

S2CID 128852045 .

^ "IAEA Depleted Uranium Factsheet" . Archived from the original on 18 March 2010.

^ An Analysis of Uranium Dispersal and Health Effects Using a Gulf War Case Study Archived 4 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine , Albert C. Marshall, Sandia National Laboratories.

^ Marshall, A. C. (2007).

"Gulf war depleted uranium risks" .

Journal of Exposure Science and Environmental Epidemiology .

18 (1): 95– 108.

doi : 10.1038/sj.jes.7500551 .

PMID 17299528 .

^ Al-Sabbak, M.; Sadik Ali, S.; Savabi, O.; Savabi, G.; Dastgiri, S.; Savabieasfahani, M. (2012).

"Metal Contamination and the Epidemic of Congenital Birth Defects in Iraqi Cities" .

Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology .

89 (5): 937– 944.

Bibcode : 2012BuECT..89..937A .

doi : 10.1007/s00128-012-0817-2 .

PMC 3464374 .

PMID 22983726 .

S2CID 10774986 .

^ a b c Murphy, Frances M. (1999).

"Gulf war syndrome: There may be no specific syndrome, but troops suffer after most wars" .

BMJ .

318 (7179): 274– 275.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.318.7179.274 .

JSTOR 25181681 .

PMC 1114762 .

PMID 9924035 .

[T]hough Gulf War veterans' illnesses are real and sometimes disabling, they do not seem to constitute a unique illness.

^ Rokke, Doug (2002).

"Dr. Doug Rokke Address on Depleted Uranium" .

True Democracy .

2 (2).

^ a b Coker, W. J.; Bhatt, B. M.; Blatchley, N. F.; Graham, J. T. (1999).

"Clinical findings for the first 1000 Gulf war veterans in the Ministry of Defence's medical assessment programme" .

BMJ .

318 (7179): 290– 294.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.318.7179.290 .

JSTOR 25181700 .

PMC 27710 .

PMID 9924053 .

As the veterans assessed by the programme were all self selected, the prevalence of illness in Gulf war veterans cannot be determined from this study. Furthermore, it is not known whether the veterans in this study were representative of sick veterans as a group.

^ Stott, Robin; Holdstock, Douglas (1999).

"WHO should undertake full inquiry into Gulf war illness" .

BMJ .

318 (7195): 1422.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.318.7195.1422a .

JSTOR 25184732 .

PMC 1115801 .

PMID 10334774 .

^ Iversen, Amy; Chalder, Trudie; Wessely, Simon (2007). "Gulf War Illness: Lessons from medically unexplained symptoms".

Clinical Psychology Review .

27 (7): 842– 854.

doi : 10.1016/j.cpr.2007.07.006 .

PMID 17707114 .

.. despite clear evidence of an increase in symptom burden and a decrease in well being" among Gulf War veterans, "exhaustive clinical and laboratory based scientific research has failed to document many reproducible biomedical abnormalities in this group. Likewise, there has been no evidence of an increase in disease related mortality.

^ U.S. Research Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans' Illnesses (2004) "Scientific Progress in Understanding Gulf War Veterans' Illnesses: Report and Recommendations" Archived 31 December 2006 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Fleming, N.; Townsend, M. (11 August 2002).

"Gulf veteran babies 'risk deformities' " .

The Guardian . Retrieved 29 August 2013 .

^ Schröder H, Heimers A, Frentzel-Beyme R, Schott A, Hoffman W (2003).

"Chromosome Aberration Analysis in Peripheral Lymphocytes of Gulf War and Balkans War Veterans" (PDF) .

Radiation Protection Dosimetry .

103 (3): 211– 219.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordjournals.rpd.a006135 .

PMID 12678382 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 January 2014.

^ Kang H, Magee C, Mahan C, Lee K, Murphy F, Jackson L, Matanoski G (2001). "Pregnancy Outcomes Among U.S. Gulf War Veterans: A Population-Based Survey of 30,000 Veterans".

Annals of Epidemiology .

11 (7): 504– 511.

doi : 10.1016/S1047-2797(01)00245-9 .

PMID 11557183 .

^ Department of Veterans Affairs (2003).

"Q's & A's – New Information Regarding Birth Defects" (PDF) .

Gulf War Review .

12 (1): 10. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 September 2006.

^ "Gulf soldier wins pension fight" .

BBC News . 2 February 2004.

^ Sample, Ian; Fleming, Nic (17 April 2003).

"When the dust settles" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 29 August 2013 .

^ Doyle, P.; MacOnochie, N.; Davies, G.; MacOnochie, I.; Pelerin, M.; Prior, S.; Lewis, S. (2004).

"Miscarriage, stillbirth and congenital malformation in the offspring of UK veterans of the first Gulf war" .

International Journal of Epidemiology .

33 (1): 74– 86.

doi : 10.1093/ije/dyh049 .

PMID 15075150 .

^ McClain, D. E.; Miller, A. C.; Kalinich, J. F. (June 2005).

Status of Health Concerns about Military Use of Depleted Uranium and Surrogate Metals in Armor-Penetrating Munitions (PDF) . Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2012.

^ Lagorio, S.; Grande, E.; Martina, L. (2008). "Review of epidemiological studies of cancer risk among Gulf War and Balkans veterans".

Epidemiologia e Prevenzione .

32 (3, number 3): 145– 155.

PMID 18828552 .

^ Pellmar, T. C.; Hogan, J. B.; Benson, K. A.; Landauer, M. R. (February 1998).

Toxicological Evaluation of Depleted Uranium in Rats: Six Month Evaluation Point (PDF) . Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute. AFRRI Special Publication 98-1. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2012.

^ Bordujenko, A. (September 2002).

"Military medical aspects of depleted uranium munitions" (PDF) .

ADF Health .

3 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ Neuffer, Elizabeth (26 January 2003).

Iraqis Trace Surge in Cancer to US Bombings Archived 2 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine , Boston, Massachusetts: Boston Globe . Page: A11 Section: National/Foreign.

^ Johnson, Larry (12 November 2002) Iraqi cancers, birth defects blamed on U.S. depleted uranium Archived 20 November 2008 at the Wayback Machine Seattle Post-Intelligencer . Retrieved 25 January 2009.

^ McKay, Ron (14 January 2001).

"Depleted Uranium: The Horrific Legacy of Basra" .

Sunday Herald . Scotland. Archived from the original on 27 May 2013 . Retrieved 15 February 2013 .

^ "WHO Data, 2004" . Retrieved 4 September 2013 .

^ "Doctor's Gulf War Studies Link Cancer to Depleted Uranium" .

The New York Times . 29 January 2001.

^ Moszynski 2003 .

^ Support the Basra Epidemiological Study [ usurped ] , International Coalition to Ban Uranium Weapons ^ Mantelero_Depleted uranium legal aspects (Italy) 2009–2011 Archived 1 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine 7 May 2011.

^ Busby, C; Hamdan, M; Ariabi, E (July 2010).

"Cancer, infant mortality and birth sex-ratio in Fallujah, Iraq 2005-2009" .

Int J Environ Res Public Health .

7 (7): 2828– 37.

doi : 10.3390/ijerph7072828 .

PMC 2922729 .

PMID 20717542 .

^ Caputi, Ross (25 October 2012).

"The victims of Fallujah's health crisis are stifled by western silence" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 29 August 2013 .

^ Report of the WHO's Depleted Uranium Mission to Kosovo (pdf 123kb) 22–31 January 2001.

^ Simons, Marlise (7 January 2001).

"Radiation From Balkan Bombing Alarms Europe" .

The New York Times .

^ Low-level DU contamination found in Bosnia and Herzegovina, UNEP calls for precaution United Nations Environment Programme , 25 March 2003. Retrieved 25 January 2009.

^ Di Lella, L. A.; Nannoni, F.; Protano, G.; Riccobono, F. (2005). "Uranium contents and atom ratios in soil and earthworms in western Kosovo after the 1999 war".

Science of the Total Environment .

337 ( 1– 3): 109– 118.

Bibcode : 2005ScTEn.337..109D .

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2004.07.001 .

PMID 15626383 .

^ Peragallo, M. S.; Urbano, F.; Sarnicola, G.; Lista, F.; Vecchione, A. (2011). "Cancer incidence in the military: an update".

Epidemiologia e Prevenzione .

35 ( 5– 6, number 5–6): 339– 345.

PMID 22166781 .

[T]he excess of reported cases for this malignancy [lymphoma] in 2001–2002 was probably due to a peak that occurred in 2000 among the whole military; it is therefore unrelated to deployment in the Balkans, and probably represents a chance event ^ Gocanin, Sonja (11 December 2019).

"Moscow, Serbian Media Appear To Mislead With Claims About Cancer Fight, NATO Bombings" .

Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . Retrieved 20 January 2023 .

^ Gocanin, Sonja (25 March 2019).

"Serbian Accusation Lingers of Link Between NATO Bombing, Health Woes" .

Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . Retrieved 4 September 2019 .

^ "U.S. jets fired radioactive bullets near Okinawa" .

CNN . 10 February 1997. Archived from the original on 24 May 2019 . Retrieved 23 May 2019 .

^ Alberici, Emma (29 January 2019).

"Secret Sardinia" .

Foreign Correspondent . Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 29 January 2019 .

^ Durakovic, A. (2005).

"The Quantitative Analysis of Uranium Isotopes in the Urine of the Civilian Population of Eastern Afghanistan after Operation Enduring Freedom" .

Military Medicine .

170 (4): 277– 284.

doi : 10.7205/MILMED.170.4.277 .

PMID 15916293 .

^ Markmeyer, B. (13 October 1989).

"Remscheid-Absturz mit Folgen" .

Die Tageszeitung: taz (in German). pp.

1– 2.

ISSN 0931-9085 . Retrieved 14 January 2021 .

^ "Remscheid: Starb Kind wegen Uranverseuchung?" .

Der Spiegel (in German). 13 January 2001 . Retrieved 14 January 2021 .

^ Zeitung, Westdeutsche (8 December 2008).

"Flugzeugabsturz in Remscheid 1988: Der Schock sitzt immer noch tief" .

Westdeutsche Zeitung (in German) . Retrieved 14 January 2021 .

^ Williams, Dai (October 2008).

"Under the radar: identifying third-generation uranium weapons" (PDF) .

Disarmament Forum .

3 . United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research: 19– 20. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 March 2012.

^ Busby, C. and Morgan, S. (2006). Did the Use of Uranium Weapons in Gulf War 2 Result in Contamination of Europe? Evidence from the Measurements of the Atomic Weapons Establishment, Aldermaston, Aberystwyth, Green Audit.

^ "FAQ 30 – Have there been accidents involving uranium hexafluoride?" .

Depleted UF 6 Management Information Network . Archived from the original on 2 March 2021 . Retrieved 22 January 2022 .

Cited sources [ edit ] Charatan, Fred (2006).

"Gulf war symptoms do not constitute a syndrome" .

BMJ .

333 (7569): 618.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.333.7569.618-b .

JSTOR 40700302 .

PMC 1570822 .

PMID 16990302 .

Greenberg, Neil; Iversen, Amy C.; Unwin, Catherin; Hull, L.; Wessely, S.

(2004).

"Screening for depleted uranium in the United Kingdom armed forces: who wants it and why?" .

Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health .

58 (7): 558– 561.

doi : 10.1136/jech.2003.014142 .

PMC 1732813 .

PMID 15194715 .

Moszynski, Peter (2003).

"Royal Society warns of risks from depleted uranium" .

BMJ .

326 (7396): 952.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.326.7396.952 .

JSTOR 25454350 .

PMC 1125878 .

PMID 12727744 .

Mould, Richard F. (2001).

"Radiation dose from depleted uranium can now be measured" .

BMJ .

322 (7290): 865– 866.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.322.7290.865/a .

JSTOR 25466697 .

PMC 1120031 .

PMID 11321019 .

S2CID 683662 .

Royal Society working group on the health hazards of depleted uranium munitions (2002).

The health hazards of depleted uranium munitions: Part II (Report). London, England: The Royal Society .

Further reading [ edit ] Brown, Mark (2006).

"Toxicological assessments of Gulf War veterans" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society .

361 (1468): 649– 679.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2006.1825 .

JSTOR 20209668 .

PMC 1569627 .

PMID 16687269 .

Dorsey, Carrie D.; Engelhardt, Susan M.; Squibb, Katherine S.; McDiarmid, Melissa A. (2009).

"Biological Monitoring for Depleted Uranium Exposure in U.S. Veterans" .

Environmental Health Perspectives .

117 (6): 953– 956.

Bibcode : 2009EnvHP.117..953D .

doi : 10.1289/ehp.0800413 .

JSTOR 25549605 .

PMC 2702412 .

PMID 19590689 .

Fetter, Steve; von Hippel, Frank N. (1999).

"The hazard posed by depleted uranium munitions" (PDF) .

Science & Global Security .

8 (2): 125– 161.

doi : 10.1080/08929880008426473 .

ISSN 0892-9882 .

S2CID 122678543 .

Royal Society working group on the health hazards of depleted uranium munitions (2001).

The health hazards of depleted uranium munitions: Part I (Report). London: The Royal Society .

——— (2002b). "The health effects of depleted uranium munitions: a summary".

Journal of Radiological Protection .

22 (2) 301: 131– 139.

Bibcode : 2002JRP....22..131T .

doi : 10.1088/0952-4746/22/2/301 .

PMID 12148788 .

S2CID 250798819 .

Squibb, Katherine S.; McDiarmid, Melissa A. (2006).

"Depleted uranium exposure and health effects in Gulf War veterans" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society .

361 (1468): 639– 648.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2006.1823 .

JSTOR 20209667 .

PMC 1569622 .

PMID 16687268 .

External links [ edit ] Look up depleted uranium in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Depleted uranium .

Scientific bodies US Health Physics Society United Nations "Human rights and weapons of mass destruction, or with indiscriminate effect, or of a nature to cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering" (The UN 2002 report) Depleted Uranium and the IAEA Scientific reports ATSDR – Case Studies in Environmental Medicine (CSEM): Uranium Toxicity Archived 4 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine U.S.

Department of Health and Human Services "Depleted Uranium in Bosnia and Herzegovina – Postconflict Assessment" Archived 25 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine by UN Environment Programme "Radiological Conditions in Areas of Kuwait With Residues of Depleted Uranium" by International Atomic Energy Agency "Technical Report on Capacity-building for the Assessment of Depleted Uranium in Iraq" Archived 9 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine by UN Environment Programme "A Review of the Scientific Literature As It Pertains to Gulf War Illnesses" by RAND Depleted Uranium article from the Royal Society (archived) An Analysis of Uranium Dispersal and Health Effects Using a Gulf War Case Study by Sandia National Laboratories Depleted Uranium Human Health Fact Sheet by Argonne National Laboratory Environmental Assessment Division Depleted uranium (DU) normative value pilot study: levels of uranium in urine samples from the general population Archived 26 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine by A.D. Jones, B. G. Miller, S. Walker, J. Anderson, A. P. Colvin, P.A. Hutchison, C.A. Soutar. IOM Research Report TM/05/03 A normative study of levels of uranium in the urine of personnel in the British Forces Archived 26 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine by B. G. Miller, A. P. Colvin, P. A. Hutchison, H. Tait, S. Dempsey, D. Lewis, C. A. Soutar. IOM Research Report TM/05/08 Opinion on the environmental and health risks posed by depleted uranium by the Scientific Committee on Health and Environmental Risks v t e Agents used in chemical warfare incapacitation riot control Blood agents Cyanogen Cyanogen bromide Cyanogen chloride (CK) Hydrogen cyanide (AC) Arsine Cacodyl cyanide Cacodyl oxide Hydrogen sulfide Phosphine Carbon monoxide Phosphorus trifluoride Methyl cyanoformate Iron pentacarbonyl Nickel tetracarbonyl 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzodioxin Glycolonitrile Lactonitrile Acetone cyanohydrin Stibine Chloral cyanohydrin Blister agents Arsenicals Ethyldichloroarsine (ED) Methyldichloroarsine (MD) Phenyldichloroarsine (PD) Lewisite (L) Lewisite 2 (L2) Lewisite 3 (L3) Sulfur mustards Levinstein mustard (EA-229) T Q CEES Nitrogen mustards HN1 HN2 HN3 TL-301 Nettle agents Phosgene oxime (CX) Other KB-16 Dibutylchloromethyltin chloride Selenium oxychloride Phenacyl bromide Dimethyl acetylenedicarboxylate Dimethyl fumarate Chalcone hydrazone Methylnitronitrosoguanidine Norcantharidin Cantharidin T-2 mycotoxin Nerve agents G-agents Tabun (GA) Sarin (GB) Chlorosarin (ClGB) Thiosarin (SGB) Soman (GD) Chlorosoman (ClGD) Ethylsarin (GE) GH Cyclosarin (GF) GP Fluorotabun EA-1356 EA-4352 Crotylsarin V-agents EA-2192 EA-3148 VE VG VM VP VR VS VX EA-1763 Chinese VX V-sub x (GD-7) GV agents GV (EA-5365) Novichok agents A-208 A-232 A-234 A-242 A-262 C01-A035 C01-A039 C01-A042 Carbamates Dimethylcarbamoyl fluoride EA-3887 EA-3887A EA-3966 EA-3990 EA-4056 T-1123 T-1152 T-1194 Octamethylene-bis(5-dimethylcarbamoxyisoquinolinium bromide) TL-599 TL-1238 TL-1299 TL-1317 Miotine (AR-28/T-1843) 3152 CT 4-686-293-01 (Agent 1-10) Other Diisopropyl fluorophosphate Dicyclohexyl phosphorofluoridate EA-2012 EA-2054 EA-2098 EA-2613 2-Ethoxycarbonyl-1-methylvinyl cyclohexyl methylphosphonate Neopentylene fluorophosphate Selenophos Phospholine R-16661 Ro 3-0422 Methanesulfonyl fluoride Dimefox (TL-792) MSPI Precursors Acetonitrile AT ATO AlP A.P.C. complex Chlorosarin Chlorosoman Cyclohexanol 1,8-Dibromooctane N,N-Diisopropylaminoethanol (KB) EA-1250 DIHP ZS DEHP EA-1224 Dimethylamidophosphoric dichloride Dimethylamidophosphoric dicyanide DMHP Ethylphosphonoselenoic dichloride Formaldoxime Nital 4-Hydroxycoumarin Isopropyl alcohol (TB) Methyldichlorophosphine (SW) Methylphosphonyl difluoride (difluoro) (DF) Methylphosphonyl dichloride (dichloro) Nitromethane OPA mixture Phosphoryl chloride Phosphorus pentachloride Phosphorus trichloride (TH) Pinacolone Pinacolyl alcohol Phenacyl chloride QL QL sulfide 2,4,5-Trichlorophenol 3,3,5-Trimethylcyclohexanol Triethyl phosphite Trimethyl phosphite TC TG Neurotoxins Anatoxin-a Saxitoxin (TZ) Coniine Bungarotoxin Botulinum toxin (BTX) Tetanospasmin (TeNT) Ryanodine Ciguatoxin (CTX) Guanitoxin (GTX) Chlorophenylsilatrane Palytoxin (PTX) Maitotoxin (MTX) Tetrodotoxin Veratridine Aconitine Brevetoxin (PbTX) Strychnine Antillatoxin (ATX) Tetraethyllead Dimethylmercury HN1 hydrochloride HN2 hydrochloride HN3 hydrochloride A-8564 Picrotoxin Gelsemine Sulfuryl fluoride Tremorine Oxotremorine Batrachotoxin Tetramethylenedisulfotetramine (TETS) Bicyclic phosphates IPTBO TBPO TBPS Cloflubicyne Trimethylolpropane phosphite Domoic acid Pulmonary/ choking agents Chlorine Bromine Phosgene (CG) Fluorine Perfluoroisobutene Chloropicrin (PS) Dimethyl(trifluoromethylthio)arsine Diphosgene (DP) Disulfur decafluoride (Z) Acrolein Ethyl bromoacetate Perchloromethyl mercaptan Phenylcarbylamine chloride Tetranitromethane Tetrachlorodinitroethane Chlorine trifluoride Perchloryl fluoride Cadmium oxide Cadmium chloride Mercuric chloride Selenium dioxide Selenoyl fluoride Trifluoronitrosomethane Trichloronitrosomethane Nitric oxide Nitrogen dioxide Dinitrogen tetroxide Sulfur dioxide Phosphorus trichloride Methyl isocyanate Ethenone Methyl vinyl ketone Trifluoroacetyl chloride Salcomine Fluomine Uranium hexafluoride Diborane Green Cross Vomiting agents Adamsite (DM) Chloropicrin Litharge - glycerine Diphenylchlorarsine Diphenylcyanoarsine Cacodyl cyanide o-Dianisidine Antimony potassium tartrate Lobeline Incapacitating agents BZ (CS-4030) Apomorphine Butyrophenone EA-4941 (CS-4640) Etorphine EA-2092 CS-4297 Etoxadrol Dimethylheptylpyran (DMHP) Canbisol EA-2148 EA-3167 Nicotine EA-3443 Methaqualone Pethidine EA-3580 Ibogaine EA-3834 Kolokol-1 LSD-25 PAVA spray Psilocybin Sleeping gas Carfentanil JB-318 JB-336 CS-27349 CAR-226,086 CAR-301,060 CAR-302,196 CAR-302,282 CAR-302,668 Benperidol Desflurane Enflurane Bufotenin Isoflurane Halothane Sevoflurane Pentazocine Procarbazine Fluphenazine Chlorpromazine Lachrymatory agents Xylyl bromide Pepper spray (OC) Mace (spray) Phorbol esters Ingenol mebutate RTX CN CS CR CNS Benzyl chloride Benzyl bromide Benzyl iodide Bromobenzyl cyanide Thiophosgene Chloroacetone Bromoacetone Bromomethyl ethyl ketone Acrolein Phenacyl bromide Chloroacetophenone oxime Ethyl bromoacetate Ethyl iodoacetate Iodoacetone Allyl isothiocyanate Hexamethylene diisocyanate Crotonaldehyde Croton oil DRC-5593 Malodorant agents Thioacetone Allicin Skatole Cadaverine Putrescine Cornea-clouding agents Lewisite CX KB-16 Methyl cyanoacrylate N-Methylmorpholine Allyl alcohol Osmium tetroxide Acrolein Cacodyl cyanide Diglycolic acid esters Biological toxins Abrin Aconitine Cyclopiazonic acid Histrionicotoxins Aflatoxins Anatoxin-a Batrachotoxin Botulinum toxin Brevetoxin Ciguatoxin Domoic acid Enterotoxin type B Grayanotoxin Guanitoxin Maitotoxin Modeccin Palytoxin Ricin Saxitoxin Shiga toxin T-2 mycotoxin Tetanospasmin Tetrodotoxin Volkensin Veratridine Tumor promoting agents Phorbol esters 12-O-Tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate Croton oil Other Methyl fluoroacetate Napalm (variants and mixtures) Fluoroethyl fluoroacetate Depleted uranium post-combustion uranium oxides Plutonium and its compounds Polonium White phosphorus List of chemical warfare agents CB military symbol v t e Nuclear technology Outline Science Chemistry Engineering Physics Atomic nucleus Fission Fusion Radiation ionizing braking Fuel Tritium Deuterium Helium-3 Fertile material Fissile material Isotope separation Nuclear material Uranium enriched depleted Plutonium Thorium Neutron Activation Capture Poison Cross section Generator Radiation Wigner effect Reflector Temperature Thermal Fast Fusion Power by country Power plant Economics Accidents and incidents Policy Fusion Radioisotope thermoelectric (RTG) MMRTG Propulsion rocket Safety and security Nuclear meltdown Medicine Imaging Autoradiograph RadBall Scintigraphy Single-photon emission (SPECT) Positron-emission tomography (PET) Therapy Fast-neutron Neutron capture therapy of cancer Targeted alpha-particle Proton-beam Tomotherapy Brachytherapy Radiosurgery Radiopharmacology Processing Atomic gardening Electron-beam processing Food irradiation Gemstone irradiation Weapons Topics Arms race Delivery Design Disarmament Ethics Explosion effects History Proliferation Testing high-altitude underground Warfare Yield TNTe Lists States with nuclear weapons Historical stockpiles and tests Tests Tests in the United States WMD treaties Weapon-free zones Weapons Waste Products Actinide Reprocessed uranium Reactor-grade plutonium Minor actinide Activation Fission LLFP Actinide chemistry Disposal Fuel cycle High-level (HLW) Low-level (LLW) Nuclear decommissioning Repository Reprocessing Spent fuel pool cask Transmutation Debate Nuclear power Nuclear weapons Blue Ribbon Commission on America's Nuclear Future Anti-nuclear movement Uranium mining Nuclear power phase-out Nuclear reactors Fission Moderator Light water Aqueous homogeneous Boiling BWR ABWR ESBWR Kerena Natural fission Pressurized AP1000 APR-1400 APR+ APWR ATMEA1 CAP1400 CPR-1000 EPR Hualong One ACPR1000 ACP1000 VVER RITM-200 KLT-40 OK-150/OK-900 OK-650 KN-3 VM IPWR-900 many others Supercritical (SCWR) Heavy water by coolant D 2 O Pressurized CANDU CANDU 6 CANDU 9 EC6 AFCR ACR-1000 CVTR IPHWR IPHWR-220 IPHWR-540 IPHWR-700 PHWR KWU MZFR R3 R4 Marviken H 2 O HWLWR ATR HW BLWR 250 Steam-generating (SGHWR) AHWR Organic WR-1 CO 2 HWGCR EL-4 KKN KS 150 Lucens Graphite by coolant Water H 2 O AM-1 AMB-X EGP-6 RBMK MKER Gas CO 2 Uranium Naturel Graphite Gaz (UNGG) Magnox Advanced gas-cooled (AGR) He GTMHR MHR-T UHTREX VHTR (HTGR) PBR (PBMR) AVR HTR-10 HTR-PM THTR-300 PMR Molten-salt Fluorides Fuji MSR Liquid-fluoride thorium reactor (LFTR) Molten-Salt Reactor Experiment (MSRE) Integral Molten Salt Reactor (IMSR) TMSR-500 TMSR-LF1 None ( fast-neutron ) Breeder (FBR) Integral (IFR) Liquid-metal-cooled (LMFR) OK-550 BM-40A VT-1 Small sealed transportable autonomous (SSTAR) Traveling-wave (TWR) Energy Multiplier Module (EM2) Reduced-moderation (RMWR) Fast Breeder Test Reactor (FBTR) Dual fluid reactor (DFR) Generation IV Sodium (SFR) BN-350 BN-600 BN-800 BN-1200 CFR-600 Phénix Superphénix PFBR FBR-600 CEFR PFR PRISM Lead BREST-300 Helium gas (GFR) Stable Salt Reactor (SSR) Others Organic nuclear reactor OMRE Arbus Piqua Aircraft Reactor Experiment Fusion by confinement Magnetic Field-reversed configuration Levitated dipole Reversed field pinch Spheromak Stellarator Tokamak Inertial Bubble (acoustic) Fusor electrostatic Laser-driven Magnetized-target Z-pinch Other Dense plasma focus Migma Muon-catalyzed Polywell Pyroelectric Nuclear technology portal Category Commons Authority control databases International FAST National United States Spain Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Depleted_uranium&oldid=1304250461 " Categories : Depleted uranium Aftermath of war Element toxicology Environmental impact of war Medical controversies Nuclear materials Suspected teratogens Uranium Vehicle armour Ammunition Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1: unfit URL All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2024 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2015 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2011 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from March 2023 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2015 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 22:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Depleted uranium 42 languages Add topic

