Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Fathers-in-law 2 Mothers-in-law 3 Parent-in-law relationships 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Parent-in-law 25 languages العربية বাংলা Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پنجابی Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ Soomaaliga کوردی Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Parent of one's spouse "Mother-in-law" and "Father-in-law" redirect here. For other uses, see Mother-in-law (disambiguation) and Father-in-law (disambiguation) .

Emperor Pedro II of Brazil (seated) with his two sons-in-law Prince Ludwig August of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha and Prince Gaston of Orléans during the Paraguayan War , 1865 A parent-in-law is a person who has a legal affinity with another by being the parent of the other's spouse . Many cultures and legal systems impose duties and responsibilities on persons connected by this relationship. A person is a child-in-law to the parents of the spouse, who are in turn also the parents of those sibling-in-laws (if any) who are siblings of the spouse (as opposed to spouses of siblings). Together, the members of this family affinity group are called the in-laws.

[ 1 ] Fathers-in-law [ edit ] A father-in-law is the father of a person's spouse.

[ 2 ] Two men who are fathers-in-law to each other's children may be called co-fathers-in-law , or, if there are grandchildren, co-grandfathers .

Mothers-in-law [ edit ] A mother-in-law is the mother of a person's spouse.

[ 3 ] Two women who are mothers-in-law to each other's children may be called co-mothers-in-law , or, if there are grandchildren, co-grandmothers .

In comedy and in popular culture, the mother-in-law is stereotyped as bossy, unfriendly, hostile, nosy, overbearing and generally unpleasant. They are often depicted as the bane of the husband, who is married to the mother-in-law's daughter. A mother-in-law joke is a joke that lampoons the obnoxious mother-in-law character.

Some Australian Aboriginal languages use avoidance speech , so-called "mother-in-law languages", special sub-languages used when in hearing distance of taboo relatives, most commonly the mother-in-law.

A mother-in-law suite is also a type of dwelling, usually guest accommodations within a family home that may be used for members of the extended family.

Parent-in-law relationships [ edit ] Parent-in-laws are often viewed as either a source of conflict or a source of support in a marriage relationship. Jealousy, competition, differences, and disillusioned expectations can cause conflict to arise in these relationships. The perception of parent-in-laws as negative influences on your marriage leads to the characterization of female in-laws as particularly difficult. The stereotyped mother-in-law joke finds humor in the reality of conflict with in-laws. Positive influences have also been noted as in-laws can be a found family for partners/child-in-laws who are not as close to their own family.

[ 4 ] People believe that negative relationships with in-laws will have a disastrous effect on the future of their marriage.

[ 5 ] However, the amount of connection to parent-in-laws has not been found to influence the success of their children's marriage. The lack of marriage success may not fall on conflict in the parent-in-law relationship, but on whether the children-in-law are on the same page about conflicts. Thus, discordant perceptions exist between spouses and their perceptions of their relationships with their in-laws, and it is disagreements on those connections that negatively affect marriage outcomes.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Affinity (law) Marriage Mother-in-law apartment Mother-in-law house Mother-in-law joke References [ edit ] ^ "in-law" . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 12 September 2014 .

^ "father-in-law" . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 12 September 2014 .

^ "mother-in-law" . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 12 September 2014 .

^ Silverstein, Judith L. (1992).

"The problem with in-laws" .

Journal of Family Therapy .

14 (4): 399– 412.

doi : 10.1046/j..1992.00469.x – via Wiley Online Library.

^ Bryant, Chalandra M. (2001).

"The Influence of In-Laws on Change in Marital Success" .

Journal of Marriage and Family .

63 (3): 614– 626.

doi : 10.1111/j.1741-3737.2001.00614.x .

JSTOR 3654637 .

^ Fiori, Katherine L.; Rauer, Amy J.; Birditt, Kira S.; Brown, Edna; Orbuch, Terri L. (2021).

"You Aren't as Close to my Family as You Think: Discordant Perceptions about In-laws and Risk of Divorce" .

Research in Human Development .

17 (4): 258– 273.

doi : 10.1080/15427609.2021.1874792 .

ISSN 1542-7609 .

PMC 8133523 .

PMID 34025298 .

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of parent-in-law at Wiktionary Audio recording of the Brothers Grimm folktale "The Mother-in-law" v t e Family History Rights Household Nuclear family Extended family Conjugal family Immediate family Matrifocal family First-degree relatives Parent mother father Child son daughter Sibling brother sister Second-degree relatives Grandparent Grandchild Uncle / Aunt Niece and nephew Third-degree relatives Great-grandparent Great-grandchild Great-uncle / Great-aunt Cousin Family-in-law Spouse wife husband Parent-in-law Sibling-in-law Child-in-law daughter-in-law son-in-law Stepfamily Stepparent stepfather stepmother Stepchild Stepsibling Kinship terminology Kinship Australian Aboriginal kinship Adoption Affinity Consanguinity Disownment Divorce Estrangement Family of choice Fictive kinship Marriage Nurture kinship Chinese kinship Hawaiian kinship Sudanese kinship Eskimo kinship Iroquois kinship Crow kinship Omaha kinship Genealogy and lineage Bilateral descent Cadet branch Common ancestor Family name Heirloom Heredity Inheritance Lineal descendant collateral descent Matrilineality Patrilineality Progenitor Clan Royal descent Family trees Pedigree chart Genogram Ahnentafel Genealogical numbering systems Seize quartiers Quarters of nobility Relationships Agape (parental love) Eros (marital love) Philia (brotherly love) Storge (familial love) Filial piety Polyfidelity Holidays Mother's Day U.S.

Father's Day Father–Daughter Day Siblings Day National Grandparents Day Parents' Day Children's Day Japan Family Day Canada American Family Day International Day of Families National Family Week UK National Adoption Day Related Breadwinner model Single parent Wedding anniversary Godparent Birth order Only child Middle child syndrome Sociology of the family Museum of Motherhood Astronaut family Dysfunctional family Domestic violence Incest Sibling abuse Sibling estrangement Sibling rivalry Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Parent-in-law&oldid=1292060111 " Categories : Affinity (law) Fatherhood Motherhood Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 00:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Parent-in-law 25 languages Add topic

