Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Fields of study 2 Research 3 Mapping 4 Classification 5 History 6 Areas of practice Toggle Areas of practice subsection 6.1 Fields of application in soil science 6.2 Related disciplines 7 Depression storage capacity 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Soil science 59 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская भोजपुरी Български Català Чӑвашла Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latina Lietuvių मराठी Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Русский සිංහල Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Agrology ) Study of soil as a natural resource on the surface of Earth A soil scientist examining horizons within a soil profile Soil science is the study of soil as a natural resource on the surface of the Earth including soil formation , classification and mapping ; physical , chemical , biological , and fertility properties of soils; and these properties in relation to the use and management of soils .

[ 1 ] The main branches of soil science are pedology ― the study of formation, chemistry, morphology, and classification of soil ― and edaphology ― the study of how soils interact with living things, especially plants. Sometimes terms which refer to those branches are used as if synonymous with soil science. The diversity of names associated with this discipline is related to the various associations concerned.  Indeed, engineers, agronomists , chemists , geologists , physical geographers , ecologists , biologists , microbiologists , silviculturists , sanitarians , archaeologists , and specialists in regional planning , all contribute to further knowledge of soils and the advancement of the soil sciences.

[ 1 ] Soil scientists have raised concerns about how to preserve soil and arable land in a world with a growing population, possible future water crisis , increasing per capita food consumption , and land degradation .

[ 2 ] Fields of study [ edit ] Soil occupies the pedosphere , one of Earth's spheres that the geosciences use to organize the Earth conceptually. This is the conceptual perspective of pedology and edaphology , the two main branches of soil science. Pedology is the study of soil in its natural setting. Edaphology is the study of soil in relation to soil-dependent uses. Both branches apply a combination of soil physics , soil chemistry , and soil biology . Due to the numerous interactions between the biosphere , atmosphere and hydrosphere that are hosted within the pedosphere, more integrated, less soil-centric concepts are also valuable. Many concepts essential to understanding soil come from individuals not identifiable strictly as soil scientists. This highlights the interdisciplinary nature of soil concepts.

Research [ edit ] Exploring the diversity and dynamics of soil continues to yield fresh discoveries and insights. New avenues of soil research are compelled by a need to understand soil in the context of climate change , [ 3 ] [ 4 ] greenhouse gases , and carbon sequestration .

[ 3 ] Interest in maintaining the planet's biodiversity and in exploring past cultures has also stimulated renewed interest in achieving a more refined understanding of soil.

Mapping [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Soil survey .

[ edit ] Soil survey , or soil mapping, is the  process of classifying soil types and other soil properties in a given area and geo-encoding such information.

Classification [ edit ] Main article: soil classification Map of global soil regions from the USDA In 1998, the World Reference Base for Soil Resources (WRB) replaced the FAO soil classification as the international soil classification system. The currently valid version of WRB is the 4th edition, 2022.

[ 5 ] The FAO soil classification, in turn, borrowed from modern soil classification concepts, including USDA soil taxonomy .

WRB is based mainly on soil morphology as an expression of pedogenesis . A major difference with USDA soil taxonomy is that soil climate is not part of the system, except insofar as climate influences soil profile characteristics.

Many other classification schemes exist, including vernacular systems. The structure in vernacular systems is either nominal (giving unique names to soils or landscapes) or descriptive (naming soils by their characteristics such as red, hot, fat, or sandy). Soils are distinguished by obvious characteristics, such as physical appearance (e.g., color , texture , landscape position), performance (e.g., production capability, flooding), and accompanying vegetation.

[ 6 ] A vernacular distinction familiar to many is classifying texture as heavy or light. Light soil content and better structure take less effort to turn and cultivate. Light soils do not necessarily weigh less than heavy soils on an air dry basis, nor do they have more porosity .

History [ edit ] The earliest known soil classification system comes from China, appearing in the book Yu Gong (5th century BCE), where the soil was divided into three categories and nine classes, depending on its color, texture and hydrology.

[ 7 ] Contemporaries Friedrich Albert Fallou (the German founder of modern soil science) and Vasily Dokuchaev (the Russian founder of modern soil science) are both credited with being among the first to identify soil as a resource whose distinctness and complexity deserved to be separated conceptually from geology and crop production and treated as a whole. As a founding father of soil science, Fallou has primacy in time. Fallou was working on the origins of soil before Dokuchaev was born; however Dokuchaev's work was more extensive and is considered to be the more significant to modern soil theory than Fallou's.

Previously, soil had been considered a product of chemical transformations of rocks, a dead substrate from which plants derive nutritious elements. Soil and bedrock were in fact equated. Dokuchaev considers the soil as a natural body having its own genesis and its own history of development, a body with complex and multiform processes taking place within it. The soil is considered as different from bedrock. The latter becomes soil under the influence of a series of soil-formation factors (climate, vegetation, country, relief and age). According to him, soil should be called the "daily" or outward horizons of rocks regardless of the type; they are changed naturally by the common effect of water, air and various kinds of living and dead organisms.

[ 8 ] A 1914 encyclopedic definition: "the different forms of earth on the surface of the rocks, formed by the breaking down or weathering of rocks".

[ 9 ] serves to illustrate the historic view of soil which persisted from the 19th century. Dokuchaev's late 19th century soil concept developed in the 20th century to one of soil as earthy material that has been altered by living processes.

[ 10 ] A corollary concept is that soil without a living component is simply a part of Earth's outer layer.

Further refinement of the soil concept is occurring in view of an appreciation of energy transport and transformation within soil. The term is popularly applied to the material on the surface of the Earth's moon and Mars, a usage acceptable within a portion of the scientific community. Accurate to this modern understanding of soil is Nikiforoff's 1959 definition of soil as the "excited skin of the sub aerial part of the Earth's crust ".

[ 11 ] Areas of practice [ edit ] Academically, soil scientists tend to be drawn to one of five areas of specialization: microbiology , pedology , edaphology , physics , or chemistry . Yet the work specifics are very much dictated by the challenges facing our civilization's desire to sustain the land that supports it, and the distinctions between the sub-disciplines of soil science often blur in the process. Soil science professionals commonly stay current in soil chemistry, soil physics, soil microbiology, pedology, and applied soil science in related disciplines.

One exciting effort drawing in soil scientists in the U.S. as of 2004 [update] is the Soil Quality Initiative. Central to the Soil Quality Initiative is developing indices of soil health and then monitoring them in a way that gives us long-term (decade-to-decade) feedback on our performance as stewards of the planet. The effort includes understanding the functions of soil microbiotic crusts and exploring the potential to sequester atmospheric carbon in soil organic matter . Relating the concept of agriculture to soil quality , however, has not been without its share of controversy and criticism, including critiques by Nobel Laureate Norman Borlaug and World Food Prize Winner Pedro Sanchez .

A more traditional role for soil scientists has been to map soils. Almost every area in the United States now has a published soil survey , including interpretive tables on how soil properties support or limit activities and uses. An internationally accepted soil taxonomy allows uniform communication of soil characteristics and soil functions . National and international soil survey efforts have given the profession unique insights into landscape-scale functions. The landscape functions that soil scientists are called upon to address in the field seem to fall roughly into six areas: Land-based treatment of wastes Septic system Manure Municipal biosolids Food and fiber processing waste Identification and protection of environmentally critical areas Sensitive and unstable soils Wetlands Unique soil situations that support valuable habitat , and ecosystem diversity Management for optimum land productivity Silviculture Agronomy Nutrient management Water management Native vegetation Grazing Management for optimum water quality Stormwater management Sediment and erosion control Remediation and restoration of damaged lands Mine reclamation Flood and storm damage Contamination Sustainability of desired uses Soil conservation There are also practical applications of soil science that might not be apparent from looking at a published soil survey.

Radiometric dating : specifically a knowledge of local pedology is used to date prior activity at the site Stratification (archeology) where soil formation processes and preservative qualities can inform the study of archaeological sites Geological phenomena Landslides Active faults Altering soils to achieve new uses Vitrification to contain radioactive wastes Enhancing soil microbial capabilities in degrading contaminants ( bioremediation ).

Carbon sequestration Environmental soil science Pedology Soil genesis Pedometrics Soil morphology Soil micromorphology Soil classification USDA soil taxonomy World Reference Base for Soil Resources [ 5 ] Soil biology Soil microbiology Soil chemistry Soil biochemistry Soil mineralogy Soil physics Pedotransfer function Soil mechanics and engineering Soil hydrology, hydropedology Fields of application in soil science [ edit ] Climate change [ 3 ] Ecosystem studies Pedotransfer function Soil fertility / Nutrient management Soil management Soil survey Standard methods of analysis Watershed and wetland studies Land Suitability classification Related disciplines [ edit ] Agricultural sciences Agricultural soil science Agrophysics science Irrigation management Anthropology archaeological stratigraphy Environmental science Landscape ecology Physical geography Geomorphology Geology Biogeochemistry Geomicrobiology Hydrology Hydrogeology Waste management Wetland science Depression storage capacity [ edit ] Depression storage capacity, in soil science, is the ability of a particular area of land to retain water in its pits and depressions, thus preventing it from flowing.

[ 12 ] Depression storage capacity, along with infiltration capacity , is one of the main factors involved in Horton overland flow , whereby water volume surpasses both infiltration and depression storage capacity and begins to flow horizontally across land, possibly leading to flooding and soil erosion . The study of land's depression storage capacity is important in the fields of geology , ecology , and especially hydrology .

See also [ edit ] Agricultural soil science Agroecology Agronomy Agrophysics Australian Society of Soil Science Incorporated (ASSSI) Compost History of soil science International Soil Reference and Information Centre (ISRIC) International Union of Soil Sciences (IUSS) Liming (soil) List of Russian Earth scientists List of State Soil Science Associations List of State Soil Science Licensing Boards National Society of Consulting Soil Scientists (NSCSS) Resonant column test Soil biology Soil Science Society of America (SSSA) Soil value World Congress of Soil Science (WCSS) References [ edit ] ^ a b Jackson, J. A. (1997). Glossary of Geology (4. ed.). Alexandria, Virginia: American Geological Institute. p 604.

ISBN 0-922152-34-9 ^ H. H. Janzen; et al. (2011).

"Global Prospects Rooted in Soil Science" .

Soil Science Society of America Journal .

75 (1): 1.

Bibcode : 2011SSASJ..75....1J .

doi : 10.2136/sssaj2009.0216 .

^ a b c Ochoa-Hueso, R; Delgado-Baquerizo, M; King, PTA; Benham, M; Arca, V; Power, SA (February 2019). "Ecosystem type and resource quality are more important than global change drivers in regulating early stages of litter decomposition".

Soil Biology and Biochemistry .

129 : 144– 152.

Bibcode : 2019SBiBi.129..144O .

doi : 10.1016/j.soilbio.2018.11.009 .

hdl : 10261/336676 .

S2CID 92606851 .

^ Pielke, Roger (12 December 2005).

"Is Soil an Important Component of the Climate System?" .

The Climate Science Weblog . Archived from the original on 8 September 2006 . Retrieved 19 April 2012 .

^ a b IUSS Working Group WRB (2022).

"World Reference Base for Soil Resources, 4th edition" . IUSS, Vienna.

^ "Vernacular Systems" . Archived from the original on 6 March 2007 . Retrieved 19 April 2012 .

^ Arnold, R.

et al . (2009) A Handbook of Soil Terminology, Correlation and Classification Earthscan, London, England.

^ Krasilnikov, N.A. (1958) Soil Microorganisms and Higher Plants Archived 12 November 2004 at the Wayback Machine ^ Wikisource:The New Student's Reference Work/4-0310 ^ Buol, S. W.; Hole, F. D. & McCracken, R. J. (1973).

Soil Genesis and Classification (First ed.). Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8138-1460-5 .

.

^ C. C. Nikiforoff (1959). "Reappraisal of the soil: Pedogenesis consists of transactions in matter and energy between the soil and its surroundings".

Science .

129 (3343): 186– 196.

Bibcode : 1959Sci...129..186N .

doi : 10.1126/science.129.3343.186 .

PMID 17808687 .

^ Hansen, Bjarne, Per Schjønning, and Erik Sibbesen. " Roughness indices for estimation of depression storage capacity of tilled soil surfaces Archived 25 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine ." Soil and Tillage Research 52.1 (1999): 103-111.

Soil Survey Staff (1993).

Soil Survey: Early Concepts of Soil.

(html) Soil Survey Manual USDA Handbook 18 , Soil Conservation Service. U.S. Department of Agriculture. URL accessed on 2004-11-30.

Marion LeRoy Jackson (2005).

Soil Chemical Analysis: Advanced Course . UW-Madison Libraries Parallel Press. pp. 5–.

ISBN 978-1-893311-47-3 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Soil science at Wikimedia Commons v t e Soil science History Index Main fields Pedology Edaphology Soil biology Soil microbiology Soil zoology Soil ecology Soil physics Soil mechanics Soil chemistry Environmental soil science Agricultural soil science Soil topics Soil Pedosphere Soil morphology Pedodiversity Soil formation Soil erosion Soil contamination Soil retrogression and degradation Soil compaction Soil compaction (agriculture) Soil sealing Soil salinity Alkali soil Soil pH Soil acidification Soil health Soil life Soil biodiversity Soil quality Soil value Soil fertility Soil resilience Soil color Soil texture Soil structure Pore space in soil Pore water pressure Soil crust Soil horizon Soil biomantle Soil carbon Soil gas Soil respiration Soil organic matter Soil moisture Soil water (retention) Soil type v t e Soil classification World Reference Base for Soil Resources (1998–) Acrisols Alisols Andosols Anthrosols Arenosols Calcisols Cambisols Chernozem Cryosols Durisols Ferralsols Fluvisols Gleysols Gypsisols Histosol Kastanozems Leptosols Lixisols Luvisols Nitisols Phaeozems Planosols Plinthosols Podzols Regosols Retisols Solonchaks Solonetz Stagnosol Technosols Umbrisols Vertisols USDA soil taxonomy Alfisols Andisols Aridisols Entisols Gelisols Histosols Inceptisols Mollisols Oxisols Spodosols Ultisols Vertisols Other systems FAO soil classification (1974–1998) Unified Soil Classification System AASHTO Soil Classification System Référentiel pédologique (French classification system) Canadian system of soil classification Australian Soil Classification Polish Soil Classification 1938 USDA soil taxonomy List of U.S. state soils List of vineyard soil types PG-3 (Spanish classification system) Non-systematic soil types Sand Silt Clay Loam Topsoil Subsoil Soil crust Claypan Hardpan Gypcrust Caliche Parent material Pedosphere Laimosphere Rhizosphere Bulk soil Alkali soil Bay mud Blue goo Brickearth Brown earth Calcareous grassland Dark earth Dry quicksand Duplex soil Eluvium Expansive clay Fill dirt Fuller's earth Hydrophobic soil Loess Lunar soil Martian soil Mud Muskeg Paleosol Peat Prime farmland Quicksand Serpentine soil Spodic soil Stagnogley Subaqueous soil Takir Terra preta Terra rossa Tropical peat Yedoma Types of soil Applications Soil conservation Soil management Soil guideline value Soil survey Soil test Soil governance Soil value Soil salinity control Erosion control Agroecology Liming (soil) Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Geomorphology Geotechnical engineering Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Societies, Initiatives Australian Society of Soil Science Incorporated Canadian Society of Soil Science Central Soil Salinity Research Institute (India) German Soil Science Society Indian Institute of Soil Science International Union of Soil Sciences International Year of Soil National Society of Consulting Soil Scientists (US) OPAL Soil Centre (UK) Soil Science Society of Poland Soil and Water Conservation Society (US) Soil Science Society of America World Congress of Soil Science Scientific journals Acta Agriculturae Scandinavica B Journal of Soil and Water Conservation Plant and Soil Pochvovedenie Soil Research Soil Science Society of America Journal See also Land use Land conversion Land management Vegetation Infiltration (hydrology) Groundwater Crust (geology) Impervious surface / Surface runoff Petrichor Wikipedia:WikiProject Soil Category soil Category soil science List of soil scientists v t e Physical geography Atmospheric science / Meteorology Biogeography / Phytogeography Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Soil science / Pedology / Edaphology Geobiology Geology Geomorphology Geostatistics Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Landscape ecology Quaternary science Category Portal Commons v t e Earth science Outline Index Atmospheric science Environmental science Geodesy Geology Geophysics Glaciology Hydrology Meteorology Oceanography Paleogeoscience Physical geography Soil science Volcanology Category Portal Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐hl48r
Cached time: 20250812000452
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.420 seconds
Real time usage: 0.510 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1842/1000000
Revision size: 18466/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 85042/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1728/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 74736/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.248/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6537052/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  410.821      1 -total
 31.52%  129.488      4 Template:Navbox
 29.44%  120.954      1 Template:Reflist
 19.51%   80.139      1 Template:Soil_science_topics
 13.26%   54.464      1 Template:Excerpt
 13.23%   54.355      1 Template:Short_description
 10.93%   44.894      1 Template:Soil_type
 10.44%   42.904      1 Template:ISBN
  8.71%   35.784      3 Template:Cite_journal
  7.66%   31.488      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:59413:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000452 and revision id 1278641922. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Soil_science&oldid=1278641922 " Categories : Soil science Earth sciences Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2023 Articles with excerpts Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2004 All articles containing potentially dated statements Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 March 2025, at 18:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Soil science 59 languages Add topic

