Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Origins 1.2 Early iconic works 2 Commercial crossover Toggle Commercial crossover subsection 2.1 Legality and ethics 2.2 Copyright 3 Street art, guerrilla art and graffiti Toggle Street art, guerrilla art and graffiti subsection 3.1 Guerilla sculpture 4 Public acceptance 5 Beautification movement Toggle Beautification movement subsection 5.1 North America 5.1.1 Canada 5.1.2 United States 5.1.3 Mexico 5.2 South America 5.3 Europe 5.4 Asia 5.4.1 India 5.4.2 Malaysia 5.4.3 South Korea 5.5 Thailand 5.6 Middle East 5.7 Israel 5.7.1 United Arab Emirates 5.8 Oceania 5.8.1 Australia 5.8.2 New Zealand 5.9 Africa 6 Exhibitions, festivals and conferences Toggle Exhibitions, festivals and conferences subsection 6.1 Documentary films 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Street art 43 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Latviešu Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Plattdüütsch Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art that is public and temporary in public spaces This article is about the static visual art form. For performing arts practiced outdoors, see Street performance and Street theatre .

Street art Street art by C215 on a postbox in the 5th arrondissement of Paris honoring French Resistance hero Pierre Brossolette in a partnership with the Centre des monuments nationaux around the Panthéon [ 1 ] Years active 1980s–present Major figures Banksy John Fekner Keith Haring Influences Graffiti Street art is visual art created in public locations for public visibility. It has been associated with the terms "independent art", "post-graffiti", "neo-graffiti" and guerrilla art .

[ 2 ] Street art has evolved from the early forms of defiant graffiti into a more commercial form of art, as one of the main differences now lies with the messaging. Street art is often meant to provoke thought rather than rejection among the general audience through making its purpose more evident than that of graffiti. The issue of permission has also come at the heart of street art, as graffiti is usually done illegally, whereas street art can nowadays be the product of an agreement or even sometimes a commission. However, it remains different from traditional art exposed in public spaces by its explicit use of said space in the conception phase.

Background [ edit ] Germany's Berlin Wall (shown 1986) was a target of artists during its existence (1961–1989).

Street art is a form of artwork that is displayed in public on surrounding buildings, on streets, trains and other publicly viewed surfaces. Many instances come in the form of guerrilla art, which is intended to make a personal statement about the society that the artist lives within. The work has moved from the beginnings of graffiti and vandalism to new modes where artists work to bring messages, or just beauty, to an audience.

[ 3 ] Some artists may use "smart vandalism" as a way to raise awareness of social and political issues, [ 4 ] whereas other artists use urban space as an opportunity to display personal artwork. Artists may also appreciate the challenges and risks that are associated with installing illicit artwork in public places. A common motive is that creating art in a format that utilizes public space allows artists who may otherwise feel disenfranchised to reach a much broader audience than other styles or galleries would allow.

Whereas traditional graffiti artists have primarily used spray paint to produce their work, "street art" can encompass other media, such as LED art , mosaic tiling, stencil graffiti , sticker art , reverse graffiti , "Lock On" sculptures , wheatpasting , woodblocking , yarn bombing and rock balancing .

[ 5 ] New media forms such as video projections onto large city buildings are an increasingly popular tool for street artists—and the availability of cheap computer hardware and software allows such artwork to become competitive with corporate advertisements. Artists are thus able to create art from their personal computers for free, which competes with companies' profits.

[ 6 ] Origins [ edit ] Street art by Kevin Larmee , SoHo, New York City (1985) Slogans of protest and political or social commentary graffiti on walls are the precursor to modern graffiti and street art, and continue as one aspect of the genre. Street art in the form of text or simple iconic graphics of corporate icons can become well-known yet enigmatic symbols of an area or an era.

[ 7 ] Some credit the " Kilroy Was Here " graffiti of the World War II era as one such early example: a simple line-drawing of a long-nosed man peering from behind a ledge. Author Charles Panati indirectly touched upon the general appeal of street art in his description of the "Kilroy" graffiti as "outrageous not for what it said, but where it turned up".

[ 8 ] Much of what is now considered modern street art has well-documented origins in New York City 's graffiti boom . It began in the 1960s, matured in the 1970s, and peaked in the 1980s with the spray-painted full-car subway train murals, especially in the Bronx .

As the 1980s progressed, a shift occurred from text-based works of early in the decade to visually conceptual street art such as Hambleton 's shadow figures.

[ 9 ] This period coincides with Keith Haring 's subway advertisement subversions and Jean-Michel Basquiat 's SAMO tags. What is now recognized as "street art" had yet to become a realistic career consideration, and offshoots such as stencil graffiti were in their infancy.

Wheatpasted street poster art used to promote bands and the clubs where they performed evolved into actual artwork or copy-art and became a common sight during the 1980s in cities worldwide.

[ citation needed ] The group working collectively as AVANT was also active in New York during this period.

[ 10 ] Punk rock music's subversive ideologies were also instrumental to street art's evolution as an art form during the 1980s. Some of the anti-museum mentality can be attributed to the ideology of Marinetti who in 1909 wrote the " Manifesto of Futurism " with a quote that reads, "we will destroy all the museums." [ 11 ] Many street artists claim we do not live in a museum so art should be in public with no tickets.

[ 11 ] Early iconic works [ edit ] The 2010 recreation of Keith Haring 's original 1982 mural; New York City's Bowery Mural wall at Houston Street and the Bowery The northwest wall of the intersection at Houston Street and the Bowery in New York City has been a target of artists since the 1970s. The site, now sometimes referred to as the Bowery Mural , originated as a derelict wall that graffiti artists used freely.

Keith Haring once commandeered the wall for his use in 1982. After Haring, a stream of well-known street artists followed, until the wall had gradually taken on prestigious status. By 2008, the wall became privately managed and made available to artists by commission or invitation only.

[ citation needed ] A series of murals by René Moncada began appearing on the streets of SoHo in the late 1970s emblazoned with the words I AM THE BEST ARTIST . René has described the murals as a thumb in the nose to the art community he felt he had helped pioneer but by which he later felt ignored by.

[ 7 ] [ 12 ] Recognized as an early act of "art provocation", [ 13 ] they were a topic of conversation and debate at the time; related legal conflicts raised discussion about intellectual property, artist's rights and the First Amendment .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] The ubiquitous murals also became a popular backdrop to photographs taken by tourists and art students, as well as for advertising layouts and Hollywood films.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] IATBA murals were often defaced, only to be repainted by René.

[ 13 ] [ 21 ] Franco the Great , also known as the "Picasso of Harlem" is another world famous street artist internationally known also for his New Art form. There were riots in the streets when Martin Luther King Jr.

was assassinated in 1968 .

Harlem business owners retaliated by installing drab-looking metal gates on their store fronts. Franco decided to turn a negative into a positive by developing a new art form on the steel gates in 1978. He has painted over 200 gates from the west to the east side of 125th street on Sundays since then, when stores are closed.

125th Street in Harlem is unofficially known as "Franco's Blvd" because of his magnificent paintings on the metal business gates.

[ 22 ] Commercial crossover [ edit ] Some street artists have earned international attention for their work and have made a full transition from street art into the mainstream art world—some while continuing to produce art on the streets.

Keith Haring was among the earliest wave of street artists in the 1980s to do so. Traditional graffiti and street art motifs have also increasingly been incorporated into mainstream advertising, with many instances of artists contracted to work as graphic designers for corporations. Graffiti artist Haze has provided font and graphic designs for music acts such as the Beastie Boys and Public Enemy .

Shepard Fairey 's street posters of then-presidential candidate Barack Obama were reworked by a special commission for use in the presidential campaign. A version of the artwork also appeared on the cover of Time magazine. It is also not uncommon for street artists to start their own merchandising lines.

[ citation needed ] Street art has received artistic recognition with the high-profile status of Banksy and other artists. This has led street art to become one of the 'sights to see' in many European cities. Some artists now provide tours of local street art and can share their knowledge, explaining the ideas behind many works, the reasons for tagging, and the messages portrayed in a lot of graffiti work.
Berlin, London, Paris, Hamburg and other cities all have popular street art tours running all year round. In London alone there are supposedly ten different graffiti tours available for tourists.

[ 23 ] Many of these organizations, such as Alternative London, [ 24 ] ParisStreetArt, [ 25 ] AlternativeBerlin, [ 26 ] pride themselves on working with local artists, so visitors can get an authentic experience and not just a rehearsed script.

Many of these guides are painters, fine-art graduates and other creative professionals that have found the medium of street art as a way to exhibit their work. With this commercial angle, they can let people into the world of street art and give them more of an understanding of where it comes from. It has been argued that this growing popularity of street art has made it a factor in gentrification .

[ 27 ] Legality and ethics [ edit ] Street art can have legal problems. The parties involved can include the artist, the city or municipal government, the intended recipient and the owner of the structure or the medium where the work was displayed. One example is a case in 2014 in Bristol, England, which illustrates the legal, moral and ethical questions that can occur. The Mobile Lovers by Banksy was painted on plywood on a public doorway, then cut out by a citizen who in turn was going to sell the piece to garner funds for a boys' club. The city government in turn confiscated the artwork and placed it in a museum. Banksy, hearing of the conundrum, then bequeathed it to the original citizen, thinking his intentions were genuine. In this case, as in others, the controversy of ownership and public property, as well as the issues of trespassing and vandalism, are issues to be resolved legally.

[ 28 ] Copyright [ edit ] In 2005, Banksy stated that "Copyright is for losers ©™".

[ 29 ] Under United States law, works of street art should be able to find copyright protection as long as they are legally installed and can fulfil two additional conditions; originality in the work, and that it is fixed in a tangible medium.

[ 30 ] This copyright would then survive for the lifespan of the artist plus 70 years.

[ 31 ] In case there is a collaboration between two artists, both would hold joint ownership in the copyright.

[ 32 ] Street artists also hold moral rights in their work, independent of economic rights arising from copyright. These include the right to integrity and the right to attribution.

[ 33 ] Recently, street art has started to gain recognition among art critics, and some major companies have found themselves in trouble for using this art without permission for advertising. In such a case, H&M , a fast fashion retailer used street art by Jason "Revok" Williams in an advertisement series.

[ 34 ] In response to Williams' ' Cease and Desist ' notice, however, H&M filed a lawsuit, alleging that since the work is a "product of criminal conduct", it cannot be protected by copyright. This view has been taken earlier too, in the cases of Villa v. Pearson Education [ 35 ] and Moschino and Jeremy Tierney.

[ 36 ] In all three cases, before the judge could make a ruling on the issue of the illegality of the art, settlements were reached.

[ 37 ] These companies typically settle out of court to avoid costly, time-consuming litigation.

When it comes to the question of the destruction of street art, the United States has applied the Visual Artists Right Act (VARA) [ 38 ] to introduce moral rights into copyright law. In English v. BFC & R East 11th Street LLC and Pollara v. Seymour , it was held that this Act was inapplicable to works of art placed illicitly. A distinction was also made between the removable and non-removable works, indicating that if a work can be removed trivially, it cannot be destroyed, irrespective of its legal status.

[ 37 ] Another important factor considered by the court in the latter case was whether the artwork was "of a recognized stature".

[ 37 ] In a case where a group of artists was awarded $6.7 million, the judge held that the art was not made without permission of the owner of the building, and that an important factor was that the demolition was done ahead of the intended date, indicating willful thought.

[ 39 ] Street art, guerrilla art and graffiti [ edit ] Guerrilla art , a humanist mural by Fasim in Alcoi , 2018, Valencia , Spain Graffiti typically consists of stylized words representing a group or community, often intended to convey messages publicly while remaining cryptic to outsiders. The telltale sign of street art is that it usually includes images, illustrations, or symbols that are meant to convey a message.

[ 40 ] Despite their differences, graffiti and street art share more similarities than just a common origin. One trait of street art that has helped to bring it to positive light in the public eye is that the messages shown are usually made to be understandable to all.

[ 40 ] While both of these types of art have many differences, there are more similarities than their origins. Both graffiti and street art are artistic expressions often driven by the desire for recognition, public visibility, and cultural commentary. Whether working anonymously, creating cryptic messages, or advocating for a cause, most artists share a desire for visibility, recognition, and emotional expression.

[ 40 ] The term street art is described in many different ways, one of which is the term "guerrilla art." Both terms describe these public works that are placed with meaning and intent. They can be done anonymously for works that are created to confront taboo issues that will result in a backlash, or under the name of a well-known artist. With any terminology, these works of art are created as a primary way to express the artist's thoughts on many topics and issues.

[ 41 ] As with graffiti, an initial trait or feature of street art is that it is often created on or in a public area without or against the permission of the owner.

[ 42 ] A main distinction between the two comes in the second trait of street art or guerrilla art, where it is made to represent and display a purposefully uncompliant act that is meant to challenge its surrounding environment.

[ 42 ] This challenge can be granular, focusing on issues within the community or broadly sweeping, addressing global issues on a public stage.

This is how the term "guerrilla art" was associated with this type of work and behavior. The word ties back to guerrilla warfare in history where attacks are made wildly, without control and with no rules of engagement. This type of warfare was dramatically different from the previously formal and traditional fighting that went on in wars normally. When used in the context of street art, the term guerilla art is meant to give a nod to the artist's uncontrolled, unexpected and often unnamed attack on societal structure or norms.

[ 43 ] Some have asked if it is sufficient to place art in the street to make street art; Nicholas Riggle looks more critically at the border between graffiti and street art and states that "an artwork is street art if—and only if—its material use of the street is internal to its meaning".

[ 44 ] The street is not a blank canvas for the street artist. It has a character, a use, a history, a texture, a shape. Street art, as well as broader urban art, transforms the street or opens the dialogue. Justin Armstrong states graffiti is identified as an aesthetic occupation of spaces, whereas urban street art repurposes them.

[ 45 ] Guerilla sculpture [ edit ] Framed Rules is an art installation in public space by Koen van Rijn, placed on 21 November 2019, in the Museumpark in Rotterdam , Netherlands.

Guerilla sculpture is the placement of sculptures in street settings without official approval; it developed from street art in England in the late 20th century.

[ 43 ] In addition to the nontraditional setting of the works of art involved, there are also many different techniques used in the creation of this artwork. The artists tend to work illegally and in secrecy to create and place these works in the dark of night, cloaked in mystery regarding their origins and creators. The sculptures are used to express the artist's views and to reach an audience that would not otherwise be reached through more traditional methods of displaying one's work to the public. In performing these acts of artistic expression, they are not working to gain acceptance or love of the people that they reach, but at times may even anger those who view their work.

[ 43 ] An example is the overnight appearance of an unsanctioned sculpture of Edward Snowden onto a column in Fort Greene Park in New York City.

[ 43 ] In other cases, the sculptures integrate two-dimensional backdrops with a three-dimensional component, such as one by Banksy titled Spy Booth (2014). The backdrop was painted on a wall in Cheltenham, England and featured Cold-War spy characters adorned in trench coats and fedoras, with spy accoutrements, microphones and reel-to-reel tape decks. These characters appeared to be tapping into a broken telephone booth.

[ 43 ] On 15 July 2020, a month after the statue of Edward Colston was pulled down during Black Lives Matter protests in Bristol , artist Marc Quinn used the empty plinth to display his sculpture A Surge of Power (Jen Reid) .

The life-sized piece, created from black resin and steel, [ 46 ] was inspired by a picture of protester Jen Reid, raising her fist during the Bristol protest that subsequently went viral and caught the attention of Quinn. The statue was removed by Bristol City Council on 16 July 2020.

[ 47 ] A deviation from the unsanctioned street sculpture is "institutionalized guerilla sculpture," which is sanctioned by civic authorities and can be commercialized. One such artist from the Netherlands is Florentijn Hofman , who in 2007 created Rubber Duck , a colossal rendition of the childhood tub-toy.

In Latin America, especially Mexico, the term antimonumento has developed as the equivalent to political guerilla sculpture, or simply, an illegal installation of a politically themed sculpture. They are used to denounce the inaction of the state and reclaim public space.

[ 48 ] Normally an antimonumento is installed during a demonstration [ 48 ] and, as Márcio Seligmann-Silva writes, "corresponds to a desire to actively recall the (painful) past." [ 49 ] Some of the issues commemorated are disappearances, massacres, migration, and the killing of women.

[ 50 ] They are used to denounce the inaction of the state and reclaim public space.

Public acceptance [ edit ] Although street art may be ubiquitous around the world, the popularity of its artistic expression is relatively recent. Street art has undergone a major transformation in public opinion to become socially accepted and respected in some public places.

[ 42 ] Even with this degree of acceptance, defacing private or public property with any and all message, whether it is considered art or not, is still widely illegal.

[ 42 ] In the beginning, graffiti was the only form of street art that there was and it was widely considered to be a delinquent act of territorial marking and crude messaging. Initially, there were very clear divisions between the work of a street artist and the act of tagging a public or private property, but in recent years where the artists are treading the line between the two, this line has become increasingly blurred.

[ 42 ] Those who truly appreciate the work of famed street artists or street works of art are in acceptance of the fact that this art would not be the same without the medium being the street. The works are subject to whatever change or destruction may come because since they are created on public or private surfaces which are neither owned by the artist or permitted to be worked on by the property owners. This acceptance of the potential impermanence of the works of art and the public placement of the uncondoned works are what contribute to the meaning of the piece and therefore, what helps the growth of street art popularity.

[ 42 ] In the 21st century, a number of American cities began installing poetry into sidewalk cement, sometimes holding public contests to choose new poems.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] Perhaps contrary to earlier anti-museum and ticket sale sentiments of some street artists; a dedicated exhibition to Street Art under the title 'Urban' opened in Peterborough Museum , United Kingdom, on 11 December 2021. With tickets for the preview evening selling at £5 GDP and subsequent entry being charged at £8 per person. The exhibition has been promoted as being of 'major national [UK] importance' and celebrating artists such as Banksy, Damien Hirst , My Dog Sighs , the Connor Brothers, Pure Evil and Blek le Rat .

[ 54 ] While street art and sculpture has been on display at Bristol Museum since a Banksy 'takeover' in 2009.

[ 55 ] Beautification movement [ edit ] Given the various benefits and sometimes high return on investment [ 56 ] street art provides businesses, schools, neighborhoods and cities with a movement as a tool to create safer, brighter, more colorful and inspiring communities, a trend which has recently been more widely recognized. Organizations like Beautify Earth have pioneered cities to leverage these benefits to create widespread beauty where it would be otherwise empty or dilapidated public wall space.

[ 57 ] A The Washington Post article written by Sydney Page has stated that according to a safety study produced by Bloomberg Philanthropies in partnership with the consulting firm Sam Schwartzentitled "Asphalt Art Safety Study", crosswalks painted with murals have been found to significantly reduce the frequency of accidents occurring at such sites.

[ 58 ] North America [ edit ] Canada [ edit ] In Montreal , with over 80 murals and counting since the foundation of MURAL Festival in 2013, the annual street art festival contributed to creating Le Plateau-Mont-Royal as an epicenter for urban arts.

Villeray , Downtown Montreal Le Sud-Ouest , Hochelaga-Maisonneuve , and multiple art districts also continue to broaden the street art circuit within the Island of Montreal.

[ citation needed ] The Under Pressure annual graffiti festival, the largest of its kind in North America, celebrated its 25th anniversary in 2021.

[ 59 ] Toronto has a significant graffiti scene .

[ 60 ] Calgary , while historically having a smaller graffiti street art scene, recently started the Beltline Urban Mural Project (BUMP) with artists from all over the world creating large murals in the city center.

[ 61 ] United States [ edit ] Early Street art by Jacek Tylicki , Lower East Side , New York City (1982) Street Art in Manhattan, New York City, 15 September 2017 New York City attracts artists from around the world.

[ 62 ] In Manhattan , "post-graffiti" street art grew in the 1980s from the then largely vacant neighborhoods of SoHo the Lower East Side and parts of East Village . The Chelsea art district became another locale, with area galleries also hosting formal exhibitions of street artist's work. In Brooklyn , the Williamsburg and Dumbo neighborhoods—especially near the waterfront—are recognized street art sites.

[ 63 ] New York City's unofficial mural district is in Bushwick, Brooklyn , with curatorial gatekeeping by a non-profit organization called The Bushwick Collective .

A vibrant mural of colorful “You Are Beautiful” stickers brightens a city street as pedestrians walk by.

Chicago has many forms of street art emerging but some of the most popular artists that can be seen everywhere in Chicago is Matthew Hoffman and his You Are Beautiful project, Sentrock, Jc Rivera (The Bear Champ), and Hebru Brantley.

Programs in the Pennsylvania cities of Philadelphia and Pittsburgh provide funding to agencies who employ street artists to decorate city walls. The Mural Arts Program established in 1984 has helped Philadelphia earn praise as the "City of Murals".
The project was initiated to encourage graffiti artists toward a more constructive use of their talents. Murals backed by The Sprout Fund in Pittsburgh were named the "Best Public Art" by the Pittsburgh City Paper in 2006.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Street art in Atlanta centers on the Old Fourth Ward and Reynoldstown neighborhoods, the Krog Street Tunnel , and along the 22-mile BeltLine railway corridor which circles the inner city. Atlanta established a Graffiti Task Force in 2011. Although the city selected a number of murals that would not be targeted by the task force, the selection process overlooked street art of the popular Krug Street Tunnel site. Art created in conjunction with the Living Walls street art conference, which Atlanta hosts annually, was spared. Some actions were taken by the unit, including arrests of artists deemed vandals, caused community opposition; some considered the city's efforts as "misdirected" or "futile".

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] After being sued by a group of artists in 2017 the city of Atlanta agreed not to enforce an ordinance requiring artists to obtain city approval for murals on private property.

[ 68 ] Images and locations of over 200 works of Atlanta street art can be found on the Atlanta Street Art Map.

[ 69 ] Sarasota , Florida, hosts an annual street art event, the Sarasota Chalk Festival , founded in 2007. An independent offshoot known as Going Vertical sponsors works by street artists, but some have been removed as controversial.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] Los Angeles 's Arts District is known for its high concentration street murals.

[ 72 ] The neighborhood of Hollywood and streets such as Sunset Boulevard , La Brea , Beverly Boulevard , La Cienega , and Melrose Avenue are among other key locations.

[ 73 ] LAB ART Los Angeles , opened in 2011, devotes its 6,500 square feet of gallery space to street art. Artwork by locals such as Alec Monopoly , Annie Preece , Smear and Morley are among the collection.

San Francisco's Mission District , center of the Mission School movement, has densely packed street art along Mission Street, and along both Clarion and Balmy Alleys .

[ 74 ] Streets of Hayes Valley , SoMa , Bayview-Hunters Point and the Tenderloin have also become known for street art.

[ 75 ] San Diego 's East Village, Little Italy, North Park, and South Park neighborhoods contain street artwork of VHILS , Shepard Fairey , Tavar Zawacki a.k.a.

ABOVE , Space Invader , Os Gêmeos , among others. Murals by various Mexican artists can be seen at Chicano Park in the Barrio Logan neighborhood.

Chicano Park , which was a part of people’s land takeover in 1970, celebrated its 52nd anniversary in 2022. The more than 80 murals depict many aspects of Latino culture from lowrider culture to Aztec warriors .

[ 76 ] The intent for the art provided people enough positive evidence to respect it and leave it be. These spaces were then seen as a place of activism and pride, rather than vandalism. Since the COVID-19 pandemic, Ground Floor Murals has created works that recognize the multicultural communities of San Diego, including Mexican singer Vicente Fernández , [ 77 ] players from the San Diego Padres , and important local community members.

[ 78 ] Their first mural was of Padres’ legend, Tony Gwynn in City Heights .

[ 79 ] Richmond , Virginia has over 100 murals created by artists, many of whom are alumni of Virginia Commonwealth University's School of the Arts or current students there. Some of the murals are privately commissioned by individuals and businesses, some are created by solo street artists, and some are collaborative group fund-raising projects.

[ 80 ] Denver street artists have been busy brightening (and enlightening) the urban landscape for decades by making canvases of the city's alleyways, building exteriors, warehouses, garage doors and storefronts.

[ 81 ] The city of Denver has a whole area called the River North Art District (RiNo) that is dedicated to the work of local creative artists. Most artists in the RiNo district are commissioned by the local business owners who want to give their buildings colorful imagery.

[ citation needed ] Mexico [ edit ] The manifestations of street art in Mexico began in the late 80s in Mexico City, inside multifamily buildings in the north of the city and also in the subway. Since then, urban art and graffiti have formed an essential part of cultural identity in the different city halls of the metropolis.
Currently, some different associations and groups are dedicated to the creation and search of spaces for urban art in Mexico City and throughout the country. Even several artists, both national and foreign or emerging and consolidated, have taken their art to the Latin American country.

Mural de Vhils en Parque La Ruina (Hermosillo, Sonora), producido para ACC Global Series There are also media, such as All City Canvas, [ 82 ] specialized in the dissemination of urban art in Mexico, Latin America and the rest of the world. In that way, it has been possible to create a universal language around this artistic manifestation. Even in 2012, All City Canvas was the first organization to create a street art festival in Mexico that sought to join international efforts and create urban art for a week in Mexico City. In recent years, they have produced several murals in collaboration with talented artists such as Vhils , It's a Living and Bier in Brood, [ 83 ] as part of the All City Canvas Global Series [ 84 ] in some cities in Mexico and the United States. The objective of the initiative is to create an impact on society through a large-scale piece of art.

South America [ edit ] Buenos Aires has developed a reputation for its large scale murals and artworks in many subway stations and public spaces. The first graffiti artists started painting in the street in the Argentine capital in the mid-1990s after visiting other countries in Europe and South America. One of the first recognized street artists in Argentina is Alfredo Segatori, nicknamed 'Pelado', who began painting in 1994 and holds the record for the largest mural in Argentina [ 85 ] measuring more than 2000 square meters.

An abundance of buildings slated for demolition provides blank canvases to a multitude of artists, and the authorities cannot keep up with removing artists' output. "Population density" and "urban anxiety" are common motifs expressed by "Grafiteiros" in their street art and pichação , rune-like black graffiti, said to convey feelings of class conflict.

Influential Brazilian street artists include Claudio Ethos, Os Gêmeos , Vitche, Onesto, and Herbert Baglione.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] Bogotá has a lot of walls dedicated to street art and a powerful artistic movement. The tourist can appreciate several wall performances: Avenida El Dorado (TransMilenio) , Avenida Suba and the historical neighborhood La Candelaria . Also, there is the Distrito graffiti (graffiti district), that is a dedicated place with gubernatorial curatory with more than 600 pieces of Colombian and international artists.

[ 88 ] Caracas at the beginning this art the works had a more cultural air, much of the first street arts in the country were related to politics. Messages of disagreement or support for the leaders of the moment predominated. Over the years, street art in Venezuela has evolved. The works with political accents continued to star in the streets of the country, but culture became part of the arena.

Graffiti in Lima , Peru (2014) Work of Brazilian artists Os Gêmeos , in Lisbon , Portugal (2011) Graffiti in Bogotá , Colombia (S. XXI) Europe [ edit ] Banksy 's Shop Until You Drop , Mayfair, London. His politically subversive street art has appeared in the UK and around the world.

[ 89 ] Social-critical work about the war on drugs by Edward von Lõngus in Tartu , Estonia London became one of the most pro-graffiti cities in the world in the 2010s. Although officially condemned and heavily enforced, street art has a huge following and in many ways is embraced by the public, for example, Stik 's stick figures.

[ 90 ] Dulwich Outdoor Gallery , in collaboration with Street Art London , is an outdoor "gallery" of street art in Dulwich , southeast London, with works based on traditional paintings in Dulwich Picture Gallery .

[ 91 ] Bristol has a prominent street art scene, due in part to the success of Banksy , [ 92 ] with many large and colorful murals dominating areas of the city.

Ostend, Belgium , hosts an international street art festival. In 2018, US art magazine Juxtapoz described The Crystal Ship as "an art festival that is quickly becoming one of the major annual street art events in the world". Today, it is just that. Having seen the light of day in 2016, every year, The Crystal Ship paints the town of Ostend red (and blue, and green, and yellow, and quite possibly every other colour you can imagine) by inviting a host of acclaimed street artists to get inspired by its people, landscape, and heritage. Curator Bjorn Van Poucke is the driving force behind this street art walhalla, where the work of artists like Axel Void (USA), Paola Delfín (Mexico), Escif (ES), Miss Van (FR), Sebas Velasco (ES), Elian (AR) and Wasted Rita (PT) transform the city.

Seth, Paris Paris has an active street art scene that is home to artists such as Space Invader , Jef Aérosol , SP 38 and Zevs . Some connect the origins of street art in France to Lettrism of the 1940s and Situationist slogans painted on the walls of Paris starting in the late 1950s.

Nouveau realists of the 1960s, including Jacques de la Villeglé , Yves Klein and Arman interacted with public spaces but, like pop art , kept the traditional studio-gallery relationship. The 1962 street installation Rideau de Fer (Iron Curtain) by Christo and Jeanne-Claude is cited as an early example of unsanctioned street art. In the 1970s, the site-specific work of Daniel Buren appeared in the Paris subway.

Blek le Rat and the Figuration Libre movement became active in the 1980s.

[ citation needed ] [ 93 ] The 13 arrondissement is actively promoting street art through the Street Art 13 project. That includes two remarkable frescos by D*Face from London: "Love will not tear us apart" and "Turncoat".

[ 94 ] Between October 2014 and March 2015, Fondation EDF hosted Jérôme Catz 's exhibition "#STREET ART, L'INNOVATION AU CŒUR D'UN MOUVEMENT", which featured new technologies integrated with pieces by artists including Shepard Fairey, JR, Zevz, and Mark Jenkins. The exhibition became the second most-visited exhibit at EDF since it opened in 1990.

[ 95 ] Street artist John Hamon 's work primarily involves projecting or pasting a poster of his photograph above his name on buildings and monuments across the city.

[ 96 ] Street art on the Berlin Wall was continuous during the time Germany was divided, but street art in Berlin continued to thrive even after reunification and is home to street artists such as Thierry Noir Tavar Zawacki a.k.a.

ABOVE and SP 38 . Post-communism, cheap rents, and ramshackle buildings gave rise to street art in areas such as Mitte , Prenzlauer Berg , Kreuzberg , and Friedrichshain .

[ citation needed ] In 2016, StreetArtNews initiated an urban artwork in the name of Urban Nation Berlin , in which several famous artists participated.

[ 97 ] The second largest city in Estonia, Tartu , has been called the Estonian street art capital.

[ 98 ] While Tallinn has been against graffiti, Tartu is known for the street art festival Stencibility and for being home to a wide range of works from various artists.

[ 99 ] The street art scene in Greece has been active since the late 1980s but gained momentum in Athens leading up to the country's 2011 financial crisis, with a number of artists raising voices of resistance, creating allegorical works and social commentary in the historic city center and Exarhia district.

The New York Times published a story about the crisis in relation to street art and art in general.

[ 100 ] Street art by Bleepsgr , whose work has been categorized as " artivism ", can be found in neighborhoods such as Psiri .

Street art in Barcelona In Spain, Madrid and Barcelona represent the most graffiti populated cities, while Valencia , Zaragoza and Málaga also have a street art scene.

[ citation needed ] Street artist (chalks) in Florence , Italy Italy has been very active in street art since the end of the 1990s; some of the most famous street artists include BLU , 108 , and Sten Lex .

[ 101 ] Street art in Amsterdam has a long history. In the mid-1960s, the counterculture movement named the provos already used the street as a canvas. Member Robert Jasper Grootveld wrote things like "Klaas komt" (English: "Klaas is Coming!") throughout the whole city. At the end of the 1970s, young artists from the punk culture wrote on the decayed city. Well-known artists from this 'No Future-generation' are Dr. Rat and Hugo Kaagman, the stencil art pioneer who made his first stencil back in 1978.

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] Yaki Kornblit brought New York graffiti artists like Blade, Dondi , Futura 2000 and Rammellzee to Amsterdam to exhibit in his gallery in the early 80s. This inspired the youth, from which a new generation style writers emerged that was later recorded in the documentary Kroonjuwelen (2006). Names as Delta, Shoe, Jaz, Cat22, High , Again and Rhyme left their mark on the city. In the early 1990s, Amsterdam became the epicenter of the graffiti movement, with a focus on its Metro system, bringing writers such as Mickey, Zedz and Yalt to the capital of the Netherlands.

[ 104 ] Figurative street art became more and more common in the streets around the turn of the century. Morcky, Wayne Horse, The London Police en Laser 3.14 communicated through their work on the street.

The city of Bergen is looked upon as the street art capital of Norway .

[ 105 ] British street artist Banksy visited the city in 2000 and inspired many to take their art to the streets.

[ 106 ] Dolk is among local street artists in Bergen.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] His art can be seen around the city. Bergen's city council in 2009 chose to preserve one of Dolk's works with protective glass.

[ 109 ] In 2011, the city council launched a plan of action for street art from 2011 to 2015 to ensure that "Bergen will lead the fashion for street art as an expression both in Norway and Scandinavia ".

[ 110 ] The city of Stavanger is host to the annual NuArt Festival , an event dedicated to promoting street art; the festival is one of the oldest curated "street art" festivals in the world. Nuart Plus is an associated industry and academic symposium dedicated to street art. The event takes place each September.

Oslo , by contrast, traditionally has a zero tolerance policy against graffiti and street art, but the sanctioned NuArt RAD project is changing that.

[ 111 ] Graffiti painting in Bromsten , Stockholm Street art came to Sweden in the 1990s and has since become the most popular way to establish art in public space.
The 2007 book "Street Art Stockholm ", by Benke Carlsson, documents street art in the country's capital.

[ 112 ] The street art scene of Finland had its growth spurt from the 1980s onwards until in 1998 the city of Helsinki began a ten-year zero-tolerance policy which made all forms of street art illegal, punishable with high fines, and enforced through private security contractors. The policy ended in 2008, after which legal walls and art collectives have been established.

[ citation needed ] Wheatpaste and stencil graffiti art in Denmark increased rapidly after visits from Faile , Banksy, Ben Eine , and Shepard Fairey between 2002 and 2004, especially in urban areas of Copenhagen such as Nørrebro and Vesterbro .

[ 113 ] Copenhagen is home of TEJN , the artist credited with introducing the Lock On street art genre.

The street art scene in Switzerland saw the artist Harald Nägeli in the late 1970s.

[ 114 ] Activity from the nineties on included artists like Toast [ 115 ] and NEVERCREW .

Graffiti art in central Warsaw , Poland, 2016 Since the collapse of communism in 1989, street art became prevalent in Poland throughout the 1990s. Artists like Sainer and Bezt became known for painting huge murals on buildings and walls in the 2010s.

[ 116 ] In the city of Łódź a permanent city exhibition was financed in 2011, under the patronage of Mayor Hanna Zdanowska, called "Urban Forms Gallery".

[ 117 ] The exhibition included work from some of Poland's elite street artists as well as globally known artists. Despite being mostly accepted by the public, with authorities occasionally allowing artists licenses to decorate public places, other properties are still illegally targeted by artists.

Warsaw and Gdańsk are other Polish cities with a vibrant street art culture.

[ 118 ] A monument in Bulgaria depicting Soviet Army soldiers was targeted by anonymous street artists in June 2011. The soldiers of the monument, located in Sofia , were embellished to portray Ronald McDonald , Santa Claus , Superman , and others. The monument existed in that condition for several days before being cleaned. Some citizens were in favor of allowing the embellishments to remain.

[ citation needed ] Mariupol in Ukraine saw building murals playing a symbolic role in the 2014 and 2022 Russian invasions of Ukraine . In 2018, the Ukrainian artist Sasha Korban painted the mural Milana on a facade of a Mariupol building, showing 3-year-old Milana Abdurashytova, a survivor of a 2015 pro-Russian missile attack, as a symbol of resilience.

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] The mural was destroyed in late 2022 while Mariupol was still occupied by Russian forces.

[ 121 ] Also in 2022, the Italian artist Jorit painted a mural of a young Australian girl, found in an online search for the word "pigtails", on another building facade in Mariupol, initially stating that the subject was a girl from Donbas who had lived in Mariupol. His inclusion in the mural of a bomb labelled "NATO" in a town that was severely bombed by Russian forces and the relation with Korban's destroyed mural were criticised by media including Il Giornale and the investigative journalism website Valigia Blu .

[ 122 ] [ 120 ] [ 123 ] Moscow became a hub for Russian graffiti artists as well as international visitors in the 2000s. The Street Kit Gallery, opened in 2008, is dedicated to street art and organizes events in galleries, pop-up spaces and on the streets of the city. The 2009 Moscow International Biennale for Young Art included a section for street art. Active artists include Make, RUS, and Kyiv -based Interesni Kazki (also active in Miami and Los Angeles).

[ 124 ] Britain's BBC network highlighted the artwork of Moscow street artist Pavel 183 in 2012.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] The dissolution of the Soviet Union left Georgia with tantalizing urban space for the development of street art. Although it is a relatively new trend in Georgia, the popularity of street art is growing rapidly. The majority of Georgian street artists are concentrated in Tbilisi . Street art serves as a strong tool among young artists to protest against the many controversial issues in the social and political life in Georgia and thus gets considerable attention in society. Influential artists include Gagosh , TamOonz, and Dr.Love.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] [ 128 ] Sarajevo became a major hub for street art in Southeastern Europe in the 2010s. It hosts the Sarajevo Street Art Festival and the acclaimed 3D street art festival, Beton Fest . The former is held in July of every year and lasts for three days. Each year's edition is made up of numerous street performances, the creation of a new street arts bohemian quarter in the city, concerts, the painting of large murals and the showcasing of other creative art forms. The latter is the only 3D street art festival in Southeastern Europe [ 129 ] and has hosted many renowned street artists such as Vera Bugatti, [ 130 ] Giovanna la Pietra, [ 131 ] Tony Cuboliquido, [ 132 ] Manuel Bastante [ 133 ] and others.

Street art by WATTTS in Paris , France Painting in the Global Tradition by Ces53 , a Dutch street artist Street art in Sesimbra , Portugal Graphic-Domain in Heidelberg , Germany, by Nicola Pragera Mural by BLU, Gaza Strip , Prague , Czech Republic Graffiti in Shoreditch , London, by Stik Urban art in Katowice , Poland Street art in the old city of Prizren , Kosovo Mural painting "Propagating machine" realized by Nevercrew in Mannheim , Germany, in 2017 Work by Bleepsgr in Athens , Greece Lie Lie Land by female street artist Bambi in Islington , London "Geometrical boundaries of Time", street art in Tbilisi , Georgia Paste-up of El Bocho in Hamburg , Germany Graffiti on road, Latvia Unicorn made of waste by Portuguese street artist Artur Bordalo (BordaloII) at NuArt Festival Aberdeen (2018) Street art in Naples Miss.Tic ( Paris ).

Inti (Paris) Urban art in Mitte ( Berlin , 2025).

David de la Mano (Paris, 2015).

Asia [ edit ] India [ edit ] In India , street art is hugely popular. Many of the film and TV series promotional materials were created by street painters/artists. Currently, digital art is replacing hand painted posters. From 1960 to the 1990s, the street posters worked well and impressed audiences. In the 1990s the hand painted posters started to be replaced by flex banners outside theatres. After the 2000s, the popularity of street posters started to decline, being replaced by digitally printed posters. Street art painting and street art drawing sketch has since declined in India due to the replacement by digital posters.

Malaysia [ edit ] "Little Children on a Bicycle" mural on Armenian Street, George Town, Penang , by Lithuanian artist Ernest Zacharevic In George Town , Penang, Lithuanian artist Ernest Zacharevic created a series of wall murals depicting local culture, inhabitants and lifestyles.

[ 134 ] They now stand as celebrated cultural landmarks of George Town, with Children on a Bicycle becoming one of the most photographed spots in the city.

[ 135 ] Since then, the street art scene has blossomed.

South Korea [ edit ] In South Korea 's second-largest city, Busan , German painter Hendrik Beikirch created a mural over 70 metres (230 ft) high, considered Asia's tallest at the time of its creation in August 2012. The monochromatic mural portrays a fisherman.

[ 136 ] It was organized by Public Delivery .

[ 137 ] Thailand [ edit ] A great deal of street art by well-known artists can be found in the Bang Rak district of Bangkok, on Soi Charoen Krung 28–32, between Charoen Krung road and the Chao Phraya river.

[ 138 ] Middle East [ edit ] Israel [ edit ] Further information: Art in Tel Aviv Areas of southern Tel Aviv including Florentin in the 1990s, evolved from an industrial zone into street-art districts.

[ 139 ] Artists repurposed its abandoned garages and crumbling façades with political murals, Hebrew poetry, religious verses and layered exchanges.

[ 140 ] Artists in the Tel Aviv scene include Dede, Klone, Broken Fingaz Crew, Know Hope, Kis-Lev and Sigalit Landau.

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] [ 143 ] Lord K2 said in a Times of Israel article this cultural revival spurred gentrification, prompting much of the graffiti scene to migrate elsewhere.

[ 144 ] Simon Durban, Banksy's former curater had an exhibition in Tel Aviv in 2025.

[ 145 ] United Arab Emirates [ edit ] In United Arab Emirates ' largest city, Dubai , several famous painters created urban mural artwork on the buildings, which was initiated by StreetArtNews and named it Dubai Street Museum.

[ 146 ] [ 147 ] Oceania [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] Further information: Street art in Melbourne and Street art in Adelaide There is street art in major cities as well as regional towns in Australia.

[ 148 ] Hosier Lane Street Art, Melbourne , Victoria , Australia Melbourne is home to one of the world's most active and diverse street art cultures and is home to pioneers in the stencil medium. Street artists such as Blek le Rat and Banksy often exhibited works on Melbourne's streets in the 2000s. Works are supported and preserved by local councils. Key locations within the city include Brunswick , Carlton , Fitzroy , Northcote and the city centre including the famous Hosier Lane .

Sydney 's street art scene includes Newtown area graffiti and street art .

Brisbane City Council supports graffiti on traffic signal boxes and other public spaces, although they prosecuted Anthony Lister in 2016 despite deputy mayor David Hinchliffe having encouraged him in 1999 to paint signal traffic boxes.

[ 149 ] The Brisbane Street Art Festival has been running annually since 2016.

[ 150 ] Many local governments throughout Australia run traffic signal box painting programs.

New Zealand [ edit ] Dunedin pioneered "official" street art in New Zealand with over sixty bus shelters being given unique murals by painter John Noakes during the 1980s, many of them featuring local scenes or scenes inspired by the names of their locales.

[ 151 ] The Dunedin City Council has since commissioned a series of similar designs to grace electric boxes around the city. Street murals have also become a popular addition to Dunedin, with over 30 works by both local and overseas artists being added to the central city—especially around the Warehouse Precinct and Exchange areas—since an international street art festival was held there in the early 2000s.

[ 152 ] These include one of New Zealand's tallest works, a seven-story mural on the wall of the Southern Cross Hotel by Fintan Magee.

[ 153 ] Christchurch was devastated by 2 earthquakes in 2010 and 2011 and as a result, 8000 homes and 80 percent of the central city were condemned. It wasn't until two and half years later that the city was able to host its first major cultural event [ citation needed ] – Rise Street Art Festival held at Canterbury Museum produced by Australasian street art organizer Oi YOU!.

[ 154 ] The event attracted over 248,000 visitors (the most-visited show in the museum's history) and saw 15 murals painted across the devastated central city. The murals became community icons for the re-emergence and rebuild of Christchurch.

[ citation needed ] Two further Oi YOU! Festivals, both under the name of Spectrum , featured large internal exhibitions as well as adding to the city's stock of murals.

[ 155 ] Since Rise , over 40 murals have been produced in the central city and the Lonely Planet guide to global street art featured Christchurch as one of the best cities in the world to experience the art form.

[ citation needed ] In Auckland in 2009, Auckland's city council permitted electrical boxes to be used as canvases for street art. Local street art group TMD (The Most Dedicated) won the "Write For Gold" international competition in Germany two years in a row. Surplus Bargains is another local collective.

[ 156 ] In 2019 in Auckland, a heritage building in the city was painted without the owners' permission by Ares Artifex.

[ 157 ] Africa [ edit ] Calligraffiti in Djerbahood , Tunisia Although street art in South Africa is not as ubiquitous as in European cities, Johannesburg 's central Newtown district is a center for street art in the city.

[ 158 ] The "City Of Gold International Urban Art Festival" was held in the city's Braamfontein civic and student district in April 2012.

[ 159 ] The New York Times reported Cairo 's emergence as a street art center of the region in 2011. Slogans calling for the overthrow of the Mubarak regime has evolved into æsthetic and politically provocative motifs.

[ 160 ] [ 161 ] Street art from Egypt , Tunisia , Yemen , and Libya has gained notoriety since the Arab Spring , including a 2012 exhibition in Madrid 's Casa Árabe.

[ 162 ] Exhibitions, festivals and conferences [ edit ] In 1981, Washington Project for the Arts held an exhibition entitled Street Works , which included urban art pioneers such as Fab Five Freddy and Lee Quiñones working on the streets.

[ 163 ] Amanda Harris of Southern California at the Minneapolis Street Art Festival in 2019 [ 164 ] Sarasota Chalk Festival was founded in 2007 sponsoring street art by artists initially invited from the US and extended to internationally. In 2011 the festival introduced a Going Vertical mural program and its Cellograph project to accompany the street drawings. International films have been produced by and about artists who have participated in the programs, their murals and street drawings, and events at the festival.

[ 165 ] The Streetart Festival Istanbul is Turkey's first annual street art and post-graffiti festival.

[ 166 ] The Festival was founded by the artist and graphics designer Pertev Emre Tastaban in 2007.

[ 167 ] Mural by Peruvian artist Pésimo in Istanbul Living Walls is an annual street art conference founded in 2009.

[ 168 ] In 2010 it was hosted in Atlanta and in 2011 jointly in Atlanta and Albany, New York . Living Walls was also active in promoting street art at Art Basel Miami Beach 2011.

[ 169 ] The RVA Street Art Festival is a street art festival in Richmond , Virginia, began in 2012 along the Canal Walk.  In 2013 it took place at the abandoned GRTC lot on Cary Street.

[ 170 ] The Pasadena Chalk Festival , held annually in Pasadena , California, is the largest street-art festival in the world, according to Guinness World Records .

[ 171 ] The 2010 edition involved about six hundred artists and attracted more than 100,000 visitors.

[ 172 ] UMA – Universal Museum of Art [ 173 ] launched a comprehensive Street Art exhibition "A Walk Into Street Art" [ 174 ] in April 2018. This exhibition in virtual reality offers works from Banksy , JR , Jef Aérosol , Vhils , Shepard Fairey , Keith Haring , among others.

[ citation needed ] The London International Pasteup Festival is an annual art event in Shoreditch , London . Founded in 2021, this festival showcases works from artists operating within the sticker and pasteup sub-genres.

[ 175 ] The Eureka Street Art Festival is an annual public art event in Humboldt County , California. Artists from California and the world paint murals and create street art during a week-long festival. In 2018, 24 artists create 22 pieces of public art in the Old Town area of the city, focusing on Opera Alley.

[ 176 ] The 2019 festival is centered on the Downtown region.

Documentary films [ edit ] Rash (2005), a feature-length documentary by Mutiny Media exploring the cultural value of Australian street art and graffiti Bomb It (2008), a documentary film about graffiti and street art around the world Exit Through the Gift Shop (2010), a documentary created by the artist Banksy about Thierry Guetta Style Wars (1983), a PBS documentary about graffiti artists in New York City featuring Seen , Kase2 , Dez and Dondi Obey Giant (2017), a documentary about the life and career of street artist, illustrator, graphic designer, activist, and founder of OBEY Clothing , Shepard Fairey .

See also [ edit ] The arts portal Brandalism Contemporary art Craftivism Eyesaw Fr. Pat Noise plaque Glossary of graffiti Graphopoli Guerrilla art and hacking art (category) List of street artists Overspray Magazine Street art in Israel Tower 13 USB dead drop Utility box art References [ edit ] ^ "Autour du Panthéon, la chasse aux portraits est ouverte !" Archived 3 October 2021 at the Wayback Machine , BeauxArts (in French), 11 July 2018 ^ Brooks, Raillan (6 December 2013).

"Aerosol Art" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 27 November 2020 . Retrieved 16 October 2022 .

^ Antonova, Maria. 2014. "Street Art".

Russian Life 57(5):17 ^ "Student art project is vandalism for a cause" .

The Herald-Times . Archived from the original on 20 March 2012 . Retrieved 4 April 2011 .

^ For the development of style in the aerosol paint medium, as well as an examination of the political, cultural, and social commentary of its artists, see the anthropological history of New York subway graffiti art, Getting Up: Subway Graffiti in New York , by Craig Castleman, a student of Margaret Mead , The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1982.

^ Geek Graffiti: A Study in Computation, Gesture and Graffiti Analysis ^ a b Smith, Howard (21 December 1982). "Apple of Temptation".

The Village Voice . Manhattan, New York. p. 38.

^ Zotti, Ed (4 August 2000).

"What's the origin of 'Kilroy was here'?" .

Straight Dope; staff report from the Science Advisory Board . Sun-Times Media, LLC.

Archived from the original on 5 January 2020 . Retrieved 29 October 2016 .

^ Robinson, David (1990) Soho Walls – Beyond Graffiti , Thames & Hudson, New York, ISBN 978-0-500-27602-0 ^ Drasher, Katherine (30 June 1983).

"Avant's on the Street" .

The Villager . pp.

31– 32.

Archived from the original on 7 July 2011 . Retrieved 29 August 2009 .

^ a b Zox-Weaver, Annalisa (1 June 2015). "Institutional Guerilla Art Open Access: The Public Sculpture of Florentijn Hofman".

Sculpture Review .

3 ( 22– 26).

^ Tierney, John (6 November 1990).

"A Wall in SoHo; Enter 2 Artists, Feuding" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 18 October 2014 . Retrieved 4 May 2012 .

^ a b Strausbaugh, John (5–11 April 1995). "Reneissance Man".

New York Press . Vol. 8, no. 14. p. Cover, 15, 16.

ISSN 0362-4331 .

^ "Moncada v. Rubin-Spangle Gallery, Inc. – November 4, 1993" . Leagle.com. 4 November 1993.

Archived from the original on 26 April 2015 . Retrieved 29 April 2012 .

^ Landes, William M.; Posner, Richard A. (2003).

The Economic Structure of Intellectual Property Law (illustrated ed.). Cambridge, Massachusetts, US: Harvard University Press . p. 285.

ISBN 978-0-674-01204-2 .

OCLC 52208762 . Retrieved 4 May 2012 .

^ Ginsburgh, Victor; Throsby, C. D. (13 November 2006).

Handbook of the Economics of Art and Culture (illustrated, reprint ed.). Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier . p. 231.

ISBN 978-0-444-50870-6 .

OCLC 774660408 . Retrieved 4 May 2012 .

^ Lerner, Ralph E.; Bresler, Judith (2005).

Art law: the guide for collectors, investors, dealers, and artists (3rd ed.). New York City: Practising Law Institute .

ISBN 978-1-4024-0650-8 .

OCLC 62207673 . Retrieved 4 May 2012 .

^ Kostelanetz, Richard (2003).

SoHo; The Rise and Fall of an Artist's Colony (1st ed.). New York: Routledge. pp.

102–104 .

ISBN 978-0-415-96572-9 . Retrieved 29 October 2016 .

^ Kahn, Steve (1999).

SoHo New York . New York City: Rizzoli International Publications, Inc. p.

65 .

ISBN 978-0-8478-2156-3 .

^ I AM THE BEST ARTIST Rene mural (1987).

The Secret of My Success (Comedy film). US: Universal Studios.

^ Glassman, Carl (1985).

SoHo; A Picture Portrait . New York: Universe Books. pp. TK.

ISBN 978-0-87663-566-7 .

^ "Home" .

francothegreat.com .

Archived from the original on 16 March 2022 . Retrieved 24 March 2022 .

^ "Incredible street art tours" .

Archived from the original on 17 November 2015 . Retrieved 26 February 2015 .

^ Means, Gary.

"Alternative London Street Art Guides" .

alternativeldn.com . Archived from the original on 4 January 2018 . Retrieved 26 February 2015 .

^ "Paris Underground" .

undergroundparis.org . Archived from the original on 31 March 2022 . Retrieved 26 February 2015 .

^ "Alternative Berlin" .

alternativeberlin.com . Archived from the original on 11 November 2011 . Retrieved 26 February 2015 .

^ Bross, F. (2017): Beer Prices Correlate with the Quality of Illegal Urban Art. A Case Study on the Relationship Between Street Art and Gentrification in a Berlin Neighborhood Archived 30 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine . Mimeo.

^ Salib, Peter (Fall 2015). "The Law of Banksy: Who Owns Street Art?".

University of Chicago Law Review .

82 (4): 293.

SSRN 2711789 .

^ Banksy, Wall and Piece (2005) page 1 ^ 17 U.S.C. § 102 ^ 17 U.S. Code § 302 ^ 17 U.S. Code § 201 ^ "moral, adj.". OED Online. September 2011. Oxford University Press. 25 October 2011.

^ Voon, Claire (15 March 2018).

"H&M Lawsuit Against Street Artist Could Change Copyright Law" .

Hyperallergic .

Archived from the original on 6 October 2022 . Retrieved 16 October 2022 .

^ Villa, 2003 WL 22922178 [ full citation needed ] ^ Jeremy Scott (20 April 2016).

"Graffiti Cannot be Copyright Protected, Claims Moschino" .

The Fashion Law . Archived from the original on 1 March 2019 . Retrieved 29 April 2019 .

^ a b c "Unchartered Territory: Enforcing an Artist's Rights in Street Art" .

HHR Art Law . 11 January 2017.

Archived from the original on 27 September 2020 . Retrieved 16 October 2022 .

^ 17 U.S.C. § 106A ^ Finn, Robin (27 August 2011).

"Writing's on the Wall (Art Is, Too, for Now)" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 15 December 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2022 .

^ a b c Bloch, Stefano. 2015. "Street Art, Public City: Law, Crime and the Urban Imagination." Urban Studies (Sage Publications, Ltd.) 52(13):2500-2503.

^ Campos, Ricardo. 2015. "Youth, Graffiti, and the Aestheticization of Transgression." Social Analysis 59(3):17-40.

^ a b c d e f Bacharach, Sondra (4 January 2016).

"Street Art and Consent" .

British Journal of Aesthetics .

55 (4): 481– 495.

doi : 10.1093/aesthj/ayv030 .

Archived from the original on 22 January 2022 . Retrieved 22 January 2022 .

^ a b c d e Sisko (Summer 2015). "Guerilla Sculpture: Free Speech and Dissent".

Sculpture Review .

64 (2): 26– 35.

^ The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 68:3, summer 2010 ^ The Contested Gallery: Street Art, Ethnography and the Search for Urban Understandings, AmeriQuest Vol. 2 nr. 1, 2005 ^ " 'Hope flows through her': artist Marc Quinn on replacing Colston with a Black Lives Matter statue" .

The Guardian . 15 July 2020.

Archived from the original on 11 February 2021 . Retrieved 10 February 2021 .

^ "Jen Reid: Bristol Black Lives Matter statue removed" .

BBC News . 16 July 2020.

Archived from the original on 16 July 2020 . Retrieved 10 February 2021 .

^ a b Infoactivismo (30 October 2017).

"Antimonumentos: intervenciones, arte, memoria | InfoActivismo.org" (in Spanish).

Archived from the original on 27 October 2021 . Retrieved 13 October 2021 .

^ Seligmann-Silva, Márcio (January–April 2016).

"Antimonumentos: trabalho de memória e de resistência" .

Psicologia USP (in Portuguese).

27 : 49– 60.

doi : 10.1590/0103-6564D20150011 .

ISSN 0103-6564 .

^ "Por qué están apareciendo "antimonumentos" en México (y cómo reflejan los episodios más oscuros de su historia reciente)" .

BBC News Mundo (in Spanish).

Archived from the original on 28 October 2021 . Retrieved 13 October 2021 .

^ Steinmetz, Jesse (28 April 2023).

"From slams to sidewalks, poetry is alive in Greater Boston" .

WGBH News .

Archived from the original on 10 May 2023 . Retrieved 31 May 2023 .

^ Brooks, Jennifer (31 May 2023).

"The sidewalk poetry of St. Paul writes a city's story underfoot" .

Star Tribune . Retrieved 31 May 2023 .

^ Bhasin, Punya (4 September 2022).

"Oakland's First Sidewalk Poetry Contest Celebrates Its History and Future" .

Pittsburgh Magazine .

Archived from the original on 3 February 2023 . Retrieved 31 May 2023 .

^ ITV News (10 December 2021).

"Banksy and other street art goes on display at Peterborough Museum" .

ITV .

Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 10 January 2022 .

^ C. Gogarty and D. Clensy (28 March 2019).

"A look back at when Banksy took over Bristol Museum in 2009" .

Bristol Post .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022 . Retrieved 10 January 2022 .

^ Guetzkow, Joshua (7–8 June 2002).

How the Arts Impact Communities: An introduction to the literature on arts impact studies (PDF) . Taking the Measure of Culture Conference. Princeton University. pp. 3, 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2018 . Retrieved 3 January 2019 .

^ Crouch, Angie.

"How the Arts Impact Communities" . NBC. NBC Los Angeles.

Archived from the original on 3 January 2019 . Retrieved 3 January 2019 .

^ Sydney Page (8 June 2022).

"Art painted on crosswalks makes streets safer, group says" .

The Washington Post United States.

Archived from the original on 5 February 2023 . Retrieved 8 June 2022 .

^ "Under Pressure – Annual Graffiti Festival" .

underpressure.ca .

Archived from the original on 23 February 2021 . Retrieved 16 January 2021 .

^ "Toronto Graffiti :: urban artists for hire" .

Archived from the original on 20 January 2021 . Retrieved 29 July 2015 .

^ "Home" .

yycbump.ca .

Archived from the original on 27 February 2020 . Retrieved 27 February 2020 .

^ Rojo, Jaime; Harrington, Steven P. (2010).

Street Art New York . Prestel Pub.

ISBN 978-3-7913-4428-7 .

^ Kugel, Seth (9 March 2008).

"To the Trained Eye, Museum Pieces Lurk Everywhere" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 11 April 2019 . Retrieved 16 October 2022 .

^ "History | Mural Arts Program" . Muralarts.org.

Archived from the original on 10 September 2017 . Retrieved 7 July 2012 .

^ Hoff, Al (14 December 2006).

"Best Public Art: Sprout Fund Murals" .

Pittsburgh City Paper .

Archived from the original on 26 January 2021 . Retrieved 2 April 2013 .

^ Wheatley, Thomas (5 May 2011).

"Atlanta's graffiti task force begins investigating, removing vandalism & Views" . Clatl.com.

Archived from the original on 4 April 2016 . Retrieved 7 July 2012 .

^ Morris, Mike (4 October 2011).

"Warrants issued for serial graffiti vandals" .

ajc.com . Archived from the original on 7 January 2012 . Retrieved 7 July 2012 .

^ "City of Atlanta settles lawsuit with street artists | Bill Rankin's Legal Brief" . Archived from the original on 12 February 2018 . Retrieved 11 February 2018 .

^ "New website provides street art map to murals all over Atlanta" .

accessatlanta . Archived from the original on 15 January 2018 . Retrieved 5 January 2018 .

^ Smith, Jessi, Get a ringside seat: MTO is not pulling any punches in his latest mural Archived 1 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine , This Week in Sarasota , 20 December 2012 ^ "An 'Unpremeditated Cultural Clash' " .

HuffPost . 20 March 2013.

Archived from the original on 16 October 2022 . Retrieved 16 October 2022 .

^ Graham, Jefferson (1 June 2018).

"Photo tour: Graffiti steals the show in L.A.'s burgeoning Arts District" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on 5 December 2019 . Retrieved 4 December 2019 .

^ Larson, Nicole (13 May 2011).

"PHOTOS: Largest Street Art Collection Debuts At LAB ART LA" .

The Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on 5 April 2016 . Retrieved 18 February 2020 .

^ San Francisco Bay Guardian , 18–24 January 2012, p. 22 ^ Veltman, Chloe (9 May 2010).

"Street Art Moves Onto Some New Streets" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 26 April 2017 . Retrieved 16 October 2022 .

^ Karlamangla, Soumya (19 April 2022).

"San Diego's Chicano Park Celebrates Its Anniversary" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 18 October 2022 . Retrieved 18 October 2022 .

^ Mendoza, Alexandra (19 December 2021).

"San Diego, Tijuana artists honor Mexican icon Vicente Fernández with murals" .

San Diego Union-Tribune .

Archived from the original on 18 October 2022 . Retrieved 18 October 2022 .

^ Mendoza, Alexandra (2 October 2021).

"Mural celebra al Canelo, Pacquiao y al fundador de un gimnasio de boxeo en San Diego" .

Los Angeles Times en Español (in Spanish).

Archived from the original on 18 October 2022 . Retrieved 18 October 2022 .

^ Alverez, Elizabeth (18 November 2020).

"New mural of Padres legend Tony Gwynn completed in City Heights" .

McKinnon Broadcasting .

Archived from the original on 18 October 2022 . Retrieved 18 October 2022 .

^ "The Unknown, Underrated Street Art of Richmond, Virginia (Photo Essay)" .

Packs Light . 19 January 2016.

Archived from the original on 12 April 2017 . Retrieved 11 April 2017 .

^ "The Best Denver Street Art | VISIT DENVER" .

www.denver.org .

Archived from the original on 22 April 2017 . Retrieved 21 April 2017 .

^ "About" . 6 June 2018.

Archived from the original on 18 December 2019 . Retrieved 11 December 2019 .

^ "Bier en Brod create new mural for All City Canvas" . 4 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 11 December 2019 . Retrieved 11 December 2019 .

^ "Vhils leaves amazing mural in Parque la Ruina for All City Canvas Global Series" . 9 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 12 December 2019 . Retrieved 11 December 2019 .

^ "Colorful mural might be world's longest" .

Reuters . Archived from the original on 12 August 2018 . Retrieved 4 November 2015 .

^ Romero, Simon (29 January 2012) "At War With São Paulo's Establishment, Black Paint in Hand" Archived 1 May 2017 at the Wayback Machine , The New York Times ^ Scott, Gabe (17 July 2009).

"Claudio Ethos" .

Exclusive Feature . High Speed Productions, Inc.

Archived from the original on 23 January 2018 . Retrieved 29 October 2016 .

^ "Distrito graffiti (graffiti district)" .

Archived from the original on 18 May 2022 . Retrieved 30 March 2022 .

^ "The Banksy Paradox: 7 Sides to the World's Most Infamous Street Artist Archived 2 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine , 19 July 2007 ^ "Walking with Stik" .

Dulwich OnView , UK . 12 June 2012.

Archived from the original on 21 October 2016 . Retrieved 17 June 2012 .

^ Beazley, Ingrid (2015).

Street Art, Fine Art . London: Heni Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-9568738-5-9 .

^ "Has Banksy struck in Primrose Hill?" .

BBC News . 11 June 2010.

Archived from the original on 29 November 2019 . Retrieved 2 April 2013 .

^ "10 Stencil Artists Changing the Way We Look at the City" .

My Modern Met . 22 May 2017.

Archived from the original on 10 July 2018 . Retrieved 10 July 2018 .

^ "Street Art in 13 Arrondissement" . Paris Digest. 2018.

Archived from the original on 22 October 2018 . Retrieved 22 October 2018 .

^ "Immense succes pour l'exposition avec 113 228 visiteurs !" [Great success for the exhibition with 113,228 visitors!] (PDF) (Press release) (in French). Paris: Fondation EDF. 2 March 2015.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 December 2018 . Retrieved 30 December 2018 .

^ Barba-Court, Kala (18 May 2018).

"John Hamon: The Enigmatic, Enduring Mystery Of Paris" .

Plain Magazine .

Archived from the original on 20 May 2019 . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

^ Lepores, Domingos (13 September 2017).

"Berlin Street Art Museum – Urban Nation Contemporary Urban Art" .

Awesome Berlin . Archived from the original on 15 January 2020 . Retrieved 15 January 2020 .

^ Karsten Kaminski.

"Tänavakunst Tartus: rohkem kui ainult kunst" Archived 23 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine Postimees Kultuur, 26 April 2015 [in Estonian] ^ Marika Agu & Sirla.

Street art in Tartu, Estonia Archived 21 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine Vandalog, 8 July 2014 ^ Donadio, Rachel (14 October 2011).

"Greece's Big Debt Drama Is a Muse for Its Artists" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 23 May 2013 . Retrieved 16 July 2024 .

^ Stewart, Jessica (1 January 2013).

Street Art Stories Roma . Mondo Bizzarro. p. 128.

ISBN 978-8896850152 .

^ 15 Dutch Street Artists you must Known Archived 12 November 2019 at the Wayback Machine , Street Art Today ^ "Dr. Rat, Godfather van de Nederlandse graffiti" . Lebowski.

Archived from the original on 27 September 2020 . Retrieved 5 April 2014 .

^ Malt, Frank (2014). 100 European graffiti artists. Atglen, Pennsylvania, Schiffer Publisching Ltd.

^ Ødegård, Ann Kristin (24 March 2010).

"Gatekunstens hovedstad" (in Norwegian). Ba.no.

Archived from the original on 14 October 2014 . Retrieved 24 March 2010 .

^ Thorkildsen, Joakim (10 March 2008).

"Fikk Banksy-bilder som takk for overnatting" (in Norwegian). Dagbladet.no. Archived from the original on 13 March 2017 . Retrieved 16 September 2012 .

^ "Derfor valgte ikke DOLK Bergen" (in Norwegian). Ba.no. 8 September 2011.

Archived from the original on 14 October 2014 . Retrieved 18 September 2011 .

^ Bergesen, Guro H.

"Populær Dolk selger så det suser" (in Norwegian). Bt.no. Archived from the original on 19 December 2014 . Retrieved 21 September 2011 .

^ "Forsvarer verning av graffiti" (in Norwegian). Ba.no. 26 June 2009.

Archived from the original on 14 October 2014 . Retrieved 26 June 2009 .

^ "Bergenkommune.no – Graffiti og gatekunst i kulturbyen Bergen – Utredning og handlingsplan for perioden 2011–2015" (PDF) (in Norwegian). Bergen.kommune.no. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 July 2013 . Retrieved 10 May 2011 .

^ "Home" .

nuartrad.no .

Archived from the original on 13 August 2022 . Retrieved 8 August 2022 .

^ Carlsson, Benke (2007).

Street art Stockholm . Stockholm: Ström.

ISBN 9789171260765 .

^ Gallery housing mentioned street artists Archived 20 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine ^ Billeter, F. (1984).

Graffiti : Wandkunst und wilde Bilder . Basel: Birkhäuser.

ISBN 978-3-7643-1617-4 .

^ "Ata Bozaci" .

Widewalls .

Archived from the original on 16 March 2018 . Retrieved 15 March 2018 .

^ "Huge murals on buildings created by artist duo ETAM CRU" .

NetDost . 16 January 2014. Archived from the original on 20 January 2014.

^ Eugene (29 September 2011).

"Polish City Embraces Street Art – My Modern Metropolis" . Mymodernmet.com.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 7 July 2012 .

^ "Poland – Street-art and Graffiti" . FatCap.

Archived from the original on 26 February 2021 . Retrieved 7 July 2012 .

^ Mural project , Rinat Akhmetov Foundation , c. 2018, Wikidata Q120793915 , archived from the original on 21 July 2023 ^ a b Lorenzo Tondo (19 July 2023).

"Photographer says street artist used daughter's picture in pro-Russia mural" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Wikidata Q120786372 .

Archived from the original on 20 July 2023.

^ Russian invaders destroyed a mural with a girl who lost her mother during the shelling of Mariupol in 2015 , We are Ukraine, 2022, Wikidata Q120794455 , archived from the original on 22 July 2023 ^ Leonardo Bianchi (15 July 2023), Il vergognoso murale di Jorit a Mariupol [ Jorit's disgraceful mural in Mariupol ] (in Italian), Valigia Blu, Wikidata Q120788862 , archived from the original on 21 July 2023 ^ Angelo Allegri (14 July 2023).

"Jorit, il graffitaro finanziato dalla Campania che dipinge murales per gli occupanti russi" [Jorit, the graffiti artist funded by Campania who paints murals for Russian occupants].

Il Giornale (in Italian).

ISSN 1124-8831 .

Wikidata Q120791946 .

Archived from the original on 21 July 2023.

^ Pfeiffer, Alice (13 October 2010).

"Graffiti Art Earns New Respect in Moscow" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 22 April 2017 . Retrieved 18 February 2017 .

^ "Street artist 'Russia's answer to Bansky' " . BBC. 8 February 2012.

Archived from the original on 4 July 2012 . Retrieved 21 June 2012 .

^ a b Documentary film about street art in Tbilisi by KetevanVashagashvili, "Gallery in the Street", 17 May 2015 [1] Archived 24 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved on 12 November 2015 ^ Caucasus Business Week www.cbw.ge "Amazing Street-Art of Georgia", 9 March 2015 [2] Archived 23 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved on 9 November 2015 ^ Georgia Today. Nina Ioseliani. www.georgiatoday.ge "Street art in Georgia", 20 August 2015 [3] Archived 13 December 2015 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved on 27 August 2015 ^ "Beton Fest čini Sarajevo 3D prijestlonicom svijeta" . N1 Television.

Archived from the original on 14 June 2018 . Retrieved 18 April 2018 .

^ "3D street art on Peace in Sarajevo" . verabugatti.it.

Archived from the original on 22 October 2020 . Retrieved 18 April 2018 .

^ "Cijelo Sarajevo pozvano na Beton Fest" . klix.ba.

Archived from the original on 14 June 2018 . Retrieved 18 April 2018 .

^ "3D street painting festival in Sarajevo" . cuboliquido.com.

Archived from the original on 10 September 2019 . Retrieved 18 April 2018 .

^ "Sarajevo: Još samo pet dana do četvrtog Beton Festa" . Radio Sarajevo. 21 August 2015.

Archived from the original on 17 June 2018 . Retrieved 18 April 2018 .

^ Lim, Serene (24 April 2015).

"The good, bad and ugly of street artist Ernest Zacharevic's murals" .

Today .

Archived from the original on 27 April 2015 . Retrieved 26 April 2015 .

^ Winnie Yeoh (3 November 2013).

"The Guardian picks Little Children" .

The Star .

Archived from the original on 1 May 2022 . Retrieved 1 May 2022 .

^ "Asia's Tallest Mural in South Korea by Hendrik Beikirch" . 7 September 2012.

Archived from the original on 13 August 2020 . Retrieved 8 July 2013 .

^ "Asia's tallest mural – By Hendrik Beikirch" . 5 September 2012.

Archived from the original on 27 February 2021 . Retrieved 29 July 2015 .

^ "Street Art, Charoen Krung Road" .

www.tourismthailand.org . Retrieved 17 January 2024 .

^ The Street Art of Tel Aviv’s Florentin Neighborhood Elijah Shifrin, Updated: 29 November 2016 ^ How To Deconstruct The Graffiti In Tel Aviv’s Hippest Neighborhood Aviya Kushner, 17 March 2017, The Forward ^ Hannah Stouffer (23 December 2013).

"Alfred Gallery" .

Juxtapoz . Retrieved 25 April 2018 .

^ Aharoni, Inbal (11 August 2011).

"The luck of the draw" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 25 April 2018 .

^ Boulos, Nick (5 October 2013).

"Show and Tel Aviv: Israel's artistic coastal city" .

The Independent . Retrieved 25 April 2018 .

^ K2, Lord.

"The disappearing street art of Tel Aviv's gentrifying Florentin neighborhood" .

www.timesofisrael.com . Retrieved 12 July 2025 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Hoffman, Maayan; ILTV (5 May 2025).

"Banksy's ex-manager launches powerful Israeli art exhibit after Hamas massacre" .

Ynetnews . Retrieved 14 July 2025 .

^ Winks, Mathias (14 December 2016).

" Curiosity – New Mural by Street Artist Seth Globepainter in Dubai // UAE" .

MC Winkels weBlog (in German).

Archived from the original on 15 January 2020 . Retrieved 15 January 2020 .

^ McFarlane, Nyree (29 November 2016).

"Satwa is currently turning into a huge street art gallery" .

What's On .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2020 . Retrieved 15 January 2020 .

^ "Australian Street Art Towns" .

Australian Silo Art Trail . 20 May 2021 . Retrieved 23 May 2021 .

^ Andrew McMillen (9 April 2016).

"Anthony Lister: street art, the law and his personal mission" .

The Australian . Retrieved 16 July 2024 .

^ "Brisbane Street Art Festival" , bsafest.com.au ^ "Tribute to bus shelter artist unveiled" Archived 30 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine , Otago Daily Times , 17 April 2012. Retrieved 1 December 2018.

^ "Artworks" Archived 22 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine , dunedinstreetart.co. Retrieved 1 December 2018.

^ This was New Zealand's tallest street mural until the creation of a nine-storey mural in Invercargill in 2019.

^ "Rise Street Art Christchurch | Oi YOU!" .

Archived from the original on 25 April 2017 . Retrieved 19 June 2017 .

^ "Spectrum Street Art Christchurch 2015" .

Archived from the original on 30 September 2017 . Retrieved 19 June 2017 .

^ Allen, Linlee. (9 November 2009) "Street Smart | Auckland's Art Bandits" Archived 18 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine , The New York Times . Tmagazine.blogs.nytimes.com. Retrieved 2 April 2013.

^ "Massive mural" .

Newshub . Archived from the original on 27 February 2020 . Retrieved 11 July 2019 .

^ "Report graffiti hotspots", City of Johannesburg site, 28 June 2012 Archived 11 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ "South Africa: Hotel, Graffiti Crew Partner to Host Art Festival", AllAfrica.com, 16 April 2012 Archived 31 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine . Allafrica.com (16 April 2012). Retrieved 2 April 2013.

^ Wood, Josh (27 July 2011) "The Maturing of Street Art in Cairo" Archived 11 April 2022 at the Wayback Machine , The New York Times .

^ "The Best Of Egyptian Political Street Art" Archived 10 July 2013 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 4 July 2013.

^ Duggan, Grace. (2 February 2012) "Arab Spring Street Art, on View in Madrid" Archived 28 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine , The New York Times .

^ Lewisohn, Cedar (2008) Street Art: The Graffiti Revolution , Tate Gallery , London, England, ISBN 978-1-85437-767-8 .

^ "Amanda Lee Harris" . Downtown Minneapolis Street Art Festival.

Archived from the original on 17 August 2019 . Retrieved 17 August 2019 .

^ Chalk Festival Archived 2 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine , a forty-page guide to the 2012 Sarasota Chalk Festival, Sarasota Observer, 28 October through 6 November 2012 ^ "Go Turkey Tourism" . Archived from the original on 24 January 2013 . Retrieved 1 November 2018 .

^ carlenehempel (18 July 2011).

"In Istanbul, artists take their ideas to the streets" .

NU Journalism Abroad 2011 .

Archived from the original on 16 October 2022 . Retrieved 16 October 2022 .

^ Guzner, Sonia (22 August 2011).

" 'Living Walls' Speaks Out Through Street Art" .

The Emory Wheel . Archived from the original on 29 July 2012 . Retrieved 9 January 2012 .

^ "Living Walls" . Archived from the original on 10 July 2012 . Retrieved 29 July 2015 .

^ "2013 RVA Street Art Festival to revitalize GRTC property" .

CBS6 . 20 March 2013.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2020 . Retrieved 22 May 2013 .

^ "World's largest chalk art festival draws a crowd in Pasadena" .

Pasadena Star News . 21 June 2015.

Archived from the original on 22 August 2016 . Retrieved 16 October 2022 .

^ "Pasadena Chalk Festival called the world's largest street-art festival" .

Daily News . 20 June 2010.

Archived from the original on 11 October 2016 . Retrieved 16 October 2022 .

^ "UMA – Universal Museum of Art" . Archived from the original on 6 May 2013 . Retrieved 6 June 2018 .

^ "A Walk Into Street Art" . Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 6 June 2018 .

^ https://arthouseprojectlondon.com/londoninternationalpasteupfestival ^ Catsos, Jennifer.

"Past Festivals" .

Eureka Street Art Festival .

Archived from the original on 8 March 2019 . Retrieved 7 March 2019 .

Further reading [ edit ] Avramidis, Konstantinos, & Tsilimpounidi, Myrto (Eds.), (2017), "Graffiti and Street Art: Reading, Writing and Representing the City", Routledge, ISBN 978-1472473332 Bearman, Joshuah (1 October 2008).

"Street Cred: Why would Barack Obama invite a graffiti artist with a long rap sheet to launch a guerrilla marketing campaign on his behalf?" .

Modern Painters .

Archived from the original on 24 October 2008 . Retrieved 1 October 2008 .

Le Bijoutier (2008), This Means Nothing , Powerhouse Books, ISBN 978-1-57687-417-2 Bonadio, Enrico (2019).

The Cambridge handbook of copyright in street art and graffiti . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9781108563581 .

OCLC 1130060776 .

Bou, Louis (2006), NYC BCN: Street Art Revolution , HarperCollins, ISBN 978-0-06-121004-4 Bou, Louis (2005), Street Art: Graffiti, stencils, stickers & logos , Instituto Monsa de ediciones, S.A., ISBN 978-84-96429-11-6 Chaffee, Lyman (1993).

Political Protest and Street Art: Popular Tools for Democratization in Hispanic Cultures . Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Press .

ISBN 978-0-313-28808-1 .

Combs, Dave and Holly (2008), PEEL: The Art of the Sticker , Mark Batty Publisher , ISBN 0-9795546-0-8 Danysz, Magda (2009) From Style Writing to Art, a street art anthology , Dokument Press, ISBN 978-8-888-49352-7 Fairey, Shepard (2008), Obey: E Pluribus Venom: The Art of Shepard Fairey , Gingko Press, ISBN 978-1-58423-295-7 Fairey, Shepard (2009), Obey: Supply & Demand, The Art of Shepard Fairey , Gingko Press, ISBN 978-1-58423-349-7 Gavin, Francesca (2007), Street Renegades: New Underground Art , Laurence King Publishers, ISBN 978-1-85669-529-9 Goldstein, Jerry (2008), Athens Street Art , Athens: Athens News, ISBN 978-960-89200-6-4 Harrington, Steven P. and Rojo, Jaime (2008), Brooklyn Street Art , Prestel, ISBN 978-3-7913-3963-4 Harrington, Steven P. and Rojo, Jaime (2010), Street Art New York , Prestel, ISBN 978-3-7913-4428-7 Hundertmark, Christian (2005), The Art Of Rebellion: The World Of Street Art , Gingko Press, ISBN 978-1-58423-157-8 Hundertmark, Christian (2006), The Art Of Rebellion 2: World of Urban Art Activism , Gingko Press, ISBN 978-3-9809909-4-3 Jakob, Kai (2009), Street Art in Berlin , Jaron, ISBN 978-3-89773-596-5 Longhi, Samantha (2007), Stencil History X , Association C215, ISBN 978-2-9525682-2-7 Manco, Tristan (2002), Stencil Graffiti , Thames and Hudson, ISBN 0-500-28342-7 Manco, Tristan (2004), Street Logos , Thames and Hudson, ISBN 0-500-28469-5 Marziani, Gianluca (2009), Scala Mercalli: The Creative Earthquake of Italian Street Art , Drago Publishing, ISBN 978-88-88493-42-8 Palmer, Rod (2008), Street Art Chile , Eight Books, ISBN 978-0-9554322-1-7 Rasch, Carsten (2014), Street Art: From around the World – stencil graffiti – wheatpasted poster art – sticker art – Volume I, Hamburg, ISBN 978-3-73860-931-8 Riggle, Nicholas Alden (2010), "Street Art: The Transfiguration of the Commonplaces".

Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism , vol. 68, issue 3 (248–257).

Robinson, David (1990) Soho Walls – Beyond Graffiti , Thames & Hudson, New York, ISBN 978-0-500-27602-0 Ross, Jeffrey Ian (Ed.), (2016), "Routledge Handbook of Graffiti and Street Art", Routledge, ISBN 978-1138792937 Schwartzman, Allan (1985), Street Art , The Dial Press, ISBN 978-0-385-19950-6 Strike, Christian and Rose, Aaron (August 2005), Beautiful Losers: Contemporary Art and Street Culture , Distributed Art Publishers, ISBN 1-933045-30-2 Walde, Claudia (2007), Sticker City: Paper Graffiti Art (Street Graphics / Street Art Series) , Thames & Hudson, ISBN 978-0-500-28668-5 Walde, Claudia (2011), Street Fonts – Graffiti Alphabets From Around The World , Thames & Hudson, ISBN 978-0-500-51559-4 Williams, Sarah Jaye, ed. (2008), Philosophy of Obey (Obey Giant): The Formative Years (1989–2008) , Nerve Books UK.

External links [ edit ] Media related to street art at Wikimedia Commons Street Art of Costa Rica, CR – danscape Archived 9 November 2021 at the Wayback Machine v t e Street art Culture Activism Aerosol paint Culture jamming Direct action Graffiti ( terminology ) Handstyle Hip hop culture Installation art Propaganda Screenprinting Spray paint art Subway Art Types Guerrilla art Moss graffiti Mural Pieces Poster Reverse graffiti Rock balancing Stencil graffiti Sticker art Tagging Throw ups Yarn bombing Wheatpaste Wildstyle Lists of artists Street Graffiti Stencil Photographers Henry Chalfant Martha Cooper Places Adelaide Atlanta Berlin (Berlin Wall) Brazil ( Southeastern Brazil ( pichação ) , São Paulo (Beco do Batman) ) Hong Kong (Free Ai Weiwei campaign) Kyiv Northern Ireland Melbourne New York City ( 5 Pointz ) Philadelphia San Francisco ( Balmy Alley , Clarion Alley ) Sarajevo Sydney (Newtown area) Tehran Toronto Palestine (West Bank Wall) Events Beton Fest The Cans Festival Living Walls See No Evil Pasadena Chalk Festival Sarajevo Street Art Festival Sarasota Chalk Festival Related Built environment Public art Public space Psychogeography Street party Urban planning Visual arts Vandalism Category: Street art v t e Visual arts and the art world Artwork Appropriation Collage Conceptual art Cultural artifact Drawing Fine art Fine-art photograph Found object Installation art Kinetic art Mixed media bricolage Mural fresco graffiti New media art history digital virtual Painting Performance art Plastic arts Portrait Printmaking Public art street art Sculpture carving relief statue tallest Site-specific art Social sculpture Soft sculpture Stained glass Artwork title Roles Artist Collector Conservator-restorer paintings frescos Critic Curator Dealer Model Patron Visual arts education Europe Places and events Art auction Art colony Art commune Art exhibition alternative exhibition space Art gallery Contemporary art gallery Art museum Single-artist museum Art school Europe Arts centre Arts festival Artist collective Artist cooperative Artist-in-residence program Artist-run initiative Artist-run space Biennale Commission Sculpture garden Sculpture trail Virtual museum History of art Timeline of art Art history (academic study) Art manifesto Art movements Criticism feminist History of painting outline Periods in Western art history Timeline of 20th century printmaking in America Related Art market The arts Catalogue raisonné Classificatory disputes Museum collection management deaccessioning Conservation-restoration paintings Cultural policy Depiction Destination painting Eclecticism in art Economics of art art finance art valuation Elements of art Forgery Index of painting-related articles Outline of the visual arts painting sculpture Provenance Sociology of art Style Unfinished work Lists Art magazines Art media Art techniques Art movements Art museums largest most visited sculpture parks single artist Art reference books Colossal sculptures in situ Contemporary artists Contemporary art galleries Modern artists National galleries Painters by name by nationality Photographers Sculptors female Stolen paintings Most expensive paintings , sculptures , works by living artists Painting portal Visual arts portal Arts portal v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wvmkh
Cached time: 20250817045351
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.824 seconds
Real time usage: 2.219 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 12446/1000000
Revision size: 127800/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 451858/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11731/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 20/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 622981/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.114/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 11765126/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 10/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1804.045      1 -total
 63.84% 1151.706      1 Template:Reflist
 18.95%  341.788     68 Template:Cite_web
 15.73%  283.786     40 Template:Cite_news
 15.47%  279.048      5 Template:Cite_Q
  5.63%  101.492     13 Template:Citation_needed
  5.31%   95.800      6 Template:Navbox
  5.27%   95.017     15 Template:Fix
  4.34%   78.290      1 Template:Street_Art
  3.80%   68.621     13 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2658000:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045351 and revision id 1305445757. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Street_art&oldid=1305445757 " Categories : Street art Culture jamming techniques Public art Visual arts genres Street culture Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from July 2024 CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Norwegian-language sources (no) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2013 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 Interlanguage link template existing link Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 03:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Street art 43 languages Add topic

