Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Relaunch 3 See also 4 Bibliography 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents The Bodley Head 7 languages العربية Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Bahasa Melayu Nederlands اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British publishing company This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "The Bodley Head" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Bodley Head Parent company Penguin Random House Founded 1887 ; 138 years ago ( 1887 ) Founders John Lane and Elkin Mathews Country of origin United Kingdom Headquarters location London Publication types Books Official website www .penguin .co .uk /company /publishers /vintage /bodley-head .html The Bodley Head is an English book publishing imprint of Penguin Random House . Founded in 1887 by John Lane and Elkin Mathews , The Bodley Head existed as an independent entity or as part of multiple consortia until it was acquired by Random House in 1987 alongside sister companies Jonathan Cape and Chatto & Windus . Random House used The Bodley Head as a children's book imprint until April 2008, when it was repositioned as an adult non-fiction imprint within the Vintage Books division.

The Bodley Head launched Penguin Books as an imprint in 1935, which John Lane spun off as an independent company the following year. The Bodley Head acquired several other imprints prior to the Random House acquisition, including Martin Hopkinson and Gerald Howe in 1941, Nonesuch Press in 1953, Werner Laurie in 1957, and Hollis & Carter in 1962.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Originally named Elkin Mathews and John Lane , The Bodley Head was a partnership set up in 1887 by booksellers Elkin Mathews and John Lane, initially to trade in antiquarian books in London. It took the name Bodley Head from a bust of Sir Thomas Bodley , the eponymist of the Bodleian Library in Oxford, above the shop door.

Lane and Mathews began in 1894 to publish works of ‘stylish decadence’, including the notorious literary periodical The Yellow Book . Also notable amongst Bodley Head's pre-Great War books were the two volume sets: Foundations of the Nineteenth Century (1910 and later editions, selling over fifty thousand copies), and Immanuel Kant , both by Houston Stewart Chamberlain .

Herbert George Jenkins was a manager at the firm during the first decade of the twentieth century, before leaving to set up his own publishing house in 1912.

[ 2 ] The Bodley Head became a private company in 1921.  In 1926 it published the Book of Bodley Head Verse , an anthology edited by J. B. Priestley .  The firm published some mainstream popular authors including Arnold Bennett and Agatha Christie and the book series, Twentieth Century Library (edited by V. K. Krishna Menon ), [ 3 ] [ 4 ] but ran into financial difficulties.

Allen Lane , John Lane's nephew who had inherited control, left in 1936 to found Penguin Books .  Before Allen Lane's new company was established, however, he published the first Penguins in 1935 under the imprint of The Bodley Head. Both "Penguin Books" and "The Bodley Head" appeared on the cover.

The Bodley Head continued after 1936 backed by a consortium of Allen & Unwin , Jonathan Cape , and J. M. Dent . In 1941, John Lane the Bodley Head took over two smaller publishing houses, Gerald Howe Ltd and Martin Hopkinson & Co.

, whose authors included Cecil Day Lewis and H. L. Mencken .

[ 5 ] The firm was bought in 1957 by Ansbacher & Co., headed by Max Reinhardt . During this period Bodley Head published the work of authors such as George Bernard Shaw , Graham Greene , Charles Chaplin , William Trevor , Maurice Sendak , Muriel Spark , Alexander Solzhenitsyn , Sam Haskins and Alistair Cooke .

Max Reinhardt was also responsible for the expansion of one of the outstanding children's books lists in modern publishing. The imprint was still important in the 1970s when it was drawn into the Jonathan Cape / Chatto & Windus group. The firm was sold to Random House in 1987, who published children's books under The Bodley Head name until 2008.

The archives of The Bodley Head Ltd are kept at Reading University .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Relaunch [ edit ] The Bodley Head imprint was relaunched by Random House as an adult imprint in April 2008. Its two principal strands are stated to be books "of scholarship in both the humanities and sciences", and books which "contribute to the intellectual and cultural climate of our times".

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Children's literature portal Category:The Bodley Head books Books in the United Kingdom Bibliography [ edit ] Stetz, Margaret; Lasner, Mark Samuels (1990).

England in the 1890s: Literary Publishing at the Bodley Head . Georgetown Univ Press.

ISBN 0-87840-509-7 .

J. W. Lambert and Michael Ratcliffe The Bodley Head 1887–1987 (1987). The story of John Lane , Allen Lane , Unwin and Max Reinhardt and their links with Bodley Head.

ISBN 0-370-30949-9 .

References [ edit ] ^ "FOB: Firms Out of Business" .

norman.hrc.utexas.edu . Retrieved 13 December 2023 .

^ "Obituaries - Mr Herbert Jenkins" .

The Times . 9 June 1923. p. 12 . Retrieved 26 March 2012 .

(Subscription required for online access) ^ Sairam Krishnan, How a young man from Calicut became the publisher who helped change British thinking , scroll.in. Retrieved 14 July 2023.

^ Bodley Head , Making Britain: Discover how South Asians shaped the nation, 1870-1950, open.ac.uk. Retrieved 14 July 2023.

^ The Publisher , Volumes 154-155 (1941), p. 260 ^ "Archives of The Bodley Head Ltd – University of Reading" . Reading.ac.uk . Retrieved 29 September 2013 .

^ Archives of The Bodley Head Ltd , jisk.ac.uk. Retrieved 13 November 2018.

^ "Bodley Head" . Vintage Books . Retrieved 29 September 2013 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Archives of the Bodley Head Ltd at Reading University v t e Bertelsmann Bertelsmann Home Entertainment Arcadia Entertainment Aris Ekdotiki ClipArt Films Feelgood Entertainment Fiction Pictures JP Video Productions Libero Video Lucifier Video Enterprises Mascot Video Media Vista Film & Audio Distributors Panorama Audio Visual Systems S.A.

Pissanos International Star Video Media assets v t e RTL Group RTL Deutschland TV RTL VOX RTL Zwei [ a ] VOXup Nitro RTL Up Super RTL Toggolino Toggo RTL Super Toggo Plus n-tv RTL Crime RTL Living RTL Passion GEO Television Radio RTL Radio 104.6 RTL Antenne Bayern [ b ] Antenne Niedersachsen [ c ] Radio Hamburg [ d ] Radio NRW [ e ] 105'5 Spreeradio Radio 21 [ f ] Radio Regenbogen [ g ] BigFM [ h ] Hitradio RTL Sachsen [ i ] Radio Brocken (50%) 89.0 RTL Antenne Thüringen (15%) Radio Ton (2%) Rock Antenne [ b ] Sachsen Funkpaket (31.9%) Radio Dresden Radio Leipzig Radio Chemnitz Radio Lausitz Radio Zwickau Radio Erzgebirge Vogtland Radio Oldie 95 (4.78%) Radio Top 40 (15%) RTL Publishing Brigitte Capital GEO Stern RTL Nederland TV RTL 4 RTL 5 RTL 7 RTL 8 RTL Z RTL Crime RTL Lounge RTL Telekids Video on Demand Videoland Groupe M6 (48.6%) TV M6 W9 6ter Paris Première Téva Série Club [ j ] M6 Music Gulli Tiji Canal J MCM MCM Top RFM TV Radio RTL RTL2 Fun Radio Catchup and Video on Demand M6+ International Gulli Girl Tiji (Russia) Gulli Africa Gulli Bil Arabi MCM Pop M6 International RTL Luxembourg TV RTL Télé Lëtzebuerg RTL Zwee Radio RTL Radio RTL Today Radio RTL LX RTL Gold Catchup RTL Play RTL Magyarország TV RTL RTL II Cool Film+ RTL Gold RTL Három Sorozat+ Muzsika TV Catchup and Video on Demand RTL+ Atresmedia (18.65%) TV Antena 3 laSexta Neox Nova Mega Atreseries Radio Onda Cero Europa FM Melodia FM Catchup Atresplayer Fremantle United Kingdom Dancing Ledge Euston Films Castlefield Hare and Tortoise Thames Talkback Naked Full Fat TV Label 1 Man Alive Wild Blue Media Ireland Element Pictures France Kwai Germany Grundy UFA UFA GmbH UFA Fiction UFA Show & Factual Teamworx Phoenix Film We Are Era Finland Grillifilms Moskito Television Production House Finland Sweden Strix Baluba Italy Lux Vide The Apartment Wildside Picomedia Denmark Miso Film Blu Productions Strong Productions Norway One Big Happy Family Rakett TV Monster Playroom Novemberfilm Strix Australia Fremantle Australia Eureka Productions United States Original Productions Random House Studio Eureka USA The Immigrant Fabel Netherlands Blue Circle Fiction Valley No Pictures Please Israel Abot Hameiri ^ joint venture with Leonine Holding , The Walt Disney Company , Bauer Media Group and Hubert Burda Media .

^ a b joint venture with Amperwelle Studio München Programmanbietergesellschaft, Axel Springer AG , Burda, Studio Gong, m.b.t. Mediengesellschaft der bayerischen Tageszeitungen für Kabelkommunikation, Medienpool and Radio Bavaria Rundfunkprogrammgesellschaft.

^ joint venture with Verlagsgesellschaft Madsack, Studio Gong Niedersachsen and Brune-Rieck-Beteiligungs.

^ joint venture with Axel Springer, Heinrich Bauer Verlag, Lühmanndruck Harburger Zeitungsgesellschaft and Morgenpost Verlag.

^ joint venture with Pressefunk Nordrhein-Westfalen and Westdeutscher Rundfunk .

^ joint venture with Funk & Fernsehen Nordwestdeutschland , Antenne Niedersachen and Niedersachsen Radio.

^ joint venture with Mediengruppe Dr. Haas.

^ joint venture with Rheinland-Pfälzische Rundfunk.

^ joint venture with Broadcast Sachsen.

^ joint venture with TF1 Group .

Penguin Random House USA Knopf Doubleday Knopf Doubleday Everyman's Library (US) Pantheon Schocken Vintage Random House Ballantine Bantam Boom! Studios Dell Del Rey Dial Modern Library Spectra Villard Crown Broadway Harmony Hogarth Rodale Three Rivers Ten Speed Watson-Guptill Children's Beginner Books Golden Penguin Adult Avery Dutton Penguin Putnam Riverhead Sentinel TarcherPerigee Viking Berkley Publishing Group Ace Berkley New American Library Jove Plume Roc Penguin Young Readers Dial Young Readers Dutton Children's Firebird Putnam Grosset & Dunlap Philomel Price Stern Sloan Puffin Warne Information Books on Tape Living Language Playaway The Princeton Review Other Sasquatch Books UK Ebury BBC Books Ebury Del Rey Rider Virgin Books (90%) W. H. Allen Penguin General Hamish Hamilton Penguin Books Viking Penguin Press Pelican Penguin Classics PRH Children Ladybird Puffin Other Cornerstone Hutchinson Heinemann Random House Transworld Bantam Doubleday Associated publishers Andersen Everyman's Library Vintage Publishing The Bodley Head Chatto & Windus Harvill Secker Jonathan Cape Vintage Canada Doubleday Canada McClelland & Stewart Douglas Gibson Books Tundra Books New Canadian Library Germany Blanvalet cbj Goldmann Heyne Luchterhand Manesse Prestel Spain Alfaguara Bruguera Ediciones B Santillana Other Companhia das Letras (70%) Dorling Kindersley Alpha PRH Publisher Services Other assets Alliant International University Arvato Brockhaus Arvato Entertainment (Sonopress) BMG Rights Management Der Spiegel (25%) Relias Learning Manager Magazin (24.9%) Sächsische Zeitung (60%) Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Bodley_Head&oldid=1293218909 " Categories : RTL Group Book publishing companies of the United Kingdom Random House Publishing companies established in 1887 1887 establishments in England British companies established in 1887 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2016 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from May 2025 Use British English from May 2025 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 31 May 2025, at 12:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Bodley Head 7 languages Add topic

