Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ecosystem Services 2 Conservation Strategies Toggle Conservation Strategies subsection 2.1 Red Listing 2.2 Species Specific Approach 2.3 System Approach 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Conservation of fungi 2 languages فارسی Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fungi are considered to be in urgent need of conservation by the British Mycological Society on the grounds that it is a traditionally neglected taxon which has legal protection in few countries. Current threats to fungi include destruction of forests worldwide, habitat fragmentation , changes in land use , pollution , anthropogenic climate change , and over-exploitation of commercially attractive species. Fungi population status has never been recorded until 2018 by the Royal Botanic Gardens .

[ 1 ] These surveys relay species information, threats, and current protective policies. Expertise of 210 contributors from 97 institutions in 42 countries contributes to these reports.

[ 1 ] The Species Survival Commission of the IUCN has five specialist groups dealing with the conservation of fungi.

Chytrid , Zygomycete , Downy Mildew and Slime Mold Specialist Group Cup-fungus , Truffle and Ally Specialist Group Lichen Specialist Group Mushroom , Bracket and Puffball Specialist Group Rust and Smut Specialist Group These groups are overseen by Cátia Canteiro, a plant and fungi specialist at the Indianapolis Zoo’s Global Center for Species Survival (GCSS). Under her leadership, these groups are focusing on Red Listing fungi species in order to build the foundation for conservation efforts.

Lack of knowledge is considered a major concern with a general paucity of comprehensive checklists, even for developed nations. In addition, the criteria for "red-listing" is not specifically designed for fungi and the kinds of data required, viz. population size, lifespan, spatial distribution and population dynamics are poorly known for most fungi. As a result, in practice, indicator species are identified as target foci for the conservation of threatened fungi. The term conservation mycology was coined in a 2018 publication.

[ 2 ] Ecosystem Services [ edit ] Fungi provide numerous ecosystem services that are essential in maintaining ecological environments and reducing the effects of climate change .

[ 3 ] Fungi help facilitate the nutrient cycle and carbon cycle , act as a food source for humans and animals, regulate animals populations, and contribute to the degradation of various pollutants.

[ 3 ] Fungi are extremely diverse and take numerous approaches in providing these services through unique and complex ecological relationships. Fungi can have mutualistic , symbiotic , or parasitic relationships.

[ 4 ] 90% of all plant species have been found to associate with fungi.

[ 5 ] Fungi provide plants with nitrogen, phosphate, and water through decomposition, protect them against pests such as nematodes and arthropods , [ 5 ] communicate with plants through their mycelium network, [ 6 ] and stimulate plant growth by influencing root development.

[ 5 ] Many of these mutualistic plant-fungi relationships are established between mycorrhiza fungi .

[ 5 ] A continuation in the loss of fungi diversity and populations will drastically alter ecosystem identity, processes, and cost governments billions of dollars to provide their ecosystem services.

Conservation Strategies [ edit ] Red Listing [ edit ] Red Listing is an approach that works with the IUCN's Red List program in which biological, geographical, and population data are acquired from field studies. The data is put into the Red List database and utilized to inform governments and organizations as to how, where, and what is needing the most conservation efforts. This strategy works through the legislative or organization processes in order to turn field data into conservation efforts. Efforts include governmental regulation of the species and its use, habitat protection, and regulation of known threats.

[ 7 ] Species Specific Approach [ edit ] Species specific approaches typically target known, at risk species, and utilize geographic data as well as population data to derive conservation strategies.

[ 8 ] These strategies include reducing human use of the species, regulating land use, reducing invasive predator populations, and improving habitat quality. Geographic data typically includes information such as extent of occurrence and area of occupancy while population data includes information such as life-history strategies , known threats, and reproductive strategies . Species specific approaches may also target an associated keystone species and work to support them. Known keystone species can provide easier methods of implementing conservation efforts and help conserve all associated species.

[ 8 ] Keystone species have effects known as a trophic cascade in which increasing population of keystone species regulate the population of predators of the target species. This in turn increases population size of the target species. Famously, Wyoming’s Yellowstone National Park utilized this approach with wolf reintroduction to regulate elk populations and restore aspen populations.

System Approach [ edit ] Systems approaches utilize biodiversity hotspots or establishing reserves for biodiversity and its protection. These system approaches focus on the range of biodiversity and preserving its order to restore system structure and composition.

[ 8 ] In turn, conservation efforts fixate on maintaining "normal" conditions which include fire, flood, and other disturbance regimes. Community and habitat interactions and dynamics such as nutrient cycling, food webs, and key ecological functions of the target species group are monitored and restored if possible.

[ 8 ] By establishing and maintaining "normal" conditions, conservationists hope that populations of target species, or target groups, will naturally return to their "normal" population levels.

See also [ edit ] Fungi by conservation status References [ edit ] ^ a b "State of the World's Plants and Fungi | Kew" .

www.kew.org . Retrieved 2023-03-31 .

^ May, Tom W.; Cooper, Jerry A.; Dahlberg, Anders; Furci, Giuliana; Minter, David W.; Mueller, Gregory M.; Pouliot, Alison; Yang, Zhuliang (2018). "Recognition of the discipline of conservation mycology".

Conservation Biology .

33 (3): 733– 736.

doi : 10.1111/cobi.13228 .

PMID 30264893 .

S2CID 52876429 .

^ a b "Benefits of Fungi for the Environment and Humans" .

UN Decade on Restoration . Retrieved 2023-03-16 .

^ "8.14: Symbiotic Relationships of Fungi" .

Biology LibreTexts . 2016-09-30 . Retrieved 2023-03-16 .

^ a b c d "How plants make friends with fungi" .

ScienceDaily . Retrieved 2023-03-16 .

^ "Underground Networking: The Amazing Connections Beneath Your Feet" .

www.nationalforests.org . Retrieved 2023-03-16 .

^ "How the Red List is Used" .

IUCN Red List . March 22, 2023 . Retrieved March 22, 2023 .

^ a b c d Molina, Randy; Horton, Thomas R.; Trappe, James M.; Marcot, Bruce G. (2011-04-01).

"Addressing uncertainty: How to conserve and manage rare or little-known fungi" .

Fungal Ecology . Conservation Underground: Fungi in a Changing World.

4 (2): 134– 146.

doi : 10.1016/j.funeco.2010.06.003 .

ISSN 1754-5048 .

v t e Conservation of species Index of conservation articles Conservation biology Biodiversity Captive breeding Compassionate conservation Conservation behavior Conservation-dependent species Conservation genetics Conservation-induced extinction Conservation status Endemism Ex-situ conservation Extinction threshold In-situ conservation Latent extinction risk Marine conservation Mutualisms and conservation Nature conservation Nuisance wildlife Pest Vermin Conservation biology of parasites Species translocation Conservation welfare Threatened species Vulnerability and susceptibility Approaches Conservation agriculture Conservation development Conservation finance Conservation grazing Conservation management system Conservation movement Conservation photography Conservation psychology Conspicuous conservation Community-based conservation Ecoregion conservation status Environmental protection Evidence-based conservation Flagship species Forest management Forest protection Tropical rainforest conservation Integrated Conservation and Development Project Other effective area-based conservation measures Riparian buffer Roadless area conservation Roadside conservation Site-based conservation Wetland conservation Protected areas Conservation designation Conservation district Conservation easement Conservation reserve Gap analysis Habitat conservation High conservation value area Landscape-scale conservation Marine protected area Marxan Open space reserve Wildlife corridor 30 by 30 target Key issues Conservation refugee Fortress conservation Habitat fragmentation Human–wildlife conflict Restoration Assisted natural regeneration Ecosystem restoration Island restoration Reforestation afforestation Rewilding marine Species reintroduction By taxon Arthropod Bird Hawaiian honeycreeper Raptor Golden eagle Fungi Land mammal American bison Arabian oryx Bear Polar bear Cheetah Elephant Indian elephant Slow loris Tiger Bengal Tiger Wolf Marine Dolphin Gray nurse shark Manatee Painted turtle Salmon Sea otter Plant Seed bank Cryopreservation By country Angola Australia Belize Brazil Canada Central African Republic Costa Rica Hong Kong Iceland India Indonesia Ireland Italy Malaysia Mauritius Namibia New Zealand Pakistan Papua New Guinea South Sudan Sweden Uganda United Kingdom Scotland United States forests Related Conservation officer De-extinction Planetary boundaries IUCN Red List NatureServe conservation status Special Area of Conservation Soil conservation List of conservation issues List of organisations List of people Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conservation_of_fungi&oldid=1291875045 " Categories : Fungus ecology Nature conservation Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 22:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conservation of fungi 2 languages Add topic

