Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Bentham's instructions 2 Jevons' economics 3 Hedonimetry Toggle Hedonimetry subsection 3.1 Units 3.2 Criticism 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources Toggle the table of contents Felicific calculus 6 languages Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Polski Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Algorithm measuring the amount of pleasure that a specific action is likely to cause This article needs additional citations for verification .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Felicific calculus" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Utilitarianism Predecessors Mozi Shantideva David Hume Claude Adrien Helvétius Cesare Beccaria William Godwin Francis Hutcheson William Paley Key proponents Jeremy Bentham John Stuart Mill Henry Sidgwick R. M. Hare Peter Singer Types of utilitarianism Negative Rule Act Two-level Total Average Preference Classical Key concepts Pain Suffering Pleasure Utility Happiness Eudaimonia Consequentialism Equal consideration Felicific calculus Utilitarian social choice rule Problems Demandingness objection Mere addition paradox Paradox of hedonism Replaceability argument Utility monster Works An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) On Liberty (1859) Utilitarianism (1861) Related topics Rational choice theory Game theory Neoclassical economics Population ethics Effective altruism Philosophy portal v t e Part of a series on Hedonism Thinkers Ajita Aristippus Bentham Chandler Epicurus Feldman Gassendi Guisán Jovinian La Mettrie Mill Onfray Pearce Piper Singer Tännsjö Yang Schools of hedonism Axiological hedonism Charvaka Christian hedonism Jovinianism Cyrenaics Epicureanism Ethical hedonism Libertinage Psychological hedonism Utilitarianism Yangism Key concepts Aponia Ataraxia Eudaimonia Felicific calculus Happiness Hedone Pain Pleasure Sensation Suffering Tetrapharmakos Related articles Hedonic treadmill Joie de vivre Paradox of hedonism "Wine, women and song" Zichan v t e The felicific calculus is an algorithm formulated by utilitarian philosopher Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832) for calculating the degree or amount of pleasure that a specific action is likely to induce. Bentham, an ethical hedonist , believed the moral rightness or wrongness of an action to be a function of the amount of pleasure or pain that it produced.  The felicific calculus could in principle, at least, determine the moral status of any considered act.  The algorithm is also known as the utility calculus , the hedonistic calculus and the hedonic calculus .

To be included in this calculation are several variables (or vectors ), which Bentham called "circumstances". These are: Intensity: How strong is the pleasure?

Duration : How long will the pleasure last?

Certainty or uncertainty : How likely or unlikely is it that the pleasure will occur?

Propinquity or remoteness: How soon will the pleasure occur?

Fecundity : The probability that the action will be followed by sensations of the same kind.

Purity : The probability that it will not be followed by sensations of the opposite kind.

Extent : How many people will be affected?

Bentham's instructions [ edit ] To take an exact account of the general tendency of any act, by which the interests of a community are affected, proceed as follows. Begin with any one person of those whose interests seem most immediately to be affected by it: and take an account, Of the value of each distinguishable pleasure which appears to be produced by it in the first instance.

Of the value of each pain which appears to be produced by it in the first instance.

Of the value of each pleasure which appears to be produced by it after the first. This constitutes the fecundity of the first pleasure and the impurity of the first pain.

Of the value of each pain which appears to be produced by it after the first. This constitutes the fecundity of the first pain, and the impurity of the first pleasure.

Sum up all the values of all the pleasures on the one side, and those of all the pains on the other. The balance, if it be on the side of pleasure, will give the good tendency of the act upon the whole, with respect to the interests of that individual person; if on the side of pain, the bad tendency of it upon the whole.

Take an account of the number of persons whose interests appear to be concerned; and repeat the above process with respect to each. Sum up the numbers expressive of the degrees of good tendency, which the act has, with respect to each individual, in regard to whom the tendency of it is good upon the whole. Do this again with respect to each individual, in regard to whom the tendency of it is bad upon the whole. Take the balance which if on the side of pleasure, will give the general good tendency of the act, with respect to the total number or community of individuals concerned; if on the side of pain, the general evil tendency, with respect to the same community.

[ 1 ] To make his proposal easier to remember, Bentham devised what he called a " mnemonic doggerel " (also referred to as "memoriter verses"), which synthesized "the whole fabric of morals and legislation": Intense, long, certain, speedy, fruitful, pure— Such marks in pleasures and in pains endure.

Such pleasures seek if private be thy end: If it be public, wide let them extend Such pains avoid, whichever be thy view: If pains must come, let them extend to few.

Jevons' economics [ edit ] W. Stanley Jevons used the algebra of pleasure and pain in his science of utility applied to economics.

[ 2 ] He described utility with graphs where marginal utility continuously declines. His figure 9 on page 173 has two curves: one for the painfulness of labour and the other for utility of production. As the amount of product increases there is a point where a "balance of pain" is reached and labour ceases.

Hedonimetry [ edit ] "Hedonimetry" redirects here. For a device to measure happiness, see Hedonometer .

Hedonimetry is the study of happiness ("experienced utility " [ 3 ] ) as a measurable economic asset.  The first major work in the field was an 1881 publication of Mathematical Psychics by the famous statistician and economist Francis Ysidro Edgeworth , who hypothesized a way of measuring happiness in units.

[ 4 ] The concept of measuring hedonic utility arose in Utilitarianism , with Classical Utilitarians acknowledging that the actual pleasure might not be easy to express quantitatively as a numeric value. Bentham, the early proponent of the concept, declared that the happiness is a sequence of episodes , each characterized by its intensity and duration. This definition formally makes episodes permutable, as the total pleasure does not depend on their order. Since practical experience teaches otherwise (enjoyment from a meal does depend on the order of courses), followers of Bentham argued that the order of episodes changes their intensity.

[ 3 ] Units [ edit ] The units of measurements used in the felicific calculus may be termed hedons and dolors .

[ 5 ] Criticism [ edit ] Some contemporary critics argue that while the felicific calculus formalizes the pursuit of well-being, it lacks emotional resonance and fails to inspire moral urgency. This is seen as a weakness in the rhetorical appeal of utilitarianism, especially when contrasted with its ambitious ethical goals.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Act utilitarianism Bellman equation Epicurus Ethical calculus Reinforcement learning Science of morality Utilitarian social choice rule - a mathematical formula for felicific calculus.

References [ edit ] ^ * Jeremy Bentham, An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation , London, 1789 ^ W. Stanley Jevons {1957) [1871] The Theory of Political Economy , 5th edition ^ a b Skyrms & Narens 2019 .

^ Edgeworth, F. Y. (1881): Mathematical Psychics , Kegan Paul, London.

[1] ^ San Diego University – Glossary Archived May 9, 2008, at the Wayback Machine by Lawrence M. Hinman ^ David Pearce (2020).

Can Biotechnology Abolish Suffering?

. p. 217.

Sources [ edit ] Skyrms, Brian; Narens, Louis (2019).

"Measuring the hedonimeter" .

Philosophical Studies .

176 (12): 3199– 3210.

doi : 10.1007/s11098-018-1170-z .

ISSN 0031-8116 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Felicific_calculus&oldid=1299805756 " Categories : Utilitarianism Hedonism Pleasure Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2021 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 14:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Felicific calculus 6 languages Add topic

