Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and overview 2 Film ratings 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents National Bureau of Classification Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from National Bureau of Classification (NBC) ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "National Bureau of Classification" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) National Bureau of Classification Formation 1956 Type Government Organization Purpose Film and Literature ratings Headquarters Male' , Maldives Region served Maldives Website [1] The National Bureau of Classification ( NBC ), previously the Film Censor Board of Maldives , is a government office founded on 21 May 1956 with the objective of presenting and promoting cinema and theatrical performances for the benefit of the Maldivian people.

History and overview [ edit ] The Government of Maldives first formed a Film Censor Board on 21 May 1956 under the President's Office. This Board was formed with the objective of presenting and promoting cinema and theatrical performances for the benefit of the Maldivian people.
On 15 May 1983 the Film Censor Board was transferred under the mandate of the Ministry of Home Affairs and Housing. The mission of the five-member Board was to check films and theatrical dramas to see if they had issues that conflicted: 1. The tenets of Islam.
2. The Constitution, Laws and Regulations of the Maldives.
3. The Maldivian Culture.

On 1 April 1998 the Film Censor Board became a subsidiary of the Ministry of Information, Arts and Culture and on 29 December 2005, the Film Censor Board was re-branded as the National Bureau of Classification, NBC. This change was brought as the government believed that classification and education was the key to manage and regulate different content so as to protect values of artistic productions and safeguard consumer interests at the same time. Presently, the National Bureau of Classification is under the Ministry of Arts, Culture and Heritage.

Film ratings [ edit ] Classification Certificates issued by NBC are based on the following categories: [ 1 ] Maldive film classifications G – General audiences.

PG – Parental guidance.

12+ – For ages 12 and above.

15+ – Suitable for ages 15 and above.

18+ – Suitable for ages 18 and above.

18+R – Suitable for ages 18 and above. Restricted.

PU – For professional use only.

References [ edit ] ^ "Classification Ratings" . Maldives: National Bureau of Classification. Archived from the original on 20 February 2014 . Retrieved 20 April 2014 .

External links [ edit ] NBC homepage NBC facebook page v t e Motion picture content rating systems Active ACB (Australia) BBFC (UK) Canadian motion picture rating system British Columbia Film Classification Office CHVRS Maritime Film Classification Board Saskatchewan Film and Video Classification Board CBFC (Pakistan) CBFC (India) Classification Office (New Zealand) ClassInd (Brazil) Derzhkino (Ukraine) Eirin (Japan) FAB (United States) FBP (South Africa) FSK (Germany) Gmedia (Saudi Arabia) Hong Kong motion picture rating system IFCO (Ireland) IGAC (Portugal) IMDA (Singapore) INCAA (Argentina) KAVI (Finland) KFCB (Kenya) KMRB (South Korea) LPF (Malaysia) LSF (Indonesia) Kijkwijzer (Netherlands) Medietilsynet (Norway) MPA (US) MTRCB (Philippines) NBC (Maldives) On Protecting Children from Information Harmful to Their Health and Development (Russia) RTC (Mexico) Former/Defunct Manitoba Film Classification Board (Canada) Ontario Film Review Board (Canada) Régie du cinéma (Canada) VET (Finland) Related Film censorship Hays Code List of banned films National Legion of Decency Payne Fund Studies Pink permits Category · Television content rating systems template · Video game content rating systems template Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Bureau_of_Classification&oldid=1304179381 " Categories : Motion picture rating systems Entertainment rating organizations Government of the Maldives Mass media in the Maldives Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2016 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 13:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Bureau of Classification Add languages Add topic

