Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ecosystems 2 Biotic communities 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Biocoenosis 49 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Íslenska Italiano ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Nederlands Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Татарча / tatarça Тоҷикӣ Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Interacting organisms living together in a habitat This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Biocoenosis" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A freshwater aquatic and terrestrial food web A biocenosis (UK English, biocoenosis , also biocenose , biocoenose , biotic community , biological community , ecological community , life assemblage ), coined by Karl Möbius in 1877, describes the interacting organisms living together in a habitat ( biotope ).

[ 1 ] The use of this term has declined in the 21st сentury.

In the palaeontological literature, the term distinguishes "life assemblages", which reflect the original living community, living together at one place and time. In other words, it is an assemblage of fossils or a community of specific time, which is different from "death assemblages" ( thanatocoenoses ).

[ 2 ] No palaeontological assemblage will ever completely represent the original biological community (i.e. the biocoenosis, in the sense used by an ecologist ); the term thus has somewhat different meanings in a palaeontological and an ecological context.

[ 2 ] Based on the concept of biocenosis, ecological communities can take various forms: Zoocenosis for the faunal community, Phytocenosis for the flora community, Microbiocenosis for the microbial community.

The geographical extent of a biocenose is limited by the requirement of a more or less uniform species composition .

Ecosystems [ edit ] Main article: Ecosystem An ecosystem , originally defined by Tansley (1935), is a biotic community (or biocenosis) along with its physical environment (or biotope ). In ecological studies, biocenosis is the emphasis on relationships between species in an area. These relationships are an additional consideration to the interaction of each species with the physical environment.

Biotic communities [ edit ] The side of a tide pool showing sea stars ( Dermasterias ), sea anemones ( Anthopleura ) and sea sponges in Santa Cruz, California Biotic communities vary in size, and larger ones may contain smaller ones. Species interactions are evident in food or feeding relationships. A method of delineating biotic communities is to map the food network to identify which species feed upon which others and then determine the system boundary as the one that can be drawn through the fewest consumption links relative to the number of species within the boundary.

Mapping biotic communities is important identifying sites needing environmental protection, such as the British Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs).  The Australian Department of the Environment and Heritage maintains a register of Threatened Species and Threatened Ecological Communities under the Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999 (EPBC Act).

See also [ edit ] Environment portal Ecology portal Earth sciences portal Biology portal Community (ecology) Hylozoism Population biology References [ edit ] ^ Möbius, Karl . 1877.

Die Auster und die Austernwirtschaft.

Verlag von Wiegandt, Hemple & Parey: Berlin, [1] . (English translation: The Oyster and Oyster Farming.

U.S. Commission Fish and Fisheries Report , 1880: 683–751, [2] .) ^ a b e.g. Ager, 1963, Principles of Palaeoecology Further reading [ edit ] Look up biocoenosis in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Kendeigh, S. Charles. 1961.

Animal Ecology . Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, N.J., 468 p.

Tansley, A. G. 1935. The use and abuse of vegetational concepts and terms.

Ecology, 16(3): 284–307.

v t e Hierarchy of life Biosphere > Biome > Ecosystem > Biocoenosis > Population > Organism > Organ system > Organ > Tissue > Cell > Organelle > Biomolecular complex > Macromolecule > Biomolecule Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biocoenosis&oldid=1302132954 " Categories : Biogeography Ecology Ecology terminology Habitats Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2016 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 15:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biocoenosis 49 languages Add topic

