Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Art 3 Architecture 4 Gallery 5 Influential people Toggle Influential people subsection 5.1 Johannes Gutenberg (c. 1398–1468) 5.2 Johann Reuchlin (1455–1522) 5.3 Albrecht Dürer (1471–1528) 5.4 Martin Luther (1483–1546) 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Sources 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents German Renaissance 20 languages العربية Български Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano Македонски Nederlands پښتو Português Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Renaissance in Germany Renaissance The Birth of Venus (c. 1484–1486) by Botticelli Aspects Architecture Dance Fine arts Greek scholars Humanism Literature Magic Music Philosophy Science Technology Warfare Regions England France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Spain Scotland Northern Europe Low Countries History and study Age of Discovery Continuity thesis High Renaissance v t e Portrait of Emperor Maximilian I (reigned: 1493–1519), the first Renaissance monarch of the Holy Roman Empire , by Albrecht Dürer , 1519 First page of a copy of the Gutenberg Bible , now in Texas The German Renaissance , part of the Northern Renaissance , was a cultural and artistic movement that spread among German thinkers in the 15th and 16th centuries, which developed from the Italian Renaissance . Many areas of the arts and sciences were influenced, notably by the spread of Renaissance humanism to the various German states and principalities . There were many advances made in the fields of architecture, the arts, and the sciences. Germany produced two developments that were to dominate the 16th century all over Europe: printing and the Protestant Reformation .

One of the most important German humanists was Konrad Celtis (1459–1508). Celtis studied at Cologne and Heidelberg , and later travelled throughout Italy collecting Latin and Greek manuscripts. Heavily influenced by Tacitus , he used the Germania to introduce German history and geography. Eventually he devoted his time to poetry, in which he praised Germany in Latin. Another important figure was Johann Reuchlin (1455–1522) who studied in various places in Italy and later taught Greek. He studied the Hebrew language , aiming to purify Christianity, but encountered resistance from the church.

The most significant German Renaissance artist is Albrecht Dürer especially known for his printmaking in woodcut and engraving , which spread all over Europe, drawings, and painted portraits.  Important architecture of this period includes the Landshut Residence , Heidelberg Castle , the Augsburg Town Hall as well as the Antiquarium of the Munich Residenz in Munich, the largest Renaissance hall north of the Alps.

[ 1 ] [ circular reference ] Background [ edit ] The Renaissance was largely driven by the renewed interest in classical learning, and was also the result of rapid economic development. At the beginning of the 16th century, Germany (referring to the lands contained within the Holy Roman Empire) was one of the most prosperous areas in Europe despite a relatively low level of urbanization compared to Italy or the Netherlands.

[ 2 ] [ full citation needed ] It benefited from the wealth of certain sectors such as metallurgy, mining, banking and textiles. More importantly, book-printing developed in Germany, and German printers dominated the new book-trade in most other countries until well into the 16th century.

Art [ edit ] The Heller altar by Albrecht Dürer The concept of the Northern Renaissance or German Renaissance is somewhat confused by the continuation of the use of elaborate Gothic ornament until well into the 16th century, even in works that are undoubtedly Renaissance in their treatment of the human figure and other respects. Classical ornament had little historical resonance in much of Germany, but in other respects Germany was very quick to follow developments, especially in adopting printing with movable type , a German invention that remained almost a German monopoly for some decades, and was first brought to most of Europe , including France and Italy, by Germans.

[ citation needed ] Main articles: Old master print , Printmaking , Woodcut , and Engraving Melencolia I , 1514, engraving by Albrecht Dürer Printmaking by woodcut and engraving was already more developed in Germany and the Low Countries than elsewhere in Europe, and the Germans took the lead in developing book illustrations, typically of a relatively low artistic standard, but seen all over Europe, with the woodblocks often being lent to printers of editions in other cities or languages. The greatest artist of the German Renaissance, Albrecht Dürer , began his career as an apprentice to a leading workshop in Nuremberg, that of Michael Wolgemut , who had largely abandoned his painting to exploit the new medium. Dürer worked on the most extravagantly illustrated book of the period, the Nuremberg Chronicle , published by his godfather Anton Koberger , Europe's largest printer-publisher at the time.

[ 3 ] Main article: Albrecht Dürer After completing his apprenticeship in 1490, Dürer travelled in Germany for four years, and Italy for a few months, before establishing his own workshop in Nuremberg. He rapidly became famous all over Europe for his energetic and balanced woodcuts and engravings, while also painting. Though retaining a distinctively German style, his work shows strong Italian influence, and is often taken to represent the start of the German Renaissance in visual art, which for the next forty years replaced the Netherlands and France as the area producing the greatest innovation in Northern European art. Dürer supported Martin Luther but continued to create Madonnas and other Catholic imagery, and paint portraits of leaders on both sides of the emerging split of the Protestant Reformation .

[ 3 ] "The Crucifixion", central panel of the Isenheim Altarpiece by Matthias Grünewald .

Main articles: Lucas Cranach the Elder and Lucas Cranach the Younger Dürer died in 1528, before it was clear that the split of the Reformation had become permanent, but his pupils of the following generation were unable to avoid taking sides. Most leading German artists became Protestants, but this deprived them of painting most religious works, previously the mainstay of artists' revenue.

Martin Luther had objected to much Catholic imagery, but not to imagery itself, and Lucas Cranach the Elder , a close friend of Luther, had painted a number of "Lutheran altarpieces", mostly showing the Last Supper , some with portraits of the leading Protestant divines as the Twelve Apostles . This phase of Lutheran art was over before 1550, probably under the more fiercely aniconic influence of Calvinism , and religious works for public display virtually ceased to be produced in Protestant areas. Presumably largely because of this, the development of German art had virtually ceased by about 1550, but in the preceding decades German artists had been very fertile in developing alternative subjects to replace the gap in their order books. Cranach, apart from portraits, developed a format of thin vertical portraits of provocative nudes, given classical or Biblical titles.

[ 4 ] Main article: Matthias Grünewald Lying somewhat outside these developments is Matthias Grünewald , who left very few works, but whose masterpiece, his Isenheim Altarpiece (completed 1515), has been widely regarded as the greatest German Renaissance painting since it was restored to critical attention in the 19th century. It is an intensely emotional work that continues the German Gothic tradition of unrestrained gesture and expression, using Renaissance compositional principles, but all in that most Gothic of forms, the multi-winged triptych .

[ 5 ] Albrecht Altdorfer ( c.

1480 –1538), Danube landscape near Regensburg c.

1528 , one of the earliest Western pure landscapes, from the Danube School in southern Germany .

Main article: Danube School The Danube School is the name of a circle of artists of the first third of the 16th century in Bavaria and Austria, including Albrecht Altdorfer , Wolf Huber and Augustin Hirschvogel . With Altdorfer in the lead, the school produced the first examples of independent landscape art in the West (nearly 1,000 years after China), in both paintings and prints.

[ 6 ] Their religious paintings had an expressionist style somewhat similar to Grünewald's. Dürer's pupils Hans Burgkmair and Hans Baldung Grien worked largely in prints, with Baldung developing the topical subject matter of witches in a number of enigmatic prints.

[ 7 ] Main articles: Hans Holbein the Elder and Hans Holbein the Younger Darmstadt Madonna , with donor portraits , oil painting by Hans Holbein the Younger , [ 8 ] on a Holbein carpet , 1525–26 and 1528. Oil and tempera on limewood, Würth Collection, Schwäbisch Hall .

Hans Holbein the Elder and his brother Sigismund Holbein painted religious works in the late Gothic style. Hans the Elder was a pioneer and leader in the transformation of German art from the Gothic to the Renaissance style. His son, Hans Holbein the Younger was an important painter of portraits and a few religious works, working mainly in England and Switzerland. Holbein's well known series of small woodcuts on the Dance of Death relate to the works of the Little Masters , a group of printmakers who specialized in very small and highly detailed engravings for bourgeois collectors, including many erotic subjects.

[ 9 ] Main article: Northern Mannerism The outstanding achievements of the first half of the 16th century were followed by several decades with a remarkable absence of noteworthy German art, other than accomplished portraits that never rival the achievement of Holbein or Dürer. The next significant German artists worked in the rather artificial style of Northern Mannerism , which they had to learn in Italy or Flanders.

Hans von Aachen and the Netherlandish Bartholomeus Spranger were the leading painters at the Imperial courts in Vienna and Prague, and the productive Netherlandish Sadeler family of engravers spread out across Germany, among other counties.

[ 10 ] Main article: Tilman Riemenschneider In Catholic parts of South Germany the Gothic tradition of wood carving continued to flourish until the end of the 18th century, adapting to changes in style through the centuries.

Veit Stoss (d. 1533), Tilman Riemenschneider (d.1531) and Peter Vischer the Elder (d. 1529) were Dürer's contemporaries, and their long careers covered the transition between the Gothic and Renaissance periods, although their ornament often remained Gothic even after their compositions began to reflect Renaissance principles.

[ 11 ] Architecture [ edit ] Main article: Architecture of Germany § Renaissance Renaissance architecture in Germany was inspired first by German philosophers and artists such as Albrecht Dürer and Johannes Reuchlin who visited Italy. Important early examples of this period are especially the Landshut Residence , the Castle in Heidelberg , Johannisburg Palace in Aschaffenburg , Schloss Weilburg , the City Hall and Fugger Houses in Augsburg and St. Michael in Munich , the largest Renaissance church north of the Alps.

Main articles: Brick Renaissance § Germany , Weser Renaissance , and Road of Weser Renaissance A particular form of Renaissance architecture in Germany is the Weser Renaissance , with prominent examples such as the City Hall of Bremen and the Juleum in Helmstedt .

In July 1567 the city council of Cologne approved a design in the Renaissance style by Wilhelm Vernukken for a two storied loggia for Cologne City Hall .

St Michael in Munich is the largest Renaissance church north of the Alps. It was built by Duke William V of Bavaria between 1583 and 1597 as a spiritual center for the Counter Reformation and was inspired by the Church of il Gesù in Rome. The architect is unknown. Many examples of Brick Renaissance buildings can be found in Hanseatic old towns, such as Stralsund , Wismar , Lübeck , Lüneburg , Friedrichstadt and Stade . Notable German Renaissance architects include Friedrich Sustris , Benedikt Rejt , Abraham van den Blocke , Elias Holl and Hans Krumpper .

Gallery [ edit ] Landshut Residence in Landshut Heidelberg Castle in Heidelberg Johannisburg Palace in Aschaffenburg City Hall of Augsburg St. Michael in Munich City Hall of Bremen Juleum in Helmstedt (built 1592), an example of Weser Renaissance architecture Leisthaus in Hamelin Mausoleum of Prince Ernst in Stadthagen Historic Town Hall of Paderborn Influential people [ edit ] Johannes Gutenberg (c. 1398–1468) [ edit ] Born  Johannes Gensfleisch zur Laden, [ 12 ] Johannes Gutenberg is widely considered the most influential person within the German Renaissance. As a free thinker, humanist, and inventor, Gutenberg also grew up within the Renaissance, but influenced it greatly as well. His best-known invention is the printing press in 1440. Gutenberg's press allowed the humanists, reformists, and others to circulate their ideas. He is also known as the creator of the Gutenberg Bible , a crucial work that marked the start of the Gutenberg Revolution and the age of the printed book in the Western world .

Johann Reuchlin (1455–1522) [ edit ] Johann Reuchlin was the most important aspect of world culture teaching within Germany at this time. He was a scholar of both Greek and Hebrew. Graduating, then going on to teach at Basel, he was considered extremely intelligent. Yet after leaving Basel, he had to start copying manuscripts and apprenticing within areas of law. However, he is most known for his work within Hebrew studies. Unlike some other "thinkers" of this time, Reuchlin submerged himself into this, even creating a guide to preaching within the Hebrew faith. The book, titled De Arte Predicandi (1503), is possibly one of his best-known works from this period.

Albrecht Dürer (1471–1528) [ edit ] Albrecht Dürer was at the time, and remains, the most famous artist of the German Renaissance. He was famous across Europe, and greatly admired in Italy, where his work was mainly known through his prints . He successfully integrated an elaborate Northern style with Renaissance harmony and monumentality. Among his best known works are Melencolia I , the Four Horsemen from his woodcut Apocalypse series, and Knight, Death, and the Devil . Other significant artists were Lucas Cranach the Elder , the Danube School and the Little Masters .

Martin Luther (1483–1546) [ edit ] Martin Luther [ 13 ] was a Protestant Reformer who criticized church practices such as selling indulgences, against which he published in his Ninety-Five Theses of 1517. Luther also translated the Bible into German, making the Christian scriptures more accessible to the general population and inspiring the standardization of the German language.

Paracelsus (1493-1541) Paracelsus was an important philosopher, physician, chemist, alchemist, theologian and scientist of the German Renaissance. His works were accepted worldwide and paved the way for Modern Science, especially chemistry and medicine.

See also [ edit ] Renaissance humanism in Northern Europe Saxon Renaissance References [ edit ] ^ Munich Residenz ^ German economic growth, 1500–1850 ,  Ulrich Pfister ^ a b Bartrum (2002) ^ Snyder, Part III, Ch. XIX on Cranach, Luther etc.

^ Snyder, Ch. XVII ^ Wood, 9 – this is the main subject of the whole book ^ Snyder, Ch. XVII, Bartrum, 1995 ^ "BBC - Dark arts: Holbein and the court of Henry VIII" .

BBC . Retrieved 2021-12-30 .

^ Snyder, Ch. XX on the Holbeins, Bartrum (1995), 221–237 on Holbein's prints, 99–129 on the Little Masters ^ Trevor-Roper, Levey ^ Snyder, 298–311 ^ Johann Gutenberg at the New Catholic Encyclopedia ^ Plass, Ewald M. (1959). "Monasticism".

What Luther Says: An Anthology . Vol. 2. St. Louis: Concordia Publishing House. p. 964.

Sources [ edit ] Bartrum, Giulia (1995); German Renaissance Prints, 1490–1550 ; British Museum Press, 1995, ISBN 0-7141-2604-7 Bartrum, Giulia (2002), Albrecht Dürer and his legacy: the graphic work of a Renaissance artist , British Museum Press, 2002, ISBN 978-0-7141-2633-3 Michael Levey , Painting at Court , Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London, 1971 Snyder, James ; Northern Renaissance Art , 1985, Harry N. Abrams, ISBN 0-13-623596-4 Trevor-Roper, Hugh ; Princes and Artists, Patronage and Ideology at Four Habsburg Courts 1517–1633 , Thames & Hudson, London, 1976, ISBN 0-500-23232-6 Wood, Christopher S.

, Albrecht Altdorfer and the Origins of Landscape , 1993, Reaktion Books, London, ISBN 0-948462-46-9 Further reading [ edit ] O'Neill, John P., ed. (1987).

The Renaissance in the North . New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art.

ISBN 0-87099-434-4 .

OCLC 893699130 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Renaissance in Germany .

v t e Renaissance General Renaissance Greek scholars in the Renaissance High Renaissance Mannerism Northern Mannerism Outline of the Renaissance Renaissance studies By field Architecture Brick Central and Eastern Europe French Italian domes Palladian Plateresque Portuguese Purism Spanish Venetian Art Early Netherlandish painting Dutch and Flemish painting Italian painting Sculpture Italian sculpture Dance Humanism France Northern Europe Latin Literature Dutch French Spanish Magic Medicine Music Philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Science Scientific Revolution Technology Theatre Warfare By region Italian Renaissance Bergamo and Brescia Ferrara Florence Lombardy Rome Papacy Sicily Urbino Venice Northern Renaissance England France Germany Saxony Weser Low Countries Poland Scotland Iberian peninsula Portugal Spain Spanish Golden Age Lists Composers Figures Humanists Structures Related Cloak and dagger Medieval renaissances Carolingian Ottonian 12th century Reenactment v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category v t e Germanic peoples Ethnolinguistic group of Northern European origin primarily identified as speakers of Germanic languages History Nordic Bronze Age Germania Pre-Roman Iron Age Roman Iron Age Romano-Germanic culture Germanic Iron Age Viking Age Early culture Architecture Art Calendar Clothing Family Festivals Folklore Proto-Germanic folklore Anglo-Saxon mythology Continental Germanic mythology Norse mythology ) Funerary practices Anglo-Saxon Norse Law Anglo-Saxon Norse Literature Anglo-Saxon Norse Names Gothic Numbers Paganism Anglo-Saxon Gothic Norse Rings Scripts Gothic alphabet Runes Sippe Symbology Warfare Anglo-Saxon Gothic and Vandal Viking Languages Germanic parent language Proto-Germanic language East Germanic languages North Germanic languages West Germanic languages Groups Alemanni Brisgavi Bucinobantes Lentienses Raetovari Adrabaecampi Angles Anglo-Saxons Ambrones Ampsivarii Angrivarii Armalausi Auiones Avarpi Baemi Baiuvarii Banochaemae Bastarnae Batavi Belgae Germani cisrhenani Atuatuci Caeroesi Condrusi Eburones Paemani Segni Morini Nervii Bateinoi Betasii Brondings Bructeri Burgundians Buri Cananefates Caritni Casuari Chaedini Chaemae Chamavi Chali Charudes Chasuarii Chattuarii Chatti Chauci Cherusci Cimbri Cobandi Corconti Cugerni Danes Dauciones Dulgubnii Favonae Firaesi Fosi Franks Ripuarian Franks Salian Franks Frisiavones Frisii Gambrivii Geats Gepids Goths Crimean Goths Greuthungi Gutones Ostrogoths Thervingi Thracian Goths Visigoths Gutes Harii Hermunduri Heruli Hilleviones Ingaevones Irminones Istvaeones Jutes Juthungi Lacringi Lemovii Lombards Heaðobards Lugii Diduni Helisii Helveconae Manimi Nahanarvali Marcomanni Marsacii Marsi Mattiaci Nemetes Njars Nuithones Osi Quadi Reudigni Rugii Rugini Saxons Semnones Sicambri Sciri Sitones Suarines Suebi Sunici Swedes Taifals Tencteri Teutons Thelir Thuringii Toxandri Treveri Triboci Tubantes Tulingi Tungri Ubii Usipetes Vagoth Vandals Hasdingi Silingi Vangiones Varisci Victohali Vidivarii Vinoviloth Warini Christianization Gothic Christianity Christianization of the Franks Christianisation of Anglo-Saxon England Christianization of Scandinavia Christianization of Iceland Category Authority control databases National United States Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐d4s4k
Cached time: 20250812013223
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.522 seconds
Real time usage: 0.717 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2139/1000000
Revision size: 19331/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 176364/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2739/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 78274/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.245/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6213314/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  481.024      1 -total
 17.56%   84.476      1 Template:Reflist
 14.04%   67.555      1 Template:Renaissance
 13.99%   67.316      7 Template:Navbox
 13.78%   66.268      1 Template:Sidebar
 13.17%   63.365      1 Template:Cite_web
 12.52%   60.210     10 Template:Main
 11.11%   53.426      1 Template:Short_description
  8.84%   42.519      1 Template:Commons_category
  8.55%   41.116      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2160116:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812013223 and revision id 1288261654. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=German_Renaissance&oldid=1288261654 " Categories : German Renaissance Northern Renaissance Cultural history of Germany 15th century in the Holy Roman Empire 15th century in Switzerland 16th century in the Holy Roman Empire 16th century in Switzerland Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from March 2019 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from November 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2015 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 May 2025, at 14:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents German Renaissance 20 languages Add topic

