Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Notable staff Toggle Notable staff subsection 1.1 Heads of department 1.2 Alumni 2 History 3 References Toggle the table of contents Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Cambridge Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°12′33″N 0°05′09″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.209208°N 0.085819°E ﻿ / 52.209208; 0.085819 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Department of the University of Cambridge Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Established 1945 ( 1945 ) Affiliation University of Cambridge Head of Department Clemens Kaminski Academic staff 29 Undergraduates 200 Postgraduates 170 Location Cambridge , United Kingdom 52°12′33″N 0°05′09″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.209208°N 0.085819°E ﻿ / 52.209208; 0.085819 Website www .ceb .cam .ac .uk The Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology (CEB) is one of the teaching and research departments at the University of Cambridge . The department trains undergraduate students and conducts original research at the interfaces between engineering, chemistry, biology and physics. It conducts research in collaboration with industrial partners. Its research programmes encompass sustainable reaction engineering, chemical product and process design, healthcare, measurement, and materials science. It conducts biotechnology research with chemical engineering at the science-engineering interface.

Notable staff [ edit ] As of 2020 [update] notable staff include [ 1 ] Sabine Bahn John Bridgwater Silvana Cardoso Howard Chase Lynn Gladden Elizabeth A. H. Hall Ross D. King Róisín Owens Heads of department [ edit ] These include heads of the former Department of Chemical Engineering and Institute of Biotechnology which merged to form the current department.

Lisa Hall [ when?

] John Dennis [ when?

] Lynn Gladden [ when?

] John Davidson [ when?

] Peter Danckwerts [ when?

] Alumni [ edit ] Former staff include: Francis Thomas Bacon History [ edit ] The old Shell building on Pembroke Street In 1945, the university received an endowment from Shell for a chemical engineering department and chair. The first Shell Professor was Terence Fox , appointed in 1946. The undergraduate Tripos course began in 1948.

Peter Danckwerts was head of department from 1959 to 1975 and then John Davidson became Shell Professor and Head of department in 1975. He held the post until 1993 when he retired.

in 2008, the Department of Chemical Engineering merged with the Institute of Biotechnology to become the Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology.

[ 2 ] Until 2017, the department's main centre of activity was the Shell building on Pembroke Street on the New Museums Site , to the south of Cambridge city centre. In 2017, the department moved over to a new building on Philippa Fawcett Drive on the West Cambridge site.

The building was officially opened by the chancellor of the university, David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville , on 24 April 2018.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ "A to Z" .

www.ceb.cam.ac.uk .

^ "We've merged! — Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology" .

www.ceb.cam.ac.uk . 22 January 2014 . Retrieved 21 May 2018 .

^ "Official opening — Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology" . University of Cambridge. 11 May 2018 . Retrieved 18 May 2018 .

v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Authority control databases ISNI Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Department_of_Chemical_Engineering_and_Biotechnology,_University_of_Cambridge&oldid=1280838109 " Categories : Biology education in the United Kingdom Biotechnology in the United Kingdom Departments of the University of Cambridge Engineering universities and colleges in the United Kingdom Institutions in the School of Technology, University of Cambridge Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Pages using infobox university with the image name parameter Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2020 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from November 2020 Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 16 March 2025, at 19:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Department of Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, University of Cambridge Add languages Add topic

