Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Worship in various religions Toggle Worship in various religions subsection 2.1 Buddhism 2.2 Christianity 2.2.1 Adoration versus veneration 2.2.2 Quaker Meeting for Worship 2.3 Hinduism 2.4 Islam 2.5 Judaism 2.5.1 Worship through mundane activities 2.6 Sikhism 2.7 Wicca 2.8 Zoroastrianism 2.9 Vaudou 3 Modern worship 4 Types 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Worship 33 languages العربية تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Bikol Central Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Frysk ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Kiswahili Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Patois Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Act of religious devotion For other uses, see Worship (disambiguation) .

Worship is an act of religious devotion usually directed towards a deity or God . For many, worship is not about an emotion, it is more about a recognition of a God. An act of worship may be performed individually, in an informal or formal group, or by a designated leader . Such acts may involve honoring .

[ clarification needed ] [ 1 ] Etymology [ edit ] The word is derived from the Old English weorþscipe , meaning to venerate "worship, honour shown to an object or deity , [ 2 ] which has been etymologised as " worthiness or worth-ship" —to give, at its simplest, worth to something.

Worship in various religions [ edit ] Buddhism [ edit ] Further information: Buddhist devotion and Puja (Buddhism) Worship in Buddhism may take innumerable forms given the doctrine of skillful means . Worship is evident in Buddhism in such forms as: guru yoga , mandala , thanka , yantra yoga , the discipline of the fighting monks of Shaolin , panchamrita , mantra recitation, tea ceremony, ganacakra , amongst others. Buddhist Devotion is an important part of the practice of most Buddhists. According to a spokesman of the Sasana Council of Burma, devotion to Buddhist spiritual practices inspires devotion to the Triple Gem.

[ 2 ] Most Buddhists use ritual in pursuit of their spiritual aspirations. In Buddhism, puja (Sanskrit and Pali: pūjā) are expressions of "honour, worship and devotional attention" [ 2 ] Acts of puja include bowing, making offerings and chanting. These devotional acts are generally performed daily at home (either in the morning or evening or both) as well as during communal festivals and Uposatha days at a temple.

Meditation ( samādhi ) is a central form of worship in Buddhism. This practice is focused on the third step of the Eightfold Path that ultimately leads to self awakening, also known as enlightenment. Meditation promotes self-awareness and exploration of the mind and spirit. Traditionally, Buddhist meditation had combined samatha (the act of stopping and calming oneself) and vipasyana (seeing clearly within) to create a complete mind and body experience. By stopping one's everyday activities and focusing on something simple, the mind can open and expand enough to reach a spiritual level. By practicing the step of vipasyana, one does not achieve the final stage of awareness, but rather approaches one step closer. Mindful meditation teaches one to stop reacting quickly to thoughts and external objects that present themselves, but rather to peacefully hold the thought without immediately responding to it. Although in traditional Buddhist faith, enlightenment is the desired end goal of meditation, it is more of a cycle in a literal sense that helps individuals better understand their minds. For example, meditation leads to understanding, leading to kindness, leading to peace, etc.

[ 3 ] Christianity [ edit ] Main articles: Christian worship , Anglican devotions , Church service , Mass in the Catholic Church , and Catholic devotions In Christianity , a church service is a formalized period of communal worship, often but not exclusively occurring on Sunday (or on Saturday in the case of those churches practicing seventh-day Sabbatarianism ). The church service is the gathering together of Christians to be taught the "Word of God" (the Holy Bible ) and encouraged in their faith . Technically, the "church" in "church service" refers to the gathering of the faithful rather than to the building in which the event takes place. In Christianity, worship is reverent honor and homage paid to God . The New Testament uses various words to express the concept of worship. The word proskuneo - "to worship" - means to bow down (to Gods or to kings).

[ 2 ] Mass is the central act of divine worship in the Catholic Church .

[ 4 ] The Congregation for Divine Worship at the Vatican publishes a Directory on Popular Piety and the Liturgy .

[ 5 ] Roman Catholic devotions are "external practices of piety" which are not part of the official liturgy of the Catholic Church but part of the popular spiritual practices of Catholics.

[ 2 ] They do not become part of liturgical worship, even if conducted in a Catholic church, in a group, in presence of a priest.

Anglican devotions is private prayers and practices used by Anglican Christians to promote spiritual growth and communion with God . Among members of the Anglican Communion , private devotional habits vary widely, depending on personal preference and on affiliation with low-church or high-church parishes .

Adoration versus veneration [ edit ] A wayside cross in Kizhi , Republic of Karelia The New Testament uses various words translatable as "worship". The word proskuneo - "to worship" - means to bow down to Gods or kings.

[ 6 ] Roman Catholicism , Anglicanism , Oriental Orthodoxy , and Eastern Orthodoxy make a technical distinction between two different concepts: adoration or latria (Latin adoratio , Greek latreia , [λατρεία] ), which is due to God alone veneration or dulia (Latin veneratio , Greek douleia [δουλεία] ), which may be lawfully offered to the saints The external acts of veneration resemble those of worship, but differ in their object and intent.  Protestant Christians, who reject the veneration of saints, question whether Catholics always maintain such a distinction in actual devotional practice, especially at the level of folk religion .

According to Mark Miravalle the English word "worship" is equivocal, in that it has been used (in Catholic writing, at any rate) to denote both adoration/ latria and veneration/ dulia , and in some cases even as a synonym for veneration as distinct from adoration: As St. Thomas Aquinas explains, adoration, which is known as latria in classical theology, is the worship and homage that is rightly offered to God alone. It is the manifestation of submission, and acknowledgement of dependence, appropriately shown towards the excellence of an uncreated divine person and to his absolute Lordship. It is the worship of the Creator that God alone deserves. Although we see in English a broader usage of the word "adoration" which may not refer to a form of worship exclusive to God—for example, when a husband says that he "adores his wife"—in general it can be maintained that adoration is the best English denotation for the worship of latria.

Veneration, known as dulia in classical theology,  the honor and reverence appropriately due to the excellence of a created person. Excellence exhibited by created beings likewise deserves recognition and honor. We see a general example of veneration in events like the awarding of academic awards for excellence in school, or the awarding of olympic medals for excellence in sports. There is nothing contrary to the proper adoration of God when we offer the appropriate honor and recognition that created persons deserve based  achievement in excellence.

We must make a further clarification regarding the use of the term "worship" in relation to the categories of adoration and veneration. Historically, schools of theology have used the term "worship" as a general term which included both adoration and veneration. They would distinguish between "worship of adoration" and "worship of veneration." The word "worship" (in a similar way to how the liturgical term "cult" is traditionally used) was not synonymous with adoration, but could be used to introduce either adoration or veneration. Hence Catholic sources will sometimes use the term "worship" not to indicate adoration, but only the worship of veneration given to Mary and the saints.

[ 7 ] Ilja Praasniekka , the Elijah Day worship on the shore of lake in Ilomantsi , Finland in July 1996 Orthodox Judaism and orthodox Sunni Islam hold that for all practical purposes veneration should be considered the same as prayer; Orthodox Judaism (arguably with the exception of some Chasidic practices), orthodox Sunni Islam, and most kinds of Protestantism forbid veneration of saints or of angels , classifying these actions as akin to idolatry .

Similarly, Jehovah's Witnesses assert that many actions classified as patriotic by Protestant groups, such as saluting a flag , count as equivalent to worship and are therefore considered idolatrous as well.

[ 8 ] Quaker Meeting for Worship [ edit ] Main articles: Meeting for worship and Quakers § Worship Quakers (the Religious Society of Friends) have both unprogrammed and programmed Meetings for Worship. Unprogrammed worship is based on silence and inward listening to the Spirit, from which any participant may share a message. In unprogrammed meetings for worship, someone speaks when that person feels that God/Spirit/the universe has given them a message for others. Programmed worship includes many elements similar to Protestant services. Many programmed meetings also include a time during the service for silent, expectant waiting and messages from the participants. During the silence, people may stand up and Minister, this is where people start talking about what they have been thinking about. It is Quaker practice to only minister once.

Hinduism [ edit ] Further information: Puja (Hinduism) , Yajna , Bhajan , fasting , and kirtan Worship in Hinduism involves invoking higher forces to assist in spiritual and material progress and is simultaneously both a science and an art. A sense of bhakti or devotional love is generally invoked. This term is probably a central one in Hinduism. A direct translation from the Sanskrit to English is problematic. Worship takes a multitude of forms depending on community groups, geography and language. There is a flavour of loving and being in love with whatever object or focus of devotion. Worship is not confined to any place of worship, it also incorporates personal reflection, art forms and group. People usually perform worship to achieve some specific end or to integrate the body, the mind and the spirit in order to help the performer evolve into a higher being.

[ 9 ] Islam [ edit ] Main article: Ibadah In Islam, Sujud (prostrations) occupy a quintessential position in the five obligatory daily formal prayers .

In Islam , worship refers to ritualistic devotion as well as actions done in accordance to Islamic law which is ordained by and pleasing to God . Worship included in the Five Pillars of Islam , primarily that of salat , which is the practice of ritual prayer five times daily.

According to Muhammad Asad , on his notes in The Message of the Qur'an translation on Q51:56 , Thus, the innermost purpose of the creation of all rational beings is their cognition of the existence of Allah and, hence, their conscious willingness to conform their own existence to whatever they may perceive of His will and plan: and it is this twofold concept of cognition and willingness that gives the deepest meaning to what the Quran describes as "worship".  As the next verse shows, this spiritual call does not arise from any supposed "need" on the part of the Creator, who is self-sufficient and infinite in His power, but is designed as an instrument for the inner development of the worshipper, who, by the act of his conscious self-surrender to the all-pervading Creative Will, may hope to come closer to an understanding of that Will and, thus closer to Allah Himself.

[ 10 ] In the Muslim world, the word worship (in the literal context of worshipping ) is forbidden to be used if it refers to an object or action and not exclusively to Allah.

[ 11 ] Judaism [ edit ] Further information: Jewish services Worship of God in Judaism is called Avodat Hashem . During the period when the Temple stood, the rites conducted there were considered the most important act of Jewish worship.

[ 12 ] However, the most common form of worship was and remains that of prayer . Other forms of worship include the conduct of prescribed rituals, such as the Passover Seder and waving the Four Species , with proper intent , as well as various types of Jewish meditation .

Worship through mundane activities [ edit ] Jewish sources also express the notion that one can perform any appropriate mundane activity as the worship of God. Examples would include returning a lost article and working to support oneself and one's family.

The Code of Jewish Law ( Orach Chayim , Chapter 231) cites Proverbs (3:6), "in all your ways, know him" ( Hebrew : בכל דרכיך דעהו ( b'chol d'rachecha dei'eihu )), as a biblical source for this idea.

Sikhism [ edit ] In Sikhism , worship takes place after the Guru Granth Sahib , which is the work of the 10 Sikh Gurus all in one. Sikhs worship God and only one God, known as "One Creator", "The Wonderful Teacher" ( Waheguru ), or "Destroyer of Darkness".

Wicca [ edit ] Wiccan worship commonly takes place during a full moon or a new moon. Such rituals are called an Esbat and may involve a magic circle which practitioners believe will contain energy and form a sacred space, or will provide them a form of magical protection.

[ 13 ] Zoroastrianism [ edit ] Prayer is one of the duties and worships of Mazdayasna , which is performed in order to always pay attention to the religious commandments and to give thanks to Ahura Mazda (God).

Vaudou [ edit ] Worship of voodoo is a cult of the spirit of the invisible world. This type of worship is inherited from ancestors of Ewe people like Adja-ewe, fon, Kotafon, Guin and Mina.   Voodoo or vaudou is a spiritual entity embodied in an objects made of clay,h ood, bronze and gold. Every January 10, Benin celebrate the Voodoo festival.

[ 14 ] Modern worship [ edit ] In modern society and sociology , some writers have commented on the ways that people no longer simply worship recognised deities, but also (or instead) worship consumer brands, [ 15 ] sports teams, and other people ( celebrities ).

[ 16 ] Sociology therefore extends this argument to suggest outside of a religion worship is a process whereby society worships itself, as a form of self-valorization and self-preservation.

[ 17 ] Types [ edit ] Ancestor worship Animal worship Idol worship Imperial cult Nature worship Pole worship See also [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Worship .

Intercession Major world religions Sacrifice - an offering of propitiation or of worship References [ edit ] ^ Fergusson, David (September 2008). "The Theology of Worship: A Reformed Perspective". In Forrester, Duncan B.

; Gay, Doug (eds.).

Worship and Liturgy in Context: Studies and Case Studies in Theology and Practice . Norwich: Hymns Ancient and Modern Ltd (published 2008). p. 71.

ISBN 9780334041689 . Retrieved 28 December 2018 .

The English term 'worship' itself derives from an Anglo-Saxon word for 'honour' ( weorthscipe ) suggesting again that worship is an action honouring one who is worthy.

^ a b c d e Bosworth and Toller, Anglo-Saxon Dictionary, " weorþscipe " ^ Maex, Edel (May 2011). "The Buddhist Roots of Mindfulness Training: A Practitioners View". Contemporary Buddhism 12 (1): 165–175. doi:10.1080/14639947.2011.564835. Retrieved 2/9/15.

^ [1] Hardon, John, Modern Catholic Dictionary ^ 'DIRECTORY ON POPULAR PIETY AND THE LITURGY: PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES ^ Called to Worship: The Biblical Foundations of Our Response Vernon Whaley - 2009 - In the Greek, the word for worship, proskuneo, means to express deep respect or adoration—by kissing, with words, or by bowing down. Associated words include epaineo , "to commend or applaud"; aineo , "to praise God"; and sebomai .

^ Miravalle, Mark (November 24, 2006).

"What Is Devotion to Mary?" .

www.motherofallpeoples.com . Mother of all peoples . Retrieved November 2, 2013 .

^ Mitchell K. Hall (2009), Vietnam War Era : People and Perspectives , ABC-CLIO, 2009, p. 97.

^ "Worship" , Krishna Maheshwari, Hindupedia, the online Hindu Encyclopedia ^ Muhammed Asad (Leopold Weiss). p918, 2003.

The Message of the Quran .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Ljakić, Zijad.

"Upotreba riječi "obožavam" " [Use of word "[I] worship"].

n-um.com (in Bosnian).

Archived from the original on 2019-09-03 . Retrieved 2019-09-03 .

^ Shmuel Safrai, Centrality of the Temple during the Second Temple period (Hebrew) ^ Living Wicca: A Further Guide for the Solitary Practitioner - Page 114, Scott Cunningham - 1993 ^ "ouidah Voodoo festival" .

kanaga-at.com .

^ Milian, Mark (May 19, 2011).

"Apple triggers 'religious' reaction in fans' brains, report says" .

Concen Forums . Retrieved September 15, 2020 – via CNN.

^ "News - The University of Sydney" .

sydney.edu.au .

^ "Emile Durkheim - The Sociology of Religion" .

www.cf.ac.uk .

v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Latvia Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐pkj79
Cached time: 20250817222440
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.629 seconds
Real time usage: 0.909 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2030/1000000
Revision size: 19492/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 222998/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2080/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 50785/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.368/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16409483/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  685.332      1 -total
 27.01%  185.109      1 Template:Religion_topics
 19.85%  136.015      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 19.82%  135.842      1 Template:Reflist
 17.30%  118.564      1 Template:Short_description
 14.43%   98.872      1 Template:Lang
 13.20%   90.468      2 Template:Cite_book
 12.20%   83.603      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.24%   35.917      1 Template:Authority_control
  4.86%   33.282      1 Template:Clarify Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:70364:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817222440 and revision id 1293781904. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Worship&oldid=1293781904 " Category : Worship Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 Bosnian-language sources (bs) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2025 Articles containing Old English (ca. 450-1100)-language text This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 16:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Worship 33 languages Add topic

