Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Queen Victoria Sea 7 languages تۆرکجه Català Cebuano Čeština فارسی עברית Kiswahili Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 81°30′N 38°00′E ﻿ / ﻿ 81.500°N 38.000°E ﻿ / 81.500; 38.000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Body of water in the Arctic Ocean Queen Victoria Sea Море королевы Виктории ( Russian ) The Queen Victoria Sea in an 1898 Franz Josef Land map showing the explorations of Frederick G. Jackson Queen Victoria Sea Location Arctic Ocean Coordinates 81°30′N 38°00′E ﻿ / ﻿ 81.500°N 38.000°E ﻿ / 81.500; 38.000 Type Sea Basin countries Norway and Russia Max. length 550 km (340 mi) Frozen Most of the year References [ 1 ] The Queen Victoria Sea ( Russian : Море королевы Виктории , Morye Korolevy Viktorii ) is a body of water in the Arctic Ocean , stretching from northeast of Svalbard to northwest Franz Josef Land . It is obstructed by ice most of the year.

This sea is named after Queen Victoria . Russian Arctic explorer Valentin Akkuratov claimed that a branch of the Gulf Stream reached as far north as the Queen Victoria Sea.

[ 2 ] Geography [ edit ] The Queen Victoria Sea is located at 81° north latitude and 38° east longitude .

[ 3 ] The Arctic Ocean farther north of the sea is frozen year round. The sea stretches as far west as the Sjuøyane in Svalbard and as far east as Rudolf Island in the Franz Josef Archipelago.

The islands of Kvitøya and Victoria Island are located at the southern limit of this Arctic sea. To the south lies the Barents Sea .

See also [ edit ] List of seas References [ edit ] ^ Geographical Dictionary of the World , p. 1510 ^ Белые призраки Арктики ^ Queen Victoria Sea: Svalbard External links [ edit ] На линии огня (in Russian) Земля Санникова (in Russian) v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category This Arctic -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Queen_Victoria_Sea&oldid=1295175048 " Categories : Marginal seas of the Arctic Ocean European seas Seas of Norway Seas of Russia Franz Josef Land Bodies of water of Svalbard Bodies of water of Arkhangelsk Oblast Arctic stubs Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Russian-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using infobox body of water without alt Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map alt Articles using infobox body of water without image bathymetry Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) All stub articles This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 05:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Queen Victoria Sea 7 languages Add topic

