Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ovoviviparity 2 Amphibians 3 Ovolarviparity 4 Criticisms and disuse 5 References Toggle the table of contents Ovoviviparity 47 languages Afrikaans العربية Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Lietuvių മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский سنڌي Српски / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Ovoviviparous ) Gestation type The characteristic quivering abdomen caused by movement of tadpoles within a pregnant female Limnonectes larvaepartus Ovoviviparity , ovovivipary , ovivipary , or aplacental viviparity is a "bridging" form of reproduction between egg-laying oviparous and live-bearing viviparous reproduction.

[ not verified in body ] Ovoviviparous animals possess embryos that develop inside eggs that remain in the mother's body until they are ready to hatch.

[ not verified in body ] The young of some ovoviviparous amphibians , such as Limnonectes larvaepartus , are born as larvae , and undergo further metamorphosis outside the body of the mother. Members of genera Nectophrynoides and Eleutherodactylus bear froglets, not only the hatching, but all the most conspicuous metamorphosis , being completed inside the body of the mother before birth.

Among insects that depend on opportunistic exploitation of transient food sources, such as many Sarcophagidae and other carrion flies, and species such as many Calliphoridae , that rely on fresh dung, and parasitoids such as tachinid flies that depend on entering the host as soon as possible, the embryos commonly develop to the first larval instar inside the mother's reproductive tract, and they hatch just before being laid or almost immediately afterwards.

Ovoviviparity [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ovoviviparous animals are those animals that are  similar to viviparous species in which there is internal fertilization and the young are born alive, but differ in that there is no placental connection and the unborn young are nourished by egg ; the mother's body does provide gas exchange .

[ citation needed ] In some species, the internally developing embryos rely solely on yolk . This is known as "yolk-sac viviparity" and is regarded as a type of lecithotrophy (no maternal provisioning). Other species exhibit matrotrophy , in which the embryo exhausts its yolk supply early in gestation and the mother provides additional nutrition. This additional provisioning may be in the form of unfertilized eggs (intrauterine oophagy ), uterine secretions ( histotrophy ) or it may be delivered through a placenta . The first two of these modes were categorized under histotroph viviparity , [ 1 ] or aplacental viviparity.

[ 2 ] Amphibians [ edit ] Further information: Modes of reproduction The young of ovoviviparous amphibians are sometimes born as larvae , and undergo metamorphosis outside the body of the mother.

Modes of reproduction include [ 3 ] based on relations between zygote and parents: Ovuliparity: external fertilisation, as in arthropods, many bony fishes, and most amphibians Oviparity: internal fertilisation, where the female lays zygotes as eggs with important vitellus (typically birds) Ovoviviparity can be thought of as a form of oviparity where the zygotes are retained in the female's body or in the male's body, but there are no trophic interactions between zygote and parents. This is found in Anguis fragilis . In seahorses , zygotes remain in the male's ventral "marsupium". In the frog Rhinoderma darwinii , the zygotes develop in the vocal sac. In the frog Rheobatrachus , zygotes develop in the stomach.

[ 4 ] Ovolarviparity [ edit ] Some insects, notably tachinid flies , are ovolarviparous, which means that the embryos develop into the first larval stage ( instar ) within the eggs while still in the female's oviduct . As a result, the larvae hatch more rapidly, sometimes immediately after egg deposition, and can begin feeding right away. A similar phenomenon is larviparity, in which larvae hatch before the female delivers them, although this may be mistakenly identified in species with very thin and transparent egg membranes.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Criticisms and disuse [ edit ] A lack of a rigidly defined term resulted in widespread misuse of the term ovoviviparity in the biological literature.

[ 7 ] Ovoviviparity has been used to describe delayed forms of egg-laying reproduction as well as live-bearing species that provide maternal nutrients but do not use a placenta.

[ 7 ] This widespread misuse of the term has led to confusion over what earlier authors meant when using the name. Modern practice has seen the disuse of ovoviviparity in favour of the more specific definitions of lecithotrophic and matrotrophic oviparity and viviparity.

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ Lodé Thierry T. 2012. Oviparity or viviparity ? That is the question. Reproductive Biology 12: 259-264 ^ Carrier, J.C.; Musick, J.A.; Heithaus, M.R., eds. (2012).

Biology of Sharks and Their Relatives . CRC Press. pp.

296– 301.

ISBN 978-1439839249 .

^ Lodé, Thierry (2001).

Les stratégies de reproduction des animaux (Reproduction strategies in animal kingdom). Eds Dunod Sciences, Paris ^ Tyler, M. J. (1994).

Australian Frogs: A Natural History.

Chapter 12, Gastric Brooding Frogs pp;135–140 Reed Books ^ Capinera, John L. (2008).

"Tachinid Flies (Diptera: Tachinidae)" .

Encyclopedia of entomology (2nd ed.). Dordrecht: Springer. pp.

3678– 3679.

ISBN 9781402062421 .

^ Wiman, Nik G.; Jones, Vincent P. (2012).

"Influence of oviposition strategy of Nemorilla pyste and Nilea erecta (Diptera: Tachinidae) on parasitoid fertility and host mortality" (PDF) .

Biological Control .

64 (3): 195– 202.

doi : 10.1016/j.biocontrol.2012.12.008 .

^ a b Blackburn, Daniel. "Discrepant use of the term 'Ovoviviparity' in the Herpetological Literature".

Herpetological Journal .

4 : 65–72.

^ Blackburn, Daniel (2015). "Evolution of Vertebrate Viviparity and Specializations for Fetal Nutrition: A Quantitative and Qualitative Analysis".

Journal of Morphology .

276 (8): 961–990.

doi : 10.1002/jmor.20272 .

PMID 24652663 .

S2CID 549574 .

v t e Human physiology of sexual reproduction Menstrual cycle Menarche Menstruation Follicular phase Ovulation Luteal phase Gametogenesis Spermatogenesis spermatogonium spermatocyte spermatid sperm Oogenesis oogonium oocyte ootid ovum Germ cell gonocyte gamete Human sexual activity Sexual arousal Sexual intercourse Masturbation Erection Penile Clitoral Orgasm Ejaculation Male Female Insemination Fertilization / Fertility Implantation Pregnancy Postpartum period Mechanics of sex Vaginal lubrication Development of the reproductive system Sexual differentiation Sexual dimorphism Feminization Virilization Puberty Gonadarche Tanner scale Pubarche Menarche Spermarche Adrenarche Maternal age / Paternal age Menopause Egg Ovum Vivipary Reproductive endocrinology and infertility Hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal axis Hypothalamic–pituitary–prolactin axis Andrology Hormone Breast Thelarche Development Lactation Breastfeeding Human reproductive system Male Female Diseases and disorders Anorgasmia Dysorgasmia Dyspareunia Erectile dysfunction Hard flaccid syndrome Premature ejaculation Vaginismus v t e Modes of reproduction Modes Oviparity Viviparity (Histotrophic, Hemotrophic) Ovoviviparity Fertilisation External fertilization Internal fertilization Parental care birds fish (mouthbrooding) humans mammals Related topics Adelphophagy Gastric-brooding frog Live-bearing aquarium fish Male pregnancy Matrotrophy Oophagy Pregnancy in fish Trophic egg v t e Eggs List of egg topics Types Bird Fish and amphibian Monotreme Fossil record Cephalopod Fish Reptile ( dinosaur ) Pathology Biology Allergy Egg cell Embryo Ichthyoplankton Oogamy Oogenesis Ootheca Ovary Oviduct Oviparity Ovoviviparity Ovulation Spawn Tooth Trophic Zygote Components Yolk White Shell and membrane Chalaza As food List of egg dishes Balut Benedict Boiled Century Coddled Custard desserts Deep fried Deviled Eggnog Egg substitutes Fried Iron Meringue Nougat Omelette Onsen tamago Poached Powdered Pickled Quiche Roe Salad Salted Sausage Scotch Scrambled Shirred Smoked Soufflé Tea In culture Balancing Carton Decorating Easter egg Egg-and-spoon race Egg drop competition Egging Fabergé egg Free range HowToBasic Humpty Dumpty Hunt Oology Oomancy Organic Organizations Ovo vegetarianism Pysanka Vegreville egg Rolling Tapping Tossing Category Commons Portals : Sharks Gastropods Snakes Frogs Amphibians Fish Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ovoviviparity&oldid=1284968425 " Categories : Eggs Viviparity Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Articles needing additional references from April 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 10 April 2025, at 21:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ovoviviparity 47 languages Add topic

