Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Contents 3 Influence 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents The Mirror of Alchimy 1 language Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Alchemical manual ascribed to Roger Bacon Title page of the 1597 edition of The Mirror of Alchimy .

The Mirror of Alchimy is a short alchemical manual, known in Latin as Speculum Alchemiae . Translated in 1597, it was only the second alchemical text printed in the English language. Long ascribed to Roger Bacon (1214-1294), the work is more likely the product of an anonymous author who wrote between the thirteenth and the fifteenth centuries.

History [ edit ] The Mirror of Alchimy is a translation of earlier works found in Latin and French. The earliest known manuscript copy is in Latin and dates from the fifteenth century. It was published as Speculum Alchemiae in Johannes Petreius ' De alchimia . This was the first alchemical compendium, and was printed in Nuremberg in 1541.

[ 1 ] The volume also included five works attributed to Geber , the works of Calid and Ortolanus , and three other texts.

Portions of De alchimia were translated into French in 1557 as Le miroir d'alquimie .

[ 2 ] The French volume was published in four parts.

Speculum Alchemiae was translated by Nicolas Bernard and appears in French at the beginning of part one. Here, Pseudo-Bacon's work is featured alongside the texts attributed to Hortulanus and Calid from the Latin edition. The series also included a second work attributed to Roger Bacon, De l'admirable puissance del'art, & de nature, ou est traicté de la pierre philosophale . Three additional works attributed to Jean de Mehun, Claude Celestin, and Pope John XXII were also incorporated.

[ 3 ] The English version of The Mirror of Alchimy was translated from the French and printed at London in 1597. Just three of the appended texts found in Le miroir d'alquimie were retained for the English book. The work was printed by Thomas Creede (fl. 1593-1617) for the publisher Richard Olive.

[ 4 ] In 1602, the Latin version of Speculum Alchemiae appeared in Volume II of the influential Theatrum Chemicum .

Contents [ edit ] On the title page the publisher describes the book as The mirror of alchimy, composed by the thrice-famous and learned fryer, Roger Bachon. Also a most excellent and learned discourse of the admirable force and efficacie of Art and Nature, written by the same Author. With certain other worthie treatises of the like argument.

In the first chapter pseudo-Bacon describes alchemy as a science teaching how to make and compound a certain medicine, which is called Elixir, the which when it is cast upon metals or imperfect bodies, does fully perfect them in the very projection . The author then goes on to describe the seven metals and the method for creating the elixir .

[ 5 ] It is a short treatise broken into seven chapters, some of which are only a paragraph long: [ 5 ] Of The Definitions Of Alchemy Of The Natural Principles, And Procreation Of Minerals Out Of What Things The Matter Of Elixir Must Be More Nearly Extracted Of The Manner Of Working, And Of Moderating, And Continuing The Fire Of The Quality Of The Vessel And Furnace Of The Accidental And Essential Colours Appearing In The Work How To Make Projection Of The Medicine Upon Any Imperfect Body The following alchemical writings are appended to Pseudo-Bacon's tract in the 1597 edition: [ 6 ] The Commentary of Hortulanus, upon the Smaragdine table of Hermes , the father of Philosophers.

The Booke of the Secrets of Alchimie, composed by Galid the sonne of Yazich.

(See: Khalid Ibn Yazid ) An excellent discourse of the admirable force and efficacie of Art and Nature, written by the famous Frier Roger Bacon.

(The connection of the historical Roger Bacon to this text is also suspect.) Influence [ edit ] The Mirror of Alchimy appeared at a time when there was an explosion of interest in Bacon, magic and alchemy in England. The evidence of this is seen in popular plays of the time such as Marlowe's Dr. Faustus (c. 1588), Greene's Friar Bacon and Friar Bungay (1589), and Jonson's The Alchemist (1610).

[ 7 ] It was one of only two alchemy books printed in English in the sixteenth century, preceded by George Ripley's The Compound of Alchymy in 1591.

[ 8 ] Alchemical texts were previously available in sixteenth century England, but only in Latin or manuscript form.

Stanton Linden writes that the description of exoteric alchemy found in this widely distributed text defined the discipline as "Corporal Science" and reinforced its longstanding association with metallurgy and goldsmithing .

[ 9 ] About this work, John Maxson Stillman wrote that "there is nothing in it that is characteristic of Roger Bacon's style or ideas, nor that distinguishes it from many unimportant alchemical lucubrations of anonymous writers of the thirteenth to the sixteenth centuries".

M. M. Pattison Muir had a similar opinion, and Edmund Oscar von Lippmann considered this text a pseudepigraph .

[ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ Tara Nummedal .

Alchemy and Authority in the Holy Roman Empire . p. 22.

^ A. C. Crombie.

Science, Art and Nature in Medieval and Modern Thought . p. 63.

^ Maggs Bros. Ltd. listing ^ Roger Bachon (1597).

The Mirror of Alchimy . p.

84 .

^ a b Roger Bachon (1597).

The Mirror of Alchimy . pp.

2 –16.

^ Roger Bachon (1597).

The Mirror of Alchimy .

^ Charles Webster.

Health, Medicine, and Mortality in the Sixteenth Century . p. 309.

^ Stanton Linden.

Darke Hierogliphicks . p. 39.

^ Stanton Linden (2003).

The Alchemy Reader . Cambridge University Press. p. 5.

^ John Maxson Stillman (2003) [1924].

Story of Alchemy and Early Chemistry . Kessinger Publishing. p. 271.

ISBN 978-0-7661-3230-6 .

Roger Bacon, The Alchemy Method ( The mirror of Alchemy ) ISBN 978-1539443964 External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: The Mirror of Alchimy The complete 1597 volume online at the Internet Archive.

Normalized text of the 1597 edition on The Alchemy Web Site.

v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Mirror_of_Alchimy&oldid=1304331892 " Categories : 1597 books Alchemical documents Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 11:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Mirror of Alchimy 1 language Add topic

