Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 Philosophy 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Notes 4.2 Bibliography 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Night-watchman state 28 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Lombard Magyar مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Government with minimal intervention "Minarchism" redirects here; not to be confused with Monarchism .

Part of a series on Libertarianism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Philosophers La Boétie Locke Franklin Burke Paine Jefferson Bentham Godwin Hodgskin Warren Emerson Stirner Spooner Proudhon Andrews Bakunin Thoreau Spencer Herbert George De Cleyre Goldman Gandhi Mises Paterson Hayek Rand Friedman (Milton) Bookchin Hess Rothbard Chomsky Nozick Machan Block Friedman (David) Van Dun Konkin Hoppe Lottieri Martín Huemer Brennan Politicians Bastiat Gladstone Acton Cleveland Coolidge Goldwater Paul Korwin-Mikke Johnson Milei Hannan Polis National variants Spain United Kingdom England United States Historical background Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Related topics Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Politics portal v t e Part of the Politics series Basic forms of government List of forms · List of countries Source of power Democracy ( rule by many ) Demarchy Direct Economic Liberal Representative Social Socialist Others Oligarchy (rule by few) Anocracy Aristocracy Broligarchy Gerontocracy Kleptocracy Kritarchy Meritocracy Noocracy Particracy Plutocracy Stratocracy Technocracy Theocracy Autocracy ( rule by one ) Despotism Dictatorship Military dictatorship Tyranny Anarchy (rule by none) Anarchism Free association Stateless Power ideology Monarchy Republic (socio-political ideologies) Absolute Communist Constitutional Directorial Legalist Parliamentary Presidential Semi-presidential Authoritarian Libertarian (socio-economic ideologies) Anarchism Colonialism Communism Despotism Distributism Fascism Feudalism Islamism Socialism Totalitarianism Tribalism Religious Secular State religion Secular state Separation of church and state State atheism Global Local (geo-cultural ideologies) City-state Intergovernmental organisation National government World government Nationalism Internationalism Globalism Power structure Unitarism Unitary state Empire Principality Client state Associated state Dependent territory Dominion Protectorate Puppet state Puppet monarch Satellite state Self-governing colony Tributary state Buffer state Vassal state Viceroyalty Federalism Confederation Devolution Federation Superstate Supranational union International relations Small power Middle power Regional power Emerging power Great power Superpower Related Administrative division Democracy indices Democratic transition Autocratization Democratisation Hybrid regimes Politics portal v t e A night-watchman state , also referred to as a minimal state or minarchy , whose proponents are known as minarchists , is a model of a state that is limited and minimal, whose functions depend on libertarian theory.

Right-libertarians support it only as an enforcer of the non-aggression principle by providing citizens with the military, the police, and courts, thereby protecting them from aggression , theft, breach of contract , fraud, and enforcing property laws .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] In the United States , this form of government is mainly associated with libertarian and objectivist political philosophy. In other countries, minarchism is also advocated by some non-anarchist libertarian socialists and other left-libertarians .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] A night-watchman state has also been popularized by Robert Nozick in Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974).

[ 6 ] The United Kingdom in the 19th century has been described by historian Charles Townshend as a standard-bearer for this form of government.

[ 7 ] Origin [ edit ] As a term, night-watchman state (German: Nachtwächterstaat ) was coined by German socialist Ferdinand Lassalle in an 1862 speech in Berlin wherein he criticized the bourgeois -liberal limited government state, comparing it to a nightwatchman . The phrase quickly caught on as a description of capitalist government, even as liberalism began to mean a more involved state, or a state with a larger sphere of responsibility.

[ 8 ] Ludwig von Mises later opined that Lassalle tried to make limited government look ridiculous though it was no more ridiculous than governments that concerned themselves with "the preparation of sauerkraut, with the manufacture of trouser buttons, or with the publication of newspapers".

[ 9 ] Proponents of the night-watchman state are minarchists , a portmanteau of minimum and -archy .

Arche ( / ˈ ɑːr k i / ; Ancient Greek : ἀρχή ) is a Greek word which came to mean "first place, power", "method of government", "empire, realm", "authorities" (in plural: ἀρχαί ), or "command".

[ 10 ] The term minarchist was coined by Samuel Edward Konkin III in 1980.

[ 11 ] Philosophy [ edit ] This section is missing information about the minarchic objections of the polycentric law (such as the non-recognition of legal orders among different providers) and the concept of the "ultra-minimal state." Additionally, the distinction between pro-voluntary funding minarchists, such as Ayn Rand and Robert Nozick , and pro-tax minarchists is not explicitly illustrated.

Please expand the section to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page .

( August 2024 ) Right-libertarian minarchists generally justify the state as a logical consequence of the non-aggression principle .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] They argue that anarcho-capitalism is impractical because it is not sufficient to enforce the non-aggression principle, as the enforcement of laws under anarchy would be open to competition.

[ 12 ] Another common objection to anarchism is that private defense and court firms would tend to represent the interests of those who pay them enough.

[ 13 ] Left-libertarian minarchists justify the state as a temporary measure on the grounds that social safety net benefits the working class. Some anarchists, such as Noam Chomsky , are in agreement with social democrats on the importance of welfare measures, but prefer using non-state methods.

[ 14 ] Left-libertarians such as Peter Hain are decentralists who do not advocate abolishing the state, [ 4 ] but do wish to limit and devolve state power, [ 5 ] stipulating that any measures favoring the wealthy be prioritized for repeal before those which benefit the poor.

[ 15 ] Some minarchists argue that a state is inevitable because anarchy is futile.

[ 16 ] Robert Nozick , who publicized the idea of a minimal state in Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974), argued that a night-watchman state provides a framework that allows for any political system that respects fundamental individual rights and therefore morally justifies the existence of a state.

[ 6 ] [ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Libertarianism portal Anarchism and anarcho-capitalism Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Big government Classical liberalism Constitutional liberalism Debates within libertarianism Objectivist movement Objectivism and libertarianism Property is theft!

Small government Taxation as theft Voluntaryism Watchman (law enforcement) References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Gregory, Anthony (May 10, 2004).

"The Minarchist's Dilemma" .

Strike the Root: A Journal of Liberty .

Archived January 12, 2020, at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved February 1, 2020.

^ a b Peikoff, Leonard (March 7, 2011).

"What role should certain specific governments play in Objectivist government?" Archived September 12, 2014, at the Wayback Machine . Peikoff.com. Retrieved January 2, 2020.

^ a b Peikoff, Leonard (October 3, 2011).

"Interview with Yaron Brook on economic issues in today's world (Part 1)" . Peikoff.com.

Archived from the original on September 12, 2014 . Retrieved January 2, 2020 .

^ a b Hain, Peter (July/August 2000).

"Rediscovering our libertarian roots" .

Chartist .

Archived June 21, 2013, at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved February 1, 2020.

^ a b Marshall, Peter (2009) [1991].

Demanding the Impossible: A History of Anarchism (POLS ed.). Oakland, California: PM Press.

p. 641 [ permanent dead link ] . "Left libertarianism can therefore range from the decentralist who wishes to limit and devolve State power, to the syndicalist who wants to abolish it altogether. It can even encompass the Fabians and the social democrats who wish to socialize the economy but who still see a limited role for the State." ISBN 978-1604860641 .

^ a b Nozick, Robert (1974).

Anarchy, State, and Utopia .

Basic Books .

ISBN 978-0465097203 .

^ Townshend, Charles (2000).

The Oxford History of Modern War . Oxford University Press. pp.

14 –15.

ISBN 0192853732 .

Britain, however, with its strong tradition of minimal government – the 'night-watchman state' – vividly illustrated the speed of the shift [during World War I] from normalcy to drastic and all-embracing wartime powers like those contained in the Defence of the Realm Act.

^ Sawer, Marian (2003).

The Ethical State?: Social Liberalism in Australia . Melbourne University Publishing.

p. 87 Archived April 21, 2023, at the Wayback Machine .

ISBN 978-0522850826 .

^ Von Mises, Ludwig (1927) [1922].

Liberalism .

p. 37 Archived April 21, 2023, at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Ἀρχή" Archy [Archy].

A Greek-English Lexicon .

Archived from the original on September 27, 2020 . Retrieved January 2, 2020 .

^ Konkin III, Samuel Edward (1980).

New Libertarian Manifesto . p. 9.

^ Long, Roderick T.; Machan, Tibor R., eds. (2008).

Anarchism/Minarchism: Is a Government Part of a Free Country?

(PDF) . Ashgate Publishing.

ISBN 978-0754660668 . Archived from the original (PDF) on November 30, 2011.

^ Holcombe, Randall G. (2004).

"Government: Unnecessary but Inevitable" (PDF) .

The Independent Review .

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 29, 2019 . Retrieved January 2, 2020 .

^ "Chomsky Replies to Multiple Questions About Anarchism" .

Z Magazine . ZCommunications. Archived from the original on September 29, 2007 . Retrieved August 19, 2011 .

Anarchists propose other measures to deal with these problems, without recourse to state authority. ... Social democrats and anarchists always agreed, fairly generally, on so-called 'welfare state measures'.

^ Richman, Sheldon (February 3, 2011).

"Libertarian Left: Free-market anti-capitalism, the unknown ideal" .

The American Conservative .

Archived June 10, 2019, at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved March 5, 2012. "[Left-libertarians] prefer that corporate privileges be repealed before the regulatory restrictions on how those privileges may be exercised." ^ Emmett, Ross B. (2011).

Frank H. Knight in Iowa City, 1919–1928 . Emerald Group Publishing.

ISBN 978-1780520087 .

^ Gordon, David (2008).

"Minimal State" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage ; Cato Institute . pp.

332– 334.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n204 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

Archived from the original on December 3, 2023 . Retrieved February 24, 2022 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Machan, Tibor R. (December 2002). "Anarchism and Minarchism. A Rapprochement".

Journal des Economists et des Estudes Humaines .

14 (4): 569–588.

Nozick, Robert (1974).

Anarchy, State, and Utopia . New York City: Basic Books.

Ostrowski, Marius S.

(2014). "Towards libertarian welfarism: protecting agency in the night-watchman state".

Journal of Political Ideologies .

13 (1): 107–128.

Wolff, Jonathan (1991).

Robert Nozick: Property, Justice, and the Minimal State . Cambridge, England: Polity Press.

External links [ edit ] "Market Anarchism as Constitutionalism" by Roderick T. Long "Chaos Theory: Two Essays on Market Anarchy" by Robert P. Murphy Robert Nozick and the Immaculate Conception of the State by Murray Rothbard v t e Libertarianism Origins Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Schools Libertarian capitalism ( Right-libertarianism ) Anarcho-capitalism Autarchism Fusionism Libertarianism bleeding-heart christian consequentialist conservative feminism geo green natural-rights neo paleo paternalism techno crypto transhumanism Libertarian authoritarianism neo-reactionary Minarchism Neo-classical liberalism Objectivism Propertarianism Voluntaryism Libertarian socialism ( Left-libertarianism ) Anarchism black collectivist communist feminism free-market agorism green individualist egoist insurrectionary libertarian communism mutualism pacifist philosophical queer social syndicalist Autonomism Communalism Guild socialism Libertarian Marxism communization mao-spontex Syndicalism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Philosophers Left-wing Bakunin Bookchin Camus Chomsky Cleyre Déjacque Fourier Godwin Goldman Guérin Hodgskin Kropotkin Marcuse Öcalan Proudhon Warren Tucker Right-wing Bastiat Block Brennan Emerson D. Friedman M. Friedman R. Friedman Goldwater Hayek Herbert Hoppe Jillette Kinsella Korwin-Mikke Lane Locke von Mises de Molinari Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Read Rothbard Simon Spencer Stossel Other George Hess Konkin de La Boétie McElroy Paine Spooner Stirner Szasz Thoreau Politicians Cleveland Coolidge Farage Gandhi Johnson Jorgensen Korwin-Mikke Milei Paul Sarwark Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Works Atlas Shrugged (1957) The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto (1973) Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973–1979) Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974) Free to Choose (1980) Related Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Outline of libertarianism v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Night-watchman_state&oldid=1300330296 " Categories : Criticism of capitalism Ferdinand Lassalle Libertarian terms Libertarian theory Libertarianism Libertarianism in the United States Minarchism Political terminology Political systems Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 uses Greek-language script (el) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from October 2020 Articles with excerpts Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles to be expanded from August 2024 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 18:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Night-watchman state 28 languages Add topic

