Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Official and unofficial case law reporting 2 Contents 3 Open publication on the Internet 4 Design and cultural references 5 History and case reporting by country Toggle History and case reporting by country subsection 5.1 Africa 5.1.1 Kenya 5.2 Asia 5.2.1 Bangladesh 5.2.2 Hong Kong 5.2.3 India 5.2.4 Pakistan 5.3 Europe 5.3.1 Ireland 5.3.2 Scotland 5.3.3 United Kingdom 5.3.3.1 England and Wales 5.3.3.2 English maritime law 5.3.3.3 Supreme Court of the United Kingdom 5.4 North America 5.4.1 Canada 5.4.2 United States 5.4.2.1 Publications 5.5 Oceania 5.5.1 Australia 5.5.2 New Zealand 6 See also 7 References 8 Source note Toggle the table of contents Law report 3 languages Dansk Deutsch Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of series of books that contain case law This article is about law reports in general. For the law report published by the Incorporated Council of Law Reporting, see Law Reports .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Law report" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The United States Reports , the official reporter of the Supreme Court of the United States A law report or reporter is a compilation of judicial opinions from a selection of case law decided by courts .

[ 1 ] These reports serve as published records of judicial decisions that are cited by lawyers and judges for their use as precedent in subsequent cases.

[ 1 ] Historically, the term "reporter" was used to refer to the individuals responsible for compiling, editing, and publishing these opinions.

[ 2 ] For example, the Reporter of Decisions of the Supreme Court of the United States is the person authorized to publish the Court's cases in the bound volumes of the United States Reports . Today, in American English , "reporter" also refers to the books themselves.

[ 3 ] In Commonwealth English , these are described by the plural term "law reports", the title that usually appears on the covers of the periodical parts and the individual volumes.

In common law jurisdictions, such as the United States, the doctrine of stare decisis ("to stand by things decided") requires courts to follow precedent by applying legal principles established in prior decisions by higher courts within the same jurisdiction.

[ 4 ] The system of precedent relies heavily on written opinions issued by appellate and supreme courts , and occasionally by trial courts, as these opinions enable judges and lawyers to reference and compare reasoning in cases involving similar factual circumstances.

[ 5 ] Official and unofficial case law reporting [ edit ] Official law reports or reporters are those authorized for publication by statute or other governmental ruling.

[ 6 ] Governments designate law reports as official to provide an authoritative, consistent, and authentic statement of a jurisdiction's primary law . Official case law publishing may be carried out by a government agency, or by a commercial entity.

Unofficial law reports, on the other hand, are not officially sanctioned and are published as a commercial enterprise. In Australia and New Zealand (see below), official reports are called authorised reports—unofficial reports are referred to as unauthorised reports.

For the publishers of unofficial reports to maintain a competitive advantage over the official ones, unofficial reports usually provide helpful research aids (e.g., summaries, indexes), like the editorial enhancements used in the West American Digest System . Some commercial publishers also provide court opinions in searchable online databases that are part of larger fee-based, online legal research systems, such as Westlaw , Lexis-Nexis or Justis.

Unofficially published court opinions are also often published before the official opinions, so lawyers and law journals must cite the unofficial report until the case comes out in the official report. But once a court opinion is officially published, case citation rules usually require a person to cite to the official reports.

Contents [ edit ] The headnote from the leading English case Wilkinson v Downton [1897] 2 QB 57.

A good printed law report in traditional form usually contains the following items: The citation reference.

The name of the case (usually the parties' names).

Catchwords (for information retrieval purposes).

The headnote (a brief summary of the case, the holding, and any significant case law considered).

A recital of the facts of the case (unless appearing in the judgment).

A note of the arguments of counsel before the judge.  (This is often omitted in modern reports.) The judgment (a verbatim transcript of the words used by the judge to explain his or her reasoning).

It is only the last item that is authoritative.  The others, although useful for its understanding, are only the law reporter's contribution.  Thus, law students are warned that the headnote is not part of the decision rendered, since headnotes occasionally contain misinterpretations of the law, and are not part of the official judgment.  (In the United States, however, the headnote, also called the syllabus, is sometimes written by the court itself, and this is noted.) Open publication on the Internet [ edit ] The development of the Internet created the opportunity for courts to publish their decisions on Web sites .  This is a relatively low cost publication method compared to paper and makes court decisions more easily available to the public (particularly important in common law countries where court decisions are major sources of law ). Because a court can post a decision on a Web site as soon as it is rendered, the need for a quickly printed case in an unofficial, commercial report becomes less crucial. However, the very ease of internet publication has raised new concerns about the ease with which internet-published decisions can be modified after publication, creating uncertainty about the validity of internet opinions.

[ 7 ] Decisions of courts from all over the world can now be found through the WorldLII Web site, and the sites of its member organizations.  These projects have been strongly encouraged by the Free Access to Law Movement .

Many law librarians and academics have commented on the changing system of legal information delivery brought about by the rapid growth of the World Wide Web . Professor Bob Berring writes that the "primacy of the old paper sets [print law reports] is fading, and a vortex of conflicting claims and products is spinning into place".

[ 8 ] In theory, court decisions posted on the Web expand access to the law beyond the specialized law library collections used primarily by lawyers and judges . The general public can more readily find court opinions online, whether posted on Web-accessible databases (such as the Hong Kong Judiciary public access site, above), or through general Web search engines .

Questions remain, however, on the need for a uniform and practical citation format for cases posted on the Web (versus the standard volume and page number used for print law reports).

[ 8 ] Furthermore, turning away from the traditional "official-commercial" print report model raises questions about the accuracy, authority, and reliability of case law found on the Web.

[ 8 ] The answer to these questions will be determined, in large part, through changing government information policies , and by the degree of influence exerted by commercial database providers on global legal information markets .

Design and cultural references [ edit ] Reports usually come in the form of sturdy hardcover books with most of the design elements on the spine (the part that a lawyer would be most interested in when searching for a case).  The volume number is usually printed in large type to make it easy to spot.

Gold leaf is traditionally used on the spine for the name of the report and for some decorative lines and bars.

In lawyer portraits and advertisements , the rows of books visible behind the lawyer are usually reports.

History and case reporting by country [ edit ] Africa [ edit ] Kenya [ edit ] Kenya's first output of law reports was in the form of volumes under the citation E.A.L.R ('"East African Law Reports'"). They were first published between 1897 and 1905. Seven of these volumes were compiled by the Hon Mr Justice R. W. Hamilton, who was then the Chief Justice of the Protectorate and the reports covered all courts of different jurisdictions.

The 1922–1956 period saw the emergence of some twenty-one volumes of the Kenya Law Reports (under the citation K.L.R). These reports included the decisions of the High Court only and were collated, compiled and edited by different puisne judges and magistrates.

Then came the period covering 1934 to 1956 which saw the birth of the famous Court of Appeal for Eastern Africa Law Reports (E.A.L.R). These reports comprised twenty-three volumes altogether which were also compiled by puisne judges and magistrates, a Registrar of the High Court and a Registrar of the Court of Appeal for Eastern Africa . These volumes reported the decisions of the then Court of Appeal for Eastern Africa and of the Privy Council. They covered only those appeals filed from the territories.

The East Africa Law Reports (cited as E.A.) were introduced in 1957 and were published in nineteen consecutive volumes until 1975. These reports covered decisions of the Court of Appeal for East Africa and the superior courts of the constituent territories, namely, Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Aden, Seychelles and Somaliland. They were published under an editorial board consisting of the Chief Justices of the Territories and the presiding judge of the Court of Appeal for Eastern Africa. Following the collapse of the East African Community, under whose auspices the reports were published, the reports went out of publication.

The period before the resumption of the East Africa Law Reports saw sporadic and transitory attempts at law reporting. Firstly, with the authority of the then Attorney-General, six volumes named the New Kenya Law Reports covering the period between and including the years 1976 to 1980 were published by the East African Publishing House . These reports included the decisions of the High Court and Court of Appeal of Kenya and were compiled by the Late Hon Mr Justice S. K. Sachdeva and were edited by Mr Paul H Niekirk and the Hon Mr Justice Richard Kuloba, a judge of the High Court of Kenya . The publication of these reports ceased when the publishing house folded them up ostensibly on account of lack of funds.

Later, two volumes of what were known as the Kenya Appeal Reports were published for the period 1982–1992 by Butterworths, a private entity, under the editorship of The Hon Chief Justice A.R.W. Hancox (hence the pseudonym "Hancox Reports") who had the assistance of an editorial board of seven persons. These reports, as their name suggested, included only the decisions of the Court of Appeal of Kenya selected over that period.

Law reports relating to special topics have also been published. Ten volumes of the Court of Review Law Reports covering the period 1953 to 1962 and including the decisions on customary law by the African Court of Review were published by the Government Printer. There was no editorial board and it is not known who the compilers of these reports were. Their apocryphal origin notwithstanding, they were commonly cited by legal practitioners and scholars.

In 1994, the Kenyan Parliament passed the National Council for Law Reporting Act, 1994 and gave the Council the exclusive mandate of:
"publication of the reports to be known as the Kenya Law Reports which shall contain judgments, rulings and opinions of the superior courts of record and also undertake such other publications as in the opinion of the Council are reasonably related to or connected with the preparation and publication of the Kenya Law Reports" (section 3 of the Act).

The Kenya Law Reports are the official law reports of the Republic of Kenya which may be cited in proceedings in all courts of Kenya (section 21 of the Act).

Asia [ edit ] Bangladesh [ edit ] In Bangladesh, the law reports are published according to the provisions of the Law Reports Act, 1875. There are many law reports now in Bangladesh. The most widely known being the Dhaka Law Report which started publication in 1949. Published monthly, the Apex Law Reports (ALR) provides timely treatment of significant developments in law through articles contributed by judges, leading scholars and practitioners. The Law Messenger [ 9 ] is an internationally standard law report which started publication in 2016. It is the first law journal in Bangladesh which specifically publishes law decisions of Supreme Court of Bangladesh, India and Pakistan only.

Mainstream Law Reports (MLR) [ 10 ] is the most-cited law journal and it ranks among the country's most-cited law reviews of any kind. Published monthly, the MLR provides timely treatment of significant developments in law through articles contributed by judges, leading scholars and practitioners. Bangladesh Legal Decisions is published under the authority of the Bangladesh Bar Council. The other law reports include Bangladesh Law Chronicles , Lawyers and Jurists , BCR , ADC , Bangladesh Legal Times and Bangladesh Law Times .

The online law report in Bangladesh is Chancery Law Chronicles , which now publishes verdicts of Supreme Court of Bangladesh.

[ 11 ] After the Supreme Court of Bangladesh was established in 1972, its online law report is Supreme Court Online Bulletin [ 12 ] and it initially published a law report, containing the judgments, orders and decisions of the Court. Another widely used law report in the country is the Bangladesh Legal Decisions which is published by the official regulator of the enrolled lawyers of the country; the Bangladesh Bar Council. Various others for example, Bangladesh Law Chronicles , Bangladesh Legal Times , Lawyers and Jurists , Counsel Law Reports , Legal Circle Law Reports , Bangladesh Legal Times , BCR , and ADC are also in operation. The decisions of the lower judiciary are not reported in any law report.

Hong Kong [ edit ] Cases of Hong Kong are predominantly published in the authorised Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal Reports (HKCFAR) and Hong Kong Law Reports and Digests (HKLRD), as well as the unauthorised but the oldest Hong Kong Cases (HKC). Some specialist series are available including the Hong Kong Family Law Reports (HKFLR), Hong Kong Public Law Reports (HKPLR) and Conveyancing and Property Reports (CPR).

Chinese-language judgments are published in the Hong Kong Chinese Law Reports and Translation (HKCLRT). The Hong Kong Law Reports and Digests were published as the Hong Kong Law Reports (HKLR) until 1997.

India [ edit ] The Supreme Court Reports (SCR) is the official reporter for Supreme Court decisions. In addition, some private reporters have been authorised to publish the Court's decisions.

[ citation needed ] Pakistan [ edit ] Pakistan inherited a common law system upon independence from Great Britain in 1947, and thus its legal system relies heavily on law reports.

The most comprehensive law book is the Pakistan Law Decisions (PLD), which contains judgments from the Supreme Court of Pakistan , the various provincial High Courts, the Service, Professional and Election Tribunals as well as the superior courts of territories such as Azad Kashmir. PLD is augmented by other books, most notably the Yearly Law Reports (YLR), and the Monthly Law Digest (MLD).

The Supreme Court also has its own law book, the Supreme Court Monthly Review (SCMR), which lists more recent cases that the court has heard.

In addition, there are books dealing with specific areas of law, such as the Civil Law Cases (CLC), which as the name suggests deals with civil cases; the Pakistan Criminal Law Journal (PCrLJ), which reports criminal cases; and the Pakistan Tax Decisions (PTD), on the Income Tax tribunal cases and their appeals.

Europe [ edit ] Ireland [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: The Irish Reports Most Irish law reports are contained in The Irish Reports (IR), published by the Incorporated Council of Law Reporting for Ireland. Other reports are contained in the Irish Law Reports Monthly (ILRM) and various online collections of court decisions.

Scotland [ edit ] The Session Cases report cases heard in the Court of Session and Scottish cases heard on appeal in the House of Lords . The Justiciary Cases report from the High Court of Justiciary . Those two series are the most authoritative and are cited in court in preference to other report series, such as the Scots Law Times , which reports sheriff court and lands tribunal cases in addition to the higher courts. The law reports service of Scotland is supplemented by other reports such as the Scottish Civil Case Reports and Green's Weekly Digest.

United Kingdom [ edit ] England and Wales [ edit ] A few volumes of the English Reports at a law library In England and Wales , beginning with the reports of cases contained in the Year Books ( Edward II to Henry VIII ) there are various sets of reports of cases decided in the higher English courts down to the present time. Until the nineteenth century, both the quality of early reports, and the extent to which the judge explained the facts of the case and his judgment, are highly variable, and the weight of the precedent may depend on the reputations of both the judge and the reporter. Such reports are now largely of academic interest, having been overtaken by statutes and later developments, but binding precedents can still be found, often most cogently expressed.

[ 13 ] In 1865, the nonprofit Incorporated Council of Law Reporting (ICLR) for England and Wales was founded, and it has gradually become the dominant publisher of reports in the UK . It has compiled most of the best available copies of pre-1866 cases into the English Reports . Post-1865 cases are contained in the ICLR's own Law Reports . Even today, the UK government does not publish an official report, but its courts have promulgated rules stating that the ICLR reports must be cited when available.

[ 14 ] Historical practice, which may still apply where no other report is available, permitted parties to rely on any report "with the name of a barrister annexed to it".

[ 15 ] English maritime law [ edit ] While maritime cases often have a contract or tort element and are reported in the standard volumes, the standard source for maritime cases is the Lloyd's Law Reports, which covers matters including maritime matters such as carriage of goods by sea , international trade law , and admiralty law .

Supreme Court of the United Kingdom [ edit ] The UK Supreme Court publishes on its own website the court's judgments after they have been handed down, together with the ICLR summary (or "headnote").

[ 16 ] North America [ edit ] Canada [ edit ] Canadian Criminal Cases law report.

Each province in Canada has an official reporter series that publishes superior court and appellate court decisions of the respective province. The federal courts, such as the Federal Court , Federal Court of Appeal , and Tax Court , each have their own reporter series. The Supreme Court of Canada has its own Reporter series, the Supreme Court Reports .

There are also general reporters, such as the long-running Dominion Law Reports , that publishes cases of national significance. Other law report series include the Canadian Criminal Cases , the Canadian Criminal Reports , the Ontario Reports and the Rapports Juridiques du Québec .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] : 29 Neutral citations are also used to identify cases.

[ 17 ] United States [ edit ] The Federal Reporter , a part of West's National Reporter System In each state of the United States , there are published reports of all cases decided by the courts having appellate jurisdiction going back to the date of their organization.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] There are also complete reports of the cases decided in the United States Supreme Court and the inferior federal courts having appellate jurisdiction since their creation under the United States Constitution .

[ 21 ] The early reporters were unofficial as they were published solely by private entrepreneurs, but in the middle of the 19th century, the U.S. Supreme Court and many state supreme courts began publishing their own official reporters.

In the 1880s, the West Publishing Company started its National Reporter System (NRS), which is a family of regional reporters, each of which collects select state court opinions from a specific group of states.

[ 19 ] [ 22 ] The National Reporter System is now the dominant unofficial reporter system in the U.S., and 21 states have discontinued their own official reporters and certified the appropriate West regional reporter as their official reporter.

[ 23 ] West and its rival, LexisNexis , both publish unofficial reporters of U.S. Supreme Court opinions.  West also publishes the West American Digest System to help lawyers find cases in its reporters.  West digests and reporters have always featured a "Key Numbering System" with a unique number for every conceivable legal topic.

Map of the U.S., showing areas covered by the Thomson West National Reporter System state law reports.

The U.S. federal government does not publish an official reporter for the federal courts at the circuit and district levels.

[ 24 ] However, just as the UK government uses the ICLR reporters by default, the U.S. courts use the unofficial West federal reporters for cases after 1880, which are the Federal Reporter (for courts of appeals) and the Federal Supplement (for district courts).

[ 25 ] For cases from federal circuit and district courts prior to 1880, U.S. courts use Federal Cases .

[ 24 ] The Federal Reporter , the Federal Supplement , and Federal Cases are all part of the NRS and include headnotes marked with West key numbers.

[ 25 ] West's NRS also includes several unofficial state-specific reporters for large states like California .

[ 22 ] The NRS now numbers well over 10,000 volumes; [ 19 ] therefore, only the largest law libraries maintain a full hard copy set in their on-site collections.

Some government agencies use (and require attorneys and agents practicing before them to cite to) certain unofficial reporters that specialize in the types of cases likely to be material to matters before the agency.  For example, for both patent and trademark practice, the United States Patent and Trademark Office requires citation to the United States Patents Quarterly (USPQ).

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Today, both Westlaw and LexisNexis also publish a variety of official and unofficial reporters covering the decisions of many federal and state administrative agencies which possess quasi-judicial powers. A recent trend in American states is for bar associations to join a consortium called Casemaker . Casemaker gives members of a state bar access to a computerized legal research system.

Publications [ edit ] Eugene Wambaugh , Study of Cases (second edition, Boston, 1894) C. C. Soule, Lawyers' Reference Manual of Law Books and Citations (Boston, 1884) Stephen Elias and Susan Levinkind, Legal Research: How To Find And Understand The Law (Berkeley: Nolo Press, 2004) Oceania [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of Law Reports in Australia .

Volumes of the Commonwealth Law Reports The Commonwealth Law Reports are the authorised reports of decision of the High Court of Australia . The Federal Court Reports are the authorised reports of decisions of the Federal Court of Australia (including the Full Court). Each state and territory has a series of authorised reports, e.g. the Victorian Reports, of decisions of the superior courts of the state or territory.

The Australian Law Reports are the largest series of unauthorised reports although there are several others general reports and reports relating to specific areas of the law, e.g. the Australian Torts Reports publish decisions from any state or federal court relating to tort law . The NSW Law Reports are published by the Council of Law Reporting for New South Wales and cover the Supreme Court of New South Wales . The Victorian Reports [ 28 ] are published by Little William Bourke [ 29 ] on behalf of the Council of Law Reporting in Victoria and cover the Supreme Court of Victoria .

New Zealand [ edit ] Main article: New Zealand Law Reports The New Zealand Law Reports (NZLR) are the authorised reports of the New Zealand Council for Law Reporting and have been published continuously since 1883. The reports publish cases of significance from the High Court , Court of Appeal and Supreme Court of New Zealand . The reports, which were initially sorted by volume, are sorted by year. Three volumes per year are now published, with the number of volumes having increased over time from one, to two and now to three. The reports do not focus on any particular area of law, with subject specific reports filling this niche. There are approximately 20 privately published report series focusing on specialist areas of law. Some areas are covered by more than one report series—such as employment, tax and family law.

See also [ edit ] Law portal All England Law Reports Atlantic Reporter European Patent Office Reports (EPOR) North Eastern Reporter North Western Reporter Pacific Reporter South Eastern Reporter Southern Reporter South Western Reporter References [ edit ] ^ a b "Law report | Common Law Cases & Judgments | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com .

Archived from the original on 24 July 2024 . Retrieved 30 November 2024 .

Law report, in common law, published record of a judicial decision that is cited by lawyers and judges for their use as precedent in subsequent cases. The report of a decision ordinarily contains the title of the case, a statement of the facts giving rise to the litigation, and its history in the courts. It then reproduces the opinion of the court and concludes with the court's judgment—affirming or reversing the judgment of the court below. The report of a modern decision is usually preceded by an analytic summary of the opinion, called a headnote, that states the points decided.

^ Friedman, Lawrence M. (2019).

A History of American Law (4th ed.). New York: Simon & Schuster. pp.

308– 310.

ISBN 9780190070915 . Retrieved 7 November 2020 .

^ Putman, William H.; Albright, Jennifer R. (2014).

Legal Research (3rd ed.). Stamford, CT: Cengage Learning. p. 138.

ISBN 9781305147188 . Retrieved 14 December 2020 .

^ Honigsberg, Peter Jan (April 2006).

Gilbert Law Summaries: Legal Research, Writing and Analysis (10th ed.). Thomson/West. p. 13.

ISBN 978-0-314-16605-0 .

In understanding precedent, you should also be aware of which courts must follow other courts' decisions on similar sets of facts. Lower courts follow only the rulings of higher courts in their jurisdictions. That is, the Texas Court of Appeals must follow legal principles laid down by the Texas Supreme Court; the Texas trial courts are bound by what the Texas Court of Appeals, the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals, and the Texas Supreme Court hold. But no Texas court is bound to follow a ruling of the Oregon Supreme Court, another state jurisdiction.

^ Honigsberg, Peter Jan (April 2006).

Gilbert Law Summaries: Legal Research, Writing and Analysis (10th ed.). Thomson/West. p. 19.

ISBN 9780314166050 .

After a federal or state appellate court or supreme court decides a case, it usually issues a written opinion explaining the decision. (Trial courts may also issue a written opinion, but usually only federal district courts do.) Our system of precedent depends upon these written opinions. In an attempt to maintain the illusion of consistency, judges need to compare their reasonings with those of other courts dealing with similar factual situations. Lawyers, too, in preparing their cases need to know how other courts have dealt with similar problems.

^ "Harvard Law School Library, One-L Dictionary , definition for 'Official Publications' " . Archived from the original on 30 April 2008 . Retrieved 2 June 2008 .

^ Liptak, Adam (24 May 2014).

"Final Word on U.S. Law Isn't: Supreme Court Keeps Editing" .

New York Times .

Archived from the original on 29 February 2016.

^ a b c Berring, Bob (Spring 1997).

"Chaos, Cyberspace and Tradition: Legal Information Transmogrified" (PDF) .

Berkeley Technology Law Journal .

12 : 189 at 200–203.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 September 2015.

.

^ "Editorial Team, Judges Name & Others" .

Archived from the original on 16 April 2017.

^ "Appellate Division Civil" .

www.mlrbd.com . Archived from the original on 6 July 2011.

^ Rahman, S.M. Saidur.

"Chancery Law Chronicles – Online Database of Bangladesh Laws" .

Archived from the original on 7 January 2010.

^ "Home : Supreme Court of Bangladesh" .

Archived from the original on 21 December 2010.

^ W. T. S. Daniel, History of the Origin of the Law Reports (London, 1884) ^ Lord Judge CJ .

"Practice Direction (Citation of Authorities) [2012] 1 WLR 780] [6]" . Archived from the original on 28 September 2015.

^ MacQueen QC, John Fraser, ed. (12 June 1863).

Speech of the Lord Chancellor on the Revision of the Law . London: W. Maxwell. p. 9.

The reports are published without any judicial control or sanction, nor is there any provision to secure correctness or security against error, but as soon as a report is published of any case with the name of a barrister annexed to it the report is accredited, and may be cited as an authority before any tribunal.

^ Court, The Supreme.

"Decided cases – The Supreme Court" .

Archived from the original on 24 June 2016.

^ a b "Case law: online resources for common law countries: Canada" . Bodleian Libraries . Retrieved 19 March 2023 .

^ Guide to Foreign and International Legal Citations law.nyu.edu ^ a b c Farnsworth, E. Allan (2010). Sheppard, Steve (ed.).

An Introduction to the Legal System of the United States (4th ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 55.

ISBN 9780199733101 .

^ Barkan, Steven M.; Bintliff, Barbara A.; Whisner, Mary (2015).

Fundamentals of Legal Research (10th ed.). St. Paul: Foundation Press. p. 81.

ISBN 978-1609300562 .

^ Barkan, Steven M.; Bintliff, Barbara A.; Whisner, Mary (2015).

Fundamentals of Legal Research (10th ed.). St. Paul: Foundation Press. pp.

64– 67.

ISBN 978-1609300562 .

^ a b Barkan, Steven M.; Bintliff, Barbara A.; Whisner, Mary (2015).

Fundamentals of Legal Research (10th ed.). St. Paul: Foundation Press. p. 83.

ISBN 978-1609300562 .

^ Barkan, Steven M.; Bintliff, Barbara A.; Whisner, Mary (2015).

Fundamentals of Legal Research (10th ed.). St. Paul: Foundation Press. p. 82.

ISBN 978-1609300562 .

^ a b Barkan, Steven M.; Bintliff, Barbara A.; Whisner, Mary (2015).

Fundamentals of Legal Research (10th ed.). St. Paul: Foundation Press. p. 67.

ISBN 978-1609300562 .

^ a b Barkan, Steven M.; Bintliff, Barbara A.; Whisner, Mary (2015).

Fundamentals of Legal Research (10th ed.). St. Paul: Foundation Press. pp.

68– 69.

ISBN 978-1609300562 .

^ Citation of authority , 37 C.F.R. § 42.12(a)(2) Archived 2007-07-13 at the Wayback Machine ^ Citation of Decisions and Office Publications , Trademark Manual of Examination Procedures  § 705.05 Archived 2008-03-24 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Victorian Reports" .

Archived from the original on 10 May 2017.

^ "Little William Bourke" . Archived from the original on 10 May 2017 . Retrieved 26 April 2018 .

Source note [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Gilman, D. C.

; Peck, H. T.; Colby, F. M., eds. (1905). "yes".

New International Encyclopedia (1st ed.). New York: Dodd, Mead.

v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐dql86
Cached time: 20250814235525
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, vary‐revision, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.629 seconds
Real time usage: 0.812 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3025/1000000
Revision size: 37650/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 95079/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1840/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 109025/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.405/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23946188/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  681.940      1 -total
 32.37%  220.737      1 Template:Reflist
 14.48%   98.716     11 Template:Cite_web
 12.95%   88.342      2 Template:Langx
 11.61%   79.178      1 Template:Law
 11.39%   77.658      1 Template:Wikisource
 11.29%   76.974      1 Template:Navbox
 11.03%   75.245      1 Template:Wikisource/outer_core
 10.61%   72.340      1 Template:Wikisource/inner_core
 10.59%   72.242     12 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1771912:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814235525 and revision id 1303587825. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Law_report&oldid=1303587825 " Categories : Case law reporters Legal research Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2024 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from August 2022 Articles containing explicitly cited British English-language text Articles containing explicitly cited American English-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2017 Wikisource templates with missing id Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating text via vb from the New International Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the New International Encyclopedia This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 21:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Law report 3 languages Add topic

