Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Provenance 2 Literature 3 Classification Toggle Classification subsection 3.1 Ancient classification 3.2 Modern classification 4 Phonology Toggle Phonology subsection 4.1 Hiatus 4.2 Ā 4.3 Ablaut 5 Post-Hellenistic 6 Notes 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Sources 8 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 8.1 Overviews 8.2 Inscriptions Toggle the table of contents Ancient Greek dialects 16 languages العربية Български Català Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Português Română Sardu Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Varieties of Ancient Greek in classical antiquity Distribution of Greek dialects in Greece in the classical period .

[ 1 ] Western group: Doric proper Northwest Doric Achaean Doric (probably Northwest Doric) Central group: Aeolic Arcado-Cypriot Eastern group: Attic Ionic Distribution of Greek dialects in Magna Graecia (Southern Italy and Sicily) in the classical period.

Western group: Doric proper Northwest Doric Achaean Doric (probably Northwest Doric) Eastern group: Attic - Ionic Ancient Greek in classical antiquity , before the development of the common Koine Greek of the Hellenistic period , was divided into several varieties .

Most of these varieties are known only from inscriptions, but a few of them, principally Aeolic , Doric , and Ionic , are also represented in the literary canon alongside the dominant Attic form of literary Greek.

Likewise, Modern Greek is divided into several dialects, most derived from Koine Greek.

Provenance [ edit ] The earliest known Greek dialect is Mycenaean Greek , the South/Eastern Greek variety attested from the Linear B tablets produced by the Mycenaean civilization of the Late Bronze Age in the late 2nd millennium BC . The classical distribution of dialects was brought about by the migrations of the early Iron Age [ note 1 ] after the collapse of the Mycenaean civilization . Some speakers of Mycenaean were displaced to Cyprus while others remained inland in Arcadia , giving rise to the Arcadocypriot dialect. This is the only dialect with a known Bronze-Age precedent. The other dialects must have preceded their attested forms but the relationship of the precedents to Mycenaean remains to be discovered.

Aeolic was spoken in three subdialects: one, Lesbian, on the island of Lesbos and the west coast of Asia Minor north of Smyrna . The other two, Boeotian and Thessalian, were spoken in the northeast of the Greek mainland (in Boeotia and Thessalia).

Doric Greek spread from a probable location in northwestern Greece to the coast of the Peloponnesus ; for example, to Sparta , to Crete and to the southernmost parts of the west coast of Asia Minor . Northwest Greek is sometimes classified as a separate dialect, and is sometimes subsumed under Doric.

Macedonian is regarded by most scholars as another Greek dialect, possibly related to Doric or NW Greek.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Ionic was mostly spoken along the west coast of Asia Minor, including Smyrna and the area to the south of it, but also in Euboea .

Homer 's Iliad and Odyssey were written in Homeric Greek (or Epic Greek), an early East Greek blending Ionic and Aeolic features.

Attic Greek , a sub- or sister-dialect of Ionic, was for centuries the language of Athens . Because Attic was adopted in Macedon before the conquests of Alexander the Great and the subsequent rise of Hellenism, it became the "standard" dialect that evolved into Koine .

Literature [ edit ] See also: Category:Ancient Greek writers by dialect Ancient Greek literature is written in literary dialects that developed from particular regional or archaic dialects. Ancient Greek authors did not necessarily write in their native dialect, but rather chose a dialect that was suitable or traditional for the type of literature they were writing (see belles-lettres ).

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] All dialects have poetry written in them, but only Attic and Ionic have full works of prose attested.

Homeric Greek is used in the first epic poems , the Iliad and the Odyssey , and the Homeric Hymns , traditionally attributed to Homer and written in dactylic hexameter . Homeric is a literary dialect with elements of Ionic, Aeolic and Arcadocypriot.

Hesiod uses a similar dialect, and later writers imitate Homer in their epics, such as Apollonius Rhodius in Argonautica and Nonnus in Dionysiaca .

[ 12 ] Homer influenced other types of poetry as well.

Ionic proper is first used in Archilochus of Paros. This dialect includes also the earliest Greek prose, that of Heraclitus and Ionic philosophers, Hecataeus and logographers , Herodotus , Democritus , and Hippocrates .

Elegiac poetry originated in Ionia and always continued to be written in Ionic .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Doric is the conventional dialect of choral lyric poetry, which includes the Laconian Alcman , the Theban Pindar and the choral songs of Attic tragedy ( stasima ). Several lyric and epigrammatic poets wrote in this dialect, such as Ibycus of Rhegium and Leonidas of Tarentum . The following authors wrote in Doric, preserved in fragments: Epicharmus comic poet and writers of South Italian Comedy ( phlyax play ), Mithaecus food writer and Archimedes .

Aeolic is an exclusively poetic lyric dialect, represented by Sappho and Alcaeus for Lesbian (Aeolic) and Corinna of Tanagra for Boeotian.

Thessalic (Aeolic), Northwest Doric, Arcadocypriot , and Pamphylian never became literary dialects and are only known from inscriptions, and to some extent by the comical parodies of Aristophanes and lexicographers.

Attic proper was used by the Attic orators , Lysias , Isocrates , Aeschines and Demosthenes , the philosophers Plato and Aristotle and the historian Xenophon .

Thucydides wrote in Old Attic. The tragic playwrights Aeschylus , Sophocles , and Euripides wrote in an artificial poetic language, [ 15 ] and the comic playwright Aristophanes wrote in a language with vernacular elements.

Classification [ edit ] Ancient classification [ edit ] The ancients classified the language into three gene or four dialects: Ionic proper, Ionic (Attic), Aeolic, Doric and later a fifth one, Koine .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Grammarians focus mainly on the literary dialects and isolated words. Historians may classify dialects on mythological/historical reasons rather than linguistic knowledge. According to Strabo, "Ionic is the same as Attic and Aeolic the same as Doric – Outside the Isthmus, all Greeks were Aeolians except the Athenians, the Megarians and the Dorians who live about Parnassus – In the Peloponnese, Achaeans were also Aeolians but only Eleans and Arcadians continued to speak Aeolic".

[ 18 ] However, for most ancients, Aeolic was synonymous with literary Lesbic.

[ 19 ] Stephanus of Byzantium characterized Boeotian as Aeolic and Aetolian as Doric.

[ 20 ] Remarkable is the ignorance of sources, except lexicographers, on Arcadian, Cypriot and Pamphylian.

Finally, unlike Modern Greek [ 21 ] and English, Ancient Greek common terms for human speech ( 'glôssa', [ 22 ] 'dialektos', [ 23 ] 'phônê' [ 24 ] and the suffix '-isti' ) may be attributed interchangeably to both a dialect and a language . However, the plural 'dialektoi' is used when dialects and peculiar words are compared and listed by the grammarians under the terms 'lexeis' [ 25 ] or 'glôssai'.

[ 26 ] Modern classification [ edit ] The dialects of classical antiquity are grouped slightly differently by various authorities.

Pamphylian is a marginal dialect of Asia Minor and is sometimes left uncategorized. Mycenaean was deciphered only in 1952 and so is missing from the earlier schemes presented here: Northwestern, Southeastern Ernst Risch, Museum Helveticum (1955): Northern Greek Doric /Northwestern Greek Aeolic Pamphylian ?

Southern Greek Ionic – Arcadocypriot – Mycenaean Alfred Heubeck: Northwestern group Doric / North-Western Greek Aeolic ?

Ancient Macedonian ?

Southeastern group Ionic – Attic Arcadocypriot Western, Central, Eastern A. Thumb, E. Kieckers, Handbuch der griechischen Dialekte (1932): Western Greek Doric dialects dialect of Achaea dialect of Elis Northwestern Greek Central Greek Aeolic Boiotic Thessalic Lesbic Arcadocypriot Eastern Greek Ionic Attic Pamphylian W. Porzig, Die Gliederung des indogermanischen Sprachgebiets (1954): Western Greek Northwestern Greek Doric Aeolic Eastern Greek Ionic – Attic Arcadocypriot East Greek West Greek C.D. Buck , The Greek Dialects (1955): [ note 2 ] East Greek The Attic – Ionic Group Attic Ionic East Ionic Central Ionic West Ionic or Euboean The Arcadocypriot Group Arcadian Cypriot Pamphylian The Aeolic Group Lesbian Thessalian Boeotian West Greek The Northwestern Greek Group Phocian (including Delphian) Locrian Elean The Northwest Greek koine The Doric Group Laconian and Heraclean Messenian Megarian Corinthian Argolic Rhodian Coan Theran and Cyrenaean Cretan Sicilian Doric A historical overview of how the dialects were classified in different points in time can be found in Van Rooy (2020).

[ 27 ] Phonology [ edit ] The Ancient Greek dialects differed mainly in vowels .

Hiatus [ edit ] Loss of intervocalic s and consonantal i and w from Proto-Greek brought two vowels together in hiatus , a circumstance often called a "collision of vowels".

[ note 3 ] Over time, Greek speakers would change pronunciation to avoid such a collision, and the way that vowels changed determined the dialect.

For example, the word for the "god of the sea" (regardless of the culture and language from which it came) was in some prehistoric form *poseidāwōn ( genitive *poseidāwonos ). Loss of the intervocalic * w left poseidāōn , which is seen in both Mycenaean and Homeric dialects. Ionic Greek changed the * a to an e ( poseideōn ), while Attic Greek contracted it to poseidōn . It changed differently in other dialects: [ citation needed ] Corinthian: potedāwoni > potedāni and potedān Boeotian: poteidāoni Cretan, Rhodian and Delphian: poteidān Lesbian: poseidān Arcadian: posoidānos Laconian: pohoidān The changes appear designed to place one vowel phoneme instead of two, a process called "contraction", if a third phoneme is created, and "hyphaeresis" ("taking away") if one phoneme is dropped and the other kept. Sometimes, the two phonemes are kept, sometimes modified, as in the Ionic poseideōn .

Ā [ edit ] A vowel shift differentiating the Ionic and Attic dialects from the rest was the shift of ā ( ᾱ ) to ē ( η ). In Ionic, the change occurred in all positions, but in Attic, it occurred almost everywhere except after e , i , and r ( ε, ι, ρ ).

Homeric Greek shows the Ionic rather than the Attic version of the vowel shift for the most part. Doric and Aeolic show the original forms with ā ( ᾱ ).

[ 28 ] Attic and Ionic mḗtēr ( μήτηρ ); Doric mā́tēr ( μᾱ́τηρ ) "mother" [ 29 ] (compare Latin māter ) Attic neāníās ( νεᾱνίᾱς ); Ionic neēníēs ( νεηνίης ) "young man" [ 30 ] Ablaut [ edit ] Another principle of vocalic dialectization follows the Indo-European ablaut series or vowel grades. The Proto-Indo-European language could interchange e (e-grade) with o (o-grade) or use neither (zero-grade). Similarly, Greek inherited the series, for example, ei , oi , i , which are e-, o- and zero-grades of the diphthong respectively. They could appear in different verb forms – present leípō ( λείπω ) "I leave", perfect léloipa ( λέλοιπα ) "I have left", aorist élipon ( ἔλιπον ) "I left" – or be used as the basis of dialectization: Attic deíknȳmi ( δείκνῡμι ) "I point out" but Cretan díknūmi ( δίκνῡμι ).

Post-Hellenistic [ edit ] Main article: Varieties of Modern Greek The ancient Greek dialects were a result of isolation and poor communication between communities living in broken terrain. All general Greek historians point out the influence of terrain on the development of the city-states. Often, the development of languages dialectization results in the dissimilation of daughter languages. That phase did not occur in Greek; instead the dialects were replaced by Standard Greek.

Increasing population and communication brought speakers more closely in touch and united them under the same authorities. Attic Greek became the literary language everywhere. Buck says: [ 31 ] "… long after Attic had become the norm of literary prose, each state employed its own dialect, both in private and public monuments of internal concern, and in those of a more… interstate character, such as… treaties…." In the last few centuries BC, regional dialects replaced local ones: Northwest Greek koine, Doric koine and Attic koine. The last came to replace the others in common speech in the first few centuries AD. After the division of the Roman Empire the earliest Modern Greek prevailed, although a version of Attic Greek was still exclusively taught in schools and served as the official language of the state until the early 20th century.

[ 32 ] The dialect distribution was then as follows: Attic Greek Koiné Byzantine Greek language Modern Greek Demotic Greek Katharevousa Yevanic Cypriot Greek Cretan Greek Southern Italian Greek ( Griko and Calabrian/Bovesian ), retaining some Doric elements Pontic Greek , retaining some Ionic elements Cappadocian Greek Romano-Greek Doric Greek Doric Koiné Tsakonian According to some scholars, Tsakonian is the only modern Greek dialect that descends from Doric, albeit with some influence from the Koine.

[ 33 ] Others include the Southern Italian dialects in this group, though perhaps they should rather be regarded as descended from the local Doric-influenced variant of the Koine.

[ 34 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Sometimes called the Greek Dark Ages because writing disappeared from Greece until the adaptation of the Phoenician alphabet.

^ First published in 1928, it was revised and expanded by Buck and republished in 1955, the year of his death. Of the new edition Buck said (Preface): this is virtually a new book." There have been other impressions, but no further changes to the text. The 1955 edition was at the time and to some degree still is the standard text on the subject in the United States. This part of the table is based on the Introduction to the 1955 edition. An example of a modern use of this classification can be found at columbia.edu as Richard C. Carrier's The Major Greek Dialects Archived October 6, 2006, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Two vowels together are not to be confused with a diphthong , which is two vowel sounds within the same syllable, often spelled with two letters. Greek diphthongs were typically inherited from Proto-Indo-European.

References [ edit ] ^ Roger D. Woodard (2008), "Greek dialects", in: The Ancient Languages of Europe , ed. R. D. Woodard, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 51.

^ Masson, Olivier (2003) [1996]. "[Ancient] Macedonian language". In Hornblower, S.; Spawforth A. (eds.).

The Oxford Classical Dictionary (revised 3rd ed.). US: Oxford University Press. pp.

905– 906.

ISBN 0-19-860641-9 .

^ Hammond, N.G.L (1993) [1989].

The Macedonian State. Origins, Institutions and History (reprint ed.). US: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-814927-1 .

^ Meier-Brügger, Michael ; Fritz, Matthias ; Mayrhofer, Manfred (2003).

Indo-European Linguistics . Walter de Gruyter. p. 28.

ISBN 978-3-11-017433-5 .

^ Roisman, Worthington, 2010, "A Companion to Ancient Macedonia", Chapter 5: Johannes Engels, "Macedonians and Greeks", p. 95: "This (i.e.

Pella curse tablet ) has been judged to be the most important ancient testimony to substantiate that Macedonian was a north-western Greek and mainly a Doric dialect".

^ "[W]e may tentatively conclude that Macedonian is a dialect related to North-West Greek.", Olivier Masson , French linguist, “Oxford Classical Dictionary: Macedonian Language”, 1996.

^ Masson & Dubois 2000 , p. 292: "..."Macedonian Language" de l ' Oxford Classical Dictionary , 1996, p. 906: "Macedonian may be seen as a Greek dialect, characterized by its marginal position and by local pronunciation (like Βερενίκα for Φερενίκα etc.)." ^ Hatzopoulos, Miltiades B. (2017).

"Recent Research in the Ancient Macedonian Dialect: Consolidation and New Perspectives" . In Giannakis, Georgios K.; Crespo, Emilio; Filos, Panagiotis (eds.).

Studies in Ancient Greek Dialects: From Central Greece to the Black Sea . Walter de Gruyter. p. 299.

ISBN 978-3-11-053081-0 .

^ Crespo, Emilio (2017). "The Softening of Obstruent Consonants in the Macedonian Dialect". In Giannakis, Georgios K.; Crespo, Emilio; Filos, Panagiotis (eds.).

Studies in Ancient Greek Dialects: From Central Greece to the Black Sea . Walter de Gruyter. p. 329.

ISBN 978-3-11-053081-0 .

^ Greek mythology and poetics By Gregory Nagy. Page 51] ISBN 978-0-8014-8048-5 (1992) ^ Sihler, Andrew Littleton (1995).

New Comparative Grammar of Greek and Latin . New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

10– 12.

ISBN 0-19-508345-8 .

^ Homer and the epic: a shortened version of The songs of Homer By Geoffrey Stephen Kirk Page 76 (1965) ^ A History of Greek Literature: From the Earliest Period to the Death of Demosthenes by Frank Byron Jevons (1894) Page 112 ^ A History of Classical Greek Literature: Volume 2. The Prose Writers (Paperback)
by John Pentland Mahaffy Page 194 ISBN 1-4021-7041-6 ^ Euripides (2008). Allan, William (ed.).

Helen . Cambridge University Press. p. 43.

ISBN 978-0-521-54541-9 .

^ New Documents Illustrating Early Christianity: Volume 5, Linguistic Essays With Cumulative Indexes to Vols. 1–5 Page 30 ISBN 0-8028-4517-7 (2001) ^ History Of The Language Sciences By Sylvain Auroux Page 440 ISBN 3-11-016736-0 (2000) ^ Strabo 8.1.2 14.5.26 ^ Mendez Dosuna, The Aeolic dialects [ full citation needed ] ^ Stephanus of Byzantium , Ethnika s.v. Ionia ^ glossa: language, dialektos: dialect, foní : voice ^ LSJ glôssa Archived December 2, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ LSJ : dialektos Archived December 2, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ LSJ phônê Archived December 2, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ LSJ lexis Archived December 2, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ Ataktoi Glôssai (Disorderly Words) by Philitas of Cos ^ Van Rooy R (2020).

Greece's labyrinth of language (pdf) . Berlin: Language Science Press.

doi : 10.5281/zenodo.3478142 .

ISBN 978-3-96110-211-2 .

^ Smyth , Greek Grammar , paragraph 30 on CCEL : vowel change involving ē , ā ^ μήτηρ ^ νεᾱνίας ^ Greek Dialects [ page needed ] ^ Mackridge, Peter. (2009).

Language and national identity in Greece, 1766–1976 . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-921442-6 .

OCLC 244417437 .

^ Medieval and modern Greek By Robert Browning Page 124 ISBN 0-521-29978-0 (1983) ^ Browning, ibid.

Sources [ edit ] Masson, Olivier; Dubois, Laurent (2000).

Onomastica Graeca Selecta . Geneva, Switzerland: Librairie Droz.

ISBN 2-600-00435-1 .

Further reading [ edit ] Library resources about Ancient Greek dialects Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Bakker, Egbert J., ed. 2010.

A companion to the Ancient Greek language.

Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

Beek, Lucien van [ nl ] .

The Reflexes of Syllabic Liquids in Ancient Greek: Linguistic Prehistory of the Greek Dialects and Homeric Kunstsprache . Brill, 2022.

http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1163/j.ctv29sfq2v .

Blažek, Václav. " Glottochronological analysis of the Greek lexicon: Modern, Tsakonian, Old and Mycenaean Greek ". In: Graeco-Latina Brunensia . 2010, vol. 15, iss. 1, pp. [17]-35.

ISSN 1803-7402 ; ISSN 2336-4424 .

Buck, Carl Darling (2001).

The Greek Dialects . London: Bristol Classical Press.

ISBN 1853995568 .

Christidis, Anastasios-Phoivos, ed. 2007.

A history of Ancient Greek: From the beginnings to Late Antiquity.

Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Colvin, Stephen C. 2007.

A historical Greek reader: Mycenaean to the koiné.

Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Horrocks, Geoffrey. 2010.

Greek: A history of the language and its speakers.

2nd ed. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

Mouzala, Melina G. (2023).

Ancient Greek dialect and its reception . Berlin: De Gruyter.

ISBN 9783110744064 .

Palmer, Leonard R. 1980.

The Greek language.

London: Faber & Faber.

Skelton, Christina Michelle. "Borrowing, Character Weighting, and Preliminary Cluster Analysis in a Phylogenetic Analysis of the Ancient Greek Dialects". In: Indo-European Linguistics 3, 1 (2015): 84–117. doi: https://doi.org/10.1163/22125892-00301003 Overviews [ edit ] Griechische Dialekte und ihre Verteilung , Titus site, in German. List, map, table of features.

Dialects of Greek , Kelley L. Ross. Map and brief description.

Excerpts from Margalit Finkelburg, "Greeks and Pre-Greeks: Aegean Prehistory and Greek Heroic Tradition" (PDF) .

(162 KiB ) . One of the topics is the origin of the dialects.

Inscriptions [ edit ] Searchable Greek Inscriptions . A considerable corpus of ancient Greek inscriptions in various dialects published by The Packard Humanities Institute.

Inscriptions Listed by Region , Centre for the Study of Ancient Documents site.

v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Greek language Origin and genealogy Graeco-Aryan Graeco-Armenian Pre-Greek substrate Graeco-Phrygian Hellenic languages Periods Proto-Greek ( c.

2900 –1600 BC) Mycenaean Greek ( c.

1600 –1100 BC) Ancient Greek ( c.

800 –300 BC) Koine Greek ( c.

300 BC –AD 330) Medieval Greek ( c.

330 –1453) Modern Greek (since 1453) Varieties Ancient Central Aeolic Mycenaean Arcadocypriot East Attic Ionic Homeric West Doric Northwest Achaean Epirote Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Hellenistic Koine Jewish Koine Greek Modern Demotic Katharevousa Cappadocian Misthiotika Cretan Cypriot Himariote Constantinople Italiot Greco/Calabrian Griko/Apulian Maniot Mariupolitan Pontic Romano-Greek Tsakonian Yevanic Greco-Australian Phonology Ancient ( accent / teaching ) Koine Standard Modern Grammar Ancient Koine Standard Modern Writing systems Cypriot syllabary Linear B Greek alphabet History Archaic forms Attic numerals Greek numerals Orthography Diacritics Braille Cyrillization and Romanization Greeklish Literature Ancient Byzantine Modern Promotion and study Hellenic Foundation for Culture Center for the Greek Language Institute for Language and Speech Processing Other Eteocretan language Eteocypriot language Greek language question Morphemes in English Terms of endearment Place names Proverbs Minoan language Greek Language Day Trojan language Comparison of Ancient Greek dictionaries Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ancient_Greek_dialects&oldid=1305357174 " Categories : Varieties of Ancient Greek Iron Age Greece Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from December 2023 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2011 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2010 This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 15:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ancient Greek dialects 16 languages Add topic

