Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and politics Toggle Life and politics subsection 1.1 Pre-Marxist period 1.2 Pivot to communism 1.3 Communist leader 1.4 Under Stalin and Rákosi 1.5 De-Stalinisation 2 Work Toggle Work subsection 2.1 History and Class Consciousness 2.1.1 What is Orthodox Marxism?

2.1.2 Reification and the Consciousness of the Proletariat 2.2 Literary and aesthetic work 2.2.1 Critical and socialist realism 2.3 Ontology of social being 3 Bibliography 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Sources 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents György Lukács 55 languages العربية বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt 文言 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hungarian philosopher and critic (1885–1971) This article is about the philosopher. For the politician, see György Lukács (politician) .

The native form of this personal name is Lukács György . This article uses Western name order when mentioning individuals.

György Lukács Lukács in 1952 Born Bernát György Löwinger ( 1885-04-13 ) 13 April 1885 Budapest , Austria-Hungary Died 4 June 1971 (1971-06-04) (aged 86) Budapest, Hungarian People's Republic Spouses Jelena Grabenko Gertrúd Jánosi  ( née Bortstieber ) Awards Order of the Red Banner (1969) [ 5 ] Education Education Royal Hungarian University of Kolozsvár ( Dr. rer. oec.

) University of Berlin University of Budapest ( PhD ) Thesis A drámaírás főbb irányai a múlt század utolsó negyedében (The Main Directions of Drama-Writing in the Last Quarter of the Past Century) (1909) Doctoral advisor Zsolt Beöthy (PhD advisor) Other advisors Georg Simmel Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental philosophy Neo-Kantianism [ 2 ] (1906–1918) Western Marxism / Hegelian Marxism (after 1918) [ 3 ] Budapest School Institutions University of Budapest [ 1 ] Doctoral students István Mészáros , Ágnes Heller Notable students György Márkus Main interests Political philosophy , social theory , literary theory , aesthetics , Marxist humanism Notable ideas Reification , class consciousness , transcendental homelessness , the genre of tragedy as an ethical category [ 4 ] György Lukács [ a ] (born Bernát György Löwinger ; [ b ] Hungarian : Szegedi Lukács György ; German : Georg Bernard Lukács ; [ c ] 13 April 1885 – 4 June 1971) was a Hungarian Marxist philosopher , literary historian , literary critic , and aesthetician .

[ 8 ] He was one of the founders of Western Marxism , an interpretive tradition that departed from the Soviet Marxist ideological orthodoxy. He developed the theory of reification , and contributed to Marxist theory with developments of Karl Marx 's theory of class consciousness . He was also a philosopher of Leninism . He ideologically developed and organised Vladimir Lenin 's pragmatic revolutionary practices into the formal philosophy of vanguard-party revolution .

Lukács was especially influential as a critic due to his theoretical developments of literary realism and of the novel as a literary genre . In 1919, he was appointed the Hungarian Minister of Culture of the government of the short-lived Hungarian Soviet Republic (March–August 1919).

[ 9 ] Lukács has been described as the preeminent Marxist intellectual of the Stalinist era, though assessing his legacy can be difficult as Lukács seemed both to support Stalinism as the embodiment of Marxist thought, and yet also to champion a return to pre-Stalinist Marxism.

[ 10 ] Life and politics [ edit ] Lukács was born Bernát György Löwinger in Budapest , Austria-Hungary , to the investment banker József Löwinger (later Szegedi Lukács József; 1855–1928) and his wife Adele Wertheimer (Wertheimer Adél; 1860–1917), who were a wealthy Jewish family. He had a brother and sister. He and his family converted to Lutheranism in 1907.

[ 11 ] His father was knighted by the empire and received a baronial title, making Lukács a baron as well through inheritance.

[ 12 ] As a writer, he published under the names Georg Lukács and György Lukács. Lukács participated in intellectual circles in Budapest , Berlin , Florence and Heidelberg .

[ 3 ] He received his doctorate in economic and political sciences ( Dr. rer. oec.

) in 1906 from the Royal Hungarian University of Kolozsvár .

[ 13 ] In 1909, he completed his doctorate in philosophy at the University of Budapest under the direction of Zsolt Beöthy .

[ 14 ] Pre-Marxist period [ edit ] Whilst at university in Budapest, Lukács was part of socialist intellectual circles through which he met Ervin Szabó , an anarcho-syndicalist who introduced him to the works of Georges Sorel (1847–1922), the French proponent of revolutionary syndicalism .

[ 15 ] In that period, Lukács's intellectual perspectives were modernist and anti-positivist . From 1904 to 1908, he was part of a theatre troupe that produced modernist , psychologically realistic plays by Henrik Ibsen , August Strindberg , and Gerhart Hauptmann .

[ 16 ] Between 1906 and 1909 while in his early twenties, he worked on his 1,000 page A modern dráma fejlődésének története ( English: History of the Development of the Modern Drama ).

[ 17 ] It was published in Hungary in 1911.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] He was dismayed when it won a prize in 1908 because he did not think the jury was fit to judge it.

[ 20 ] Lukács spent much time in Germany, and studied at the University of Berlin from 1906 to 1907, during which time he made the acquaintance of the philosopher Georg Simmel .

[ 16 ] Later in 1913 whilst in Heidelberg, he befriended Max Weber , Emil Lask , Ernst Bloch , and Stefan George .

[ 16 ] The idealist system to which Lukács subscribed at this time was intellectually indebted to neo-Kantianism (then the dominant philosophy in German universities) [ 16 ] and to Plato , Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel , Søren Kierkegaard , Wilhelm Dilthey , and Fyodor Dostoyevsky . In that period, he published Soul and Form ( Die Seele und die Formen , Berlin, 1911; tr. 1974) and The Theory of the Novel (1916/1920; tr. 1971).

[ 9 ] After the beginning of the First World War , Lukács was exempted from military service.

[ 3 ] In 1914, he married the Russian political activist Jelena Grabenko.

[ 3 ] In 1915, Lukács returned to Budapest, where he was the leader of the " Sunday Circle ", an intellectual salon . Its concerns were the cultural themes that arose from the existential works of Dostoyevsky, which thematically aligned with Lukács's interests in his last years at Heidelberg. As a salon, the Sunday Circle sponsored cultural events whose participants included literary and musical avant-garde figures, such as Karl Mannheim , the composer Béla Bartók , Béla Balázs , Arnold Hauser , Zoltán Kodály and Karl Polanyi ; [ 21 ] some of them also attended the weekly salons. In 1918, the last year of the First World War (1914–1918), the Sunday Circle became divided. They dissolved the salon because of their divergent politics; several of the leading members accompanied Lukács into the Communist Party of Hungary .

[ 3 ] Pivot to communism [ edit ] In the aftermath of the First World War and the Russian Revolution of 1917 , Lukács rethought his ideas. He became a committed Marxist in this period and joined the fledgling Communist Party of Hungary in 1918.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Up until at least September 1918, he had intended to emigrate to Germany, but after being rejected from a habilitation in Heidelberg, he wrote on 16 December that he had already decided to pursue a political career in Hungary instead.

[ 22 ] Lukács later wrote that he was persuaded to this course by Béla Kun .

[ 22 ] The last publication of Lukács' pre-Marxist period was "Bolshevism as a Moral Problem", a rejection of Bolshevism on ethical grounds that he apparently reversed within days.

[ 23 ] Communist leader [ edit ] György Lukács in 1917 Lukács in 1919 As part of the government of the short-lived Hungarian Soviet Republic , Lukács was made People's Commissar for Education and Culture (he was deputy to the Commissar for Education Zsigmond Kunfi ).

[ 24 ] It is said by József Nádass that Lukács was giving a lecture entitled "Old Culture and New Culture" to a packed hall when the republic was proclaimed, which was interrupted due to the revolution.

[ 25 ] During the Hungarian Soviet Republic , Lukács was a theoretician of the Hungarian version of the red terror .

[ 26 ] In an article in the Népszava , 15 April 1919, he wrote that "The possession of the power of the state is also a moment for the destruction of the oppressing classes. A moment, we have to use".

[ 27 ] Lukács later became a commissar of the Fifth Division of the Hungarian Red Army , in which capacity he ordered the execution of eight of his own soldiers in Poroszló , in May 1919, which he later admitted in an interview.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] After the Hungarian Soviet Republic was defeated, Lukács was ordered by Kun to remain behind with Ottó Korvin , when the rest of the leadership evacuated. Lukács and Korvin's mission was to clandestinely reorganize the communist movement, but this proved to be impossible. Lukács went into hiding, with the help of photographer Olga Máté . After Korvin's capture in 1919, Lukács fled from Hungary to Vienna. He was arrested but was saved from extradition due to a group of writers including Thomas and Heinrich Mann .

[ 31 ] Thomas Mann later based the character Naphta on Lukács in his novel The Magic Mountain .

[ 32 ] He married his second wife, Gertrúd Bortstieber in 1919 in Vienna, a fellow member of the Hungarian Communist Party .

[ 25 ] [ 3 ] Around the 1920s, while Antonio Gramsci was also in Vienna, though they did not meet each other, [ 33 ] Lukács met a fellow communist, Victor Serge , and began to develop Leninist ideas in the field of philosophy.

[ 34 ] His major works in this period were the essays collected in his magnum opus History and Class Consciousness ( Geschichte und Klassenbewußtsein , Berlin, 1923). Although these essays display signs [ 35 ] [ d ] of what Vladimir Lenin referred to as " left communism " [ 38 ] (with later Leninists calling it " ultra-leftism "), they provided Leninism with a substantive philosophical basis. In July 1924, Grigory Zinoviev attacked this book along with the work of Karl Korsch at the Fifth Comintern Congress.

[ 39 ] In 1925, shortly after Lenin's death, Lukács published in Vienna the short study Lenin: A Study in the Unity of His Thought ( Lenin: Studie über den Zusammenhang seiner Gedanken ). In 1925, he published a critical review of Nikolai Bukharin 's manual of historical materialism .

[ 40 ] As a Hungarian exile, he remained active on the left wing of the Hungarian Communist Party, and was opposed to the Moscow-backed programme of Béla Kun . His "Blum theses" of 1928 called for the overthrow of the counter-revolutionary regime of Admiral Horthy in Hungary by a strategy similar to the Popular Fronts that arose in the 1930s. He advocated a "democratic dictatorship" of the proletariat and peasantry as a transitional stage leading to the dictatorship of the proletariat . After Lukács's strategy was condemned by the Comintern , he retreated from active politics into theoretical work.

Lukács left Vienna in 1929, first for Berlin, then for Budapest.

[ 3 ] Under Stalin and Rákosi [ edit ] In 1930, while residing in Budapest, Lukács was summoned to Moscow .

[ 3 ] This coincided with the signing of a Viennese police order for his expulsion. Leaving their children to attend their studies, Lukács and his wife went to Moscow in March 1930. Soon after his arrival, Lukács was "prevented" from leaving and assigned to work alongside David Riazanov ("in the basement") at the Marx–Engels Institute .

[ 41 ] Lukács returned to Berlin in 1931 [ 8 ] and in 1933 he once again left Berlin for Moscow to attend the Institute of Philosophy of the Russian Academy of Sciences .

[ 8 ] During this time, Lukács first came into contact with the unpublished works of the young Marx .

[ 3 ] Lukács and his wife were not permitted to leave the Soviet Union until after the Second World War . During Joseph Stalin 's Great Purge , Lukács was sent to internal exile in Tashkent for a time, where he and Johannes Becher became friends. Lukács survived the purges of the Great Terror . There is much debate among historians concerning the extent to which Lukács accepted Stalinism at this period.

[ 3 ] In 1945, Lukács and his wife returned to Hungary. As a member of the Hungarian Communist Party, he took part in establishing the new Hungarian government. From 1945 Lukács was a member of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences . Between 1945 and 1946, he strongly criticised non-communist philosophers and writers. Lukács has been accused of playing an "administrative" (legal-bureaucratic) role in the removal of independent and non-communist intellectuals such as Béla Hamvas , István Bibó , Lajos Prohászka , and Károly Kerényi from Hungarian academic life. Between 1946 and 1953, many non-communist intellectuals, including Bibó, were imprisoned or forced into menial work or manual labour.

Lukács's personal aesthetic and political positions on culture were always that socialist culture would eventually triumph in terms of quality. He thought it should play out in terms of competing cultures, not by "administrative" measures. In 1948–49, Lukács's position for cultural tolerance was smashed in a "Lukács purge," when Mátyás Rákosi turned his famous salami tactics on the Hungarian Working People's Party .

In the mid-1950s, Lukács was reintegrated into party life. The party used him to help purge the Hungarian Writers' Union in 1955–1956.

Tamás Aczél and Tibor Méray (former Secretaries of the Hungarian Writers' Union) both believe that Lukács participated grudgingly, and cite Lukács's leaving the presidium and the meeting at the first break as evidence of this reluctance.

[ 42 ] De-Stalinisation [ edit ] In 1956, Lukács became a minister of the brief communist revolutionary government led by Imre Nagy , which opposed the Soviet Union.

[ 43 ] At this time, Lukács's daughter led a short-lived party of communist revolutionary youth. Lukács's position on the 1956 revolution was that the Hungarian Communist Party would need to retreat into a coalition government of socialists and slowly rebuild its credibility with the Hungarian people. While a minister in Nagy's revolutionary government, Lukács also participated in trying to reform the Hungarian Communist Party on a new basis. This party, the Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party , was rapidly co-opted by János Kádár after 4 November 1956.

[ 44 ] During the 1956 Hungarian Revolution , Lukács was present at debates of the anti-party and revolutionary communist Petőfi Society while remaining part of the party apparatus. During the revolution, as mentioned in Budapest Diary, Lukács argued for a new Soviet-aligned communist party. In Lukács's view, the new party could win social leadership only by persuasion instead of force. Lukács envisioned an alliance between the dissident communist Hungarian Revolutionary Youth Party , the revolutionary Hungarian Social Democratic Party and his own Soviet-aligned party as a very junior partner.

Following the defeat of the Revolution, Lukács was deported to the Socialist Republic of Romania with the rest of Nagy's government.

[ 43 ] Unlike Nagy, he avoided execution, albeit narrowly. Due to his role in Nagy's government, he was no longer trusted by the party apparatus. Lukács's followers were indicted for political crimes throughout the 1960s and '70s, and a number fled to the West. Lukács's books The Young Hegel ( Der junge Hegel , Zurich, 1948) and The Destruction of Reason ( Die Zerstörung der Vernunft , Berlin, 1954) have been used to argue that Lukács was covertly critical of Stalinism as a distortion of Marxism.

[ 45 ] In this reading, these two works are attempts to reconcile the idealism of Hegelian- dialectics with the dialectical materialism of Marx and Engels, and position Stalinism as a philosophy of irrationalism .

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] He returned to Budapest in 1957.

[ 8 ] Lukács publicly abandoned his positions of 1956 and engaged in self-criticism. Having abandoned his earlier positions, Lukács remained loyal to the Communist Party until his death in 1971. In his last years, following the uprisings in France and Czechoslovakia in 1968, Lukács became more publicly critical of the Soviet Union and the Hungarian Communist Party.

[ 48 ] In an interview just before his death, Lukács remarked: Without a genuine general theory of society and its movement, one does not get away from Stalinism. Stalin was a great tactician... But Stalin, unfortunately, was not a Marxist... The essence of Stalinism lies in placing tactics before strategy, practice above theory... The bureaucracy generated by Stalinism is a tremendous evil. Society is suffocated by it. Everything becomes unreal, nominalistic. People see no design, no strategic aim, and do not move..." Thus Lukács concludes "we must learn to connect the great decisions of popular political power with personal needs, those of individuals.

— Marcus, Judith; Zoltan, Tarr (1989). pp. 215–216, Georg Lukács: Theory, Culture, and Politics Work [ edit ] Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Part of a series on Leninism Schools of thought Bolshevism Bordigism Marxism–Leninism Nkrumaism Right communism Trotskyism Workerism Concepts Anti-imperialism Collective leadership Democratic centralism Dialectical materialism Dual power Labor aristocracy Liquidationism National liberation Proletarian internationalism Revolutionary defeatism Revolutionary situation Self-determination Socialist state Soviet democracy Vanguardism World revolution People Lenin Trotsky Bukharin Kamenev Stalin Zinoviev Rykov Bubnov Sokolnikov Lukács Bordiga Hồ Gramsci Nkrumah Negri Theoretical works The Development of Capitalism in Russia (1899) What Is to Be Done?

(1902) Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1917) The State and Revolution (1917) The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky (1918) "Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder (1920) Foundations of Leninism (1924) Leninism: Introduction to the Study of Leninism (1925) History Russian Social Democratic Labour Party 2nd Congress Prague Conference Bolsheviks RSDLP (Bolsheviks) Russian Revolution February Revolution October Revolution History of Soviet Russia RSFSR Collective leadership Civil War Red Army War communism Red Terror National delimitation Anti-religious campaign New Economic Policy Soviet Union Death and funeral of Lenin Comintern Joseph Stalin's rise to power Related topics 26 Baku Commissars Anti-Leninist left De-Leninization Jacobinism Marxism Libertarian Luxemburgism Left communism Mensheviks Orthodox Marxism Proletkult Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e History and Class Consciousness [ edit ] Further information: History and Class Consciousness Written between 1919 and 1922 and published in 1923, Lukács's collection of essays History and Class Consciousness contributed to debates concerning Marxism and its relation to sociology , politics and philosophy .

[ 49 ] With this work, Lukács initiated the current of thought that came to be known as " Western Marxism ".

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 23 ] At Lukács' direction, there was no reprinting in his lifetime, making it rare and hard to acquire before 1968. Its return to prominence was aided by the social movements of the 1960s.

[ 23 ] The most important essay in Lukács's book introduces the concept of " reification ". In capitalist societies, human properties, relations and actions are transformed into properties, relations and actions of human-produced things, which become independent of them and govern their life. These human-created things are then imagined to be originally independent of the human. Moreover, human beings are transformed into thing-like beings that do not behave in a human way but according to the laws of the thing-world.

[ 52 ] This essay is notable for reconstructing aspects of Marx's theory of alienation before the publication of the Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 — the work in which Marx most clearly expounds the theory.

[ 53 ] Lukács also develops the Marxist theory of class consciousness - the distinction between the objective situation of a class and that class's subjective awareness of this situation.

[ 54 ] Lukács proffers a view of a class as an "historical imputed subject ".

[ 54 ] An empirically existing class can successfully act only when it becomes conscious of its historical situation, i.e. when it transforms from a "class in itself" to a "class for itself".

[ 55 ] Lukács's theory of class consciousness has been influential within the sociology of knowledge .

In his later career, Lukács repudiated the ideas of History and Class Consciousness , in particular the belief in the proletariat as a " subject - object of history" (1960 Postface to French translation). As late as 1925–1926, he still defended these ideas, in an unfinished manuscript, which he called Tailism and the Dialectic.

It was not published until 1996 in Hungarian and English in 2000 under the title A Defence of History and Class Consciousness .

[ citation needed ] What is Orthodox Marxism?

[ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( December 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Lukács argues that methodology is the only thing that distinguishes Marxism : even if all its substantive propositions were rejected, it would remain valid because of its distinctive method: [ 56 ] Orthodox Marxism, therefore, does not imply the uncritical acceptance of the results of Marx's investigations. It is not the 'belief' in this or that thesis, nor the exegesis of a 'sacred' book. On the contrary, orthodoxy refers exclusively to method. It is the scientific conviction that dialectical materialism is the road to truth and that its methods can be developed, expanded and deepened only along the lines laid down by its founders.

— §1 He criticises Marxist revisionism by calling for the return to this Marxist method, which is fundamentally dialectical materialism . Lukács conceives "revisionism" as inherent to the Marxist theory, insofar as dialectical materialism is, according to him, the product of class struggle: For this reason the task of orthodox Marxism, its victory over Revisionism and utopianism can never mean the defeat, once and for all, of false tendencies. It is an ever-renewed struggle against the insidious effects of bourgeois ideology on the thought of the proletariat. Marxist orthodoxy is no guardian of traditions, it is the eternally vigilant prophet proclaiming the relation between the tasks of the immediate present and the totality of the historical process.

— end of §5 According to him, "The premise of dialectical materialism is, we recall: 'It is not men's consciousness that determines their existence, but on the contrary, their social existence that determines their consciousness.' ...Only when the core of existence stands revealed as a social process can existence be seen as the product, albeit the hitherto unconscious product, of human activity." (§5). In line with Marx's thought, he criticises the individualist bourgeois philosophy of the subject , which founds itself on the voluntary and conscious subject. Against this ideology , he asserts the primacy of social relations. Existence – and thus the world – is the product of human activity; but this can be seen only if the primacy of social process on individual consciousness is accepted. Lukács does not restrain human liberty for sociological determinism : to the contrary, this production of existence is the possibility of praxis .

He conceives the problem in the relationship between theory and practice. Lukács quotes Marx's words: "It is not enough that thought should seek to realise itself; reality must also strive towards thought." How does the thought of intellectuals relate to class struggle, if theory is not simply to lag behind history, as it is in Hegel's philosophy of history ("Minerva always comes at the dusk of night...")? Lukács criticises Friedrich Engels 's Anti-Dühring , saying that he "does not even mention the most vital interaction, namely the dialectical relation between subject and object in the historical process, let alone give it the prominence it deserves." This dialectical relation between subject and object is the basis of Lukács's critique of Immanuel Kant 's epistemology , according to which the subject is the exterior, universal and contemplating subject, separated from the object.

For Lukács, "ideology" is a projection of the class consciousness of the bourgeoisie , which functions to prevent the proletariat from attaining consciousness of its revolutionary position. Ideology determines the "form of objectivity ", thus the very structure of knowledge. According to Lukács, real science must attain the "concrete totality" through which only it is possible to think the current form of objectivity as a historical period. Thus, the so-called eternal " laws " of economics are dismissed as the ideological illusion projected by the current form of objectivity ("What is Orthodoxical Marxism?", §3). He also writes: "It is only when the core of being has shown itself as social becoming, that the being itself can appear as a product, so far unconscious, of human activity, and this activity, in turn, as the decisive element of the transformation of being." ("What is Orthodoxical Marxism?", §5) Finally, "orthodoxical Marxism" is not defined as an interpretation of Capital as if it were the Bible or an embrace of "Marxist thesis", but as fidelity to the "Marxist method", dialectics .

Reification and the Consciousness of the Proletariat [ edit ] Drawing from the insights of Max Weber and Georg Simmel , [ 57 ] Lukács introduces the concept of reification to describe the mystified consciousness of capitalist society, where human relations and activities are objectified as commodities . This idea builds on Marx's analysis of " commodity fetishism " in Capital . Under capitalism, human qualities are subordinated to the demands of production and exchange, reducing individuals to mere units of labor power .

Rationalization — manifesting in legal systems, technology, and labor organization — fragments human activity and diminishes individuality. This specialization creates a society where holistic understanding becomes impossible, and bourgeois philosophy reinforces this fragmentation by prioritizing calculable, empirical facts over any unifying vision of reality.

[ 58 ] For Lukács, bourgeois rationalism, with its reliance on abstract mathematics and calculability, excludes any meaningful engagement with the whole. It either confines itself to empirical reality or ventures into utopian speculation, neither of which can address the systemic contradictions of capitalism. The idealist dialectic, in its attempt to restore unity by emphasizing the subject’s creativity, fails to grasp the revolutionary potential of human praxis.

[ 58 ] Reification cannot be overcome within the limits of bourgeois consciousness. Only the proletariat , through its unique position as both a commodity and the creator of social reality, can grasp the totality of the social mechanism. When the proletariat achieves class consciousness , it recognizes and rebels against the pervasive reification of social life. This awakening is not mere awareness but a revolutionary act that liberates humanity from objectification. For the proletariat, truth is not a passive reflection of an external reality but part of a historical process of emancipation.

[ 59 ] Lukács saw the destruction of society as a proper solution to the "cultural contradiction of the epoch". In 1969, he cited: “Even though my ideas were confused from a theoretical point of view, I saw the revolutionary destruction of society as the one and only solution to the cultural contradictions of the epoch. Such a worldwide overturning of values cannot take place without the annihilation of the old values.

[ 60 ] Literary and aesthetic work [ edit ] In addition to his standing as a Marxist political thinker, Lukács was an influential literary critic of the twentieth century. His important work in literary criticism began early in his career, with The Theory of the Novel , a seminal work in literary theory and the theory of genre . The book is a history of the novel as a form, and an investigation into its distinct characteristics. In The Theory of the Novel , he coins the term " transcendental homelessness ", which he defines as the "longing of all souls for the place in which they once belonged, and the 'nostalgia… for utopian perfection, a nostalgia that feels itself and its desires to be the only true reality'".

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] Lukács maintains that "the novel is the necessary epic form of our time." [ 63 ] Lukács later repudiated The Theory of the Novel , writing a lengthy introduction that described it as erroneous, but nonetheless containing a "romantic anti-capitalism" which would later develop into Marxism. (This introduction also contains his famous dismissal of Theodor Adorno and others in Western Marxism as having taken up residence in the "Grand Hotel Abyss".) Lukács's later literary criticism includes the well-known essay "Kafka or Thomas Mann?", in which Lukács argues for the work of Thomas Mann as a superior attempt to deal with the condition of modernity , and criticises Franz Kafka 's brand of modernism . Lukács steadfastly opposed the formal innovations of modernist writers like Kafka, James Joyce , and Samuel Beckett , preferring the traditional aesthetic of realism.

During his time in Moscow in the 1930s, Lukács worked on Marxist views of aesthetics while belonging to the group around an influential Moscow magazine "The Literary Critic" ( Literaturny Kritik ).

[ 64 ] The editor of this magazine, Mikhail Lifshitz , was an important Soviet author on aesthetics. Lifshitz's views were very similar to Lukács's insofar as both argued for the value of traditional art; despite the drastic difference in age (Lifschitz was much younger), both Lifschitz and Lukács indicated that their working relationship at that time was a collaboration of equals. Lukács contributed frequently to this magazine, which was also followed by Marxist art theoreticians around the world through various translations published by the Soviet government.

The collaboration between Lifschitz and Lukács resulted in the formation of an informal circle of the like-minded Marxist intellectuals connected to the journal Literaturnyi Kritik [The Literary Critic], published monthly starting in the summer of 1933 by the Organisational Committee of the Writers' Union. ... A group of thinkers formed around Lifschitz, Lukács and Andrei Platonov ; they were concerned with articulating the aesthetical views of Marx and creating a kind of Marxist aesthetics that had not yet been properly formulated.

[ 65 ] Lukács famously argued for the revolutionary character of the novels of Sir Walter Scott and Honoré de Balzac . Lukács felt that both authors' nostalgic, pro-aristocratic politics allowed them accurate and critical stances because of their opposition (albeit reactionary) to the rising bourgeoisie . This view was expressed in his later book The Historical Novel (published in Russian in 1937, then in Hungarian in 1947), as well as in his essay " Realism in the Balance " (1938).

The Historical Novel is probably Lukács's most influential work of literary history. In it, he traces the development of the genre of historical fiction. While prior to 1789, he argues, people's consciousness of history was relatively underdeveloped, the French Revolution and Napoleonic wars that followed brought about a realisation of the constantly changing, evolving character of human existence. This new historical consciousness was reflected in the work of Sir Walter Scott, whose novels use 'representative' or 'typical' characters to dramatise major social conflicts and historical transformations, for example, the dissolution of feudal society in the Scottish Highlands and the entrenchment of mercantile capitalism. Lukács argues that Scott's new brand of historical realism was taken up by Balzac and Tolstoy, and enabled novelists to depict contemporary social life not as a static drama of fixed, universal types, but rather as a moment of history, constantly changing, open to the potential of revolutionary transformation. For this reason, he sees these authors as progressive and their work as potentially radical, despite their own personal conservative politics.

For Lukács, this historical realist tradition began to give way after the 1848 revolutions, when the bourgeoisie ceased to be a progressive force and their role as agents of history was usurped by the proletariat. After this time, historical realism begins to sicken and lose its concern with social life as inescapably historical. He illustrates this point by comparing Flaubert's historical novel Salammbô to that of the earlier realists. For him, Flaubert's work marks a turning away from relevant social issues and an elevation of style over substance. Why he does not discuss Sentimental Education , a novel much more overtly concerned with recent historical developments, is not clear. For much of his life Lukács promoted a return to the realist tradition that he believed had reached its height with Balzac and Scott, and bemoaned the supposed neglect of history that characterised modernism.

The Historical Novel has been hugely influential in subsequent critical studies of historical fiction, and no serious analyst of the genre fails to engage at some level with Lukács's arguments.

Critical and socialist realism [ edit ] Lukács defined realistic literature as literature capable of relating human life to the totality. He distinguishes between two forms of realism, critical and socialist . Lukács argued that it was precisely the desire for a realistic depiction of life that enabled politically reactionary writers such as Balzac , Walter Scott and Tolstoy to produce great, timeless and socially progressive works. According to Lukács, there is a contradiction between worldview and talent among such writers. He greatly valued the comments made in that direction by Lenin on Tolstoy and especially by Engels on Balzac, where Engels describes the "triumph of realism": Balzac boldly exposed the contradiction of nascent capitalist society and hence his observation of reality constantly clashed with his political prejudices. But as an honest artist he always depicted only what he himself saw, learned and underwent, concerning himself not at all whether his-true-to-life description of the things he saw contradicted his pet ideas.

[ 66 ] Critical realists include writers who could not rise to the communist worldview, but despite this, tried to truthfully reflect the conflicts of the era, not content with the direct description of single events. A great story speaks through individual human destinies in their work. Such writers are not naturalists, allegorists and metaphysicians. They do not flee from the world into the isolated human soul and do not seek to raise its experiences to the rank of timeless, eternal and irresistible properties of human nature.

[ citation needed ] Balzac, Tolstoy, Anatole France , Romain Rolland , George Bernard Shaw , Lion Feuchtwanger and Thomas Mann are the brightest writers from the gallery of critical realists.

[ citation needed ] Lukács notes that realistic art is usually found either in highly developed countries or in countries undergoing a period of rapid socio-economic development, yet it is possible that backward countries often give rise to advanced literature precisely because of their backwardness, which they seek to overcome by artistic means. Lukács (together with Lifshitz ) polemicized against the "vulgar sociological" thesis then dominant in Soviet literary criticism. The "vulgar sociologists" (associated with the former RAPP ) prioritized class origin as the most important determinant for an artist and his work, categorizing artists and artistic genres as "feudal", "bourgeois", "petty-bourgeois" etc. Lukács and Lifshitz sought to prove that such great artists as Dante , Shakespeare , Cervantes , Goethe or Tolstoy were able to rise above their class worldview by grasping the dialectic of individual and society in its totality and depicting their relations truthfully.

All modernist art – avant-garde , naturalism , expressionism , surrealism , etc. – is the opposite of realism. This is decadent art, examples of which are the works of Kafka , Joyce , Musil , Beckett , etc. The main shortcoming of modernism, which predicts its inevitable defeat, is the inability to perceive the totality and carry out the act of mediation. One cannot blame the writer for describing loneliness, but one must show it in such a way that it is clear to everyone: human loneliness is an inevitable consequence of capitalist social relations. Whereas in Kafka, we meet with "ontological solitariness", depicted as a permanent situation of man and a universal value. In this regard, Kafka stops at the description of the phenomenon, given directly; he is not able to rise to the totality, which alone can reveal the meaning of loneliness. Therefore, Kafka acts like the naturalists. In order for the image of chaos, confusion and fear of the modern world and man to be realistic, the writer must show the social roots that generate all these phenomena. And if, like Joyce, one depicts the spiritual world and the sense of time of a person in a state of absolute decay, without bothering to search for reasons and prospects for a way out, then the writer gives a false image of the world, and his works must be recognized as immature.

So, modernism is deprived of a historical perspective, tying the person to positions and situations that are not really historically and socially determined. Modernism transforms such situations into transcendental qualities. The great images of great literature, Achilles and Werther , Oedipus and Tom Joad , Antigone and Anna Karenina , are social beings, for Aristotle already noted that man is a social being. And the heroes of modernist literature are torn out of their ties with society and history. Narrative becomes purely "subjective", the animal in man is opposed to the social in him, which corresponds to Heidegger 's denial and condemnation of society as something impersonal. He wrote: Literary and art history is a mass graveyard where many artists of talent rest in deserved oblivion because they neither sought nor found any association to the problems of advancing humanity and did not set themselves on the right side in the vital struggle between health and decay.

[ 67 ] Barbara Stackman maintains that, for Lukács, decadents are decadent not because they depict illness and decay, but because they do not recognize the existence of health, of the social sphere that would reunite the alienated writer to the progressive forces of history. Sickness, then, is a reactionary mode of insertion into the class struggle ; sickness, writes Lukács, "produces a complete overturning of values." Though "sick art" may have its dialectical moment in the sun (Lukács cites only Antigone as an example where that which is declining may even appear as human greatness and purity), it is destined for the dust heap of history, while "healthy art" is a "reflection of the lasting truth of human relationships." [ 68 ] On the other hand, socialist realism is recognized as the highest stage in the development of literature: The prospect of socialist realism is, of course, the struggle for socialism. Socialist realism differs from critical realism not only in that it is based on a specific socialist perspective, but also in that it uses this perspective to describe from within the forces that work in favor of socialism . Critical realists have more than once described the political struggle of our time and depicted heroes – socialists and communists. But only socialist realists describe such heroes from the inside, thus identifying them with the forces of progress. The greatness of socialist realism lies in the fact that the historical totality, directed towards communism, becomes clear as daylight in any fragment of a given work.

[ 69 ] In 1938, in his work Realism in the Balance , a polemic against Ernst Bloch , Walter Benjamin , Bertolt Brecht and Theodor Adorno , Lukács explained the lack of modernism in the Soviet Union in this way: The more the domination of the proletariat strengthened, the more deeply and comprehensively socialism penetrated the economy of the Soviet Union, the wider and deeper the cultural revolution embraced the working masses, the stronger and more hopelessly "avant-garde" art was pushed out by an ever more conscious realism. The decline of expressionism is ultimately a consequence of the maturity of the revolutionary masses.

[ 70 ] No less typical is his article "Propaganda or Partisanship?", in which he polemicizes against the definition of socialist art as "tendentious." Literature, in his opinion, should not be biased, but only "party-spirited" in the essence of taking the side of the class that is objectively progressive in the given historical moment. Tendentious literature eclectically connects "pure art" with politically alien elements brought in from outside. But such a program, which Franz Mehring once defended, means "the primacy of form over content" and contrasts the aesthetic and political elements of the work. This understanding of art, Lukács says, is Trotskyist .

[ 71 ] Lukács' defense of socialist realism contained a critique of Stalinism and a condemnation of most of the party-propagandistic Soviet literature of the 1930s and 1940s (which was based on Andrei Zhdanov 's doctrine of "conflictless art" and which Lukács dismissively called "illustrative" literature) as a distortion of true socialist realism. He acknowledged that Stalinism suffered from a lack of "mediation" in the field of cultural policy. Instead of describing the real conflicts of the life of a socialist society, Stalinist literature turned into bare schemes and abstractions, describing the general truths of theory and in no way "mediating" them with images taken from reality. The specificity of art was forgotten, and it turned into an instrument of agitation. Schematic optimism has spread in place of the historical. The heroes did not represent any of the typical qualities of the new society. Lenin's article "Party Organization and Party Literature", which, as Nadezhda Krupskaya said, dealt only with political literature, turned into a rule of artistic activity and its evaluation.

Despite all this criticism, Lukács never changed his basic conviction: socialist realism represents a "fundamentally" and "historically" higher stage in the development of art than all its predecessors.

The most surprising product of Lukács' discourse on socialist realism is his articles on Alexander Solzhenitsyn , whom he considered to be the greatest " plebeian realist" writer of the twentieth century. Lukács welcomed the appearance of the writer's short stories and novellas as the first sign of the renaissance of socialist realism, since Solzhenitsyn, in describing camp life in A Day in the Life of Ivan Denisovich , depicts everyday events as a symbol of an entire era. Nor is Solzhenitsyn a naturalist, since he refers the events described to the socio-historical totality and does not seek to restore capitalism in Russia. According to Lukács, Solzhenitsyn criticizes Stalinism from a plebeian, and not from a communist point of view. And if he does not overcome this weakness, then his artistic talent will decrease.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] Ontology of social being [ edit ] Later in life, Lukács undertook a major exposition on the ontology of social being, which has been partly published in English in three volumes. The work is a systematic treatment of dialectical philosophy in its materialist form.

Bibliography [ edit ] Main article: György Lukács bibliography History and Class Consciousness (1972).

ISBN 0-262-62020-0 .

The Theory of the Novel (1974).

ISBN 0-262-62027-8 .

Lenin: A Study in the Unity of His Thought (1998).

ISBN 1-85984-174-0 .

A Defense of History and Class Consciousness (2000).

ISBN 1-85984-747-1 .

See also [ edit ] Lajos Jánossy , Lukács's adopted son Marx's notebooks on the history of technology Notes [ edit ] ^ UK : / ˈ l uː k æ tʃ / , [ 6 ] US also /- k ɑː tʃ / ; [ 7 ] Hungarian: [ˈɟørɟ ˈlukaːtʃ] ^ Hungarian: [ˈbɛrnaːt ˈɟørɟ ˈløviŋɡɛr] ^ German: [ˈluːkatʃ] ^ Lenin made his view known in a review he gave of Lukács' work: "Its Marxism is purely verbal; its distinction between defensive and offensive tactics is artificial; it gives no concrete analysis of precise and definite historical situations; it takes no account of what is most essential (the need to take over, and learn to take over, all fields of work and all institutions in which the bourgeoisie exercises its influence over the masses, etc.)" [ 36 ] [ 37 ] References [ edit ] ^ Piroska Balogh and Botond Csuka (2021), "Aesthetics in Hungary: Traditions and Perspectives" , ESPES , 10 (1):7–11.

^ Georg Lukács: Neo-Kantian Aesthetics , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ^ a b c d e f g h i j Georg Lukács , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Jackson, William Thomas Hobdell; Stade, George (1983).

European Writers . Scribner. p. 1258.

ISBN 978-0-684-17916-2 .

^ Lichtheim 1970 , p. ix.

^ "Lukács" .

Collins English Dictionary .

HarperCollins .

^ "Lukács" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d.

^ a b c d György Lukács – Britannica.com ^ a b "György Lukács".

Benét's Reader's Encyclopedia (3rd ed.).

Harper & Row . 1987. p. 588.

^ Leszek Kołakowski ([1981], 2008), Main Currents of Marxism , Vol. 3: The Breakdown , W. W. Norton & Company, Ch VII: "György Lukács: Reason in the Service of Dogma", W.W. Norton & Co.

^ Raddatz, Fritz J. (1972).

Georg Lukács in Personal Testimonies and Photo documents . Hamburg.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Lunching under the Goya. Jewish Collectors in Budapest at the Beginning of the Twentieth Century , Konstantin Akinsha, Quest. Issues in Contemporary Jewish History ^ Júlia Bendl, "Lukács György élete a századfordulótól 1918-ig" Archived 13 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine , 1994 (Hungarian) ^ L. Ferenc Lendvai, A fiatal Lukács: utja Marxhoz, 1902–1918 , Argumentum, 2008, p. 46; István Hermann, Georg Lukács: sein Leben und Wirken , Böhlau, 1986, p. 44.

^ Lukács 1972 , pp. ix–x: "On the other hand, the contradictions in my social and political views brought me intellectually into contact with Syndicalism and above all with the philosophy of George Sorel. ... My interest in Sorel was aroused by Ervin Szabó" ^ a b c d Kołakowski, Leszek (2005).

Main Currents of Marxism . London: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 991.

ISBN 978-0-393-32943-8 .

^ Thouard, Denis (2015). "Form and History: From Lukács to Szondi".

Textual Understanding and Historical Experience . pp.

31– 41.

doi : 10.30965/9783846756539_005 .

ISBN 978-3-7705-5653-3 .

^ Lukács, György (1911).

A Modern Dráma Fejlödésének Története (in Hungarian). Budapest: Kisfaludy-Társaság.

OCLC 14194603 .

(2 volumes) ^ See also: Bécsy, Tamás (1993). "György Lukács's Theory of Drama". In Illés, László (ed.).

Hungarian Studies on György Lukács, vol II (PDF) . Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó. p. 357.

ISBN 963-05-6030-5 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 February 2023 . Retrieved 21 February 2023 .

^ Vaisman, Ester (December 2005).

"O 'jovem' Lukács: trágico, utópico e romântico?" ['Young' Lukács: tragic, utopian and romantic?].

Kriterion: Revista de Filosofia (in Portuguese).

46 (112): 293– 310.

doi : 10.1590/S0100-512X2005000200013 .

^ Kołakowski, Leszek (2005).

Main Currents of Marxism . London: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 993.

ISBN 978-0-393-32943-8 .

^ a b c Lukács, Georg; Tar, Judith Marcus (1977). "Bolshevism as a Moral Problem".

Social Research .

44 (3): 416– 424.

JSTOR 40970293 .

^ a b c d Breines, Paul (1979). "Young Lukács, Old Lukács, New Lukács".

The Journal of Modern History .

51 (3): 533– 546.

doi : 10.1086/241950 .

JSTOR 1876636 .

S2CID 144192645 .

^ Kołakowski, Leszek (2005).

Main Currents of Marxism . London: W. W. Norton & Company. pp.

993– 4.

ISBN 978-0-393-32943-8 .

^ a b Lopez, Daniel (19 January 2019).

"The Conversion of Georg Lukács" .

Jacobin .

^ The hinterland of the white terror. Wien, 1920. Online: https://www.marxists.org/magyar/archive/lukacs/fth.htm ^ Népszava, 1919.04.15. Online: https://adtplus.arcanum.hu/hu/view/Nepszava_1919_04/?pg=0&layout=s ^ Georg Lukács. Revolutionäres Denken. Eine Einführung in Leben und Werk (hg. v. Frank Benseler), Darmstadt-Neuwied, 1984, p. 64.

^ Lengyel András: A "tizedeltető" Lukács. Egy politikai folklór-szüzsé történeti hátteréhez. In Forrás, 2017-01. Online: http://www.forrasfolyoirat.hu/1701/lengyel.pdf Archived 11 February 2017 at the Wayback Machine p. 75.

^ Váry Albert: A vörös uralom áldozatai Magyarországon (The victims of the Reds in Hungary. Online: http://mtdaportal.extra.hu/books/vary_albert_a_voros_uralom_aldozatai.pdf ^ Congdon, Lee (2014).

Exile and Social Thought: Hungarian Intellectuals in Germany and Austria, 1919–1933 . Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. pp.

45– 46.

ISBN 978-1-4008-5290-1 .

^ Kołakowski, Leszek (1978).

Main Currents of Marxism, Vol. 3: – The breakdown . Oxford: Clarendon Press. p. 306.

ISBN 0-19-824570-X .

^ Domenichelli, Mario (2020).

"Lukács and the Marxist 'Living Art' " .

Zagreber germanistische Beiträge .

29 : 125– 143.

doi : 10.17234/ZGB.29.7 .

S2CID 244698036 .

^ Kókai, Károly (2017). "The Communist International and the Contribution of Georg Lukács in the 1920s".

Social Scientist .

45 (11/12): 63– 72.

JSTOR 26405282 .

^ Miller, Jim (1982). "Revolutionary Rationalism: Luxemburg, Lukács, and Gramsci — Georg Lukacs: The Reification of Subjectivity".

History and human existence: From Marx to Merleau-Ponty (1st ed.). Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 130.

ISBN 9780520047792 .

... confronted with Lenin's critique of his position as "ultra-Leftist" in 1920 ...

^ Lenin, V.I (1965) [First published June 1920]. "Kommunismus (Journal of the Communist International)". In Lenin, V.I (ed.).

Collected Works . Vol. 31 (4th English ed.). Moscow: Progress Publishers. pp.

165– 167.

^ Williams, Brian (10 February 2011).

"Lenin versus the early Lukács" .

Socialist Action . Retrieved 19 September 2021 .

Lenin's own summary on Lukács's position was: "Its Marxism is purely verbal; its distinction between defensive and offensive tactics is artificial; it gives no concrete analysis of precise and definite historical situations; it takes no account of what is most essential (the need to take over, and learn to take over, all fields of work and all institutions in which the bourgeoisie exercises its influence over the masses, etc.)" ^ Lenin, Vladimir Ilyich (2001) [1920].

Left-wing communism, an infantile disorder: A popular essay in Marxian strategy and tactics . Honolulu: University Press of the Pacific.

ISBN 0898754488 .

^ Kołakowski, Leszek (2005).

Main Currents of Marxism . London: W. W. Norton & Company. pp.

994– 5.

ISBN 978-0-393-32943-8 .

^ Kołakowski, Leszek (2005).

Main Currents of Marxism . London: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 995.

ISBN 978-0-393-32943-8 .

^ Kołakowski, Leszek (2005).

Main Currents of Marxism . London: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 996.

ISBN 978-0-393-32943-8 .

^ Tamás Aczél, Tibor Méray (1960), The revolt of the mind: a case history of intellectual resistance behind the Iron Curtain.

[ page needed ] ^ a b Kołakowski, Leszek (2005).

Main Currents of Marxism . London: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 997.

ISBN 978-0-393-32943-8 .

^ Woroszylski, Wiktor (1957), Diary of a revolt: Budapest through Polish eyes , Translated by Michael Segal, Sydney: Outlook, [pamphlet] .

^ Osborne, Peter (1996).

"The Legacy of Marx: István Mészáros" . In Osborne, Peter (ed.).

A critical sense: Interviews with intellectuals . London: Routledge. pp.

47– 64.

ISBN 9781134684250 . Retrieved 18 September 2021 .

^ Rockmore, I. (2012).

Lukács Today: Essays in Marxist Philosophy . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 5.

ISBN 9789400928978 .

^ Burman, Anders (2018). "Back to Hegel! Georg Lukács, Dialectics, and Hegelian Marxism". In Burman, Anders; Baronek, Anders (eds.).

Hegelian Marxism: The Uses of Hegel's Philosophy in Marxist Theory from Georg Lukács to Slavoj Žižek . Södertörn University. pp.

17– 34.

ISBN 978-9188663504 .

^ Le Blanc, Paul (2013). "Spider and Fly: The Leninist Philosophy of Georg Lukács".

Historical Materialism .

21 (2): 47– 75.

doi : 10.1163/1569206X-12341298 .

^ Meszaros, Istvan (1991). " History and Class Consciousness ". In Bottomore, Tom ; Harris, Laurence; Kiernan, V.G.

; Miliband, Ralph (eds.).

The Dictionary of Marxist Thought (Second ed.). Blackwell Publishers Ltd. pp.

241– 242.

ISBN 0-631-16481-2 .

^ Bien, Joseph (1999). Audi, Robert (ed.).

The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p.

521 .

ISBN 0-521-63722-8 .

^ Merleau-Ponty, Maurice (1973).

Adventures of the Dialectic . Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern University Press. p.

30 –59.

ISBN 978-0-8101-0404-4 .

^ Petrovic, Gajo (1991).

"Reification" . In Bottomore, Tom ; Harris, Laurence; Kiernan, V.G.

; Miliband, Ralph (eds.).

The Dictionary of Marxist Thought (Second ed.). Blackwell Publishers Ltd. p. 463.

ISBN 0-631-16481-2 .

^ Avineri, Shlomo (1968).

The Social and Political Thought of Karl Marx . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 96.

ISBN 0-521-09619-7 .

^ a b Fetscher, Iring (1991). "Class Consciousness". In Bottomore, Tom ; Harris, Laurence; Kiernan, V.G.

; Miliband, Ralph (eds.).

The Dictionary of Marxist Thought (Second ed.). Blackwell Publishers Ltd. p. 89.

ISBN 0-631-16481-2 .

^ Fetscher, Iring (1991). "Class Consciousness". In Bottomore, Tom ; Harris, Laurence; Kiernan, V.G.

; Miliband, Ralph (eds.).

The Dictionary of Marxist Thought (Second ed.). Blackwell Publishers Ltd. pp.

89– 90.

ISBN 0-631-16481-2 .

^ Wright, Erik Olin; Levine, Andrew; Sober, Elliott (1992).

Reconstructing Marxism: Essays on Explanation and the Theory of History . London: Verso. pp.

103– 4.

ISBN 0-86091-554-9 .

^ Petrovic, Gajo (1991).

"Reification" . In Bottomore, Tom ; Harris, Laurence; Kiernan, V.G.

; Miliband, Ralph (eds.).

The Dictionary of Marxist Thought (Second ed.). Blackwell Publishers Ltd. p. 464.

ISBN 0-631-16481-2 .

^ a b Kołakowski, Leszek (1978).

Main Currents of Marxism . London: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 275.

ISBN 0-19-824570-X .

^ Kołakowski, Leszek (1978).

Main Currents of Marxism . London: W. W. Norton & Company. p. 276.

ISBN 0-19-824570-X .

^ György Lukacs, “Mon chemin vers Marx” (1969), Nouvelles Etudes hongroises (Budapest, 1973), 8:78–79, cited in Löwy, Michael (2015).

Georg Lukács – from Romanticism to Bolshevism . NLB. p. 93.

ISBN 978-1-78663-143-5 .

^ G. Lukacs, The Theory of the Novel , London: Merlin Press, 1963, p. 70.

^ Young, Joyce (May 2009).

A Book Without Meaning: Why You Aren't Happy With the Ending of Infinite Jest (Thesis). p. 4.

hdl : 10150/197263 .

^ The Theory of the Novel . MIT. 1971. p. 146.

ISBN 0262620278 .

^ Gutov D., Learn, learn and learn .

In: Make Everything New – A Project on Communism. Edited by Grant Watson, Gerrie van Noord & Gavin Everall. Published by Book Works and Project Arts Centre, Dublin, 2006, pp. 24–37.

^ Pavlov, Evgeni V. (2012). "Perepiska [Letters], Mikhail Lifschitz and György Lukács, Moscow: Grundrisse, 2011; Pisma V. Dostalu, V. Arslanovu, M. Mikhailovu [Letters to V. Dostal, V. Arslanov, M. Mikhailov], Mikhail Lifschitz, Moscow: Grundrisse, 2011".

Historical Materialism .

20 (4): 187– 198.

doi : 10.1163/1569206X-12341272 .

^ Bhattacharya, Ramkrishna.

"Two Balzacs Two Gogols Two Tolstoys" .

^ Lukács, György (1971) [1934].

"Healthy or Sick Art?" (PDF) .

Writer and Critic & Other Essays . Translated by Kahn, Arthur D. New York: The Universal Library.

^ Spackman, Barbara (1989).

"The Island of Normalcy" .

The Rhetoric of Sickness from Baudelaire to D'Annunzio . New York: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 9781501723308 .

^ Lukács, György (1969) [1957].

"Critical and Socialist Realism" (PDF) .

The Meaning of Contemporary Realism . Translated by Mander, John & Necke. London: Merlin Press.

^ Lukács, György (1977) [1938].

"Realism in the Balance" (PDF) .

Aesthetics and Politics . Translated by Taylor, Ronald. London: Verso Books.

^ Lukács, György (1934).

"Propaganda or Partisanship?" .

Partisan Review . Translated by Mins, Leonard F. New York: John Reed Club.

^ Lukács, György (1969).

Solzhenitsyn (PDF) . Translated by Graf, William David. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.

^ Makarenko, Viktor Pavlovich (1992).

"Critical and Socialist Realism" .

Marxism: Idea and Power . Rostov-on-Don: University of Rostov Publishing House.

Sources [ edit ] Aczél, Tamás , and Meray, Tibor , 1975.

Revolt of the Mind: a case history of intellectual resistance behind the iron curtain .

Greenwood Press Reprint.

Arato, Andrew ; Breines, Paul (1979).

The Young Lukács and the Origins of Western Marxism . New York: The Seabury Press.

ISBN 0-8164-9359-6 .

Baldacchino, John , 1996.

Post-Marxist Marxism: Questioning the Answer: Difference and Realism after Lukacs and Adorno . Brookfield, VT: Avebury.

Corredor, Eva L.

, 1987.

György Lukács and the Literary Pretext . New York: P. Lang .

Feenberg, Andrew (1981).

Lukacs, Marx and the Sources of Critical Theory . Totowa, New Jersey: Rowman and Littlefield.

ISBN 0-8476-6272-1 .

Granville, Johanna.

"Imre Nagy aka 'Volodya' – A Dent in the Martyr's Halo?" , "Cold War International History Project Bulletin", no. 5 (Woodrow Wilson Center for International Scholars, Washington, DC), Spring, 1995, pp. 28, and 34–37.

Granville, Johanna, "The First Domino: International Decision Making During the Hungarian Crisis of 1956", Texas A & M University Press, 2004.

ISBN 1-58544-298-4 Heller, Agnes, 1983.

Lukacs Revalued .

Blackwell .

Kadvany, John , 2001.

Imre Lakatos and the Guises of Reason . Duke University Press.

ISBN 0-8223-2659-0 .

Kadarkay, Arpad , 1991.

Georg Lukács: Life, Thought, and Politics .

Basil Blackwell .

Kettler, David , 1970. "Marxism and Culture: Lukács in the Hungarian Revolutions of 1918/19," Telos, No. 10, Winter 1971, pp. 35–92 Kołakowski, Leszek (2005).

Main Currents of Marxism . London: W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0-393-32943-8 .

KGB Chief Kryuchkov to CC CPSU, 16 June 1989 (trans. Johanna Granville).

Cold War International History Project Bulletin 5 (1995): 36 [from: TsKhSD , F. 89, Per. 45, Dok. 82.].

Lichtheim, George (1970).

George Lukács . Viking Press.

ISBN 978-0-670-01909-0 .

Löwy, Michael , 1979.

Georg Lukács—From Romanticism to Bolshevism . Trans.

Patrick Chandler . London: NLB.

Lukács, Georg (1972).

History and Class Consciousness: Studies in Marxist Dialectics . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-62020-8 .

Lukács, György (2001) "Realism in the Balance." In, Vincent B. Leitch (ed.).

The Norton Anthology of Theory and Criticism .  New York: Norton. pp. 1033-1058.

Archived 23 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine Marcus, Judith; Tarr, Zoltán (1989).

Georg Lukács: Theory, Culture, and Politics . Transaction Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-88738-244-4 .

Meszaros, Istvan, 1972.

Lukács' Concept of Dialectic . London: The Merlin Press .

ISBN 978-0850361599 Muller, Jerry Z.

, 2002.

The Mind and the Market: Capitalism in Western Thought .

Anchor Books .

Shafai, Fariborz , 1996.

The Ontology of Georg Lukács: Studies in Materialist Dialectics . Brookfield, USA: Avebury.

ISBN 978-1859724224 Sharma, Sunil , 1999.

The Structuralist Philosophy of the Novel: a Marxist Perspective: a Critique of Georg Luckács [ sic ], Lucien Goldmann , Alan Swingewood & Michel Zéraffa . Delhi: S.S. Publishers .

Snedeker, George , 2004.

The Politics of Critical Theory: Language, Discourse, Society . Lanham, MD: University Press of America.

Thompson, Michael J. (ed.) , 2010.

Georg Lukács Reconsidered: Essays on Politics, Philosophy, and Aesthetics .

Continuum Books .

Woroszylski, Wiktor , 1957.

Diary of a revolt: Budapest through Polish eyes.

Trans. Michael Segal. [Sydney: Outlook]. Pamphlet.

Further reading [ edit ] Furner, James. "Commodity Form Philosophy," in Marx on Capitalism: The Interaction-Recognition-Antinomy Thesis . (Leiden: Brill, 2018). pp. 85–128.

Gerhardt, Christina. "Georg Lukács," The International Encyclopedia of Revolution and Protest, 1500 to the Present . 8 vols. Ed. Immanuel Ness (Malden: Blackwell, 2009). 2135–2137.

Hohendahl, Peter Uwe . "The Scholar, The Intellectual, And The Essay: Weber, Lukács, Adorno, And Postwar Germany," German Quarterly 70.3 (1997): 217–231.

Hohendahl, Peter Uwe "Art Work And Modernity: The Legacy of Georg Lukács," New German Critique: An Interdisciplinary Journal of German Studies 42.(1987): 33–49.

Hohendahl, Peter Uwe, and Blackwell Jeanine. "Georg Lukács in the GDR: On Recent Developments in Literary Theory," New German Critique: An Interdisciplinary Journal of German Studies 12.(1977): 169–174.

Jameson, Fredric .

Marxism and Form: Twentieth-century Dialectical Theories of Literature.

Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1972.

Morgan, W. John, 'Political Commissar and Cultural Critic: Georg Lukács'. Chapter 6 in Morgan, W. John, Communists on Education and Culture 1848–1948 , Palgrave Macmillan, 2003, pp. 83–102.

ISBN 0-333-48586-6 Morgan, W. John, ‘Georg Lukács: cultural policy, Stalinism, and the Communist International.’ International Journal of Cultural Policy , 12 (3), 2006, pp. 257–271.

Stern, L. "George Lukacs: An Intellectual Portrait," Dissent, vol. 5, no. 2 (Spring 1958), pp. 162–173.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to György Lukács .

Works by György Lukács at Project Gutenberg Works by or about György Lukács at the Internet Archive Georg Lukács Archive , Marxists website Guide to Literary Theory Archived 1 November 2005 at the Wayback Machine , Johns Hopkins University Press Georg Lukács , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Petri Liukkonen.

"György Lukács" .

Books and Writers .

Bendl Júlia, "Lukács György élete a századfordulótól 1918-ig" Lukács and Imre Lakatos Hungarian biography Georg Lukács Archive , Libertarian Communist Library Múlt-kor Történelmi portál ( Past-Age Historic Portal ): Lukács György was born 120 years ago (in Hungarian) Levee Blanc, "Georg Lukács: The Antinomies of Melancholy" , Other Voices , Vol.1 no.1, 1998.

Michael J. Thompson, "Lukacs Revisited" New Politics, 2001, Issue 30 Realism in the Balance Political offices Preceded by Zsigmond Kunfi People's Commissar of Education 1919 Succeeded by József Pogány Preceded by József Darvas Minister of Culture 1956 Succeeded by post abolished v t e Ministers of education of Hungary since 1848 Revolution of 1848 J. Eötvös Batthyány Horváth Kingdom of Hungary J. Eötvös Szlávy Pauler Trefort Baross Csáky L. Eötvös Wlassics Berzeviczy G. Lukács (*1865) Tost Apponyi Székely Zichy Jankovich Apponyi Zichy Transition period Lovászy Juhász Nagy Kunfi G. Lukács (*1885) Pogány ( opposed by P. Teleki ) Garbai Imre Huszár Regency Haller Jó. Vass Klebelsberg Ernszt Karafiáth Hóman P. Teleki Hóman Szinyei Merse Antal Rakovszky Transition period Rajniss Szálasi G. Teleki Keresztury Communist Hungary Ortutay Darvas Erdey-Grúz Kónya Kállai Benke Ilku Nagy Polinszky Pozsgay Köpeczi Czibere Glatz Republic of Hungary Andrásfalvy Mádl Fodor Magyar Pokorni Pálinkás Magyar Hiller Ministers of Culture Révai Darvas G. Lukács (*1885) Orbán Pozsgay Hámori Rockenbauer Görgey Hiller Bozóki Minister of Religion Já. Vass Minister of Higher Education Erdey-Grúz Minister of National/Human Resources Réthelyi Balog Kásler v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Positivism Perspectives Antihumanism Empiricism Rationalism Scientism Declinations Legal positivism Logical positivism Positivist school Postpositivism Sociological positivism Machian positivism (empirio-criticism) Rankean historical positivism Polish positivism Russian Machism Principal concepts Consilience Demarcation Evidence Induction Justification Pseudoscience Critique of metaphysics Unity of science Verificationism Antitheses Antipositivism Confirmation holism Critical theory Falsifiability Geisteswissenschaft Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human science Humanities Metaphysics Methodological dualism Problem of induction Reflectivism Related paradigm shifts in the history of science Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s) Uncertainty principle (1927) Related topics Behavioralism Post-behavioralism Critical rationalism Criticism of science Epistemology anarchism idealism nihilism pluralism realism Holism Instrumentalism Modernism Naturalism in literature Nomothetic–idiographic distinction Objectivity in science Operationalism Phenomenalism Philosophy of science Deductive-nomological model Ramsey sentence Sense-data theory Qualitative research Relationship between religion and science Sociology Social science Philosophy Structural functionalism Structuralism Structuration theory Positivist-related debate Method Methodenstreit (1890s) Werturteilsstreit (1909–1959) Positivismusstreit (1960s) Fourth Great Debate in international relations (1980s) Science wars (1990s) Contributions The Course in Positive Philosophy (1830) A General View of Positivism (1848) Critical History of Philosophy (1869) Idealism and Positivism (1879–1884) The Analysis of Sensations (1886) The Logic of Modern Physics (1927) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) The Two Cultures (1959) The Universe in a Nutshell (2001) Proponents Richard Avenarius A. J. Ayer Alexander Bogdanov Percy Williams Bridgman Auguste Comte Eugen Dühring Émile Durkheim Stephen Hawking Ernst Laas Ernst Mach C. P. Snow Berlin Circle Vienna Circle Criticism Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) History and Class Consciousness (1923) The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1934) The Poverty of Historicism (1936) World Hypotheses (1942) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Truth and Method (1960) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) Conjectures and Refutations (1963) One-Dimensional Man (1964) Knowledge and Human Interests (1968) The Poverty of Theory (1978) The Scientific Image (1980) The Rhetoric of Economics (1986) Critics Theodor W. Adorno Gaston Bachelard Mario Bunge Wilhelm Dilthey Paul Feyerabend Hans-Georg Gadamer Jürgen Habermas Thomas Kuhn Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Herbert Marcuse Deirdre McCloskey Stephen Pepper Karl Popper Willard Van Orman Quine E. P. Thompson Bas van Fraassen Max Weber Concepts in contention Knowledge Objectivity Phronesis Truth Verstehen Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy 2 Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists RKD Artists ADK FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐kpqtj
Cached time: 20250817052110
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.518 seconds
Real time usage: 1.811 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11891/1000000
Revision size: 77557/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 364241/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 20584/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 316981/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.965/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 28097457/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1471.728      1 -total
 26.41%  388.661      2 Template:Reflist
 15.85%  233.209     41 Template:Cite_book
 14.80%  217.845      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
  9.80%  144.298      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.63%  127.057      4 Template:Efn
  7.77%  114.327      1 Template:Marxism
  5.95%   87.545      3 Template:IPA
  4.67%   68.697      9 Template:ISBN
  4.21%   61.977      1 Template:Birth_date Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:43069535:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817052110 and revision id 1304915456. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=György_Lukács&oldid=1304915456 " Categories : György Lukács 1885 births 1971 deaths 20th-century Hungarian essayists 20th-century Hungarian philosophers Burials at Kerepesi Cemetery Culture ministers of Hungary Ministers of education of Hungary Epistemologists Government ministers of Hungary Hegelian philosophers Hungarian Communist Party politicians Hungarian Jews Hungarian literary critics Hungarian Marxists Hungarian nobility Hungarian revolutionaries Jewish philosophers Jewish socialists Literary theorists Marxist humanists Marxist theorists Hungarian Marxist writers Members of the German Academy of Sciences at Berlin Members of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences Members of the Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party Members of the Hungarian Working People's Party Members of the National Assembly of Hungary (1949–1953) Members of the National Assembly of Hungary (1953–1958) Metaphysicians Ontologists People of the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Philosophers of art Philosophers of culture Philosophers of education Philosophers of literature Philosophers of social science Hungarian political philosophers Philosophy writers Social philosophers Writers from Budapest Max Weber scholars Hegel scholars Hidden categories: Pages with Hungarian IPA Pages with German IPA CS1 maint: location missing publisher Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Hungarian-language sources (hu) CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from November 2011 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from December 2010 Use dmy dates from February 2020 Articles with hCards Articles containing Hungarian-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 Articles needing additional references from December 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with Hungarian-language sources (hu) Template:Succession box: 'after' parameter includes the word 'abolished' S-aft: 'after' parameter includes the word 'abolished' This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 23:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents György Lukács 55 languages Add topic

