Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Attributes and family 3 Mythology Toggle Mythology subsection 3.1 Odyssey 3.2 Other appearances 4 Cult 5 Vulturnus 6 Genealogy 7 See also 8 References 9 Bibliography 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Eurus 25 languages Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Esperanto فارسی Français Ido Italiano Latina Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia East wind god in Greek mythology For the fictional character, see List of Sherlock characters § Eurus Holmes .

Eurus God of the East Wind Eurus on a mosaic from Antioch .

Greek Εὖρος Abode Sky Genealogy Parents Astraeus and Eos Siblings Winds ( Boreas , Notus , and Zephyrus ), Eosphorus , the Stars, Memnon , Emathion , Astraea Equivalents Roman Vulturnus In Greek mythology and religion , Eurus ( Ancient Greek : Εὖρος , romanized : Euros , lit.

'east wind') is the god and personification of the east wind, although sometimes he is also said to be southeast specifically.

[ 1 ] He is one of the four principal wind gods, the Anemoi , alongside Boreas (north wind), Zephyrus (west wind) and Notus (south wind). Eurus is featured rarely in ancient literature and art, appearing together with his three brothers as part of a whole if at all, and virtually has no individual mythology of his own. Often he is excluded from the group entirely, leaving Boreas, Zephyrus and Notus to represent the Anemoi. His Roman equivalent is the god Vulturnus .

Etymology [ edit ] The ancient Greek noun εὖρος ( eûros ) refers to the wind that blows from the east.

[ 2 ] Its ultimate etymology is not clear, although it has been variously connected to the Greek words for the dawn ( Ancient Greek : ἠώς , ēṓs ) and aura ( Ancient Greek : αὔρα , aúra ).

[ 2 ] Attributes and family [ edit ] Eurus is traditionally the god of the east or south-east wind.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] He has been both described as rain-bringing and a dry type of wind.

[ 4 ] Eurus, unlike the three other principal wind gods, is often skipped by ancient authors. He is the only one not to be mentioned by Hesiod at all, who makes the three beneficial winds the children of Eos (the dawn goddess) and her husband Astraeus , and says that all the other, non-beneficial for humanity winds are the sons of Typhon .

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] Instead of Eurus, Hesiod only speaks of "Argestes" for the fourth, which could also refer to Apeliotes occasionally (the god of the southeast wind).

[ 6 ] Similarly, he is the only one among the four who does not have an Orphic Hymn sang in his honour.

It is thus Nonnus , a fifth-century AD author from Panopolis who made Eurus one of the children of Eos and Astraeus in his Dionysiaca .

[ 7 ] Mythology [ edit ] Eurus relief from the Tower of the Winds in Athens , Greece .

In his few appearances in mythology, Eurus is usually paired with Notus, the south wind, like Zephyrus is paired with Boreas.

[ 3 ] Like Notus [ 8 ] and unlike Zephyrus/Boreas, Eurus has little to no mythology of his own, and only appears as part of a whole when the Anemoi feature in some tale.

Odyssey [ edit ] According to the Odyssey the winds seem to dwell on the island of Aeolia , as Zeus has made Aeolus the keeper of the winds.

[ 9 ] Aeolus receives Odysseus and his crew warmly, and keeps them as guests for a month.

[ 10 ] As they part, Aeolus gives Odysseus a bag containing all the winds, except for the gentle Zephyrus who blows them back home. Although warned not to open the bag under any circumstances, Odysseus's crewmates however foolishly open the bag, thinking it to contain some treasure, and set free Eurus along with all the other winds as well, who then blow the ships back to Aeolia, whereupon Aeolus refused to help them a second time.

[ 9 ] Some time later, he and Notus strand Odysseus on Thrinacia , the island of the sun-god Helios , for an entire month, following their departure from the island of Circe .

[ 11 ] After Odysseus left Calypso , the sea-god Poseidon in anger let loose all four of them, Eurus included, to cause a storm and raise great waves in order to drown him.

[ 12 ] Other appearances [ edit ] The horses on the Pergamon Altar , Pergamon Museum in Berlin.

In the Dionysiaca , he and his confirmed brothers live with their father Astraeus; Eurus serves nectar in cups when Demeter pays the family a visit.

[ 7 ] In the Pergamon Altar , which depicts the battle of the gods against the Giants , Eurus and the other three wind gods are shown in the shape of horses who pull Hera's chariot; [ 13 ] [ 14 ] traces of their equine form are also found in Quintus Smyrnaeus 's works, where they pull Zeus's chariot instead.

[ 15 ] Cult [ edit ] Early attestation of Eurus and wind-related worship is found in the Mycenaean Greek words a-ne-mo-i-je-re-ja ( Linear B : 𐀀𐀚𐀗𐀂𐀋𐀩𐀊 ) and a-ne-mo i-je-re-ja (Linear B: 𐀀𐀚𐀗𐄀𐀂𐀋𐀩𐀊 ), that is, "priestess of the winds", found on the KN Fp 1 and KN Fp 13 tablets.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] In post- Greek Dark Ages times, traces of Eurus's worship as part of the Four Winds is found in Titane in Corinthia where a sanctuary to the Winds stood, [ 18 ] Sparta where Eurus was described as the 'saviour of Sparta,' [ 4 ] Coronea where they had an altar, [ 19 ] and Attica .

Vulturnus [ edit ] For the Romans, Eurus was identified with the god Vulturnus ("he from Vultur", a mountain in Apulia , perhaps related to the world "vulture"), closely associated with dry and warm weather.

[ 4 ] He was also called Africanus (meaning "he from Africa ") occasionally, due to the dry type of east wind the ancients knew.

[ 20 ] Genealogy [ edit ] Eurus's family tree [ 21 ] Uranus Gaia Pontus Oceanus Tethys Hyperion Theia Crius Eurybia The Rivers The Oceanids Helios Selene [ 22 ] Eos Astraeus Pallas Perses EURUS Anemoi Astraea [ 23 ] Stars Cronus Rhea Coeus Phoebe Hestia Hera Hades Zeus Leto Asteria Demeter Poseidon Iapetus Clymene (or Asia ) [ 24 ] Mnemosyne (Zeus) Themis Atlas [ 25 ] Menoetius Prometheus [ 26 ] Epimetheus The Muses The Horae See also [ edit ] Ancient Greece portal Ancient Rome portal Mythology portal Bacab Dáinn, Dvalinn, Duneyrr and Duraþrór Norðri, Suðri, Austri and Vestri Vayu List of wind deities References [ edit ] ^ a b c Grimal 1987 , s.v.

Eurus .

^ a b Liddell & Scott 1940 , s.v.

εὖρος .

^ a b Smith 1873 , s.v.

Venti .

^ a b c Hünemörder, Christian; Bloch, René (2006).

"Eurus" . In Cancik, Hubert; Schneider, Helmuth (eds.).

Brill's New Pauly . Translated by Christine F. Salazar. Hamburg, Berne: Brill Reference Online.

doi : 10.1163/1574-9347_bnp_e406210 . Retrieved April 13, 2023 .

^ Rausch, Sven (2006).

"Zephyrus" . In Cancik, Hubert; Schneider, Helmuth (eds.).

Brill's New Pauly . Translated by Christine F. Salazar. Hamburg: Brill Reference Online.

doi : 10.1163/1574-9347_bnp_e12216400 . Retrieved April 13, 2023 .

^ Kerenyi 1951 , p.

205 .

^ a b Nonnus , Dionysiaca 6.28 ^ Grimal 1987 , p.

312 .

^ a b Myrsiades 2019 , p.

104 .

^ Homer , Odyssey 1-45 ^ Gantz 1996 , p.

705 .

^ Hard 2004 , p.

100 .

^ LIMC 617 (Venti) ^ Kunze, Max (1988).

Der grosse Marmoraltar von Pergamon [ The Large Marble Altar of Pergamon ] (in German). Berlin: Staatliche Museem zu Berlin. pp.

23– 24.

^ Quintus Smyrnaeus , Fall of Troy 12.189 ^ Raymoure, K. A.

"a-ne-mo" .

Linear B Transliterations . Deaditerranean. Dead Languages of the Mediterranean. Archived from the original on 2019-02-12 . Retrieved 2014-03-28 .

"KN Fp 1 + 31" .

"KN 13 Fp(1) (138)" .

^ "DĀMOS: Database of Mycenaean at Oslo - Department of Philosophy, Classics, History of Art and Ideas" .

^ Pausanias , Description of Greece 2.12.1 ^ Pausanias , Description of Greece 9.34.3 ^ Lactantius Placidus , On the Thebaid 2.4 ^ Hesiod , Theogony 132–138 , 337–411 , 453–520 , 901–906, 915–920 ; Caldwell, pp. 8–11, tables 11–14. Eurus himself is not named in the Theogony .

^ Although usually the daughter of Hyperion and Theia, as in Hesiod , Theogony 371–374 , in the Homeric Hymn to Hermes (4), 99–100 , Selene is instead made the daughter of Pallas the son of Megamedes.

^ Astraea is not mentioned by Hesiod, instead she is given as a daughter of Eos and Astraeus in Hyginus Astronomica 2.25.1 .

^ According to Hesiod , Theogony 507–511 , Clymene, one of the Oceanids , the daughters of Oceanus and Tethys , at Hesiod , Theogony 351 , was the mother by Iapetus of Atlas, Menoetius, Prometheus, and Epimetheus, while according to Apollodorus , 1.2.3 , another Oceanid, Asia was their mother by Iapetus.

^ According to Plato , Critias , 113d–114a , Atlas was the son of Poseidon and the mortal Cleito .

^ In Aeschylus , Prometheus Bound 18, 211, 873 (Sommerstein, pp.

444–445 n. 2 , 446–447 n. 24 , 538–539 n. 113 ) Prometheus is made to be the son of Themis .

Bibliography [ edit ] Gantz, Timothy (1996).

Early Greek Myth: A guide to literary and artistic sources . Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press; in two volumes: (Vol. 1) ISBN 978-0-8018-5360-9 ; (Vol. 2) ISBN 978-0-8018-5362-3 .

Grimal, Pierre (1987).

The Dictionary of Classical Mythology . Translated by A. R. Maxwell-Hyslop. New York, USA: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 0-631-13209-0 .

Hard, Robin (2004).

The Routledge Handbook of Greek Mythology: Based on H.J. Rose's "Handbook of Greek Mythology" .

Psychology Press .

ISBN 9780415186360 .

Hesiod , Theogony , in The Homeric Hymns and Homerica with an English Translation by Hugh G. Evelyn-White , Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1914.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Homer , The Iliad with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PhD in two volumes . Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1924.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Homer ; The Odyssey with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, PH.D. in two volumes . Cambridge, MA., Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann, Ltd. 1919.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Kerenyi, Karl (1951).

The Gods of the Greeks .

London , UK: Thames and Hudson.

Kunze, Max (1994).

Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae (LIMC) . Vol. VII.1. Zürich and Munich: Artemis Verlag.

ISBN 3-7608-8751-1 .

Lactantius Placidus , Lactantii Placidi qui dicitur Commentarios in Statii Thebaida it Commentarium in Achilleida recensuit , translated by Richard Jahnke, 1898, B. G. Tevbneri, Lipsiae.

Liddell, Henry George ; Scott, Robert (1940).

A Greek-English Lexicon , revised and augmented throughout by Sir Henry Stuart Jones with the assistance of Roderick McKenzie . Oxford: Clarendon Press .

Online version at Perseus.tufts project.

Myrsiades, Kostas (April 5, 2019).

Reading Homer's Odyssey . Pennsylvania, USA: Bucknell University Press .

ISBN 9781684481361 .

Nonnus , Dionysiaca ; translated by Rouse, W H D , III Books XXXVI-XLVIII.

Loeb Classical Library No. 346, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1940.

Internet Archive .

Pausanias , Pausanias Description of Greece with an English Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A., in 4 Volumes.

Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1918.

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

Quintus Smyrnaeus , Quintus Smyrnaeus: The Fall of Troy , translated by A.S. Way, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press , 1913.

Internet Archive .

Smith, William (1873).

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology . Vol. III: Oarses–Zygia. London: John Murray.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Eurus .

EURUS from the Theoi Project v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Religion and religious practice Main beliefs Ages of Man Golden Age Heroic Age Ancient accounts of Homer Apotheosis Arete Daemon Destiny Eudaimonia Euhemerism Eunoia Eusebeia Golden mean Golden Rule Greek words for love Hemitheos Hero cult Hubris Interpretatio graeca Katabasis Kleos Know thyself Metamorphosis Metempsychosis Nympholepsy Paradoxography Patron gods Pederasty Phronesis Polytheism Sophrosyne Soter Theia mania Xenia Texts / odes / epic poems Epic Cycle Aethiopis Cypria Iliad Iliupersis Little Iliad Nostoi Odyssey Telegony Theban Cycle Oedipodea Thebaid Epigoni Alcmeonis Others Aesop's Fables Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Catalogue of Women Cyranides Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Golden Verses of Pythagoras Greek Magical Papyri Homerica Homeric Hymns Interpretation of Dreams Oneirocritica Orphic Hymns Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Sortes Astrampsychi Stories from Plato Atlantis Myth of Er Ring of Gyges Theogony Works and Days Religions Antecedents Minoan religion Mycenaean religion List of Mycenaean deities Paleo-Balkan mythology Proto-Indo-European mythology Religions of the ancient Near East Expressions Atheism Henotheism Monotheism Polytheism Hellenistic religions Early Christianity Christianization Relationship with Greek philosophy Esoteric systems Early alchemy Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Hellenistic Judaism God-fearers Syncretic religions Alexander Ptolemaic cult Etruscan religion Greco-Buddhism Roman religion Imperial cult Religious views of emperor Julian Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Arcadian Mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Orphism Samothracian Mysteries New religious movements Discordianism Feraferia Gaianism Hellenism Religious practice Worship / rituals Amphidromia Arotoi Hieroi Astragalomancy Baptes Cult of Artemis at Brauron Daduchos Divination Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Greco-Roman mysteries Hero cult Heroön Hierophany Hieros gamos Hymns Incubation Komos Nekyia Omophagia Orgia Panegyris Prayer Sacrifice Animal sacrifice Hecatomb Holocaust Libation Pharmakos Votive offering Theatre Religious offices Amphictyonic league Archon basileus Basilinna Gerarai Hiereia Hierophant Hierophylakes Iatromantis Kanephoros Mystagogue Oracle Sibyl Thiasus Religious objects Baetyl Cult image Chryselephantine sculpture Xoanon Greek terracotta figurines Kernos Kykeon Loutrophoros Omphalos Panathenaic amphora Rhyton Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Thymiaterion Magic Apotropaic magic Curse tablet Divination Greek Magical Papyri Hermeticism Hermetica Necromancy Philia Events Festivals / feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Halieia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Leucophryna Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Ptolemaieia Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Heraean Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Actia Sacred places Temples / sanctuaries Asclepieion Delphinion Mithraeum Necromanteion of Acheron Nymphaeum Panionium Parthenon Ploutonion Telesterion Temenos Temple of Artemis, Ephesus Temple of Zeus, Olympia Oracles Amphiareion of Oropos Aornum Claros Delphi Didyma Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Apollo at Ptoion Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros Oracle of Menestheus Sanctuary of the Great Gods Tegyra Mountains Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Caves of Pan Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Island of Achilles Delos Islands of Diomedes Springs Castalian Spring Hippocrene Pierian Spring Others Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Theatre of Dionysus Myths and mythology Deities ( Family tree ) Primordial deities Aether Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Water deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Proteus River gods Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Charon Hermes Hermanubis Thanatos Angelos Cabeiri The Erinyes (Furies) Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Darrhon Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Pasiphaë Art and beauty deities Aphrodite Apollo The Charites (Graces) Aglaea Euphrosyne Thalia Dionysus The Muses Calliope Clio Polyhymnia Euterpe Terpsichore Erato Melpomene Thalia Urania Other major deities The Anemoi (Winds) Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Azone Chrysaor Cybele Eileithyia Glycon Harmonia Nemesis Pan Pegasus Zelus Heroes / heroines Individuals Abderus Achilles Actaeon Adonis Aeneas Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Polydeuces) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Menelaus Narcissus Nestor Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Otrera Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Groups Argonauts Calydonian hunters Epigoni Seven against Thebes Oracles / seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyls Cimmerian Cumaean Delphic Erythraean Hellespontine Libyan Persian Phrygian Samian Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Other mortals Aegeus Aegisthus Agamemnon Andromache Andromeda Antigone Augeas Briseis Cassiopeia Creon of Thebes Chryseis Chrysothemis Clytemnestra Damocles Deidamia Deucalion Electra Eteocles Europa Gordias Hecuba Helen of Troy Hellen The Heracleidae Hermione Hippolyta Io Iphigenia Ismene Jocasta Laius Lycian peasants Lycaon The Maenads Memnon Messapian shepherds Midas Minos Myrrha Neoptolemus Niobe Orestes Paris Patroclus Penelope Philomela Phoenix Polybus of Corinth Polynices Priam Procne Pylades Pyrrha Telemachus Troilus Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Necromanteion (necromancy temple) Necromanteion of Acheron Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Isles of the Blessed Mourning Fields Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Residents Anticlea Danaïdes Eurydice Ixion Ocnus Salmoneus The Shades Sisyphus Tantalus Tiresias Titans Tityos Visitors Dionysus Heracles Hermes Odysseus Orpheus Pirithous Psyche Theseus Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Charon's obol Animals, daemons, and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Menoetius Mythical Beings Lists Deities Mythological creatures Mortals Minor figures Trojan War characters Minor spirits Daemon Agathodaemon Cacodaemon Eudaemon Nymph Satyr Beasts / creatures Centaur Centaurides Ichthyocentaur Cyclops Dragon Drakaina Echidna Giant Gorgon Harpy Hecatonchires Hippocampus Horses of Helios Lamia Phoenix Python Siren Scylla and Charybdis Sphinx Typhon Captured / slain by heroes Calydonian boar Cerberus Cerynian Hind Chimera Cretan Bull Crommyonian Sow Erymanthian boar Khalkotauroi Lernaean Hydra Mares of Diomedes Medusa Minotaur Nemean lion Orthrus Polyphemus Stymphalian birds Talos Teumessian fox Tribes Achaeans Amazons Anthropophagi Bebryces Cicones Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Laestrygonians Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Spartoi Telchines Places / Realms Aethiopia Ara Colchis Erytheia Hyperborea Ismarus Ithaca Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Phlegra Scheria Scythia Symplegades Tartessos Themiscyra Thrinacia Troy Events Apollo and Daphne Calydonian boar hunt Eros and Psyche Judgment of Paris Labours of Heracles Orpheus and Eurydice Returns from Troy Odyssey Wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Gigantomachy Indian War Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Argo Dragon's teeth Diipetes Eidolon Galatea Girdle of Aphrodite Golden apple Golden Fleece Gordian knot Harpe Ichor Labyrinth Lotus tree Milk of Hera Moly Necklace of Harmonia Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos ( Winged helmet ) Phaeacian ships Philosopher's stone Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thyrsus Trident of Poseidon Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of fire Symbols Bowl of Hygieia Caduceus Cornucopia Gorgoneion Kantharos Labrys Orphic egg Ouroboros Owl of Athena Phallus Rod of Asclepius Swan song Wind East West North South Modern treatments Classical mythology in western art and literature Classicism Classics Greek mythology in popular culture Modern understanding of Greek mythology v t e Ancient Greek deities Primal elements Aether Chaos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx The Ourea Pontus Tartarus Uranus Titans Twelve Titans Coeus Crius Cronus Dione Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Descendants of the Titans Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Olympian deities Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Olympian Gods Asclepius Eileithyia Enyo Eris Iris Harmonia Hebe Heracles Paean Pan Muses Daughters of Zeus Calliope Clio Euterpe Erato Melpomene Polyhymnia Terpsichore Thalia Urania Daughters of Apollo Apollonis Borysthenis Cephisso Boeotian Muses Aoide Melete Mneme Muses of the Lyre Hypate Mese Nete Muses at Sicyon Polymatheia Charites (Graces) Aglaia Euphrosyne Hegemone Pasithea Thalia Horae (Hours) Dike Eirene Eunomia Children of Styx Bia Kratos Nike Zelus Water deities Sea deities Amphitrite Benthesikyme Brizo Calliste Calypso Ceto Eurybia Glaucus Leucothea Melicertes Nereus Nerites Oceanus Phorcys Pontus Poseidon Proteus Rhodos Tethys Thalassa Thaumas Thetis Triton Oceanids Acaste Admete Asia Callirhoe Ceto Clymene (consort of Helios) Clymene (wife of Iapetus) Clytie Dione Dodone Doris Electra Eurynome Idyia Melia (consort of Apollo) Melia (consort of Inachus) Metis Perse Philyra Pleione Plouto Styx Telesto Theia Zeuxo Nereids Amatheia Amphithoe Amphitrite Arethusa Cymatolege Cymo Dynamene Galatea Galene Protomedeia Psamathe Sao Spio Thalia Thetis River gods Achelous Alpheus Anapus Asopus Asterion Axius Caanthus Cebren Cephissus Enipeus Kladeos Meander Nilus Numicus Phyllis Peneus Sangarius Scamander Selemnus Simoeis Strymon Naiads Aegina Achiroe Aganippe The Anigrides Argyra Bistonis Bolbe Caliadne Cassotis Castalia Cleocharia Creusa Daphne Drosera Harpina The Ionides Ismenis Larunda Lilaea Liriope Melite Metope Minthe Moria Nana Nicaea Orseis Pallas Pirene Salmacis Stilbe The Thriae Corycia Cleodora Melaina Tiasa Personifications Children of Eris Algos Amphillogiai The Androktasiai Atë Dysnomia Horkos Hysminai Lethe Logoi Limos Machai Neikea Phonoi Ponos Pseudea Children of Nyx Apate Eris Geras Hesperides Hypnos The Keres The Moirai Atropos Clotho Lachesis Momus Moros Nemesis Oizys The Oneiroi Philotes Thanatos Others Achlys Adephagia Aergia Aidos Aion Alala Alastor Aletheia Alke Amechania Anaideia Ananke Angelia Anteros Apheleia Arete The Arae Astraea Caerus Chronos Chrysus Corus Deimos Dikaiosyne Dyssebeia Eiresione Ekecheiria Eulabeia Eupraxia Eusebeia Ersa Eros Erotes Gelos Hedone Hedylogos Heimarmene Hermaphroditus Homados Homonoia Horme Hymen Iacchus Ioke Kakia Koalemos Kydoimos The Litae Lyssa The Maniae Methe Nomos Palioxis Peitharchia Peitho Penia Penthus Pepromene Pheme Phobos Phrike Phthonus Poine Polemos Poros Praxidice Proioxis Prophasis Soter Soteria Thrasos Tyche Other deities Sky The Anemoi Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Hesperus Phosphorus Phaethon Astrape and Bronte Aura The Hesperides The Hyades Nephele The Pleiades Alcyone Sterope Celaeno Electra Maia Merope Taygete Sirius Tritopatores Agriculture Aphaia Demeter Despoina Eunostus Opora Philomelus Plutus Health Asclepius Aceso Epione Iaso Hygieia Paean Panacea Telesphorus Rustic deities Aetna Agdistis The Alseids Amphictyonis Aristaeus Attis Britomartis The Cabeiri Comus The Dryades Erato The Hamadryades Chrysopeleia The Epimelides Hecaterus Leuce The Maenades The Meliae Hyperborean maidens The Oreads Echo Priapus Rhapso Silenus Telete Others Aphroditus Arke Auxesia Enodia Circe Enyalius Hecate Orthanes Palaestra Pasiphaë Phanes Sosipolis Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eurus&oldid=1304316592 " Categories : Anemoi Deeds of Poseidon Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing Mycenaean Greek-language text CS1: long volume value Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 08:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eurus 25 languages Add topic

