Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Bronze Age Europe 2 Iron Age Europe Toggle Iron Age Europe subsection 2.1 Situla art 3 Attribute of Isis 4 Christian situlae 5 Outside Europe 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Citations 6.2 Sources 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Situla 16 languages Български Català Deutsch Español Euskara Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Nederlands Polski Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Situla (vessel) ) Bucket shaped container found in archaeological sites For other uses, see Situla (disambiguation) .

Etruscan situla, 600–550 BC, tomb 68 at the Certosa necropolis Situla (plural situlae ), from the Latin word for bucket or pail, is the term in archaeology and art history for a variety of elaborate bucket-shaped vessels from the Bronze Age to the Middle Ages , usually with a handle at the top. All types may be highly decorated, most characteristically with reliefs in bands or friezes running round the vessel.

Decorated Iron Age situlae in bronze are a distinctive feature of Etruscan art in burials from the northern part of the Etruscan regions, from which the style spread north to some cultures in Northern Italy , Slovenia , and adjacent areas, where terms such as situla culture and situla art may be used.

Situla is also the term for types of bucket-shaped Ancient Greek vases, some very finely painted.

[ 1 ] More utilitarian pottery situlae are also found, and some in silver or other materials, [ 2 ] such as two glass ones from late antiquity in St Mark's, Venice . Ancient Egyptian and Near Eastern shapes tend to have a pointed bottom, so that they must rest on a stand or on their side. The practical wider shape is a European invention, first seen in the European Bronze Age .

Bronze Age Europe [ edit ] Urnfield culture, bronze situla with bird-headed sun ship motif, Hungary , c. 1000 BC.

[ 3 ] Bronze situlae were a feature of the Urnfield culture which dominated central Europe and parts of southern Europe in the Late Bronze Age. They frequently incorporated schematic depictions of solar boats with bird head protomes , known as the 'sun-bird-ship' motif.

[ 4 ] Iron Age Europe [ edit ] Typical Iron Age situlae are bronze , as in the types of libation vessels found as grave goods in Etruscan graves , the Este culture (example, the Situla Benvenuti ) and neighbouring Golasecca culture , and the eastern zone of the Hallstatt culture of Central and Southeast Europe. Here they have a distinctive style, often without a handle; the Vače situla is a Slovenian example. These usually have sides sloping outwards, then a sharp turn in at the shoulder, and outside Etruria often a short narrower neck. The shape has similarities with the narrower spouted Etruscan shape of flagon that was also copied to the north, as in the 5th-century Basse Yutz Flagons found in France. They are often decorated, in the most elaborate examples with several bands of figures running round the vessel. They may or may not have handles, and sometimes have lids.

[ 5 ] Many are made of several sheets held together with rivets .

[ 6 ] The Etruscan examples are most characteristic in the 7th century BC, though continuing well afterwards. They are in various materials, from pottery to bronze, and sometimes silver. The Situla of the Pania is an unusual luxury Etruscan example in ivory , and the Bocchoris vase a ceramic import from Egypt from an Etruscan burial. The Este and Hallstatt examples are later, with the Slovenian production reaching a peak in quality in the 5th century, up to about 400 BC, well after the Hallstatt period had ended over much of its area.

[ 7 ] Some were found containing cremated ashes, but they were essentially luxury vessels used at feasts.

[ 8 ] Numerous Hallstatt situlae were found in Slovenia, mainly (19 of them) in the area of Novo Mesto in Lower Carniola , which has been named the "City of Situlae" due to this.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Japodian burial urns made by the Japodes tribe of Illyrians are a 5th-century BC extension into modern Bosnia of this style.

Later Etruscan and then Roman styles favoured a simple shape curving from the base, becoming vertical at the top, with a wide mouth and no shoulder, but sometimes a projecting rim. These had a variety of uses, including for washing and bathing. Any decoration was often concentrated on the upper part of the sides.

Situla art [ edit ] Situla art was an important means of transition of Greek-derived motifs from the Etruscans through the regions to the north to the emerging La Tène culture further west.

[ 11 ] According to Ruth and Vincent Megaw , "Situla art depicts life as seen from a masculine viewpoint, in which women are servants or sex objects; most of the scenes which include humans are of the feasts in which the situlae themselves figure, of the hunt or of war".

[ 12 ] Similar scenes are found on other vessel shapes, as well as bronze belt-plaques.

[ 13 ] The processions of animals, typical of earlier examples, or humans derive from the Near East and Mediterranean, and Nancy Sandars finds the style shows "a gaucherie that betrays the artist working in a way that is uncongenial, too much at variance with the temper of the craftsmen and the craft". Compared to earlier styles that arose organically in Europe "situla art is weak and sometimes quaint", and "in essence not of Europe".

[ 14 ] Except for the Benvenuti Situla, men are hairless, with "funny hats, dumpy bodies and big heads", though often shown looking cheerful in an engaging way. The Benevenuti Situla is also unusual in that it seems to show a specific story.

[ 15 ] Bronze situla from Hallstatt , 800–750 BC Etruscan with geometric ornament, 700–550 BC Etruscan " Situla della Pania ", 7th century BC Etruscan, silver, Chiusi , c. 650 BC Etruscan, with silver mounts, Cerveteri c. 650 BC Clearer reproduction of the Etruscan bronze situla at the top of the page.

Situla Benvenuti , Este culture , c. 600 BC Bronze vases & situlae, Eastern zone of Hallstatt culture D, Kleinklein Golasecca culture II A, turn of the 7/6th century BC The Vače situla , Slovenia, 5th century BC Late Etruscan, 3rd century BC, bronze Late Etruscan, c. 300 BC, pottery Roman bronze situla from Germany, 2nd–3rd centuries Bronze stamnoid situla, c. 340–320 BC, Sofia , Bulgaria Ancient Greek ( Apulian ) pottery situla vase, 340-320 BC Roman silver situla with lady (or Venus) bathing, 190–210 AD Attribute of Isis [ edit ] Priestess of Isis carrying situla, Roman statue, 2nd century BC The term is also used for pails carried by figures in other art forms; according to Plutarch and other sources this was a sign of a devotee of Isis , who herself is often shown carrying one (containing water from the sacred Nile ), of a rather different shape, with a rounded bottom, and sometimes lidded. This rounded shape, often with a "nipple" at the bottom (see Luristan example in § Gallery , below), is believed to have represented the female breast .

[ 16 ] These were also donated to temples as votive offerings by devotees.

Christian situlae [ edit ] Elaborate early medieval situlae, sometimes called aspersoria (singular: aspersorium ), were Christian liturgical objects used to hold holy water , also usually of bronze, and straight-sided with a handle. An aspergillum was dipped in the situla to collect water with which to sprinkle the congregation or other objects.

Four richly carved ivory examples from the 10th century are known: the Basilewsky Situla of 920 in the Victoria & Albert Museum , decorated with twelve scenes from the life of Christ on two levels (it contains one of the very few depictions of Judas Iscariot showing remorse and throwing the thirty silver coins on the floor of the Temple), [ 17 ] the "Situla of Gotofredo" of c. 980 in Milan Cathedral , [ 18 ] one in the Aachen Cathedral Treasury, [ 19 ] and one in the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.

[ 20 ] All came from the milieu of the Ottonian court: an inscription says that Archbishop Gotfredus presented the Milan example in anticipation of a visit by the Emperor, [ 21 ] also referred to in the London example which was possibly from the same workshop.

[ 22 ] The latest and most lavish is the Aachen example, which is studded with jewels and shows an enthroned Emperor, surrounded by a pope and archbishops. This was probably made in Trier about 1000.

[ 23 ] The Basilewsky Situla, 920, Ottonian , in ivory Ottonian ivory situla with scenes from the Life of Christ c. 860–880 AD Outside Europe [ edit ] The term may also be used for similar vessels from other cultures, especially the ancient Middle East and China and Vietnam.

[ 24 ] Bronze bath buckets are also found in Islamic art , such as the 12th century Persian Bobrinsky Bucket in the Hermitage Museum .

Egyptian faience situla with erased cartouche of Akhenaten , 12 inches high Situla from Luristan , 9th century BC; note the "nipple" at the bottom Egyptian, 305–30 BC, Ptolemaic Dynasty, bronze Nasrid situla from the Alhambra , 14th century. Bronze with niello .

References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ MFA Boston, Attic vase situla Archived 2007-02-24 at the Wayback Machine ^ Kipfer, 518 ^ "Situla" .

Institute for the Study of the Ancient World . 2022.

^ "History of Europe: The People of the Metal Ages – Rituals, religion and art" .

Britannica.com . Retrieved 8 November 2022 .

In the stylistic development during the Metal Ages, two phenomena are of particular interest. The first is the development of the sun-bird-ship motif of the Urnfield Culture. The origin of this motif, which featured bird-headed ships embellished with solar disks, is not known, but over a short period about 1400 BCE it became common both as incised decoration and as plastic art throughout a vast area of eastern and central Europe. The similarity in execution and composition is remarkable and suggests a shared understanding of its meaning and the intensity of contact between distant areas.

^ Megaw, 34-39 ^ Sandars, 223 ^ Megaw, 34–39 ^ Sandars, 224 ^ "Novo mesto bogatejše še za eno poslikano situlo" [Novo mesto Richer for Another Painted Situla] (in Slovenian). Lokalno.si. 6 February 2006 . Retrieved 15 December 2010 .

^ "Application for the Title of the European Capital of Culture 2012" (PDF) . City Municipality of Maribor. 2008.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) [ permanent dead link ] ^ Sandars, 223–225; Megaw, 34–39 ^ Megaw, 37 ^ Sandars, 223–224 ^ Sandars, 225, quoted ^ Sandars, 224 ^ Witt, 55.

Isis situla Archived 2012-02-26 at the Wayback Machine ^ Basilewsky Situla V&A Museum ^ "image of Milan situla" . Archived from the original on 2014-02-22 . Retrieved 2010-01-21 .

^ Image of Aachen situla Archived 2011-07-22 at the Wayback Machine ^ Metropolitan Museum example ^ Lasko, 92–3 ^ Though Lasko, 92 disagrees with this.

^ All except the New York situla are illustrated and discussed in Beckwith, pp. 129–130, 135–136 ^ Metropolitan, Vietnamese bronze situla Sources [ edit ] Beckwith, John.

Early Medieval Art: Carolingian, Ottonian, Romanesque , Thames & Hudson, 1964 (rev. 1969), ISBN 0-500-20019-X Kipfer, Barbara Ann.

Encyclopedic dictionary of archaeology , Springer, 2000, ISBN 0-306-46158-7 , ISBN 978-0-306-46158-3 .

Google books Lasko, Peter , Ars Sacra, 800–1200 , Yale University Press, 1995 (2nd edn.) ISBN 978-0300060485 Megaw, Ruth and Vincent , Celtic Art: From Its Beginnings to the Book of Kells , 1989 (2001 2nd edn), Thames & Hudson Sandars, Nancy K., Prehistoric Art in Europe , Penguin (Pelican, now Yale, History of Art), 1968 (nb 1st edn.) Witt, Reginald Eldred.

Isis in the ancient world , JHU Press, 1997 (2nd ed), ISBN 0-8018-5642-6 , ISBN 978-0-8018-5642-6 .

Google books Further reading [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Situlae .

Beckwith, John.

The Basilewsky Situla , 1963, HMSO Frey, Otto-Herman.

Die Entstehung der Situlenkunst: Studien zur figürlich verzierten Toreutik von Este , 1969.

Kastelic, Joze, and Karl Kromer, Guido Mansuelli.

Situla Art: Ceremonial Bronzes of Ancient Europe , NY McGraw-Hill 1965 Kern, Anton, and Cordie Rosemarie, Guichard Vincent.

Situlen - Bilderwelten zwischen Etruskern und Kelten auf antikem Weingeschirr , 2009 v t e Greek vase shapes Wine vessels Amphora Kotyle Kantharos Karkhesion Kyathos Kylix Lakaina Mastos Oenochoe Pelike Psykter Rhyton Skyphos Water vessels Hydria Hydriske Kalpis Mixing vessels Dinos Krater Cookware Chytra Lebes Tableware Pinakion Perfume, oil, and wedding Alabastron Aryballos Askos Lebes Gamikos Lekythos Loutrophoros Lydion Pelike Pyxis Stirrup jar Funerary and religious Kernos Lekythos Loutrophoros Phiale Storage Amphora Calathus Chytra Lebes Pelike Pithos Situla Stamnos Other Band skyphos Epinetron Luchnos Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Situla&oldid=1285885457 " Categories : Bronzeware Iron Age Containers Archaeological artefact types Ivory works of art Ottonian art Este culture Golasecca culture Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Slovenian-language sources (sl) CS1 errors: missing periodical All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 April 2025, at 10:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Situla 16 languages Add topic

