Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theoretical background Toggle Theoretical background subsection 1.1 Purposes and applications 1.2 Self-cultivation: cultural and philosophical psychotherapies 1.2.1 Confucianism and the relational self 1.2.2 Taoism and the authentic self 1.2.3 Buddhism and the non-self 2 Influences of self-cultivation on Chinese philosophy Toggle Influences of self-cultivation on Chinese philosophy subsection 2.1 Confucian self-cultivation as a psychological process 2.1.1 Jūnzǐ 2.2 Cultural and Ethical Values involved 2.3 Cultivation of self in East Asian philosophy of education 3 Modern practices Toggle Modern practices subsection 3.1 The "self"-concept in Western culture 3.2 Morita therapy 3.3 Naikan therapy 3.4 The theory of constructive living 3.5 Epicurean meleta 3.6 Nietzsche's ethics of self-cultivation 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Self-cultivation 2 languages العربية Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Development of one's virtues This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( September 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may be confusing or unclear to readers .

Please help clarify the article . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .

( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e Self-cultivation or personal cultivation ( Chinese : 修身 ; pinyin : xiūshēn ; Wade–Giles : hsiu-shen ; lit.

'cultivate oneself') is the development of one's mind or capacities through one's own efforts.

[ 1 ] Self-cultivation is the cultivation, integration, and coordination of mind and body. Although self-cultivation may be practiced and implemented as a form of cognitive therapy in psychotherapy , it goes beyond healing and self-help to also encompass self-development, self-improvement and self realisation. It is associated with attempts to go beyond and understand normal states of being, enhancing and polishing one's capacities and developing or uncovering innate human potential .

[ 2 ] Self-cultivation also alludes to philosophical models in Mohism , Confucianism , Taoism and other Chinese philosophies , as well as in Epicureanism , and is an essential component of well-established East-Asian ethical values. Although this term applies to cultural traditions in Confucianism and Taoism, the goals and aspirations of self-cultivation in these traditions differ greatly.

[ 3 ] Theoretical background [ edit ] Purposes and applications [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Self-cultivation is an essential component of the context of existential relations [ clarification needed ] .

[ 4 ] It enhances individuality and personal growth and centralises the idea [ clarification needed ] of human agency . Self-cultivation is a process that cultivates one's mind and body in an attempt to transcend ordinary habitual states of being, enhancing a person's coordination and integration of congruent thoughts, beliefs and actions.  It aims to polish or enlighten their capacities and inborn potentials.

Self-cultivation: cultural and philosophical psychotherapies [ edit ] Confucianism, Taoism, and Buddhism have adopted elements of doctrine from one another to form new branches and sects. Some of these have disseminated to East Asian regions including Taiwan, Japan, and Korea.

[ 5 ] Confucianism and the relational self [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Confucius believed that one's life is the continuation of one's parents' life. Therefore, followers of Confucianism teach their children in such way that the younger generation is educated to cultivate themselves to live with a satisfactory level of self-discipline . Even though individuals see a clear-cut boundary between themselves and others, each person in a dyadic relationship is seen embedded in a particular social network.

[ further explanation needed ] By respecting the parents—the elder and the superior—a child is raised to be morally upright according to the expectations of others. This can be a social burden that causes stressful interpersonal relationships, and can cause disturbance and conflicts.

Taoism and the authentic self [ edit ] Chinese Philosophy – Five Elements (Cycle of Balance and Control) Further information: Ziran , Pu (Taoism) , and Zhenren See also: Neidan This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Taoism tends to focus on linking the body and mind to the Nature. Taoism advocates the authentic self that is free from legal, social, or political restrictions. It seeks to cultivate an individual's self by healing and emancipating them from the ethical bounds of the human society. Taoism interprets the fortune or misfortune in one's life in terms of one's destiny ( 命 ), which is determined by the person's birth date and time. By avoiding the interference of personal desires and by relating everything to the system of the opposing elements of yin and yang , the cosmology of Taoism aims to keep individuals and everything in the harmonious balance. The explanation of self-cultivation in Taoism also corresponds to the equilibrium of the Five Transformative Phases ( 五行 Wu Xing ): metal ( 金 ), wood ( 木 ), water ( 水 ), fire ( 火 ), and  earth ( 土 ).

Buddhism and the non-self [ edit ] Main article: Bhavana After the introduction of Buddhism to China, "spiritual self-cultivation" ( 精神修养 ) became one of the terms used to translate the Buddhist concept of bhāvana . The ultimate life goal in Buddhism is nirvana . People are encouraged to practice self-cultivation by detaching themselves from their desires and egos, and by attaining a mindful awareness of the non-self .

Chán and Zen Buddhist scholars emphasise that the key in self-cultivation is a " beginner's mind " which can allow the uncovering of the " luminous mind " and the realisation of innate Buddha-nature through the experience of sudden enlightenment .

[ 6 ] In Japan, the Buddhist practice is equated with the notion of shūyō ( 修養 しゅうよう ) or personal cultivation.

[ 7 ] Influences of self-cultivation on Chinese philosophy [ edit ] Confucian self-cultivation as a psychological process [ edit ] Part of a series on Confucianism Early history Spring and Autumn period Confucius Warring States period Mencius Xunzi Western Han Dong Zhongshu Gongsun Hong Fundamental concepts Tian Ganying Zhengming Xiao Sangang Wuchang Li Ren Xin Yi Schools Neo-Confucianism Han Learning Taigu school Lingnan Confucianism New Confucianism Progressive Confucianism Hermeneutic schools Old Text New Text Confucianism by country Korea Japan Vietnam Indonesia United States Confucian texts Ruzang Five Classics Classic of Poetry Book of Documents Book of Rites Book of Changes Spring and Autumn Annals Four Books Analects Mencius Doctrine of the Mean Great Learning Other texts Three Commentaries Rites of Zhou Ceremonial Rites Classic of Filial Piety Erya Organization Religious Confucianism Confucian ritual religion Confucian royal ancestral shrine Temple of Confucius Confucian churches and sects Holy Confucian Church Indonesian Confucian Church Universal Church of the Way and its Virtue Phoenix churches Xuanyuanism Shengdao Nanyang Confucian Association v t e Self-cultivation ( 修养 xiū yǎng ) in the Confucian tradition refers to keeping the balance between inner and outer selves, and between self and others. Self-cultivation in Chinese is an abbreviation of " xiū-xīn yǎng-xìng " ( 修心养性 ), which literally translates to "rectifying one’s mind and nurturing one’s character (in particular through art, music and philosophy)".

[ 5 ] Confucianism embodies metaphysics of self.

[ further explanation needed ] It develops a complex model of self-cultivation. The cohering key concept is 'intellectual intuition', which is explained as a direct insight and cognition of present knowledge of reality, with no inference of bias toward discernment or logical reasoning. Confucianism has a large emphasis as its foundation the incorporation, application and implementation of filial piety .

Self-cultivation aims to achieve a harmonious society that is dependent on personal noble cultivation. The process entails the pursuit of moral perfection through knowledge and application.

[ 3 ] Jūnzǐ [ edit ] See also: Analects and Junzi In the Analects of Confucius there are two types of persons. One is the "profound person" ( 君子 ; jūnzǐ ), and the other is "petty person" ( 小人 ; xiǎorén ). These two types are opposed to one another in terms of developed potential. Confucius takes something of a blank slate perspective: "all human beings are alike at birth" ( Analects 17.2), but eventually "the profound person understands what is moral. The petty person understands what is profitable" (4.16).

The jūnzǐ is the person who always manifests the quality of rén ( 仁 ; "humaneness", "co-humanity" in an interdependent, hierarchical universe") in themselves and they display the quality of yì ("rightness", "righteousness") in their actions (4.5). Confucius highlights his fundamentally elitist , hierarchical model of relations by describing how the jūnzǐ relates to their fellows: "The moral force of the jūnzǐ is like the wind, whereas the xiǎorén 's is like the grass. The grass shall bend when the wind is let to blow over it." — Analects , 12.32 According to D. C. Lau, yì is an attribute of actions, and rén is an attribute of agents.

[ 8 ] There are conceptual links between yì , lǐ ("ritual propriety"), dé ("virtue"), and the jūnzǐ . According to what is yì , the jūnzǐ exerts the moral force, which is dé , and thus demonstrates rén .

The following passages from the Analects point out the pathway towards self-cultivation that Confucius taught, with the ultimate goal of becoming the jūnzǐ : "The Master's Way is nothing but other-regard and self-reflection." — Analects , 4.15 "From the age of fifteen on, I have been intent upon learning; from thirty on, I have established myself; from forty on, I have not been confused; from fifty on, I have known the mandate of Heaven; from sixty on, my ear has been attuned; from seventy on, I have followed my heart's desire without transgressing what is right." — Analects , 2.4 In the first passage, "self-reflection" is explained as "Do not do to others what you do not desire for yourself" (15.24). Confucius considers it extremely important for one to realise the necessity of concern and empathy for others, which can be achieved by reflecting upon oneself. The deeply relational self can then respond to inner reflection with outer virtue.

The second passage indicates the life-long timescale of the process of self-cultivation. It can begin during one's early teenage years, then extend well into more-mature age. The process includes the transformation of the individual, in which they realise that they should be able to distinguish and choose from what is right and what is desired.

Self-cultivation, Confucius expects, is an essential philosophical process for one to become jūnzǐ by maximising rén .

He aims to reflect upon a self that is able to compare itself with moral and social principles of tradition.

[ clarification needed ] Confucius does not suffer from the Cartesian "mind-body problem" . In Confucianism, there is no division between inner and outer self, thus the cumulative effect brought by Confucian self-cultivation is not just limited to one's self or person, but extends rather to the social and even cosmic.

[ 9 ] Monument of Confucius Cultural and Ethical Values involved [ edit ] Confucius and Students Self-cultivation is one of the key principles of Confucianism, and may be considered the core of Chinese philosophy. The latter can be seen as the disciplined reflections on the insights of self-cultivation. While Étienne Balazs asserted that all Chinese philosophy is social philosophy and that the idea of the group takes precedence over conceptions of the individual self as the social dimension of the human condition features so prominently in the Chinese world of thought, [ citation needed ] Wing-Tsit Chan suggests a more comprehensive characterisation of Chinese philosophy as humanism : not the humanism that denies or slights a Supreme Power, but one that professes the unity of man and Heaven.

[ 10 ] Similar to the Western sense of guilt, the Chinese sense of shame is studied to amplify that social approval and other external factors, such as the impression from others, defines the fundamental morals the Chinese society holds, rather than internal psychological sanction.

[ clarification needed ] In Chinese ethics, the prevalent sociological literature on the mechanisms of "saving face" ( 面子 , miànzǐ ) and "networking" ( 关系 , guānxì ) exhibits the importance of Chinese interpersonal and social relationships via the understanding of self-cultivation [ clarification needed ] .

Cultivation of self in East Asian philosophy of education [ edit ] In East Asian cultures, self-cultivation is one of the most important concerns in regards to personal growth [ clarification needed ] . To help students and the younger generation understand the meaning of being a person, philosophers (mostly scholars) tried to explain their definitions of self with various theoretical approaches.

The legacy of Chinese philosopher Confucius, among others (for example, Laozi , Zhuangzi , and Mencius ), has provided a rich domain of Chinese philosophical heritage in East Asia.

[ 11 ] Firstly, the goal of education, and one's most noble goal in life, is to properly develop oneself in order to become a "profound person" ( 君子 , jūnzǐ ). Young people were taught that it was shameful to become a "petty person" ( 小人 , xiǎo rén ), as that was the exact opposite to "sage" ( 圣人 , shèngrén ). However, as both Confucian and Daoist philosophers adopted the term shèngrén , there has been divergence that led to differences in educational concepts and practices.

[ 12 ] Besides Confucianism and Daoism, the Hundred Schools of Thought in Ancient China also included Buddhist and other varieties of philosophy, each of which offered different thoughts on the ideal conception of self.

In the modern era, some East Asian cultures have abandoned some of the archaic conceptions, or have replaced traditional humanistic education with a more common modern approach of self-cultivation that adapts the influences of globalisation. Nevertheless, the East Asian descendants and followers of Confucius still consider an ideal human being essential for their life-time education, with their cultural heritage deeply influenced by radical Confucian values.

Modern practices [ edit ] The "self"-concept in Western culture [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The "self" concept in western psychology originated from views of a number of empiricists and rationalists.

Hegel (1770–1831) established a view of self-consciousness in which, by observation, our subject-object consciousness stimulates our rationale and reasoning, which then guides human behaviour.

Freud (1856–1939) developed a three-part model of the psyche comprising the Id ( Das Es ), the Ego ( Das Ich ), and the superego ( Das Über-Ich ).

[ 13 ] [ full citation needed ] Freud's self-concept influenced Erikson (1902–1994), who emphasized self-identity crisis and self-development. Following Erikson, J. Marcia described the continuum of identity development and the nature of our self-identity.

The concept of self-consciousness derives from self-esteem, self-regulation, and self-efficacy .

The subject's concept of "self" is defined in how the individual perceives and builds the link between their self and the world around them.

[ clarification needed ] Morita therapy [ edit ] Morita Masatake (1874–1938) a.k.a. Morita Shoma ( 森田 正馬 ) Main article: Morita therapy Through case-based [ jargon ] research, Japanese psychologist Morita Masatake (1874–1938) introduced Morita therapy . It is based on Masatake's theory of consciousness and his four-stage therapeutic method, and is described as an ecological therapy method that focuses on purpose through individuals' responses [ clarification needed ] .

Morita therapy resembles rational-emotive therapy by American psychologist Albert Ellis , and existential and cognitive behavioral therapy.

[ 14 ] Naikan therapy [ edit ] Main article: Naikan Naikan (" 内観 ", lit.

' looking inside ' , self-reflection) is a Japanese psychotherapeutic method introduced and developed decades ago by Japanese businessman and Buddhist monk ( Jōdo Shinshū ) Yoshimoto Ishin (1916–1988).

Initially, naikan therapy was more often used in correctional settings, however it has been adapted to situational and psychoneurotic disorders.

Similar to Morita therapy, naikan requires subordination to a carefully structured period of "retreat" that is compassionately supervised by the practitioner. Contrary to Morita, naikan is shorter (seven days) and utilizes long, regulated periods of daily meditation in which introspection is directed toward the resolution of contemporary conflicts and problems.

"In contrast to Western psychoanalytic psychotherapy, both naikan and Morita tend to keep transference issues simplified and positive, while resistance is dealt with procedurally rather than interpretively." [ 15 ] The theory of constructive living [ edit ] Based largely on the adaptions of two Japanese structured methods of self-reflection, Naikan therapy and Morita therapy , constructive living is a Western approach to mental health education. Purpose-centered and response-oriented, constructive living (sometimes abbreviated as CL) focuses on the mindfulness and purposes of one's life. It is considered as a process of action to approach the reality thoughtfully. It also emphasizes the ability to understand one's self by recognizing the past, in which it reflects upon the present. Constructive Living highlights the importance of acceptance, of the world we live in, as well as the emotions and feelings individuals have in unique situations.

D. Reynolds , Author of Constructive Living and Director of the Constructive Living Center in Oregon, U.S., argues that before taking the actions which may potentially bring positive changes, people are often hold back by the belief of "dealing with negative emotions first". According to Reynolds, the most crucial component of the process of effectuating affirmations is not getting the mind right. However, one's mind and emotions are effectively adjusted during the process of self-reflection, [ 16 ] which indicates that there shall be a behavioural change taken place beforehand.

Epicurean meleta [ edit ] At the closing of his Letter to Menoeceus , Epicurus instructs his disciple to practice (meleta) "both by yourself and with others of like mind". The first field of practice shares semantic roots with and is related to the Hellenistic philosophical concept of "epimeleia heauton" (self-care), which involves methods of self-cultivation. In addition to the study of philosophy, this may include other techniques for living (techne biou) or technologies of the soul, like the visualizing technique known as "placing before the eyes", a cognitive therapy technique known as "relabeling", moral portraiture, and other didactic and ethical methods. We find examples of these techniques in Philodemus of Gadara , the poet Lucretius , and other Epicurean guides.

Nietzsche's ethics of self-cultivation [ edit ] See also: Friedrich Nietzsche and Nietzsche and Asian Thought F. Nietzsche (1844–1900) "If you incorporate this thought within you, amongst your other thoughts" he maintains "It will transform you. If for everything you wish to do you begin by asking yourself: 'Am I certain I want to do this an infinite number of times?' this will become for you the greatest weight." [ 17 ] (KSA 9:11 [143])
Nietzsche worked on the project of reviving Self-cultivation, an ancient ethics. "I hate everything that merely instructs me without augmenting or directly invigorating my own activity"(HL 2:1) "It follows therefore that he must conceive eternal recurrence among other things as a practice that stimulates self-cultivation. In fact in one of his characteristically grandiose moments he identified it as 'the great cultivating thought' in the sense that it might weed out those too weak to bear the thought of living again (WP 1053). In a more tempered fashion, however, he framed the thought of recurrence as part of an ethics of self-cultivation and self-transformation." [ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Self Neo-Confucianism Eastern philosophy References [ edit ] ^ "self-cultivation" .

Merriam-Webster Online-Dictionary . Retrieved 1 May 2019 .

^ Cohen, Avraham; Bai, Heesoon; Fiorini, Karen (2014). "The Self-Cultivation Model of Lifelong Learning". In Wang, Viktor (ed.).

Handbook of Research on Adult and Community Health Education: Tools, Trends, and Methodologies . Medical Information Science Reference. pp.

333– 351.

ISBN 9781466662605 . Retrieved 3 May 2019 .

^ a b Tang, Yijie (2015).

Confucianism, Buddhism, Daoism, Christianity and Chinese Culture . Heidelberg: Springer. p. 29.

ISBN 978-3-662-45532-6 .

^ Yan, Zhonghu. “Ultimate reality and self-cultivation in early Confucianism: A conceptual/existential approach.” Dao Companions to Chinese Philosophy , 2 Sept. 2013, pp. 363–378, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-90-481-2936-2_15.

^ a b Hwang, Kwang-Kuo; Chang, Jeffrey (October 2009).

"Self-Cultivation: Culturally Sensitive Psychotherapies in Confucian Societies" .

The Counseling Psychologist .

37 (7). Sage Publications: 1010– 1032.

doi : 10.1177/0011000009339976 .

S2CID 13877241 – via ResearchGate.

^ Wang, Youru; Wawrytko, Sandra A. (2019).

Dao Companion to Chinese Buddhist Philosophy . Dordrecht: Springer. p. 165.

ISBN 978-90-481-2938-6 .

^ Yasuo, Yuasa (1987).

The Body: Toward an Eastern Mind-Body Theory . Albany, N.Y.: SUNY Press. p. 85.

ISBN 0-88706-469-8 .

^ Confucius (1992).

The analects . Translated by Lau, D.C. (2nd ed.). Hong Kong: Chinese University Press of Hong Kong.

ISBN 9789622015272 .

^ Richey, Jeff.

"Confucius (551—479 B.C.E.)" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 7 May 2019 .

^ Chan, Wing-Tsit (1963).

A Source Book in Chinese Philosophy . Princeton University Press. pp.

49– 83.

ISBN 978-1-4008-2003-0 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Hung, Ruyu (December 2017).

"Cultivation of self in East Asian philosophy of education" .

Educational Philosophy and Theory .

49 (12: Special Issue: The Cultivation of Self in East Asian Philosophy of Education): 1131– 1135.

doi : 10.1080/00131857.2017.1376438 .

^ Di Lauro, Frances (2002).

" 'Keeping to the Centre': Ru and Daoist Ideals" .

Sydney Studies in Religion . Retrieved 15 May 2019 .

^ Freud, 1923 ^ Naikan-Hitosuji Yoshimoton Ishin no Shougai'Ibusuki . Japan Naikan Association. 1988. pp.

275– 276.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Murase, Takao; Johnson, Frank (1974). "Naikan, Morita, and Western Psychotherapy".

Archives of General Psychiatry .

31 (1): 121– 128.

doi : 10.1001/archpsyc.1974.01760130091016 .

PMID 4835992 .

^ Reynolds, David. K. (1984).

Constructive Living . U.S.A: University of Hawaii Press.

ISBN 978-0824808716 .

^ Nietzsche, Friedrich.

Kritische Studienausgabe (KSA) . Vol. 9. p. 143.

^ Ure, Michael.

"Nietzsche's Ethics of Self-Cultivation and Eternity" .

Ethics and Self-Cultivation : 84.

Bibliography [ edit ] Wu, Meiyao (24 January 2017).

"The Process of Self-Cultivation and the Mandala Model of the Self" .

Frontiers in Psychology .

8 : 24.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00024 .

PMC 5259693 .

PMID 28174544 .

Confucian Self-Cultivation and Daoist Personhood, H.Wang Choukroune, Leïla; Garapon, Antoine (15 September 2007).

"The norms of Chinese harmony Disciplinary rules as social stabiliser A harmonious society is one in which the rule of law is given greater strength and authority" .

China Perspectives .

2007 (3).

doi : 10.4000/chinaperspectives.2013 .

Dutournier, Guillaume; Ji, Zhe (31 December 2009).

"Social experimentation and 'popular Confucianism' " .

China Perspectives .

2009 (4).

doi : 10.4000/chinaperspectives.4925 .

Gramsci, A. (1992). Prison notebooks, Vol. 2. New York, NY: Columbia University Press. [Google Scholar] Heidegger, M. (1969). Identity and difference (J. Stambaugh, Trans. with an introduction.). New York, NY: Harper & Row Publishers. [Google Scholar] Heidegger, M. (1977). The question concerning technology and other essays ( W. Lovitt, Trans. with an introduction.). New York: Harper Torchbooks. [Google Scholar] Heidegger, M. (1978). Letter on humanism. In D. F. Krell (Ed.), Basic writings (2nd ed., pp. 213–265). London: Routledge. [Google Scholar] Huang, C. -C. (2010). Humanism in East Asian Confucian Contexts. Bielefeld: Transcript Verlag.[Crossref], [Google Scholar] Legge, J. (Trans.). (1861). Confucian analects. The Chinese classics, volume 1. (D. Sturgeon, Ed.). Chinese Text Project. Retrieved 21 March 2017, from http://ctext.org/analects [Google Scholar] Wittgenstein, L. (1997). Philosophical investigations (2nd ed.). (G. E. M. Anscombe, Trans.). Malden, MA: Blackwell. [Google Scholar] Wittgenstein, L. (2001). Tractatus Logico-philosophicus (D. F. Pears & B. F. McGuinness, Trans.). New York, NY: Routledge.  [Google Scholar] Yu, K. P. (2013). The hows and whys of the classics of filial piety孝經的道與理 (Xiaojing de dao yu li). Hong Kong: InfoLink. [Google Scholar] External links [ edit ] Look up self-cultivation in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Self-cultivation at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity "Confucius" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"Neo-Confucian Philosophy" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Entry: Confucius Interfaith Online: Confucianism Confucian Documents at the Internet Sacred Texts Archive.

Oriental Philosophy, "Topic:Confucianism" Institutional China Confucian Philosophy China Confucian Religion China Confucian Temples China Kongzi Network v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Chinese philosophy Schools Agriculturalism Buddhism Confucianism Han learning Neo-Confucianism New Confucianism Huang–Lao Legalism Mohism Marxism School of Diplomacy School of Names Naturalism Taoism Daoxue Xuanxue Yangism Mixed School Nine Schools of Thought Hundred Schools of Thought Philosophers Eastern Zhou Bu Shang Chunyu Kun Confucius Deng Xi Duanmu Ci Gaozi Gongsun Long Guan Zhong Han Fei Hui Shi Laozi Li Kui Li Si Lie Yukou Mencius Mozi Shang Yang Shen Buhai Shen Dao Su Qin Sun Tzu Wu Qi Ximen Bao Xu Xing Xunzi Yang Zhu Yuan Xian Zhang Yi Zhuang Zhou Zichan Zisi Zou Yan Qin Han Ban Zhao Dong Zhongshu Dongfang Shuo Dou Wu Huan Tan Jia Yi Jia Kui Jing Fang Kong Anguo Liu An Lu Jia Liu Xiang Ma Rong Wang Chong Wang Fu Xun Yue Yang Xiong Three Kingdoms Jin Northern and Southern Bao Jingyan Fan Zhen Fan Ye Ge Hong Guo Xiang Fu Xuan He Yan Huiyuan Ji Kang Sengzhao Wang Su Wang Bi Xiahou Xuan Xie Daoyun Xun Can Yan Zhitui Zhi Dun Sui Tang Fu Yi Jizang Wang Tong Zhang Zhihe Han Yu Li Ao Liu Yuxi Liu Zongyuan Linji Yixuan Five Dynasties Ten Kingdoms Song Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Fan Zhongyan Hu Hong Lu Jiuyuan Shao Yong Shen Kuo Su Song Wang Anshi Wang Chongyang Wang Chuyi Ye Shi Zhang Zai Zhou Dunyi Zhu Xi Yuan Ming Chen Jiru Huang Zongxi Hong Zicheng Jiao Hong Jiao Yu Lai Zhide Li Zhi Liu Bowen Liu Zongzhou Luo Rufang Qian Dehong Wang Ji Wang Gen Wang Yangming Wu Cheng Xu Ai Zhan Ruoshui Qing Chen Hongmou Chen Menglei Dai Zhen Fang Bao Fang Lanfen Fang Quan Feng Guifen Gong Zizhen Gu Yanwu Hong Liangji Ji Yun Ma Qixi Lin Zexu Liu Yiming Pan Pingge Tan Sitong Tang Zhen Wang Fuzhi Wei Yuan Yan Yuan Yu Yue Yu Zhengxie Zhang Xuecheng Zhuang Cunyu Zeng Guofan 20th century Cai Yuanpei Carsun Chang P. C. Chang Chen Daqi Chen Duxiu Chung-ying Cheng Ch'ien Mu Chu Anping Fang Keli Feng Youlan Gan Yang Gu Su Gu Zhun He Guanghu Hu Qiaomu Hu Shih Hua Gang Ray Huang Jiang Qing Jin Yuelin Kang Youwei Lee Shui-chuen Li Shicen Li Zehou Liang Qichao Liang Shuming Lin Yutang Liu Xiaofeng Lu Xun Mao Zedong Mou Zongsan Qiu Renzong Sun Yat-sen Tang Chun-i Tang Yijie Tsang Lap Chuen Xiong Shili Xu Fuguan Yang Changji Yin Haiguang Yu Dunkang Zhang Dongsun Zhang Shenfu Zhou Guoping Zhou Zuoren Concepts Tao De Fa Jian'ai Jing Jing zuo Li Confucianism Neo-Confucianism Ming yun Qi Qing Ren Three teachings Shen Si Ti Tian Mandate of Heaven Wu wei Filial piety Xin Human nature Self-cultivation Yi Yin and yang Yong Zhengming Ziran Topics Logic Theology Metaphysics Politics Ethics Role ethics State consequentialism Ink wash Shan shui Society Epistemology Metaphilosophy Legitimacy v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐xzpcs
Cached time: 20250816101122
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.026 seconds
Real time usage: 1.269 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7620/1000000
Revision size: 28924/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 396958/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 21365/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 151368/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.579/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25555465/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  974.341      1 -total
 17.44%  169.944      1 Template:Reflist
 15.20%  148.113     60 Template:Lang
  8.82%   85.932      1 Template:Philosophy_sidebar
  7.55%   73.600      2 Template:Cite_web
  7.49%   72.988     12 Template:Navbox
  6.51%   63.437      1 Template:Short_description
  6.49%   63.272      8 Template:Clarify
  6.02%   58.647      1 Template:Multiple_issues
  5.87%   57.165      1 Template:Philosophy_topics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:60458006:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816101122 and revision id 1291684421. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Self-cultivation&oldid=1291684421 " Categories : Chinese philosophy Concepts in ethics Confucian ethics Taoist philosophy Taoist practices Buddhist practices Buddhist philosophy Psychotherapy Self-care Personal development Philosophy of life Concepts in Chinese philosophy Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Pages with missing ISBNs Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from September 2019 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2023 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from October 2020 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles needing additional references from September 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 Articles containing German-language text All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from September 2023 All articles that are too technical Wikipedia articles that are too technical from September 2023 All articles needing expert attention Articles needing expert attention from September 2023 Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 22 May 2025, at 19:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Self-cultivation 2 languages Add topic

