Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Works 2 See also 3 References 4 Sources Toggle the table of contents Mahendra Sūri 5 languages অসমীয়া Català हिन्दी Kreyòl ayisyen తెలుగు Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Mahendra Suri ) Indian mathematician (1340–1400) Mahendra Sūri (c. 1340 – 1400) [ 1 ] is the 14th century Jain astronomer who wrote the Yantraraja , the first Indian treatise on the astrolabe .

[ 2 ] He was trained by Madana Sūri, and was teacher to Malayendu Sūri.

[ 1 ] Jainism had a strong influence on mathematics particularly in the last couple of centuries BC. By the time of Mahendra Suri, however, Jainism had lost support as a national religion and was much less vigorous.

Works [ edit ] Image of folio 3 of Malayendu Sūri's commentary (1382) on Mahendra Sūri's Yantrarāja (1370).

(Internet Archive) Mahendra Suri's fame rests on the work Yantrarāja , which introduced the astrolabe to the Indian astronomer.

[ 1 ] Mahendra Sūri was patronized by the Tughluq ruler of Delhi, Firūz Shāh (r. 1351–1388), who evinced keen interest in astronomy. Firūz Shāh had earlier caused the Bṛhatsaṃhitā of Varāhamihira to be translated into Persian . At the sultan's instance, Mahendra Sūri studied the astrolabe and introduced it to the Sanskrit audience in 1370 in his Yantrarāja . Its circulation was largely, if not wholly, confined to astronomers who worked within the Islamic and Ptolemaic traditions.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] The Yantrarāja is best described as an astrolabe user's manual. It explains how this king ( rāja ) of instruments ( yantra ) is to be constructed and commissioned for purposes of observation. The saumya yantra (northern instrument) projected from the South Pole and the yāmya yantra (southern instrument) projected from the North Pole are discussed separately, followed by a description of the phaṇīndra yantra (the serpentine instrument), which combines both.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] A detailed discussion on the application of the astrolabe is found in Malayendu Sūri's commentary on the Yantrarāja . This commentary is also interesting because it provided, for the first time to Indian astronomers, tables for ready reference, which helped simplify calculations. The commentator gave latitudes of 75 cities. Malayendu made a list of latitudes for 32 stars, which were identified as relevant for purposes of calculations in India.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Indian mathematicians Yantraraja References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Devadevan, Manu V.

"Academia website" .

Academia .

^ Glick; et al., eds. (2005).

Medieval Science, Technology, and Medicine: An Encyclopedia .

Routledge . p. 464.

ISBN 0-415-96930-1 .

the Jain astronomer Mahendra Suri ( fl.

1370)...wrote the first Indian treatise on the astrolabe, called the Yantraraja (1370) ^ a b c Padmakara Dvivedi (ed)., Dvivedi, Sudhakara. (1933).

Gaṇaka Taraṅgiṇī or Lives of Hindu Astronomers . Benaras: Jyotish Prakash Press.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c Pingree, David. (1981). Census of the Exact Sciences in Sanskrit, Series A, Vol 4.

Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society.

^ a b c Raikwa, K.K. (ed). (1936). Yantrarāja of Mahendraguru with the Commentary of

Malayendu Sūri. Bombay: Nirnaya Sagar Press.

Sources [ edit ] K. V. Sarma (2008), "Mahendra Suri", Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures (2nd edition) edited by Helaine Selin , Springer, ISBN 978-1-4020-4559-2 .

v t e Indian mathematics Mathematicians Ancient Apastamba Baudhayana Katyayana Manava Pāṇini Pingala Yajnavalkya Classical Āryabhaṭa I Āryabhaṭa II Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri Brahmadeva Brahmagupta Govindasvāmi Halayudha Jyeṣṭhadeva Kamalakara Mādhava of Saṅgamagrāma Mahāvīra Mahendra Sūri Munishvara Narayana Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Jagannatha Samrat Nilakantha Somayaji Śrīpati Sridhara Gangesha Upadhyaya Varāhamihira Sankara Variar Virasena Modern Srinivasa Ramanujan Satyendra Nath Bose P.C. Mahalanobis Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar C.R. Rao Veeravalli S. Varadarajan S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan K. R. Parthasarathy (probabilist) M. S. Narasimhan C. S. Seshadri Harish-Chandra Subbayya Sivasankaranarayana Pillai Tilak Raj Prabhakar Manjul Bhargava Akshay Venkatesh Ravi Vakil Kannan Soundararajan Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize recipients in Mathematical Science Treatises Aryabhatiya Bakhshali manuscript Bijaganita Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Ganita Kaumudi Grahalaghava Kanakkusaram Karanapaddhati Līlāvatī Lokavibhaga Pātīgaṇita Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Romaka Siddhanta Sadratnamala Siddhānta Shiromani Śulba Sūtras Surya Siddhanta Tantrasamgraha Vasishtha Siddhanta Veṇvāroha Yuktibhāṣā Yavanajataka Pioneering innovations Brahmi numerals Hindu–Arabic numeral system Symbol for zero (0) Infinite series expansions for the trigonometric functions Centres Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Jantar Mantar ( Jaipur , New Delhi , Ujjain , Varanasi ) Historians of mathematics Bapudeva Sastri (1821–1900) Shankar Balakrishna Dikshit (1853–1898) Sudhakara Dvivedi (1855–1910) M. Rangacarya (1861–1916) P. C. Sengupta (1876–1962) B. B. Datta (1888–1958) T. Hayashi A. A. Krishnaswamy Ayyangar (1892– 1953) A. N. Singh (1901–1954) C. T. Rajagopal (1903–1978) T. A. Saraswati Amma (1918–2000) S. N. Sen (1918–1992) K. S. Shukla (1918–2007) K. V. Sarma (1919–2005) Translators Walter Eugene Clark Henry Thomas Colebrooke David Pingree Other regions Babylon China Greece Islamic mathematics Europe Modern institutions Indian Statistical Institute Bhaskaracharya Pratishthana Chennai Mathematical Institute Institute of Mathematical Sciences Indian Institute of Science Harish-Chandra Research Institute Homi Bhabha Centre for Science Education Ramanujan Institute for Advanced Study in Mathematics TIFR Authority control databases International VIAF Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mahendra_Sūri&oldid=1301680847 " Categories : 14th-century Indian astronomers 14th-century Indian mathematicians 14th-century Indian Jains Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2019 Year of death unknown Year of birth unknown Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 04:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mahendra Sūri 5 languages Add topic

