Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Fields of linguistics proper 2 Linguistic theories 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Theoretical linguistics 29 languages العربية বাংলা Български Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Gaelg Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Bahasa Indonesia मराठी Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Română Русский Shqip Simple English தமிழ் Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of linguistics which inquires into the nature of language Part of a series on Linguistics Outline History Index General linguistics Diachronic Lexicography Morphology Phonology Pragmatics Semantics Syntax Syntax–semantics interface Typology Applied linguistics Acquisition Anthropological Applied Mathematical Computational Conversation analysis Corpus linguistics Discourse analysis Determinism Distance Documentation Ethnography of communication Ethnomethodology Forensic History of linguistics Interlinguistics Neurolinguistics Philology Philosophy of language Phonetics Psycholinguistics Sociolinguistics Text Translating and interpreting Writing systems Theoretical frameworks Formalist Constituency Dependency Distributionalism Generative Glossematics Functional Cognitive Construction grammar Functional discourse grammar Grammaticalization Interactional linguistics Prague circle Systemic functional Usage-based Structuralism Topics Autonomy of syntax Compositionality Conservative and innovative language Descriptivism Etymology Iconicity Internet linguistics LGBTQ linguistics Origin of language Orismology Orthography Philosophy of linguistics Prescriptivism Second-language acquisition Theory of language Terminology Portal v t e Theoretical linguistics is a term in linguistics that, [ 1 ] like the related term general linguistics , [ 2 ] can be understood in different ways. Both can be taken as a reference to the theory of language , or the branch of linguistics that inquires into the nature of language and seeks to answer fundamental questions as to what language is, or what the common ground of all languages is.

[ 2 ] The goal of theoretical linguistics can also be the construction of a general theoretical framework for the description of language.

[ 1 ] Another use of the term depends on the organisation of linguistics into different sub-fields. The term 'theoretical linguistics' is commonly juxtaposed with applied linguistics .

[ 3 ] This perspective implies that the aspiring language professional, e.g. a student, must first learn the theory i.e. properties of the linguistic system, or what Ferdinand de Saussure called internal linguistics .

[ 4 ] This is followed by practice, or studies in the applied field. The dichotomy is not fully unproblematic because language pedagogy , language technology and other aspects of applied linguistics also include theory.

[ 3 ] Similarly, the term general linguistics is used to distinguish core linguistics from other types of study. However, because college and university linguistics is largely distributed with the institutes and departments of a relatively small number of national languages , some larger universities also offer courses and research programmes in 'general linguistics' which may cover exotic and minority languages , cross-linguistic studies and various other topics outside the scope of the main philological departments.

[ 5 ] Fields of linguistics proper [ edit ] When the concept of theoretical linguistics is taken to refer to core or internal linguistics , it means the study of the parts of the language system. This traditionally means phonology , morphology , syntax and semantics .

Pragmatics and discourse can also be included; delimitation varies between institutions. Furthermore, Saussure's definition of general linguistics consists of the dichotomy of synchronic and diachronic linguistics , thus including historical linguistics as a core issue.

[ 4 ] Linguistic theories [ edit ] See also: Theory of language There are various frameworks of linguistic theory which include a general theory of language and a general theory of linguistic description .

[ 6 ] Current humanistic approaches include theories within structural linguistics and functional linguistics . In addition to the humanistic approaches of structural linguistics and functional linguistics, the field of theoretical linguistics encompasses other frameworks and perspectives.

Evolutionary linguistics is one such framework that investigates the origins and development of language from an evolutionary and cognitive perspective. It incorporates various models within generative grammar , which seeks to explain language structure through formal rules and transformations.

Cognitive linguistics and cognitive approaches to grammar , on the other hand, focuses on the relationship between language and cognition, exploring how language reflects and influences our thought processes.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Theoretical Linguistics – journal Course in General Linguistics References [ edit ] ^ a b Hamp, Eric P.; Ivić, Pavle; Lyons, John (2020).

Linguistics . Encyclopædia Britannica, inc.

ISBN 9783110289770 . Retrieved 2020-08-03 .

^ a b Graffi, Giorgio (2009). "20th century linguistics: overview of trends".

Concise Encyclopedia of Philosophy of Language and Linguistics . Elsevier. pp.

780– 794.

ISBN 9780080965017 .

^ a b Harris, Tony (2001).

"Linguistics in applied linguistics: a historical overview" .

Journal of English Studies .

3 (2): 99– 114.

doi : 10.18172/jes.72 . Retrieved 2020-08-03 .

^ a b de Saussure, Ferdinand (1959) [First published 1916].

Course in General Linguistics (PDF) . New York: Philosophy Library.

ISBN 9780231157278 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-08-08 . Retrieved 2020-08-03 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ "General linguistics" . University of Helsinki. 2020 . Retrieved 2020-08-03 .

^ a b Linguistic Theory ScienceDirect. Retrieved 19 May 2023.

Portals : Language Linguistics Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theoretical_linguistics&oldid=1282186132 " Categories : Formal sciences Linguistics Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 March 2025, at 21:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Theoretical linguistics 29 languages Add topic

