Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Ancient Egypt 1.2 Aristotle 1.3 Hippocrates 1.4 René Descartes 1.5 Thomas Willis 1.6 Franz Joseph Gall 1.7 Jean-Baptiste Bouillaud 1.8 Paul Broca 1.9 Carl Wernicke 1.10 Karl Spencer Lashley 2 Approaches 3 Methods and tools Toggle Methods and tools subsection 3.1 Standardized neuropsychological tests 3.2 Brain scans 3.3 Global Brain Project 3.4 Electrophysiology 3.5 Experimental tasks 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Neuropsychology 53 languages العربية Bikol Central Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of the brain related to specific psychological processes and behaviors For the academic journal, see Neuropsychology (journal) .

Neuropsychology Topics Brain regions Clinical neuropsychology Cognitive neuropsychology Cognitive neuroscience Dementia Human brain Neuroanatomy Neurophysiology Neuropsychological assessment Neuropsychological rehabilitation Traumatic brain injury Brain functions Arousal Attention Consciousness Decision making Executive functions Natural language Learning Memory Motor coordination Perception Planning Problem solving Thought People Alan Baddeley Arthur L. Benton David Bohm Antonio Damasio Phineas Gage Norman Geschwind Elkhonon Goldberg Patricia Goldman-Rakic Donald O. Hebb Kenneth Heilman Eric Kandel Edith Kaplan Muriel Lezak Benjamin Libet Rodolfo Llinás Alexander Luria Brenda Milner Karl H. Pribram Pasko Rakic Oliver Sacks Mark Rosenzweig Roger W. Sperry Hans-Lukas Teuber Henry Molaison ("H.M.", patient) K.C.

(patient) Tests Benton Visual Retention Test Continuous Performance Task Halstead–Reitan Neuropsychological Battery Hayling and Brixton tests Lexical Decision Task Luria–Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery Mini–mental state examination Rey–Osterrieth complex figure Stroop Test Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale Wechsler Memory Scale Wisconsin Card Sorting Task Psychology portal Philosophy portal Medicine portal v t e Part of a series on Psychology Outline History Subfields Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Psychology portal v t e Neuropsychology is a branch of psychology concerned with how a person's cognition and behavior are related to the brain and the rest of the nervous system . Professionals in this branch of psychology focus on how injuries or illnesses of the brain affect cognitive and behavioral functions.

[ 1 ] It is both an experimental and clinical field of patient-focused psychology. Thus aiming to understand how behavior and cognition are influenced by brain function. It is also concerned with the diagnosis and treatment of behavioral and cognitive effects of neurological disorders . Whereas classical neurology focuses on the pathology of the nervous system and classical psychology is largely divorced from it, neuropsychology seeks to discover how the brain correlates with the mind through the study of neurological patients. It thus shares concepts and concerns with neuropsychiatry and with behavioral neurology in general. The term neuropsychology has been applied to lesion studies in humans and animals. It has also been applied in efforts to record electrical activity from individual cells (or groups of cells) in higher primates (including some studies of human patients).

[ 2 ] In practice, neuropsychologists tend to work in research settings ( universities , laboratories , or research institutions), clinical settings (medical hospitals or rehabilitation settings, often involved in assessing or treating patients with neuropsychological problems), and forensic settings or industry (often as clinical-trial consultants where CNS function is a concern).

History [ edit ] Neuropsychology is a relatively new discipline within the field of psychology . The first textbook defining the field, Fundamentals of Human Neuropsychology , was initially published by Kolb and Whishaw in 1980.

[ 3 ] However, the history of its development can be traced back to the Third Dynasty in ancient Egypt , perhaps even earlier.

[ 4 ] There is much debate as to when societies started considering the functions of different organs. For many centuries, the brain was thought useless and was often discarded during burial processes and autopsies. As the field of medicine developed its understanding of human anatomy and physiology , different theories were developed as to why the body functioned the way it did. Many times, bodily functions were approached from a religious point of view, and abnormalities were blamed on bad spirits and the gods. The brain has not always been considered the center of the functioning body. It has taken hundreds of years to develop our understanding of the brain and how it affects our behaviors.

Ancient Egypt [ edit ] In ancient Egypt, writings on medicine date from the time of the priest Imhotep .

[ 5 ] They took a more scientific approach to medicine and disease, describing the brain, trauma, abnormalities, and remedies for reference for future physicians. Despite this, Egyptians saw the heart, not the brain, as the seat of the soul .

[ 6 ] Aristotle [ edit ] Senses , perception , memory , dreams , action in Aristotle's biology . Impressions are stored in the seat of perception , linked by his Laws of Association (similarity, contrast, and contiguity).

[ 7 ] Aristotle reinforced this focus on the heart which originated in Egypt. He believed the heart to be in control of mental processes, and looked on the brain, due to its inert nature, as a mechanism for cooling the heat generated by the heart.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] He drew his conclusions based on the empirical study of animals. He found that while their brains were cold to the touch and that such contact did not trigger any movements, the heart was warm and active, accelerating and slowing dependent on mood.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Such beliefs were upheld by many for years to come, persisting through the Middle Ages and the Renaissance period until they began to falter in the 17th century due to further research.

[ 9 ] The influence of Aristotle in the development of neuropsychology is evident within language used in modern day, since we "follow our hearts" and "learn by the heart." [ 9 ] Main article: Aristotle § Thought Hippocrates [ edit ] Hippocrates viewed the brain as the seat of the soul. He drew a connection between the brain and behaviors of the body, writing: "The brain exercises the greatest power in the man." [ 10 ] Apart from moving the focus from the heart as the "seat of the soul" to the brain, Hippocrates did not go into much detail about its actual functioning. However, by switching the attention of the medical community to the brain, his theory led to more scientific discovery of the organ responsible for our behaviors. For years to come, scientists were inspired to explore the functions of the body and to find concrete explanations for both normal and abnormal behaviors. Scientific discovery led them to believe that there were natural and organically occurring reasons to explain various functions of the body, and it could all be traced back to the brain. Hippocrates introduced the concept of the mind – which was widely seen as a separate function apart from the actual brain organ.

René Descartes [ edit ] Philosopher René Descartes expanded upon this idea and is most widely known for his work on the mind–body problem . Often Descartes's ideas were looked upon as overly philosophical and lacking in sufficient scientific foundation.  Descartes focused much of his anatomical experimentation on the brain, paying special attention to the pineal gland – which he argued was the actual "seat of the soul." Still deeply rooted in a spiritual outlook towards the scientific world, the body was said to be mortal, and the soul immortal. The pineal gland was then thought to be the very place at which the mind would interact with the mortal and machine-like body. At the time, Descartes was convinced the mind had control over the behaviors of the body (controlling the person) – but also that the body could have influence over the mind, which is referred to as dualism .

[ 11 ] This idea that the mind essentially had control over the body, but the body could resist or even influence other behaviors, was a major turning point in the way many physiologists would look at the brain. The capabilities of the mind were observed to do much more than simply react, but also to be rational and function in organized, thoughtful ways – much more complex than he thought the animal world to be. These ideas, although disregarded by many and cast aside for years led the medical community to expand their own ideas of the brain and begin to understand in new ways just how intricate the workings of the brain really were, and the complete effects it had on daily life, as well as which treatments would be the most beneficial to helping those people living with a dysfunctional mind. The mind–body problem, spurred by René Descartes, continues to this day with many philosophical arguments both for and against his ideas. However controversial they were and remain today, the fresh and well-thought-out perspective Descartes presented has had long-lasting effects on the various disciplines of medicine, psychology, and much more, especially in putting an emphasis on separating the mind from the body in order to explain observable behaviors.

Thomas Willis [ edit ] Thomas Willis It was in the mid-17th century that another major contributor to the field of neuropsychology emerged.

Thomas Willis studied at Oxford University and took a physiological approach to the brain and behavior. It was Willis who coined the words 'hemisphere' and 'lobe' when referring to the brain.

[ 12 ] He was one of the earliest to use the words 'neurology' and 'psychology'. Rejecting the idea that humans were the only beings capable of rational thought, Willis looked at specialized structures of the brain.

[ 9 ] He theorized that higher structures accounted for complex functions, whereas lower structures were responsible for functions similar to those seen in other animals, consisting mostly of reactions and automatic responses.

[ 13 ] He was particularly interested in people with manic disorders and hysteria.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] His research constituted some of the first times that psychiatry and neurology came together to study individuals. Through his in-depth study of the brain and behavior, Willis concluded that automated responses such as breathing, heartbeats, and other various motor activities were carried out within the lower region of the brain. Although much of his work has been made obsolete, his ideas presented the brain as more complex than previously imagined, and led the way for future pioneers to understand and build upon his theories, especially when it came to looking at disorders and dysfunctions in the brain.

[ 14 ] Franz Joseph Gall [ edit ] Neuroanatomist and physiologist Franz Joseph Gall made major progress in understanding the brain.  He theorized that personality was directly related to features and structures within the brain. However, Gall's major contribution within the field of neuroscience is his invention of phrenology . This new discipline looked at the brain as an organ of the mind, where the shape of the skull could ultimately determine one's intelligence and personality.

[ 16 ] This theory was like many circulating at the time, as many scientists were taking into account physical features of the face and body, head size, anatomical structure, and levels of intelligence; only Gall looked primarily at the brain. There was much debate over the validity of Gall's claims however, because he was often found to be wrong in his predictions. He was once sent a cast of René Descartes' skull, and through his method of phrenology claimed the subject must have had a limited capacity for reasoning and higher cognition.

[ 17 ] As controversial and false as many of Gall's claims were, his contributions to understanding cortical regions of the brain and localized activity continued to advance understanding of the brain, personality, and behavior. His work is considered crucial to having laid a firm foundation in the field of neuropsychology, which would flourish over the next few decades.

Jean-Baptiste Bouillaud [ edit ] Jean-Baptiste Bouillaud Towards the late 19th century, the belief that the size of ones skull could determine their level of intelligence was discarded as science and medicine moved forward. A physician by the name of Jean-Baptiste Bouillaud expanded upon the ideas of Gall and took a closer look at the idea of distinct cortical regions of the brain each having their own independent function. Bouillaud was specifically interested in speech and wrote many publications on the anterior region of the brain being responsible for carrying out the act of ones speech, a discovery that had stemmed from the research of Gall. He was also one of the first to use larger samples for research although it took many years for that method to be accepted. By looking at over a hundred different case studies, Bouillaud came to discover that it was through different areas of the brain that speech is completed and understood. By observing people with brain damage, his theory was made more concrete. Bouillaud, along with many other pioneers of the time made great advances within the field of neurology, especially when it came to localization of function. There are many arguable debates as to who deserves the most credit for such discoveries, [ 18 ] and often, people remain unmentioned, but Paul Broca is perhaps one of the most famous and well known contributors to neuropsychology – often referred to as "the father" of the discipline.

Paul Broca [ edit ] Inspired by the advances being made in the area of localized function within the brain, Paul Broca committed much of his study to the phenomena of how speech is understood and produced. Through his study, it was discovered and expanded upon that we articulate via the left hemisphere. Broca's observations and methods are widely considered to be where neuropsychology really takes form as a recognizable and respected discipline. Armed with the understanding that specific, independent areas of the brain are responsible for articulation and understanding of speech, the brains abilities were finally being acknowledged as the complex and highly intricate organ that it is. Broca was essentially the first to fully break away from the ideas of phrenology and delve deeper into a more scientific and psychological view of the brain.

[ 19 ] Carl Wernicke [ edit ] Carl Wernicke was an influential nineteenth century neuropsychiatrist specifically interested in understanding how abnormalities could be localized to specific brain regions. Previously held theories attributed brain function as one singular process but Wernicke was one of the first to attribute brain function to different regions of the brain based on sensory and motor function.

[ 20 ] In 1873, Wernicke observed a patient presenting with poor language comprehension despite maintaining intact speech and hearing following a severe stroke. Post-morbid analysis revealed a lesion near the auditory region of the brain in the parietal-temporal region of the left hemisphere.

[ 21 ] Originally named sensory aphasia, this region later became known as Wernicke's area.

[ 21 ] Individuals with damage to this area present with fluent but receptive aphasia characterized by the inability to comprehend or express written or spoken language while maintaining intact speech and auditory processes.

[ 22 ] Along with Paul Broca, Wernicke's contributions greatly expanded the present knowledge of language development and localization of left hemispheric function.

Karl Spencer Lashley [ edit ] Main article: Karl Lashley Lashley's works and theories that follow are summarized in his book Brain Mechanisms and Intelligence.

[ 23 ] Lashley's theory of the Engram was the driving force for much of his research. An engram was believed to be a part of the brain where a specific memory was stored. He continued to use the training/ablation method that Franz had taught him. He would train a rat to learn a maze and then use systematic lesions and removed sections of cortical tissue to see if the rat forgot what it had learned.

Through his research with the rats, he learned that forgetting was dependent on the amount of tissue removed and not where it was removed from. He called this mass action and he believed that it was a general rule that governed how brain tissue would respond, independent of the type of learning. But we know now that mass action was a misinterpretation of his empirical results, because in order to run a maze the rats required multiple cortical areas. Cutting into small individual parts alone will not impair the rats' brains much, but taking large sections removes multiple cortical areas at one time, affecting various functions such as sight, motor coordination, and memory, making the animal unable to run a maze properly.

[ 24 ] Neurosurgeon Karl Pribram worked with Lashley to determine the exact location of specific memories in primate brains.

[ 25 ] This work would influence the establishment of Pribram's Holonomic brain theory .

Lashley also proposed that a portion of a functional area could carry out the role of the entire area, even when the rest of the area has been removed. He called this phenomenon equipotentiality . We know now that he was seeing evidence of plasticity in the brain: within certain constraints the brain has the ability for certain areas to take over the functions of other areas if those areas should fail or be removed – although not to the extent initially argued by Lashley.

Approaches [ edit ] Experimental neuropsychology is an approach that uses methods from experimental psychology to uncover the relationship between the nervous system and cognitive function. The majority of work involves studying healthy humans in a laboratory setting, although a minority of researchers may conduct animal experiments. Human work in this area often takes advantage of specific features of our nervous system (for example that visual information presented to a specific visual field is preferentially processed by the cortical hemisphere on the opposite side) to make links between neuroanatomy and psychological function.

[ 26 ] Clinical neuropsychology is the application of neuropsychological knowledge to the assessment (see neuropsychological test and neuropsychological assessment ), management, and rehabilitation of people who have experienced illness or injury (particularly to the brain) which has caused neurocognitive problems. In particular they bring a psychological viewpoint to treatment, to understand how such illness and injury may affect and be affected by psychological factors.

[ 27 ] They also can offer an opinion as to whether a person is demonstrating difficulties due to brain pathology or as a consequence of an emotional or another (potentially) reversible cause or both.  For example, a test might show that both patients X and Y are unable to name items that they have been previously exposed to within the past 20 minutes (indicating possible dementia).  If patient Y can name some of them with further prompting (e.g. given a categorical clue such as being told that the item they could not name is a fruit), this allows a more specific diagnosis than simply dementia (Y appears to have the vascular type which is due to brain pathology but is usually at least somewhat reversible).  Clinical neuropsychologists often work in hospital settings in an interdisciplinary medical team; others work in private practice and may provide expert input into medico-legal proceedings.

[ 28 ] Current research into biological science of memory bridges multiple scales, from the molecular to
the neuropsychological (Moscovitch et al., 2016). Memory needs specific details on the specifics of
synaptic dynamism and also requires an explanation of the comprehension procedures and memory
structures having neurobiological capabilities.

Cognitive neuropsychology is a relatively new development and has emerged as a distillation of the complementary approaches of both experimental and clinical neuropsychology. It seeks to understand the mind and brain by studying people with brain injuries or neurological illnesses. One model of neuropsychological functioning is known as functional localization.

[ 29 ] This is based on the principle that if a specific cognitive problem can be found after an injury to a specific area of the brain, it is possible that this part of the brain is in some way involved. However, there may be reason to believe that the link between mental functions and neural regions is not so simple. An alternative model of the link between mind and brain, such as parallel processing , may have more explanatory power for the workings and dysfunction of the human brain. Yet another approach investigates how the pattern of errors produced by brain-damaged individuals can constrain our understanding of mental representations and processes without reference to the underlying neural structure. A more recent but related approach is cognitive neuropsychiatry which seeks to understand the normal function of mind and brain by studying psychiatric or mental illness .

[ 30 ] Connectionism is the use of artificial neural networks to model specific cognitive processes using what are considered to be simplified but plausible models of how neurons operate. Once trained to perform a specific cognitive task these networks are often damaged or 'lesioned' to simulate brain injury or impairment in an attempt to understand and compare the results to the effects of brain injury in humans.

[ 31 ] Functional neuroimaging uses specific neuroimaging technologies to take readings from the brain, usually when a person is doing a particular task, in an attempt to understand how the activation of particular brain areas is related to the task. In particular, the growth of methodologies to employ cognitive testing within established functional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) techniques to study brain-behavior relations is having a notable influence on neuropsychological research.

[ 32 ] In practice these approaches are not mutually exclusive and most neuropsychologists select the best approach or approaches for the task to be completed.

Methods and tools [ edit ] Standardized neuropsychological tests [ edit ] Main article: Neuropsychological test These tasks have been designed so the performance on the task can be linked to specific neurocognitive processes.

[ 33 ] These tests are typically standardized , meaning that they have been administered to a specific group (or groups) of individuals before being used in individual clinical cases. The data resulting from standardization are known as normative data. After these data have been collected and analyzed, they are used as the comparative standard against which individual performances can be compared. Examples of neuropsychological tests include: the Wechsler Memory Scale (WMS), the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS), Boston Naming Test, the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test , the Benton Visual Retention Test , and the Controlled Oral Word Association. When interpreting neuropsychological testing it is important that the diagnosis is empirically informed in order to determine if the cognitive deficits presented are legitimate. Successful malingering and symptom exaggeration can result in substantial benefits for the individual including but not limited to significant financial compensation, injury litigation, disability claims, and criminal sentencing. Due to the nature of these potential benefits, it is imperative that malingering is identified in neuropsychological tests in order to avoid making an invalid diagnosis. The Slick, Sherman, and Iverson (1999) criteria for Malingered Neurocognitive Dysfunction (MND) has pioneered the ability to detect malingering in a variety of performance validity tests (PVT) and symptom validity tests (SVT) across multiple neuropsychological contexts and disorders.

[ 34 ] These tests detect malingering by identifying performance that is below the level of probability for neuropsychological dysfunction.

[ 35 ] Brain scans [ edit ] The use of brain scans to investigate the structure or function of the brain is common, either as simply a way of better assessing brain injury with high resolution pictures, or by examining the relative activations of different brain areas. Such technologies may include fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging) and positron emission tomography (PET), which yields data related to functioning, as well as MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), computed axial tomography (CAT or CT), and diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) [ 36 ] which yields structural data.

Global Brain Project [ edit ] Brain models based on mice and monkeys have been developed based on theoretical neuroscience involving working memory and attention, while mapping brain activity based on time constants validated by measurements of neuronal activity in various layers of the brain. These methods also map to decision states of behavior in simple tasks that involve binary outcomes.

[ 37 ] Electrophysiology [ edit ] Main article: Electrophysiology The use of electrophysiological measures designed to measure the activation of the brain by measuring the electrical or magnetic field produced by the nervous system. This may include electroencephalography (EEG) or magneto-encephalography (MEG).

Experimental tasks [ edit ] The use of designed experimental tasks, often controlled by computer and typically measuring reaction time and accuracy on a particular tasks thought to be related to a specific neurocognitive process. An example of this is the Cambridge Neuropsychological Test Automated Battery (CANTAB) or CNS Vital Signs (CNSVS).

[ 38 ] See also [ edit ] Medicine portal Philosophy portal Psychology portal Behavioral neurology Biological psychology Clinical neuropsychology Cognitive neuropsychiatry Cognitive neuropsychology Cognitive neuroscience Cognitive psychology Comparative neuropsychology List of neurological conditions and disorders Neurology Neuropsychoanalysis Neuropsychiatry Neuroscience Neurosemiotics Psychiatric genetics References [ edit ] ^ Gluck MA, Mercado E, Myers CE (2016).

Learning and Memory: From Brain to Behavior . New York/NY, US: Worth Publishers. p. 57.

ISBN 978-1-319-15405-9 .

^ Posner MI, DiGirolamo GJ (November 2000). "Cognitive neuroscience: origins and promise".

Psychological Bulletin .

126 (6): 873– 889.

doi : 10.1037/0033-2909.126.6.873 .

PMID 11107880 .

^ "The Great Canadian Psychology Website - Researchers" . University of Calgary . Retrieved 14 August 2017 .

^ Finger S (2000).

Minds Behind the Brain: A History of the Pioneers and their discoveries . New York: Oxford. pp.

22 .

ISBN 978-0-19-518182-1 .

^ Highfield R.

"How Imhotep gave us medicine" .

The Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 2022-01-12 . Retrieved 24 March 2018 .

^ Carus P (1905). "The Conception of the Soul and the Belief in Resurrection Among the Egyptians".

The Monist .

15 (3): 409– 428.

doi : 10.5840/monist190515326 .

JSTOR 27899609 .

^ Warren H (1921).

"A History of the Association Psychology" .

Nature .

110 (2750): 19– 30, 259, 296.

Bibcode : 1922Natur.110S..75.

.

doi : 10.1038/110075d0 .

hdl : 2027/chi.65413836 .

S2CID 4115902 .

^ a b "History of Neuropsychology | BRAIN" .

brainaacn.org . 31 January 2016 . Retrieved 2018-09-25 .

^ a b c d e Benton AL, Sivan AB (March 2007). "Clinical neuropsychology: a brief history".

Disease-a-Month .

53 (3): 142– 147.

doi : 10.1016/j.disamonth.2007.04.003 .

PMID 17544643 .

^ Finger 2000 , p. 44 ^ Finger 2000 , p. 92 ^ Finger S (1994). "History of Neuropsychology".

Neuropsychology . Elsevier. pp.

1– 28.

doi : 10.1016/b978-0-08-092668-1.50007-7 .

ISBN 978-0-08-092668-1 .

S2CID 140943975 .

^ Finger S (2005-03-03). "Thomas Willis: The Functional Organization of the Brain".

Minds Behind the Brain . Oxford University Press. pp.

85– 100.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195181821.003.0007 .

ISBN 978-0-08-092668-1 .

^ a b Arráez-Aybar LA, Navia-Álvarez P, Fuentes-Redondo T, Bueno-López JL (March 2015).

"Thomas Willis, a pioneer in translational research in anatomy (on the 350th anniversary of Cerebri anatome)" .

Journal of Anatomy .

226 (3): 289– 300.

doi : 10.1111/joa.12273 .

PMC 4337668 .

PMID 25688933 .

^ Eadie MJ (March 2003). "A pathology of the animal spirits -- the clinical neurology of Thomas Willis (1621-1675). Part II -- disorders of intrinsically abnormal animal spirits".

Journal of Clinical Neuroscience .

10 (2): 146– 157.

doi : 10.1016/S0967-5868(02)00164-9 .

PMID 12637040 .

S2CID 32365672 .

^ Benton A (2000).

History of Neuropsychology: Selected Papers . US: Oxford.

^ Finger 2000 , p. 151 ^ Viney W (2003).

A History of Psychology: Ideas and Context (3rd ed.). Boston: Pearson.

^ Cubelli R, De Bastiani P (February 2011). "150 years after Leborgne: why is Paul Broca so important in the history of neuropsychology?".

Cortex; A Journal Devoted to the Study of the Nervous System and Behavior .

47 (2): 146– 147.

doi : 10.1016/j.cortex.2010.11.004 .

PMID 21112584 .

S2CID 45646738 .

^ "Carl Wernicke | Encyclopedia.com" .

www.encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 2022-04-21 .

^ a b Javed, Kinaan; Reddy, Vamsi; M Das, Joe; Wroten, Michael (2022), "Neuroanatomy, Wernicke Area" , StatPearls , Treasure Island (FL): StatPearls Publishing, PMID 30422593 , retrieved 2022-04-21 ^ Lanczik, M.; Keil, G. (June 1991).

"Carl Wernicke's localization theory and its significance for the development of scientific psychiatry" .

History of Psychiatry .

2 (6): 171– 180.

doi : 10.1177/0957154X9100200604 .

ISSN 0957-154X .

PMID 11613217 .

S2CID 20908696 .

^ Carmichael L (May 1959). "Karl Spencer Lashley, experimental psychologist".

Science .

129 (3360): 1410– 1412.

Bibcode : 1959Sci...129.1410C .

doi : 10.1126/science.129.3360.1410 .

PMID 13658968 .

^ "Learning and Memory (Section 4, Chapter 7)" .

Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences . The University of Texas Medical School at Houston . Retrieved 15 March 2022 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ Forsdyke, Donald R. (2009-01-01).

"Samuel Butler and human long term memory: Is the cupboard bare?" .

Journal of Theoretical Biology .

258 : 156– 164.

Bibcode : 2009JThBi.258..156F .

doi : 10.1016/j.jtbi.2009.01.028 .

^ "What is Experimental Neuropsychology?" .

www.allpsychologycareers.com . Retrieved 2018-09-25 .

^ "Clinical and experimental neuropsychology" .

UKEssays . Retrieved 2018-09-25 .

^ Cohen D (2008).

"Neuropsychology" .

Dr Doug Cohen .

^ Stebbins GT (2007). "Neuropsychological Testing".

Textbook of Clinical Neurology . Elsevier. pp.

539– 557.

doi : 10.1016/b978-141603618-0.10027-x .

ISBN 978-1-4160-3618-0 .

^ Hall J, O'Carroll RE, Frith CD (2010). "Neuropsychology".

Companion to Psychiatric Studies (8th ed.). Elsevier. pp.

121– 140.

doi : 10.1016/b978-0-7020-3137-3.00007-3 .

ISBN 978-0-7020-3137-3 .

^ Garson J (2018).

"Connectionism" . In Zalta EN (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2018 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 2018-09-25 .

^ Roalf DR, Gur RC (November 2017).

"Functional brain imaging in neuropsychology over the past 25 years" .

Neuropsychology .

31 (8): 954– 971.

doi : 10.1037/neu0000426 .

PMC 5822440 .

PMID 29376672 .

^ Boyle GJ, Saklofske DH, Matthews G, eds. (2012).

SAGE Benchmarks in Psychology . Vol. 3: Psychological Assessment. London: SAGE.

ISBN 978-0-85702-270-7 .

^ Sherman, Elisabeth (May 6, 2020).

"Multidimensional Malingering Criteria for Neuropsychological Assessment: A 20-Year Update of the Malingered Neuropsychological Dysfunction Criteria" .

Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology .

35 (6): 735– 764.

doi : 10.1093/arclin/acaa019 .

PMC 7452950 .

PMID 32377667 .

^ Etcoff, L. M.; Kampfer, K. M. (December 1996). "Practical guidelines in the use of symptom validity and other psychological tests to measure malingering and symptom exaggeration in traumatic brain injury cases".

Neuropsychology Review .

6 (4): 171– 201.

doi : 10.1007/BF01874896 .

ISSN 1040-7308 .

PMID 9159771 .

S2CID 11046587 .

^ Alexander AL, Lee JE, Lazar M, Field AS (July 2007).

"Diffusion tensor imaging of the brain" .

Neurotherapeutics .

4 (3): 316– 329.

doi : 10.1016/j.nurt.2007.05.011 .

PMC 2041910 .

PMID 17599699 .

^ Wei W, Wang XJ (December 2016).

"Inhibitory Control in the Cortico-Basal Ganglia-Thalamocortical Loop: Complex Regulation and Interplay with Memory and Decision Processes" .

Neuron .

92 (5): 1093– 1105.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.10.031 .

PMC 5193098 .

PMID 27866799 .

^ Bauer RM, Iverson GL, Cernich AN, Binder LM, Ruff RM, Naugle RI (May 2012).

"Computerized neuropsychological assessment devices: joint position paper of the American Academy of Clinical Neuropsychology and the National Academy of Neuropsychology" .

Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology .

27 (3): 362– 373.

doi : 10.1093/arclin/acs027 .

PMC 3499090 .

PMID 22382386 .

External links [ edit ] Library resources about Neuropsychology Resources in your library v t e Neuropsychology Topics Brain–computer interface Brain regions Clinical neuropsychology Cognitive neuroscience Human brain Misconceptions Neuroanatomy Neurophysiology Phrenology Traumatic brain injury Brain functions Arousal Attention Consciousness Decision making Executive functions Learning Memory Motor coordination Natural language Perception Planning Problem solving Thought People Arthur Lester Benton David Bohm António Damásio Phineas Gage Norman Geschwind Elkhonon Goldberg Kurt Goldstein Donald O. Hebb Kenneth Heilman Edith Kaplan Muriel Lezak Benjamin Libet Rodolfo Llinás Alexander Luria Brenda Milner Karl H. Pribram Oliver Sacks Roger Wolcott Sperry H. M.

K. C.

Tests Bender-Gestalt Test Benton Visual Retention Test Clinical Dementia Rating Continuous Performance Task Glasgow Coma Scale Hayling and Brixton tests Johari window Lexical decision task Mini–mental state examination Stroop effect Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale Wisconsin card sorting Category Commons Philosophy portal Psychology portal v t e Psychology History Philosophy Portal Psychologist Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Methodologies Animal testing Archival research Behavior epigenetics Case study Content analysis Experiments Human subject research Interviews Neuroimaging Observation Psychophysics Qualitative research Quantitative research Self-report inventory Statistical surveys Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Psychologists Wilhelm Wundt William James Ivan Pavlov Sigmund Freud Edward Thorndike Carl Jung John B. Watson Clark L. Hull Kurt Lewin Jean Piaget Gordon Allport J. P. Guilford Carl Rogers Erik Erikson B. F. Skinner Donald O. Hebb Ernest Hilgard Harry Harlow Raymond Cattell Abraham Maslow Neal E. Miller Jerome Bruner Donald T. Campbell Hans Eysenck Herbert A. Simon David McClelland Leon Festinger George A. Miller Richard Lazarus Stanley Schachter Robert Zajonc Albert Bandura Roger Brown Endel Tulving Lawrence Kohlberg Noam Chomsky Ulric Neisser Jerome Kagan Walter Mischel Elliot Aronson Daniel Kahneman Paul Ekman Michael Posner Amos Tversky Bruce McEwen Larry Squire Richard E. Nisbett Martin Seligman Ed Diener Shelley E. Taylor John Anderson Ronald C. Kessler Joseph E. LeDoux Richard Davidson Susan Fiske Roy Baumeister Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Category Wiktionary definition Wiktionary category Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Wikibooks v t e Neuroscience Outline History Basic science Behavioral epigenetics Behavioral genetics Brain mapping Brain-reading Cellular neuroscience Computational neuroscience Connectomics Imaging genetics Integrative neuroscience Molecular neuroscience Neural decoding Neural engineering Neuroanatomy Neurobiology Neurochemistry Neuroendocrinology Neurogenetics Neuroinformatics Neurometrics Neuromorphology Neurophysics Neurophysiology Systems neuroscience Clinical neuroscience Behavioral neurology Clinical neurophysiology Epileptology Neurocardiology Neuroepidemiology Neurogastroenterology Neuroimmunology Neurointensive care Neurology Neuro-oncology Neuro-ophthalmology Neuropathology Neuropharmacology Neuroprosthetics Neuropsychiatry Neuroradiology Neurorehabilitation Neurosurgery Neurotology Neurovirology Nutritional neuroscience Psychiatry Cognitive neuroscience Affective neuroscience Behavioral neuroscience Chronobiology Molecular cellular cognition Motor control Neurolinguistics Neuropsychology Sensory neuroscience Social cognitive neuroscience Interdisciplinary fields Consumer neuroscience Cultural neuroscience Educational neuroscience Evolutionary neuroscience Global neurosurgery Neuroanthropology Neural engineering Neurobiotics Neurocinema Neurocriminology Neuroeconomics Neuroepistemology Neuroesthetics Neuroethics Neuroethology Neurohistory Neurolaw Neuromarketing Neuromorphic engineering Neuroscience of music Neurophenomenology Neurophilosophy Neuropolitics Neurorobotics Neurotheology Paleoneurobiology Social neuroscience Concepts Brain–computer interface Development of the nervous system Neural network (artificial) Neural network (biological) Detection theory Intraoperative neurophysiological monitoring Neurochip Neurodegenerative disease Neurodevelopmental disorder Neurodiversity Neurogenesis Neuroimaging Neuroimmune system Neuromanagement Neuromodulation Neuroplasticity Neurotechnology Neurotoxin Self-awareness Category Commons v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Universals Development Attachment Bonding Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / Mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism / acquired characteristics Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evolution Unilineal evolution Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neuropsychology&oldid=1301150284 " Category : Neuropsychology Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts Pages using div col with small parameter This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 09:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neuropsychology 53 languages Add topic

