Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Constituents 2 Indications 3 History 4 Allergies and other concerns 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Soy formula 4 languages العربية Français Bahasa Indonesia 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Substitute for human breast milk Soy formula is a substitute for human breast milk . It is a commercial product based on the proteins found in soybeans. Soy infant formula uses processed soybeans as its source of protein, and comes in powdered or liquid form.

[ 1 ] Usually lactose-free, soy infant formula contains a different sugar. Infants who are intolerant of cows' milk protein may also be intolerant of soy protein. It differs from human breast milk in a number of ways.

[ 2 ] Soy protein inhibits the absorption of iron. The soy-based formulas discussed by the World Health Organization reports that soy formula is fortified with iron to compensate for this effect.

[ 3 ] One naturally occurring plant-based compound found in soy-based infant formula is phytic acid . It is also a strong inhibitor of iron absorption, though it can be removed in processing. It is not known how many manufacturers of soy-based formula incorporate this practice. China and Vietnam have regulated soy-based infant formulas to include NaFeEDTA (sodium-feric ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid ) to fortify the formula and enhance the absorption of iron by the infant. When iron compounds are added to soy-based infant formula, the iron compound is encapsulated to prevent it from making the formula dark.

[ 4 ] Constituents [ edit ] Genetically modified ingredients may be present in soy-based infant formula. It may also be of lower nutritional value.

[ 5 ] Soy-based infant formula can have aluminum , phytates , and phytoestrogens (isoflavones) that might cause unanticipated effects. Other constituents are amino acids : such as taurine , methionine , and carnitine . Added minerals are phosphore, calcium, iron, and zinc . SIF also contains soy-isolate that supplies 95% of protein.

Indications [ edit ] Breastfeeding is still the best option for feeding infants.

[ 6 ] There are instances when breastfeeding is not possible and the use of formula is appropriate.

[ 5 ] Indications for the use of soy-based infant formula are galactosaemia and lactase deficiency . When a child develops an allergy to cows' milk, soy-based formula is used. SBF is less costly than other breast milk formula substitutes.

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] Past reports of the effects of soy formula have suggested that a constituent of soy formula may affect reproductive functions. However, studies have shown that no correlation exists between the consumption of soy formula and abnormality in reproductive anatomy or function.

[ 7 ] Soy-based infant formula has been used for over the past 100 years. By late 1800s and the early 1900s, supplementation of breastfeeding with formula was acceptable.

[ 5 ] Soy-based formula was used as early as 1909.

[ 6 ] Allergies and other concerns [ edit ] Soy-based infant formula is associated with allergies in infants .

[ 8 ] Chronic food protein-induced enterocolitis syndrome (FPIES) has been observed in infants aged younger than three months who were fed with soy formula.

[ 9 ] France has taken soy-based infant formula off the market. Soy-base formula accounts for about 20% of the infant formula purchased in the US. In New Zealand formula use is around 10%, and in Belgium and the UK and about 5%.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Food portal Breast milk jewelry Lactivism Baby Gaga Allergies in children References [ edit ] ^ "Promoting Breastfeeding During Pregnancy – Step 3" . World Health Organization. 7 August 2017.

Archived from the original on 22 August 2017 . Retrieved 7 August 2017 – via www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov.

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Walker, Marsha (2011).

Breastfeeding management for the clinician : using the evidence . Sudbury, Mass: Jones and Bartlett Publishers.

ISBN 9780763766511 .

^ "Preventing and Controlling Iron Defiency Anaemia Through Primary Health Care" . The World Health Organization. 1990. Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 August 2017 . Retrieved 9 August 2017 .

^ "JIACI · Journal of Investigational Allergology and Clinical Immunology" . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-08-08 . Retrieved 2017-08-07 .

^ a b c Walker, Marsha (1 August 2015).

"Formula Supplementation of Breastfed Infants: Helpful or Hazardous?" .

ICAN: Infant, Child, & Adolescent Nutrition .

7 (4): 198– 207.

doi : 10.1177/1941406415591208 .

^ a b c d Vandenplas, Yvan; De Greef, Elisabeth; Devreker, Thierry; Hauser, Bruno (1 February 2011). "Soy infant formula: is it that bad?".

Acta Paediatrica .

100 (2): 162– 166.

doi : 10.1111/j.1651-2227.2010.02021.x .

PMID 20860705 .

S2CID 44418196 .

^ Andres, Aline; Moore, Mary B.; Linam, Leann E.; Casey, Patrick H.; Cleves, Mario A.; Badger, Thomas M. (1 May 2015).

"Compared with Feeding Infants Breast Milk or Cow-Milk Formula, Soy Formula Feeding Does Not Affect Subsequent Reproductive Organ Size at 5 Years of Age" .

The Journal of Nutrition .

145 (5): 871– 875.

doi : 10.3945/jn.114.206201 .

PMID 25761499 .

^ Nowak-Węgrzyn, Anna; Katz, Yitzhak; Mehr, Sam Soheil; Koletzko, Sibylle (1 May 2015).

"Non–IgE-mediated gastrointestinal food allergy" .

Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology .

135 (5): 1114– 1124.

doi : 10.1016/j.jaci.2015.03.025 .

PMID 25956013 .

^ Nowak-Węgrzyn, A; Jarocka-Cyrta, E; Moschione Castro, APB (2017).

"Food Protein–Induced Enterocolitis Syndrome" .

Journal of Investigational Allergology and Clinical Immunology .

27 (1): 1– 18.

doi : 10.18176/jiaci.0135 .

ISSN 1018-9068 .

PMID 28211341 .

External links [ edit ] Using Wikipedia for Research v t e Breastfeeding Anatomy, physiology and immunology Anti inflammatory agents in breast milk Areola Areolar gland (gland of Montgomery) Breast Breast anatomy Breast crawl Breast milk Breastfeeding and medications Dysphoric milk ejection reflex Frenulum of tongue Galactose Human milk oligosaccharide Hypothalamic–pituitary–prolactin axis Latching on Lactation suppression Lactiferous duct Lactose Milk Overactive let-down Oxytocin Passive immunity Prolactin Prolactin modulator Colostrum Lactation Nipple Mammary gland Mammary alveoli Mammary lobule Disorders and difficulties Blocked milk duct Breastfeeding difficulties Breast engorgement Low milk supply Fissure of the nipple Inverted nipple Cracked nipple Mastitis Nipple bleb Nipple vasospasm Neonatal jaundice Nipple pain in breastfeeding Breastfeeding infertility Breastfeeding and HIV Prolactinoma Breastfeeding and mental health Culture and support Breastfeeding advocacy Breastfeeding in art Breastfeeding in Islam Breastfeeding in public Breastfeeding in the United States Breastfeeding organizations Breastfeeding promotion Child's Right to Nurse Act Diana West (lactation consultant) History and culture of breastfeeding Human-animal breastfeeding Human milk bank Human milk banking in North America International Breastfeeding Symbol Jack Newman (doctor) International Breast Milk Project La Leche League Lactation room Lactivism Mothers' rights Pat Shelly Amy Spangler Mary Rose Tully World Breastfeeding Week Roles Doula Midwifery Lactation consultant Lactation counselor List of breastfeeding activists Wet nurse Equipment used with breastfeeding Breast pump Nipple shield Nursing bra Nursing chair Supplemental nursing system Other topics Baby-led weaning Weaning Extended breastfeeding Nipple confusion Breastfeeding and fertility Breastfeeding and medications Breastfeeding contraindications Breastfeeding and mental health v t e Infants and their care Health ( pediatrics ) Baby food Birth weight Breast pump Breastfeeding Breastfeeding and medications Breastfeeding and mental health Bottle feeding Colic Cradle cap Esotropia Failure to thrive Immunization Infant and toddler safety Infant bathing Infant feeding Infant food safety Infant formula Infant massage Infant respiratory distress syndrome Infant sleep training Neonatal intensive care unit Newborn care and safety Oral rehydration therapy Pedialyte Preterm birth Shaken baby syndrome Soy formula SIDS Development Attachment parenting Baby-led weaning Baby talk Babbling Birth defect Childbirth Crawling Gestational age Infant visual development Irritant diaper dermatitis Infant cognitive development Infant crying Kangaroo care Mother Nursery rhyme Object permanence Parent Parenting Peekaboo Play Prenatal development Prenatal development table Teething Walking Weaning Socialization and culture Attachment Babysitting Child abuse Child care Child custody Children's rights UN Child rights Circumcision Foster care Grandparent visitation Infant swimming Milk bank Nanny Wet nurse Infant care and equipment Baby bouncer Baby gate Baby monitor / Hidden camera Baby powder Baby shampoo Baby toy Baby walker Bib Baby swing Baby transport Bassinet Car seat safety Child vehicular heat stroke deaths Cloth diaper Cradle board Diaper Diaper bag Baby wipes Haberman Feeder High chair Infant bed (American 'crib' and 'cradle', British 'cot') Infant carrier Infant clothing Pacifier Playpen Stroller Supplemental nursing system Swaddling Swim diaper Teether Travel cot Other topics Baby shower Babywearing Child neglect Closed adoption Cry room Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder Infant ear piercing Open adoption Prenatal cocaine exposure Neonatal withdrawal syndrome Parental child abduction Parental responsibility Parenting plan Paternity Paternity fraud Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Soy_formula&oldid=1187108626 " Categories : Infant formula Baby products Babycare Breastfeeding Soy-based foods Soy products Soybeans Neonatology Hidden categories: Source attribution Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 November 2023, at 14:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Soy formula 4 languages Add topic

