Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Recruitment Toggle Recruitment subsection 1.1 Exemption 1.2 Alternatives to military service 2 Army service Toggle Army service subsection 2.1 Boot camp 2.2 Long service 3 Compensation 4 Further mandatory services 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Conscription in Switzerland 4 languages فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of conscription in Switzerland Timetable of military duties, Switzerland.

Conscription 1780 caricature of a press gang Related concepts Alternative civilian service Civil conscription Conscientious objector Conscription crisis Counter-recruitment Draft-card burning Draft evasion Economic For autistic people Impressment Levée en masse Male expendability Military service National service Of people with disabilities Penal military unit Sexism War resister By historical country Ottoman Empire Russian Empire Soviet Union By modern country Argentina Australia Azerbaijan Bermuda Brazil Canada China DR Congo ( child soldiers ) Cuba Cyprus ( reduction ) Denmark Egypt Eritrea Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Israel Iran Ireland North Korea South Korea Latvia Lithuania Myanmar the Netherlands New Zealand Norway Mexico Monaco Mozambique the Philippines Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Sri Lanka Sudan Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Turkey United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Ukraine Vietnam v t e Switzerland has mandatory service ( German : Militärdienst / Zivildienst ; French : service militaire / service civil ; Italian : servizio militare / servizio civile ) in the Swiss Army or Civilian Service for all able-bodied male citizens , who are conscripted when they reach the age of majority .

[ 1 ] Women may volunteer for any position.

[ 2 ] Conscripts make up the majority of the manpower in the Swiss Armed Forces .

[ 3 ] On September 22, 2013, a referendum that aimed to abolish conscription was held in Switzerland.

[ 4 ] However, the referendum failed with over 73% of the electorate voting against it, showing strong support for conscription of men in Switzerland.

Recruitment [ edit ] Service record book Service in the army or civil protection usually begins at the age of 20, but recruitment may commence as early as 16 for those interested in preparatory courses, which are a precondition for gaining access to some sectors of the armed forces.

[ 5 ] After the first written communications, all the male conscripts (for which attendance is mandatory) [ 6 ] and female volunteers are convoked for an information day ( German : Orientierungstag ; French : Journée d’information ; Italian : Giornata informativa ), usually taking place near the municipality of residence of the attendants. During this day they are given a presentation of the army, the civil protection , Switzerland's security policy , an overview of their rights and duties and administrative directives.

[ 6 ] On this occasion conscripts are issued a service record book, used to attest the fulfilment of military obligations.

[ 6 ] It is possible to postpone service up to four years given adequate reasons (e.g. study abroad). Any further delaying of service could incur fines. Conscripts are advised to either carry out their service in a single long stretch or to fraction their time by undergoing recruit training first and serving in a later phase.

[ 7 ] Recruitment itself takes place over a period of two or three days in one of the six recruitment centres spread across Switzerland ( Windisch , Payerne , Sumiswald , Monte Ceneri , Rüti , Mels ). Recruits are assigned different positions according to their physical fitness, intellectual capabilities and aptitude.

[ 8 ] Military service is not mandatory for women, but they may volunteer for any position.

[ 2 ] In 2016, an expert commission that the Swiss government charged with reviewing the country's conscription system recommended that women be included in the military draft in order to meet its annual demand of 18,000 new soldiers a year.

[ 9 ] Exemption [ edit ] People determined unfit for service, where fitness is defined as "satisfying physical, intellectual and mental requirements for military service or civil protection service and being capable of accomplishing these services without harming oneself or others" , [ 10 ] are exempted from service but pay an additional 3% of annual income tax until the age of 37 but for a maximum of 11 years, unless they are affected by a disability .

[ 11 ] Almost 20% of all conscripts were found unfit for military or civilian service in 2008; the rate is generally higher in urban cantons such as Zurich and Geneva than in the rural ones.

[ 12 ] Swiss citizens living abroad are generally exempted from conscription in time of peace, [ 13 ] while dual citizenship grants the individual the option to do his military service abroad, instead of in Switzerland.

[ 14 ] Alternatives to military service [ edit ] Main article: Swiss Civilian Service Since 1996, conscripts who are found to be sufficiently fit for regular military service, but who object for reasons of conscience, can apply for civilian service . This service consists of various kinds of social services, such as reconstructing cultural sites, helping the elderly and other activities removed from military connotations. Civilian service lasts 340 days, 50% longer than a soldier's regular army service.

[ 15 ] Conscripts found to be sufficiently unfit for regular military service, but not for exemption, take part in civil protection , where they serve 245 days (but a maximum of 66 days per year) and may be called on to assist the police, fire or health departments, as well as natural disaster relief and crowd control during demonstrations or events with large attendance.

[ 16 ] Each day served lowers the exemption tax for that year by 4% until it reaches 0.

[ 17 ] Army service [ edit ] A Swiss Army exercise near Glarus Boot camp [ edit ] Boot camp lasts 18 or 21 weeks. In the first seven weeks recruits receive the "general basic instructions"; after this period, some recruits leave boot camp as they are presented with an opportunity to advance to cadet school.

The second phase of six weeks is devoted to function-specific basic instructions , where recruits learn skills specific to their job. In the third phase, called "instruction in formation", battlegroups and battalions are formed.

[ 18 ] Every Swiss soldier used to be issued with a sealed box of ammunition, but following a Swiss Federal Parliament decision to discontinue the practice in 2007, ammunition have been withdrawn starting in early 2008.

[ 19 ] Conscripts who are unwilling to carry a weapon on moral grounds may apply for weaponless service.

[ 20 ] Recruits seeking higher ranks will require further training: the grade of sergeant requires 4 weeks of rank-specific instructions, 1 week of boot camp preparation and 18 weeks of practical service – normally as an instructor at boot camp for new recruits; [ 21 ] the grade of sergeant-major requires the training for the grade of sergeant, but after 14 weeks of practical service as a sergeant, there are 6 weeks of rank-specific instructions and then again as a sergeant-major 1 week of boot camp preparation and 18 weeks of practical service; [ 21 ] the grade of lieutenant requires the training for the grade of sergeant, but after 7 weeks of practical service as a sergeant, there are 15 weeks of rank-specific instructions and then again as a lieutenant 1 week of boot camp preparation and 18 weeks of practical service.

[ 21 ] The age and duration after when military obligations end also varies with rank, ranging from 12 years for enlisted men and NCOs to 50 for staff officers .

[ 22 ] Professional officers retire between 58 and 65.

[ 23 ] Long service [ edit ] Conscripts choosing long service fulfill their entire military obligations in a continuous 300-day service, after which they are incorporated in the reserve for the following seven years.

[ 24 ] A maximum of 15% of conscripts of any age class has the possibility to choose this path.

[ 25 ] Compensation [ edit ] As of 2017, all personnel are paid a basic compensation ranging from 4 Swiss francs a day for a recruit to CHF 30 for a lieutenant general.

[ 26 ] This is further supplemented by an additional compensation ranging from 23 to 80 Swiss francs for non-commissioned officers or officers undergoing training.

During military service, military personnel are further paid an income-loss insurance ( German , EO , Erwerbsersatzordnung ; French , APG , Allocation pour perte de gain ). This "EO" is financed with social contributions levied on salaries.

For employees, the "EO" consists in a compensation of 80% of their regular salary. Most employers, however, continue to pay the full salary during military service. In this case, the compensation is paid to the employer. Employers cannot fire a person in service by law, although there is no specific provision preventing a conscript from being fired before or after a period of service, other than the catch-all law against wrongful termination .

Students, independents or unemployed persons receive a fixed compensation of CHF 62, although this compensation amounts to CHF 97 for non-commissioned and commissioned officers while undergoing training. This "EO" can be further improved to a maximum CHF 174 if one has children.

[ 27 ] Further mandatory services [ edit ] The political system in Switzerland is characterized by the so-called militia-system , where civilian service tasks basically are carried out on a part-time basis. Therefore there is a mandatory service for Compulsory Fire Services and in Swiss civil defense and protection institutions for all inhabitants as well.

References [ edit ] ^ "Military service" .

www.ch.ch . Retrieved 2025-07-07 .

Every Swiss man is required to serve in the military or in the alternative civilian service. In most cases, the military service obligation applies from age 18 to 30.

^ a b "Femmes dans l'armée" (in French). Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports. Archived from the original on 2 May 2009 . Retrieved 10 July 2009 .

^ "The basic organisation of the Swiss Armed Forces" (PDF) . Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 12 July 2009 .

^ "Volksabstimmung vom 22 September 2013" [Referendums on 22 September 2013].

Swiss Parliament (in Swiss High German). 28 June 2013. Archived from the original on 6 March 2014 . Retrieved 4 March 2013 .

^ "Rekrutierung" (in French). Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports. Archived from the original on 28 February 2008 . Retrieved 10 July 2009 .

^ a b c "Orientierungstag" (in French). Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports. Archived from the original on 22 March 2009 . Retrieved 10 July 2009 .

^ "Verschiebung Rekrutierung?" (in German). Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports. Archived from the original on 8 August 2014 . Retrieved 7 August 2014 .

^ "Journées de recrutement" (in French). Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports. Archived from the original on 28 February 2008 . Retrieved 10 July 2009 .

^ Braw, Elisabeth (2016-07-20).

"Expand the Draft to Women" .

Foreign Affairs . Retrieved 2016-09-06 .

^ "Définition de l'aptitude au service" (in French). Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports. Archived from the original on 2 May 2009 . Retrieved 10 July 2009 .

^ "Ordonnance sur la taxe d'exemption de l'obligation de servir" (in French). Federal Authorities of the Swiss Confederation . Retrieved 10 July 2009 .

^ "Les chiffres du recrutement en 2008" (in French). Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports. Archived from the original on 24 July 2011 . Retrieved 10 July 2009 .

^ "Les Suisses de l'étranger" (in French). Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports. Archived from the original on 25 April 2009 . Retrieved 10 July 2009 .

^ "Doubles-nationaux" (in French). Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports. Archived from the original on 26 April 2009 . Retrieved 10 July 2009 .

^ "Ziviler Ersatzdienst" (in French). Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports. Archived from the original on 28 February 2008 . Retrieved 10 July 2009 .

^ "Protection civile" (in French). Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports. Archived from the original on 30 April 2009 . Retrieved 10 July 2009 .

^ "Civil protection" .

www.ch.ch . Retrieved 2025-07-07 .

^ "Déroulement de l'école" (in French). Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports. Archived from the original on 8 May 2009 . Retrieved 10 July 2009 .

^ "Retrait des munitions de poche" (in French). Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports. Archived from the original on 27 April 2008 . Retrieved 10 July 2009 .

^ "Service sans arme" (in French). Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports. Archived from the original on 12 August 2009 . Retrieved 10 July 2009 .

^ a b c "Milizkarriere" .

Schweizer Armee (in German) . Retrieved 2021-06-09 .

^ "Fedlex" .

www.fedlex.admin.ch . Retrieved 2025-07-07 .

^ "Loi fédérale sur l'armée et l'administration militaire" (in French). Federal Authorities of the Swiss Confederation . Retrieved 10 July 2009 .

^ "Ordonnance sur les obligations militaires" (in French). Federal Authorities of the Swiss Confederation . Retrieved 15 March 2023 .

^ "Service long" (in French). Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports . Retrieved 15 March 2023 .

^ "Sold" (in German). Federal Department of Defence, Civil Protection and Sports. Archived from the original on 9 April 2017 . Retrieved 3 March 2017 .

^ "Finanzielle Entschädigung" . Archived from the original on 2009-04-25 . Retrieved 2009-07-12 .

Further reading [ edit ] McPhee, John .

La Place de la Concorde Suisse New York: Noonday Press (Farrar, Strraus & Giroux), 1984.

ISBN 0-374-51932-3 .

A non-fiction narrative which goes inside the Swiss Army and explores the relationship between the militia and Swiss society.

v t e Swiss Armed Forces Overview Ministry of Defence Conscription History Intelligence Ranks Awards Weapons of mass destruction Opposition Land Forces ARD 10 Military Police Special Detachment Special Forces Command Swissint Swisscoy Air Force History Patrouille Suisse PC-7 Team Parachute Reconnaissance Company 17 Aircraft Squadrons Aeromedical Center (AMC) v t e Conscription in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Portal : Switzerland Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conscription_in_Switzerland&oldid=1300096641 " Categories : Conscription in Switzerland Military of Switzerland Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Swiss High German-language sources (de-ch) CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing German-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 07:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conscription in Switzerland 4 languages Add topic

