Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Reception 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents The Social Contract 31 languages العربية বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1762 book by Jean-Jacques Rousseau This article is about Jean-Jacques Rousseau's 1762 treatise. For "social contract" as a political and philosophical concept, see Social contract . For other uses, see Social Contract (disambiguation) .

The Social Contract; or, Principles of Political Right Title page of the first octavo edition Author Jean-Jacques Rousseau Original title Du contrat social; ou, Principes du droit politique Language French Publication date 1762 Publication place France (edited in Amsterdam ) Original text Du contrat social; ou, Principes du droit politique at French Wikisource Translation The Social Contract; or, Principles of Political Right at Wikisource Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e The Social Contract , originally published as On the Social Contract; or, Principles of Political Right ( French : Du contrat social; ou, Principes du droit politique ), is a 1762 French-language book by the Genevan philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau . The book theorizes about how to establish legitimate authority in a political community , that is, one compatible with individual freedom, in the face of the problems of commercial society, which Rousseau had already identified in his Discourse on Inequality (1755).

The Social Contract helped inspire political reforms or revolutions in Europe, especially in France .

The Social Contract argued against the idea that monarchs were divinely empowered to legislate. Rousseau asserts that only the general will of the people has the right to legislate, for only under the general will can the people be said to obey only themselves and hence be free. Although Rousseau's notion of the general will is subject to much interpretive controversy, it seems to involve a legislature consisting of all adult members of the political community who are restricted to legislating general laws for the common good.

Overview [ edit ] Title page of a pirated edition of the Social Contract , probably printed in Germany [ 1 ] The epigraph of the work is "foederis aequas / dicamus leges" ("Let us set equal terms for the truce") ( Virgil , Aeneid XI.321–22). The stated aim of The Social Contract is to determine whether there can be a legitimate political authority, since people's interactions he saw at his time seemed to put them in a state far worse than the good one they were at in the state of nature , even though living in isolation. He concludes book one, chapter three with, "Let us then admit that force does not create right, and that we are obliged to obey only legitimate powers", which is to say, the ability to coerce is not a legitimate power―might does not make right, and the people have no duty to submit to it. A state has no right to enslave a conquered people.

Rousseau argues that legitimate authority must be compatible with individual freedom. Such authority can only be compatible with individual freedom if it is consented to, and hence there must be a social contract . However, Rousseau's conception of this social contract was different to that of thinkers before him, such as Grotius , Hobbes , and Pufendorf .

[ 2 ] : 75 For Rousseau, since one's right to freedom is inalienable, the people cannot obligate themselves to obey someone other than themselves. Transferring rights to an authority involved renunciation of freedom and transformed the natural equality of men into subjection.

[ 2 ] : 77 Hence, the only legitimate social contract is one that establishes the people themselves as the rulers. Rousseau refers to the united will of the people as the general will .

[ 2 ] : 85 The general will, to be truly general, must only legislate laws with general form, i.e., laws that apply equally to all. For Rousseau, collective self-rule would increase freedom if the people to whom laws applied were also the ones prescribing them.

[ 2 ] : 79 Rousseau, who objected to extreme wealth inequality, also argued that equality is essential for the attainment of liberty, and concluded that legislation ought to preserve equality.

[ 3 ] [ 2 ] : 80 Rousseau argues that the sovereign power must be separate from the government, which in Rousseau's terminology refers to the executive power . The division of sovereign from government is necessary because the sovereign cannot deal with particular matters like applications of the law.

[ 2 ] : 89 Doing so would undermine its generality, and therefore damage its legitimacy. Thus, the government must remain a separate institution from the sovereign body. When the government exceeds the boundaries set in place by the people, it is the mission of the people to abolish such government and begin anew.

Rousseau claims that the size of the territory to be governed often decides the nature of the government. Since a government is only as strong as the people, and this strength is absolute, the larger the territory, the more strength the government must be able to exert over the populace (cf. also Turner's frontier thesis for the case of America). In his view, a monarchical government is able to wield the most power over the people since it has to devote less power to itself, while a democracy the least. In general, the larger the bureaucracy , the more power required for government discipline. Normally, this relationship requires the state to be an aristocracy or monarchy . When Rousseau uses the word democracy, he refers to an executive composed of all or most of the people (Bk. 3, Ch. 3, Para. 2) rather than to a representative democracy . Rousseau argues that it is the people themselves, not their representatives, who have supreme power, and that everyone taking part in legislation is a check against abuse of power.

[ 2 ] : 83 In light of the relation between population size and governmental structure, Rousseau argues that like his native Geneva , small city-states are the form of the nation in which freedom can best flourish.

[ 2 ] : 82 For states of this size, an elected aristocracy is preferable, and in very large states a benevolent monarch; but even monarchical rule, to be legitimate, must be subordinate to the sovereign rule of law.

Reception [ edit ] Upon publication, the distribution of The Social Contract in France was prohibited, and Rousseau fled the country to avoid imprisonment.

[ 2 ] : 99 However, it was primarily Rousseau's chapter on civil religion, rather than his ideas on liberty and sovereignty, that caused the controversy.

In America, Noah Webster borrowed heavily from The Social Contract to write Sketches of American Policy (1785), one of the earliest widely-published arguments for a strong central government in America.

[ 4 ] Immanuel Kant, one of the most influential moral philosophers in Western philosophy , acknowledged his debt to Rousseau's work in political philosophy , of which The Social Contract is perhaps the closest to a complete statement. Kant wrote, "I myself am a researcher by inclination. I feel the entire thirst for cognition and the eager restlessness to proceed further in it, as well as the satisfaction at every acquisition. There was a time when I believed this alone could constitute the honour of humankind, and I despised the rabble who knows nothing. Rousseau has set me right. This blinding prejudice vanishes, I learn to honour human beings, and I would feel by far less useful than the common labourer if I did not believe that this consideration could impart a value to all others in order to establish the rights of humanity." (Refl. 20:44) The French philosopher Voltaire used his publications to criticise and mock Rousseau, but also to defend free expression . In his Idées républicaines (1765), he reacted to the news that The Social Contract had been burned in Geneva , saying "The operation of burning it was perhaps as odious as that of writing it. […] To burn a book of argument is to say: 'We do not have enough wit to reply to it.'" [ 5 ] [ 6 ] The work was also banned in Paris [ 7 ] and was forbidden by the Church being listed on the Index Librorum Prohibitorum .

[ a ] The work received a refutation called The Confusion of the Social Contract by Jean-Jacques Rousseau by the Jesuit Alfonso Muzzarelli in Italy in 1794.

[ 8 ] The influence of Rousseau on Maximilien Robespierre from his diary during the Estates General of 1789 : Divine man! It was you who taught me to know myself. When I was young you brought me to appreciate the true dignity of my nature and to reflect on the great principles which govern the social order . . . . I saw you in your last days and for me the recollection of the time will always be a source of proud joy. I contemplated your august features and saw there the imprint of those dark griefs which the injustice of man inflicted on you.

[ 9 ] Thomas Carlyle assessed its impact: and now has not Jean Jacques promulgated his new Evangel of a Contrat Social; explaining the whole mystery of Government, and how it is contracted and bargained for,—to universal satisfaction? Theories of Government! Such have been, and will be; in ages of decadence. Acknowledge them in their degree; as processes of Nature, who does nothing in vain; as steps in her great process. Meanwhile, what theory is so certain as this, That all theories, were they never so earnest, painfully elaborated, are, and, by the very conditions of them, must be incomplete, questionable, and even false? Thou shalt know that this Universe is, what it professes to be, an infinite one. Attempt not to swallow it , for thy logical digestion; be thankful, if skilfully planting down this and the other fixed pillar in the chaos, thou prevent its swallowing thee . That a new young generation has exchanged the Sceptic Creed , What shall I believe?

for passionate Faith in this Gospel according to Jean Jacques is a further step in the business; and betokens much.

He advised: "In such prophesied Lubberland , of Happiness, Benevolence, and Vice cured of its deformity, trust not, my friends! . . . Is not Sentimentalism twin-sister to Cant , if not one and the same with it? Is not Cant the materia prima of the Devil; from which all falsehoods, imbecilities, abominations body themselves; from which no true thing can come? For Cant is itself properly a double-distilled Lie; the second-power of a Lie." [ 3 ] See also [ edit ] George Mason Memorial , Washington, D.C., includes Du Contract Social as an element of the statue of a seated Mason.

Totalitarian democracy Notes [ edit ] ^ Beacon for Freedom of Expression search for Rousseau References [ edit ] ^ R.A. Leigh, Unsolved Problems in the Bibliography of J.-J. Rousseau (Cambridge, 1990), plate 22.

^ a b c d e f g h i Wokler, Robert (2001).

Rousseau: a very short introduction . Very short introductions. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-280198-2 .

^ a b Carlyle, Thomas (1837).

"Chapter 1.2.VII. Contrat Social." .

The French Revolution: A History .

^ Harris, Micah (2024-09-01).

"Noah Webster and the Influence of Rousseau on Education in America, 1785–1835" .

American Political Thought .

13 (4): 505– 527.

doi : 10.1086/732277 .

ISSN 2161-1580 .

^ Gay, Peter (1959).

Voltaire's Politics: The Poet as Realist . New Jersey: Princeton University Press. pp.

214– 219.

^ Davidson, Ian (2004).

Voltaire in Exile . Atlantic books. pp.

186– 187.

ISBN 1843540878 .

^ "Jean-Jacques Rousseau | The Core Curriculum" .

www.college.columbia.edu .

Columbia University . Retrieved 12 April 2017 .

^ Charles E. O'Neill; Joaquín María Domínguez (2001).

Diccionario histórico de la Compañía de Jesús: Costa Rossetti-Industrias . Univ Pontifica Comillas. p. 1450.

ISBN 978-84-8468-038-3 .

^ Robespierre, Diary .

Further reading [ edit ] Bertram, Christopher (2003).

Rousseau and the 'Social Contract' . Routledge.

Cohen, Joshua (2010).

Rousseau: A Free Community of Equals . Oxford University Press.

Incorvati, Giovanni (2012) “Du contrat social, or the principles of political right(s) . Les citoyens de Rousseau ont la parole en anglais”, in : G. Lobrano, P.P. Onida, Il principio della democrazia. Jean-Jacques Rousseau Du Contrat social (1762) , Napoli, Jovene, p. 213-256.

Williams, David Lay (2014).

Rousseau's 'Social Contract': An Introduction .  Cambridge University Press.

Wraight, Christopher D. (2008).

Rousseau's The Social Contract: A Reader's Guide . London: Continuum Books.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Du Contrat social (Jean-Jacques Rousseau) .

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: The Social Contract Wikiquote has quotations related to The Social Contract .

The Social Contract, translated by G. D. H. Cole at Standard Ebooks The Social Contract Section from a philosophy encyclopedia entry on Rousseau Du contrat social (MetaLibri) The Social Contract translated 1782 by G. D. H. Cole at constitution.org The Social Contract Public domain audiobook G. D. H. Cole translation The Social Contract English translation audiobook on LibriVox.org Catholic Encyclopedia Based on an article critical of The Social Contract , written in 1908.

SparkNotes entry on The Social Contract Rousseaus Gesellschaftsvertrag in Kurzform A site containing The Social Contract , slightly modified for easier reading The Social Contract on In Our Time at the BBC Du contrat social, or the principles of political right(s) v t e Jean-Jacques Rousseau Works Discourse on the Arts and Sciences Le devin du village Discourse on Inequality Letter to M. D'Alembert on Spectacles Julie, or the New Heloise Emile, or On Education The Social Contract Constitutional Project for Corsica Pygmalion Confessions Considerations on the Government of Poland Letters on the Elements of Botany Essay on the Origin of Languages Dialogues: Rousseau, Judge of Jean-Jacques Reveries of a Solitary Walker Concepts Amour de soi Amour-propre General will v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other MusicBrainz work NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐chdq5
Cached time: 20250817044530
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.801 seconds
Real time usage: 0.957 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6316/1000000
Revision size: 16682/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 160103/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 16541/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 76515/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.468/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14851021/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  778.980      1 -total
 21.10%  164.344      1 Template:Infobox_book
 19.05%  148.395      1 Template:Infobox
 15.69%  122.215      2 Template:Reflist
 15.13%  117.834      1 Template:Republicanism_sidebar
 14.85%  115.643      1 Template:Politics_series_sidebar
 14.63%  113.946      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 13.13%  102.311      3 Template:Lang
 11.72%   91.313      3 Template:Sister_project
 11.54%   89.933      3 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1922779:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044530 and revision id 1303751513. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Social_Contract&oldid=1303751513 " Categories : 1762 non-fiction books Books about sovereignty Books about political philosophy Social philosophy literature Works by Jean-Jacques Rousseau Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles that link to foreign-language Wikisources Articles that link to Wikisource Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 21:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Social Contract 31 languages Add topic

