Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Organisation 2 Principia Cybernetica Web 3 Workshops and symposia 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Principia Cybernetica 2 languages Français Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Principia Cybernetica" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) International cooperation of scientists in the field of cybernetics and systems science Principia Cybernetica is an international cooperation of scientists in the field of cybernetics and systems science , especially known for their website, Principia Cybernetica. They have dedicated their organization to what they call "a computer-supported evolutionary-systemic philosophy, in the context of the transdisciplinary academic fields of Systems Science and Cybernetics".

[ 1 ] Organisation [ edit ] Principia Cybernetica was initiated in 1989 in the USA by Cliff Joslyn and Valentin Turchin , and a year later broadened to Europe with Francis Heylighen from Belgium joining their cooperation.

Major activities of the Principia Cybernetica Project are: Principia Cybernetica Web: an online encyclopedia Web Dictionary of Cybernetics and Systems; an online dictionary [ 2 ] Newsletter Principia Cybernetica News Conferences and traditional publications The organization is associated with: American Society for Cybernetics .

Evolution, Complexity and Cognition group: a transdisciplinary research group at the Free University of Brussels , Belgium, founded in 2004 and directed by Francis Heylighen .

Journal of Memetics -Evolutionary Models of Information Transmission (JoM-EMIT) is an international peer-refereed scientific journal Global Brain Group: for discussion about the emergence of a global brain .

[ 3 ] Principia Cybernetica Web [ edit ] The Principia Cybernetica Web, [ 4 ] which went online in 1993 , is one of the first complex webs in the world.
It contains content on cybernetics , systems theory , complexity , and related approaches.

Workshops and symposia [ edit ] Especially in the 1990s the Principia Cybernetica has organized a series of workshops and international symposia on cybernetic themes.

[ 5 ] On the 1st Principia Cybernetica Workshop in June 1991 in Brussels many cyberneticists attended like Harry Bronitz, Gordon Pask , J.L. Elohim, Robert Glueck, Ranulph Glanville , Annemie Van Kerkhoven, Don McNeil, Elan Moritz, Cliff Joslyn, A. Comhaire and Valentin Turchin .

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] W. Ross Ashby Complex adaptive system Evolutionary epistemology Global brain Manifest and latent functions and dysfunctions Red Queen Stuart Umpleby Emergence References [ edit ] ^ Principia Cybernetica Masthead Last modified Oct 17, 2006. Accessed Oct 13, 2009.

^ Web Dictionary of Cybernetics and Systems ^ The Global Brain Group ^ Principia Cybernetica Web ^ a b Principia Cybernetica Meetings , 2001, retrieved October 2007.

Further reading [ edit ] Woody Evans (2003), A Review of the Principia Cybernetica Web , Mississippi Libraries, 67(1), p.16, Spring 2003.

Ben Goertzel (2000), The Principia Cybernetica Project: Placing the Web at the Center of Man’s Quest for Knowledge , September 2000.

Koen Van Damme (2007), Principia Cybernetica: An introduction .

Francis Heylighen (2000). " Foundations and Methodology for an Evolutionary World View: A Review of the Principia Cybernetica Project" in: Foundations of Science , 5(4), p.457-490.

Francis Heylighen , C. Joslyn & Valentin Turchin (1991). " A Short Introduction to the Principia Cybernetica Project [ dead link ] ". in: Journal of Ideas , 2(1), p.26-29.

C. Joslyn, Francis Heylighen & V. Turchin (1993). "Synopsys of the Principia Cybernetica Project". in: Proc. 13th Int. Congress on Cybernetics , p. 509-513.

External links [ edit ] Principia Cybernetica Home page Principia Cybernetica Project Organization Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Principia_Cybernetica&oldid=1292518959 " Categories : Cybernetics Organizations established in 1989 Systems sciences organizations Hidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from May 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2025 This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 11:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Principia Cybernetica 2 languages Add topic

