Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Some significant manuscripts and collections 3 Current organization Toggle Current organization subsection 3.1 Subject libraries 3.2 Special Collections Division 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Uppsala University Library 6 languages Español Français 日本語 Português Slovenščina Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 59°51′21″N 17°37′56″E ﻿ / ﻿ 59.85581°N 17.63228°E ﻿ / 59.85581; 17.63228 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Uppsala University Library" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Uppsala University Library Uppsala universitetsbibliotek Carolina Rediviva , one of the library buildings, built 1816–1841 according to the design of Carl Fredrik Sundvall.

59°51′21″N 17°37′56″E ﻿ / ﻿ 59.85581°N 17.63228°E ﻿ / 59.85581; 17.63228 Location Uppsala , Sweden Established 1620 ( 1620 ) Other information Director Lars Burman Parent organization Uppsala University Website www .ub .uu .se The Uppsala University Library ( Swedish : Uppsala universitetsbibliotek ) at Uppsala University in Uppsala , Sweden , consists of 11 subject libraries, one of which is housed in the old main library building, Carolina Rediviva . The library holds books and periodicals, manuscripts, musical scores, pictures, and maps.

History [ edit ] One of the reading rooms at Carolina Rediviva The exact site of the library during its earliest years is not known, but the university from its foundation in 1477, was located on what became known as "Student Island" in the Fyris River , where the academy mill – now the provincial museum – was later built. In 1566, King Eric XIV donated the old chapter house, south of the Uppsala Cathedral , to be used for lectures. After the construction of the Gustavianum in the 1620s, this building was referred to as the Collegium vetus or Gamla akademien ("the old academy"), until it was renamed in 1704 through a decision of the consistory (university board) and called the Academia Carolina , in honour of kings Charles IX , Charles XI and Charles XII . When a new library building was eventually constructed, it received the name Carolina Rediviva , "the revived Carolina", in honour of the old building, but was located to an entirely different place.

As of approximately 1871, the library contained approximately 200,000 volumes and 8,000 manuscripts, including the Codex Argenteus .

[ 1 ] The library remained in Gustavianum, which luckily escaped the flames in 1702, until Carolina Rediviva was completed in 1841. Carolina Rediviva has since retained the status of central library of the university until a reorganization in the 1990s did away with the concept of a centralized library organization and divided the library into a number of branch libraries of equal status, with Carolina being home of one of the branch libraries dedicated to humanities and social sciences . Nevertheless, the central functions of the library system largely remain in the building, as do the "cultural heritage units" (the Department for manuscripts and music and the Department for maps and prints).

Parallel to the development of the central library, the "seminars" (later called "departments") of the university had their own libraries. Currently, the library's collections are dispersed in the subject libraries. In 2004 most of subject libraries within the Faculties of Arts, Languages and Theology were amalgamated to form the new Karin Boye Library in the English Park Centre for the Humanities, next to the old cemetery.

Some significant manuscripts and collections [ edit ] The Codex Argenteus The university library of Uppsala was mainly created through the large donations in the early 17th century of confiscated libraries from monasteries, especially that in Vadstena and the Greyfriars Monastery, Stockholm (including the books donated to it by Kanutus Johannis ), and the important collection of Baron Hogenskild Bielke who had been executed in 1605 and whose library was confiscated by the crown and donated by Gustav Adolph in 1621.

[ 2 ] In 1669, the University Library received the Codex Upsaliensis, one of the four main manuscripts of the Prose Edda .

The many wars in which Sweden took a part in the 17th century brought many important manuscripts and collections to Sweden as spoils of war, some of which eventually ended up in Uppsala. (For example, in 1626 Swedish looted from the Polish Kolegium Jezuitów w Braniewie some 1300 books and manuscripts). The most famous example is the Codex Argenteus (the "Silver Bible") , most of what remains of Bishop Ulfilas 's translation of the New Testament into Gothic , which was looted in Prague. Another example is the Copernicana , the main part of the library of astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus , looted by the Swedish Army in Kraków . The so-called Emperor's Bible was lost when Swedish troops occupied Goslar in Germany, and eventually also ended up in Uppsala University Library.

Later donations and purchases include many archives and collections of various Swedish families and individuals, such as the personal papers of King Gustav III , which were left to the library, to be opened only 50 years after the King's death.

More recently acquired collections include the Bibliotheca Walleriana and the Waller manuscript collection , collected by Dr Erik Waller , and partly donated, partly purchased by the library. It is one of the largest libraries of books concerned with the history of science and medicine, and a manuscript collection mostly of letters from notable scientists. The manuscript collection is in the process of being scanned and published on the web .

The Bodoni collection is the largest collection of prints of Giambattista Bodoni (1740–1813) outside his native Parma . It was donated by the industrialist Erik Kempe in 1959 and later extended with funds donated at the same time.

The music collections includes the Düben collection [ 3 ] which was accumulated from 1640 until 1718 by the Düben family, a German family of musicians which included a number of members serving as Hofkapellmeister of the royal court orchestra. It contains a large selection of 17th-century music, notably important works by Buxtehude not elsewhere preserved. The Düben collection has been catalogued and is in the process of being scanned and published on the web: https://www2.musik.uu.se/duben/Duben.php Other music collections are those from the manors of Leufsta and Gimo, the collection of Hugo Alfvén , that of the Joseph Martin Kraus , and the various collections that have been taken as spoils of war, such as the Cancionero de Uppsala , a 16th-century collection of Spanish music printed in Venice 1556 and not preserved in any other copy.

[ 4 ] Current organization [ edit ] The library is headed by a Library Director, the head librarian (at the moment Johanna Hansson).

Blåsenhus Library - One of the 11 subject libraries Subject libraries [ edit ] Carolina Rediviva The Karin Boye Library. (Named after the writer Karin Boye .) Blåsenhus Library Dag Hammarskjöld and Law Library. (Named after the UN Secretary General Dag Hammarskjöld .) Library for Economic Sciences Blåsenhus Library Medical Library Bio-Medical Library Ångström Library. (In the Ångström Laboratory and named after Anders Jonas Ångström and his son Knut Ångström .) Earth Sciences Library Biology Library Almedalen Library ( Gotland ) Special Collections Division [ edit ] Early Printed Books and Special Collections Manuscripts and music Maps and Pictures Preservation References [ edit ] ^ Du Chaillu, Paul (1882).

The Land of the Midnight Sun, volume 1 . New York: Harper & Brothers. p. 319.

^ "Ebielke" . www.ub.uu.se. Archived from the original on 7 June 2007 . Retrieved 3 September 2016 .

^ "Duben Collection Info" . www.musik.uu.se. Archived from the original on 10 June 2007 . Retrieved 3 September 2016 .

^ "Musik" . www.ub.uu.se. Archived from the original on 10 November 2005 . Retrieved 3 September 2016 .

Charlotte Bellamy, The Heritage on the Hill: Blog Texts from Uppsala University Library , Uppsala, Uppsala universitetsbibliotek, 2014.

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Uppsala University Institutions University Hospital University Library Linnaean Garden Botanical Garden Observatory Gustavianum University Hall Carolina Rediviva Ångström Laboratory People Uppsala University People Chancellors University Nations Student Union Royal Society of Sciences in Uppsala Royal Academic Orchestra Nations Stockholm Upland Gästrike-Hälsinge Östgöta Västgöta Södermanlands-Nerike Västmanlands-Dala Småland Göteborg Kalmar Värmland Norrland Gotland Categories Uppsala University UU Alumni UU Faculty UU Rectors Other Partner Institutions Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Portugal Croatia Greece Poland Vatican Israel Artists ULAN Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Uppsala_University_Library&oldid=1306057823 " Categories : Uppsala University Academic libraries in Sweden Buildings and structures in Uppsala 1620 establishments in Sweden Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles needing additional references from February 2011 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from July 2023 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Swedish-language text Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 17:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Uppsala University Library 6 languages Add topic

