Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure and formation 2 Geologic importance 3 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 3.1 Blanco fracture zone 3.2 Charlie-Gibbs fracture zone 3.3 Heirtzler fracture zone 3.4 Mendocino fracture zone 3.5 Romanche fracture zone 3.6 Sovanco fracture zone 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Fracture zone 9 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Polski Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Linear feature on the ocean floor Approximate surface projection on oceans of named fracture zones (orange). Also shown are relevant present plate boundaries (white) and associated features (lighter orange). Click to expand to interactive map.

[ 1 ] A fracture zone is a linear feature on the ocean floor—often hundreds, even thousands of kilometers long—resulting from the action of offset mid-ocean ridge axis segments. They are a consequence of plate tectonics .  Lithospheric plates on either side of an active transform fault move in opposite directions; here, strike-slip activity occurs.  Fracture zones extend past the transform faults, away from the ridge axis; are usually seismically inactive (because both plate segments are moving in the same direction), although they can display evidence of transform fault activity, primarily in the different ages of the crust on opposite sides of the zone.

In actual usage, many transform faults aligned with fracture zones are often loosely referred to as "fracture zones" although technically, they are not. They can be associated with other tectonic features and may be subducted or distorted by later tectonic activity. They are usually defined with bathymetric , gravity and magnetic studies.

Structure and formation [ edit ] Mid-ocean ridges are divergent plate boundaries. As the plates on either side of an offset mid-ocean ridge move, a transform fault forms at the offset between the two ridges.

[ 2 ] Fracture zones and the transform faults that form them are separate but related features. Transform faults are plate boundaries, meaning that on either side of the fault is a different plate. In contrast, outside of the ridge-ridge transform fault, the crust on both sides belongs to the same plate, and there is no relative motion along the junction.

[ 3 ] The fracture zone is thus the junction between oceanic crustal regions of different ages.  Because younger crust is generally higher due to increased thermal buoyancy , the fracture zone is characterized by an offset in elevation with an intervening canyon that may be topographically distinct for hundreds or thousands of kilometers on the sea floor.

Geologic importance [ edit ] Blanco fracture zone map Bathymetry map of the North Atlantic Ocean showing the full extent of the Charlie-Gibbs fracture zone (horizontal black lines in the center of the image) Magnetostratigraphy of the East Pacific Rise near the Heirtzler fracture zone showing ages of sea floor spreading in millions of years (Ma) The Romanche fracture zone with red arrows indicating directions of movements of tectonic plates As many areas of the ocean floor, particularly the Atlantic Ocean, are currently inactive, it can be difficult to find past plate motion. However, by observing the fracture zones, one can determine both the direction and rate of past plate motion. This is found by observing the patterns of magnetic striping on the ocean floor (a result of the reversals of Earth's magnetic field over time). By measuring the offset in the magnetic striping, one can then determine the rate of past plate motions.

[ 4 ] In a similar method, one can use the relative ages of the seafloor on either side of a fracture zone to determine the rate of past plate motions. By comparing how offset similarly aged seafloor is, one can determine how quickly the plate has moved.

[ 3 ] Examples [ edit ] Main article: List of fracture zones Blanco fracture zone [ edit ] The Blanco fracture zone is a fracture zone running between the Juan de Fuca Ridge and the Gorda Ridge . The dominating feature of the fracture zone is the 150 km (93 mi) long Blanco Ridge, which is a high-angle, right-lateral strike slip fault with some component of dip-slip faulting .

[ 5 ] Charlie-Gibbs fracture zone [ edit ] The Charlie-Gibbs fracture zone consists of two fracture zones in the North Atlantic that extend for over 2,000 km (1,200 mi). These fracture zones displace the Mid-Atlantic Ridge a total of 350 km (220 mi) to the west. The section of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge between the two fracture zones is seismically active.

[ 6 ] The flow of major North Atlantic currents is associated with this fracture zone which hosts a diverse deep water ecosystem.

[ 7 ] : 3 Heirtzler fracture zone [ edit ] The Heirtzler fracture zone was named after James Ransom Heirtzler, who first demonstrated through magnetostratigraphy that the Mid-Atlantic Ridge was spreading south of Iceland, providing the first clear evidence for plate tectonics .

[ 8 ] This name was approved by the Advisory Committee on Undersea Features in 1993.

[ 9 ] The area around the Heirtzler fracture zone and the Pacific–Antarctic Ridge which is a southwestern portion of the East Pacific Rise has been mapped in detail by amongst other techniques magnetostratigraphy (see picture on this page).

[ 10 ] Mendocino fracture zone [ edit ] The Mendocino fracture zone extends for over 4,000 km (2,500 mi) off the coast of California and separates the Pacific plate and Gorda plate . The bathymetric depths on the north side of the fracture zone are 800 to 1,200 m (2,600 to 3,900 ft) shallower than to the south, suggesting the seafloor north of the ridge to be younger. Geologic evidence backs this up, as rocks were found to be 23 to 27 million years younger north of the ridge than to the south.

[ 11 ] Romanche fracture zone [ edit ] Also known as the Romanche Trench , this fracture zone separates the North Atlantic and South Atlantic oceans. The trench reaches 7,758 m (25,453 ft) deep, is 300 km (190 mi) long, and has a width of 19 km (12 mi). The fracture zone offsets the Mid-Atlantic Ridge by more than 640 km (400 mi).

[ 12 ] Sovanco fracture zone [ edit ] The Sovanco fracture zone is a dextral-slip transform fault running between the Juan de Fuca and Explorer Ridge in the North Pacific Ocean . The fracture zone is 125 km (78 mi) long and 15 km (9.3 mi) wide.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Plate reconstruction Oceans portal References [ edit ] ^ General citations for named fracture zones are at page Wikipedia:Map data/Fracture zone and specific citations are in interactive detail.

^ Sandwell, D.T.; Smith, W.H.F.

"Exploring the Ocean Basins With Satellite Altimeter Data" . NOAA, National Geophysical Data Center & World Data Center A for Marine Geology & Geophysics.

^ a b "Oceanic Transform Faults and Fracture Zones" . Columbia University . Retrieved 3 March 2015 .

^ "Understanding Plate Motions" . United States Geological Survey.

^ Dziak, R. P.; Fox, C. G.; Embley, R. W.; Nabelek, J. L.; Braunmiller, J.; Koski, R. A. (2000). "Recent tectonics of the Blanco Ridge, eastern blanco transform fault zone".

Marine Geophysical Researches .

21 (5): 423– 450.

doi : 10.1023/A:1026545910893 .

S2CID 126819774 .

^ Lilwall, R. C.; Kirk, R. E. (1985).

"Ocean-bottom seismograph observations on the Charlie-Gibbs fracture zone" .

Geophysical Journal International .

80 (1): 195.

Bibcode : 1985GeoJ...80..195L .

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-246X.1985.tb05085.x .

^ Keogh, Poppy; KeoghCommand, Rylan J.; KeoghEdinger, Evan; KeoghGeorgiopoulou, Aggeliki; KeoghRobert, Katleen (2022).

"Benthic megafaunal biodiversity of the Charlie-Gibbs fracture zone:spatial variation, potential drivers, and conservation status" .

Marine Biodiversity .

52 (55): 1– 18.

Bibcode : 2022MarBd..52...55K .

doi : 10.1007/s12526-022-01285-1 .

PMC 9512888 .

PMID 36185618 .

^ Nazarova-Heirtzler, K.; Taylor, P.T. (2022).

"James Ransom Heirtzler: A Tribute" .

Perspectives of Earth and Space Scientists .

3 (1). e2022CN000186.

doi : 10.1029/2022CN000186 .

^ "Heirtzler Fracture Zone" .

Geographic Names Information System .

United States Geological Survey , United States Department of the Interior . Retrieved 9 June 2012 .

^ Ondréas, H.; Aslanian, D.; Géli, L.; Olivet, J.L.; Briais, A. (2001). "Variations in axial morphology, segmentation, and seafloor roughness along the Pacific‐Antarctic Ridge between 56 S and 66 S".

Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth .

106 (B5): 8521– 8546.

Bibcode : 2001JGR...106.8521O .

doi : 10.1029/2000JB900394 .

^ "Mendocino Fracture Zone" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 28 April 2015 .

^ "Romanche Gap" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 28 April 2015 .

^ Cowan, Darrel S.; Botros, Mona; Johnson, H. Paul (October 1986). "Bookshelf tectonics: Rotated crustal blocks within the Sovanco Fracture Zone".

Geophysical Research Letters .

13 (10): 995– 998.

Bibcode : 1986GeoRL..13..995C .

doi : 10.1029/GL013i010p00995 .

v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fracture_zone&oldid=1294031536 " Categories : Fracture zones Plate tectonics Oceanographical terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2017 Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 04:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fracture zone 9 languages Add topic

