Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Ruling class 25 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Português Русский Shqip Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Social class of a given society that decides upon and sets that society's political agenda For other uses, see The Ruling Class (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Sociology History Outline Index Key themes Society Globalization Human behavior Human environmental impact Identity Industrial revolutions 3 / 4 / 5 Popularity Social complexity Social environment Social equality Social equity Social power Social stratification Social structure Social cycle theory Perspectives Conflict theory Critical theory Structural functionalism Positivism Social constructionism Social darwinism Symbolic interactionism Branches Aging Architecture Art Astrosociology Body Criminology Consciousness Culture Death Demography Deviance Disaster Economic Education Emotion ( Jealousy ) Environmental Family Feminist Fiscal Food Gender Generations Health Historical Immigration Industrial Internet Jewry Knowledge Language Law Leisure Literature Marxist Mathematic Medical Military Music Peace, war, and social conflict Philosophy Political Public Punishment Race and ethnicity Religion Rural Science ( History of science ) Social movements Social psychology Sociocybernetics Sociology Space Sport Technology Terrorism Urban Utopian Victimology Visual Methods Quantitative Qualitative Comparative Computational Ethnographic Conversation analysis Historical Interview Mathematical Network analysis Social experiment Survey Major theorists 1700s: Comte · Sieyès 1800s: Martineau · Tocqueville · Marx · Spencer · Le Bon · Ward · Pareto · Tönnies · Veblen · Simmel · Durkheim · Addams · Mead · Weber · Du Bois · Mannheim · Elias 1900s: Fromm · Adorno · Gehlen · Aron · Merton · Nisbet · Mills · Bell · Schoeck · Goffman · Bauman · Foucault · Luhmann · Habermas · Baudrillard · Bourdieu · Giddens Lists Bibliography Terminology Journals Organizations People Timeline By country Society portal v t e In sociology, the ruling class of a society is the social class who set and decide the political and economic agenda of society .

In Marxist philosophy, the ruling class are the class who own the means of production in a given society and apply their cultural hegemony to determine and establish the dominant ideology ( ideas , culture , mores , norms , traditions ) of the society. In the case of the capitalist mode of production , that class is the capitalist class, also known as the bourgeoisie .

In the 21st century, the worldwide political economy established by globalization has created a transnational capitalist class who are not native to any one country.

[ 1 ] Background [ edit ] In previous modes of production , such as feudalism (inheritable property and rights), the feudal lords of the manor were the ruling class; in an economy based upon chattel slavery , the slave owners were the ruling class. The political economy of the feudal system gave socio-economic and legal power to the feudal lord over the life, labour, and property of the vassal , including military service. The political economy of a slave state gave the slaver socio-economic and legal power over the person, labour, and property of a slave.

[ 2 ] In Marxist philosophy , the capitalist society has two dominant social classes: (i) the ruling-class bourgeoisie (capitalist class) who own the means of production as private property ; and (ii) the working-class proletariat whom the bourgeoisie subject to the exploitation of labour , [ 3 ] which form of political economy is justified by the dominant ideology of the ruling class.

[ 4 ] To replace the capitalist mode of production in a society, Marxism seeks to void the political legitimacy of the bourgeoisie as the ruling class and overthrow it and its state apparatus, replacing it with a state controlled by the working class, a worker's state, which abolishes private property and takes the means of production under its control. In marxist theory, such a society, in which the proletariat has become the ruling class by seizing power and replacing the capitalist state institutions with institutions that serve the proletariat, is called a dictatorship of the proletariat .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The ultimate goal of this worker's state is the abolition of classes and thus of class rule itself.

In the political economies of the former Marxist-Leninist states , the nomenklatura replaced the capitalist ruling class and control the means of production, allocate resources, etc for the society, per the directions of the party. They were the administrators of the bureaucracy that executed the socio-economic functions of the state.

[ 6 ] The sociologist C. Wright Mills identified and distinguished between the ruling class and the power élite who make the decisions for modern capitalist societies.

[ 7 ] Likewise, to establish a society without social classes, anarchism seeks to abolish the ruling class.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Unlike the Marxist perspective, anarchists, such as Mikhail Bakunin , seek to abolish the state , because, despite revolutionary change, the (capitalist) ruling class would be replaced by another ruling class (party leaders), which is a political cycle that voids the social-change purpose of a revolution .

[ 10 ] Questioning the existence of a functional ruling class in 21st-century societies, Mattei Dogan proposes that the political and socio-economic élites do not form a cohesive ruling class within their societies because of the social stratification and the narrow specialisation of labour consequent to the globalization of the world economy.

[ citation needed ] In contrast, for the 20th century, he identifies the combination of military defeat, political implosion and the presence of a charismatic leader as the drivers for the downfall of ruling classes in the Russian Empire , the Ottoman Empire , and later for the creation of Vichy France .

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Aristocracy Class consciousness Elite theory Group decision-making Hegemony Liberal elite New class Nobility Nomenklatura Overclass The Man The Superclass List Totalitarianism Upper ten thousand References [ edit ] ^ Transnational Capitalist Class Archived 2010-08-16 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Slave Ownership" . Archived from the original on 2007-12-03.

^ "Sociology: Marxism" (PDF) .

Oxford Cambridge and RSA . 2015. p. 11.

^ a b Abercrombie, Nicholas; Turner, Bryan S. (1978).

"The Dominant Ideology Thesis" .

The British Journal of Sociology .

29 (2): 149– 170.

doi : 10.2307/589886 .

JSTOR 589886 .

^ Marx, Karl (1875).

Critique of the Gotha Program . New York, NY: International Publishers Company, Incorporated (published 1987).

ISBN 978-0-7178-0043-8 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Wasserstein, Bernard (12 February 2009).

Barbarism and Civilization: A History of Europe in our Time . OUP Oxford.

ISBN 978-0-19-162251-9 .

^ Codevilla, Angelo.

"America's Ruling Class — And the Perils of Revolution" .

The American Spectator .

2 (July 2010): 19 . Retrieved 14 July 2015 .

^ Deirdre Hogan (2007).

"Feminism, Class and Anarchism" .

The Anarchist Library .

^ Benjamin Franks. "British Anarchisms and the Miners' Strike": 229.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.604.4418 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Patrick Cannon (2019).

"Marx's Leviathan" .

Philosophy Now (131).

^ Dogan, Mattei; Higley, John (2012). "Elites, Crises, and Regimes in Comparative Analysis [1998]".

Historical Social Research / Historische Sozialforschung .

37 (1 (139)): 278.

JSTOR 41756461 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Ruling class .

Dogan, Mattei (ed.), Elite Configuration at the Apex of Power, Brill, Leiden, 2003.

v t e Social class Status Stratum Economic classes Theories Elite theory Gilbert model Marxian Mudsill theory New class Spoon class theory Weberian (three-component) Related topics Caste Chattering classes Class conflict Class discrimination Class society Class traitor Classicide Classless society Euthenics High society Nouveau riche / Parvenu Poverty Ranked society Snobbery Social cleansing Social exclusion Social mobility Social orphan Social position Social stigma Subaltern Status Anxiety By demographic By status Administrative detainee Alien illegal immigrant refugee Citizen dual or multiple native-born naturalized second-class Clique adolescent Convicted Migrant worker Political prisoner Socioeconomic Stateless By " collar " Blue Green Grey New Pink White By type Ruling Aristocracy Aristoi Hanseaten Magnate Oligarchy Russian Patrician Ancient Rome Post-Roman Political Family List Hereditary Royal family Intellectual Clergy Priest Knowledge worker Professor Scholar Warrior Chhetri Cossacks Cuāuh Harii Hashashin Knight Kshatriya Nair Ocēlōtl Pendekar Samurai Spartiate Vanniyar / Vanniar (Chieftain) Upper Business magnate Elite Gabellotto Gentry Lord Nobility Landed Petty Old money Overclass Robber baron Seigneur Superclass Creative Bohemians Middle Bourgeoisie Petite Burgher Lower middle class Upper middle class Working Commoner Lazzaroni Lumpenproletariat Pea-pickers Peasant Precariat Proletariat Working poor Under Ant tribe Outcast Outlaw / Prisoner Serf Plebeian Rat tribe Slave / Freedman Untouchable By country or region United States Affluence American Dream History Mobility Classes Upper Black Donor Gentry Middle Black Mexican-American Upper Middle Underprivileged Lower Under Income Household Inequality Personal Poverty Standard of living Education Homelessness Home-ownership Other regions or countries Africa Belize Cambodia China Colombia France Haiti India Iran Italy Luxembourg Nepal New Zealand Nigeria Romania Sri Lanka Tibet United Kingdom United States Historic 18th-century Spain Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Aztec Ottoman Empire Pre-industrial East Asia Pre-industrial Europe Soviet Union Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ruling_class&oldid=1299365257 " Categories : Social classes Social inequality High society (social class) Upper class Power (social and political) concepts Control (social and political) Decision-making Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 00:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ruling class 25 languages Add topic

