Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 See also 3 Notes 4 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Benedetto da Maiano 17 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara Français 한국어 Italiano Ligure Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Benedetto da Majano ) Italian sculptor Benedetto da Maiano St. John the Baptist , polychrome terra cotta of c. 1480, in the National Gallery of Art .

Benedetto da Maiano (1442 – 24 May 1497) was an Italian Early Renaissance sculptor .

Biography [ edit ] Born in the village of Maiano (now part of Fiesole ), he started his career as a companion of his brother, the architect Giuliano da Maiano . When he reached the age of thirty he started training under the sculptor Antonio Rossellino . There he learned to work with marble and eventually became more famous than Rossellino and one of the most important sculptors of the 15th century. During his early life, he specialised in wood-mosaic, with the Studiolo of Federico da Montefeltro and other works.

King Matthias Corvinus of Hungary invited him to his court, and it is said that the destruction on the journey of some inlay work he was taking to his royal patron made him decide to seek more durable material.

[ 1 ] Pulpit of Santa Croce in Florence His early attributed works include a shrine dedicated to San Savino for the cathedral of Faenza . Although he was more prolific in sculpting religious subjects, he also carved some portraits of important Florentines ; for instance, in 1474, the bust of Pietro Mellini in the Bargello .

[ 2 ] In 1475, he worked with his brother Giuliano on the Collegiata church in San Gimignano . Benedetto's most important contribution was the carved altar in the chapel of Santa Fina .

[ 1 ] In 1480, he made the framework of the doorway of the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence. The marble pulpit in the Santa Croce [ 1 ] in Florence is considered his masterpiece. On the pulpit are scenes from the life of St. Francis of Assisi . Also in 1480, with his brother Giuliano, he built and made the sculptures for the little oratory of the Madonna dell'Olivo, outside Prato . The adolescent St. John of the Bargello is ascribed to the year 1481.

In 1489 Benedetto designed the Strozzi Palace in Florence which still stands (continued by Cronaca ). It is believed he went to Naples in 1490, and there finished the works begun by Rossellino in the Sant'Anna church. He also executed various sculptures in Naples, among them an Annunciation at the church of Monte Oliveto.

[ 3 ] As an architect, he created the tomb of Filippo Strozzi , with its roundel of Mother and Child supported by cherubs in the church of Santa Maria Novella in Florence, and the portico of Santa Maria delle Grazie in Arezzo .

[ 4 ] He died in Florence at the age of 55.

See also [ edit ] Master of the Marble Madonnas Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Sturgis, Russell (1901).

A Dictionary of Architecture and Building, Volume I . Macmillan. p. 291.

^ Bust of Pietro Mellini ^ Luitpold Dussler (July 1924). "A Clay Model by Benedetto da Majano for the Altar in Monte Oliveto, Naples".

The Burlington Magazine for Connoisseurs .

45 (256): 21– 23.

JSTOR 862172 .

^ Weigert, Hans (1961). Busch, Harald; Lohse, Bernd (eds.).

Buildings of Europe: Renaissance Europe . New York: The Macmillan Company . p. 10.

Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Benedetto da Majano ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Benedetto da Maiano .

Leonardo da Vinci: anatomical drawings from the Royal Library, Windsor Castle , exhibition catalog fully online as PDF from The Metropolitan Museum of Art, which contains material on Benedetto da Maiano (see index) The Gubbio Studiolo and its conservation, volumes 1 & 2 , from The Metropolitan Museum of Art Libraries (fully available online as PDF), which contains material on Benedetto da Maiano (see index) Carl Brandon Strehlke, “ Putto Carrying a Festoon by Benedetto da Maino (cat. 1133) ,” in The John G. Johnson Collection: A History and Selected Works [ permanent dead link ] , a Philadelphia Museum of Art free digital publication Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Poland Vatican Israel Artists ULAN RKD Artists KulturNav 2 People Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Benedetto_da_Maiano&oldid=1303813574 " Categories : 1442 births 1497 deaths People from Fiesole 15th-century Italian sculptors Italian male sculptors Italian Renaissance sculptors Catholic sculptors Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Commons category link is on Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2021 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 05:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Benedetto da Maiano 17 languages Add topic

