Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Becoming a hacker 2 Key contributions Toggle Key contributions subsection 2.1 Conway's Game of Life 2.2 Packing problems 2.3 Symbolic computation 2.4 Space-filling curves 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Bill Gosper 15 languages Català Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Kreyòl ayisyen مصرى Nederlands Português Română Русский Slovenščina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American mathematician and programmer (born 1943) Ralph William Gosper Jr.

Born ( 1943-04-26 ) April 26, 1943 (age 82) Nationality American Alma mater Massachusetts Institute of Technology Occupation(s) Programmer, Computer scientist, Mathematician Organizations Xerox PARC , Symbolics , Wolfram Research , the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory , Macsyma, Inc.

Known for Gosper curve , Gosper Glider Gun , Gosper's algorithm , Hashlife Ralph William Gosper Jr.

(born April 26, 1943), known as Bill Gosper , is an American mathematician and programmer.

[ 1 ] Along with Richard Greenblatt , he may be considered to have founded the hacker community, and he holds a place of pride in the Lisp community.

[ 2 ] The Gosper curve and Gosper's algorithm are named after him.

Becoming a hacker [ edit ] In high school, Gosper was interested in model rockets until one of his friends was injured in a rocketry accident and contracted a fatal brain infection.

[ 3 ] Gosper enrolled in MIT in 1961, and he received his bachelor's degree in mathematics from MIT in 1965 despite becoming disaffected with the mathematics department because of their anti-computer attitude.

[ 3 ] In his second year at MIT, Gosper took a programming course from John McCarthy and became affiliated with the MIT AI Lab .

His contributions to computational mathematics include HAKMEM and the MIT Maclisp system. He made major contributions to Macsyma , Project MAC 's computer algebra system. Gosper later worked with Symbolics and Macsyma, Inc.

on commercial versions of Macsyma.

In 1974, he moved to Stanford University , where he lectured, and worked with Donald Knuth .

[ 3 ] Since that time, he has worked at or consulted for Xerox PARC , Symbolics , Wolfram Research , the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory , and Macsyma Inc.

Key contributions [ edit ] Conway's Game of Life [ edit ] This section of a biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Bill Gosper" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) He became intensely interested in the Game of Life shortly after John Horton Conway had proposed it.  Conway conjectured the existence of infinitely growing patterns, and offered a reward for an example. Gosper was the first to find such a pattern, the glider gun , and won the prize.

[ 4 ] Gosper was also the originator of the Hashlife algorithm that can speed up the computation of Life patterns by many orders of magnitude.

Packing problems [ edit ] Gosper has created numerous packing problem puzzles, such as "Twubblesome Twelve".

[ 5 ] Symbolic computation [ edit ] Gosper was the first person to realize the possibilities of symbolic computation on a computer as a mathematics research tool, [ citation needed ] whereas computer methods were previously limited to purely numerical methods. In particular, this research resulted in his work on continued fraction representations [ 6 ] of real numbers and Gosper's algorithm for finding closed form hypergeometric identities.

In 1985, Gosper briefly held the world record for computing the most digits of pi with 17 million digits.

[ 7 ] See chronology of computation of π .

Space-filling curves [ edit ] In the continuity of early 20th century examples of space-filling curves —the Koch-Peano curve, Cesàro and Lévy C curve , all special cases of the general de Rham curve —and following the path of Benoit Mandelbrot , Gosper discovered the Peano-Gosper curve , before engaging with variations on the Harter-Heighway dragon .

[ 8 ] In the late 80s, Gosper independently discovered the Gosper-Lafitte triangle.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution Hashlife References [ edit ] ^ Bill Gosper Archived January 10, 2008, at the Wayback Machine , Vintage Computer Festival . Accessed January 3, 2007.

^ Levy, Steven, Hackers: Heroes of the Computer Revolution , (1984) ^ a b c Albers, Donald J.; Alexanderson, Gerald L.

; Reid, Constance , eds. (1990), "Bill Gosper", More Mathematical People , Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, pp.

100– 117 .

^ Gardner, Martin (2001).

The Colossal Book of Mathematics . New York: W. W. Norton.

ISBN 0-393-02023-1 .

^ Rucker, Rudy (2012).

Nested Scrolls: The Autobiography of Rudolf Von Bitter Rucker . Macmillan. p. 240.

ISBN 978-0-76532753-6 .

^ Gosper, Bill .

"Continued Fraction Arithmetic" . Retrieved August 2, 2018 .

^ Arndt, Jörg; Haenel, Christoph (2006).

Pi Unleashed . Springer-Verlag. pp. 104, 206.

ISBN 978-3-540-66572-4 .

English translation by Catriona and David Lischka. Record was in 1985.

^ Gosper, Bill (22 June 2018).

"Plane-Filling Functions vs. Space-Filling Curves" .

YouTube . Retrieved November 1, 2019 .

^ "Distribution of nonempty triangles inside a fractal rep-4-tile" .

The On-Line Encyclopedia of Integer Sequences . 1995.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bill Gosper .

Official website Autobiography Bill Gosper's Graphics "The Troublesome Twelve Circle Problem" .

Puzzle . Demonstration Project.

Wolfram Research . Mar 2011.

for the free Mathematica Player v t e Conway's Game of Life and related cellular automata Structures Breeder Garden of Eden Glider Gun Methuselah Oscillator Puffer train Rake Reflector Replicator Sawtooth Spacefiller Spaceship Spark Still life Life variants Day and Night Highlife Lenia Life without Death Seeds Concepts Moore neighborhood Speed of light Von Neumann neighborhood Implementations Golly Life Genesis Video Life Anonymous;Code Key people John Conway Martin Gardner Bill Gosper Richard Guy Websites LifeWiki Popular culture Bloom Wake v t e Fractals Characteristics Fractal dimensions Assouad Box-counting Higuchi Correlation Hausdorff Packing Topological Recursion Self-similarity Iterated function system Barnsley fern Cantor set Koch snowflake Menger sponge Sierpiński carpet Sierpiński triangle Apollonian gasket Fibonacci word Space-filling curve Blancmange curve De Rham curve Minkowski Dragon curve Hilbert curve Koch curve Lévy C curve Moore curve Peano curve Sierpiński curve Z-order curve String T-square n-flake Vicsek fractal Gosper curve Pythagoras tree Weierstrass function Strange attractor Multifractal system L-system Fractal canopy Space-filling curve H tree Escape-time fractals Burning Ship fractal Julia set Filled Newton fractal Douady rabbit Lyapunov fractal Mandelbrot set Misiurewicz point Multibrot set Newton fractal Tricorn Mandelbox Mandelbulb Rendering techniques Buddhabrot Orbit trap Pickover stalk Random fractals Brownian motion Brownian tree Brownian motor Fractal landscape Lévy flight Percolation theory Self-avoiding walk People Michael Barnsley Georg Cantor Bill Gosper Felix Hausdorff Desmond Paul Henry Gaston Julia Niels Fabian Helge von Koch Paul Lévy Aleksandr Lyapunov Benoit Mandelbrot Hamid Naderi Yeganeh Lewis Fry Richardson Wacław Sierpiński Other Coastline paradox Fractal art List of fractals by Hausdorff dimension The Fractal Geometry of Nature (1982 book) The Beauty of Fractals (1986 book) Chaos: Making a New Science (1987 book) Kaleidoscope Chaos theory Authority control databases International VIAF National Australia Academics Association for Computing Machinery Scopus People Trove Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bill_Gosper&oldid=1287145096 " Categories : 1943 births Living people 20th-century American mathematicians 21st-century American mathematicians American number theorists Massachusetts Institute of Technology School of Science alumni Cellular automatists Recreational mathematicians People from Pennsauken Township, New Jersey Lisp (programming language) people American computer businesspeople Scientists at PARC (company) Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards BLP articles lacking sources from July 2019 All BLP articles lacking sources All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2016 Commons category link from Wikidata Official website not in Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 April 2025, at 08:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bill Gosper 15 languages Add topic

