Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Format 3 Guests 4 Reception 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents International Waters (podcast) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about the comedy podcast. For the waters outside national jurisdictions, see International waters .

Podcast International Waters International Waters logo Presentation Hosted by Dave Holmes Genre Comedy, Panel game .

Written by Sarah Morgan and Riley Silverman Language English Updates Bimonthly Length About an hour Production Production Jennifer Marmor, Laura Swisher, Christian Duenas No.

of episodes 95 as of April 6, 2017 Publication Original release March 18, 2012 Provider Maximum Fun Related Website https://maximumfun.org/podcasts/troubled-waters/ International Waters was a comedy podcast hosted by Dave Holmes since renamed as Troubled Waters and distributed by the Maximum Fun network. The show pits teams of comedians from the United States and the United Kingdom against each other in a panel game format.

History [ edit ] The first episode of International Waters was released on March 18, 2012.

[ 1 ] The show was hosted by public radio producer and Maximum Fun founder Jesse Thorn until September 2013, with guest hosts Jordan Morris and Dave Holmes occasionally filling in. After a break in the show in late 2013, Holmes took over as full-time host on January 15, 2014, with episode 18.

[ 2 ] In February 2019, the show underwent a format and title change, and became "Troubled Waters," in which two teams, each taking one side of a common disagreement, compete in a trivia contest over "the right to be right." Format [ edit ] The podcast features two competing teams of comedians who must answer questions about pop culture to earn points. One team consists of two comedians from the US, and the other team consists of two comedians from the UK (with Canada occasionally used as an alternative competing nation).

[ 3 ] The opening round consists of questions based on current affairs, followed by a second round in which the American contestants answer questions about a topic from British pop-culture, and vice versa. The host awards points for correct answers and for answers that are "wrong, but funny." [ 4 ] The final round, usually worth a game-winning '1 million points', [ 4 ] typically asks contestants to construct an argument about or pitch an idea for a chosen topic, with Holmes adjudicating on the funniest or most creative answer.

The show is written by Riley Silverman and John-Luke Roberts and is produced by Jennifer Marmor, Laura Swisher and Christian Duenas.

[ 5 ] Guests [ edit ] International Waters has featured several notable guests, including Fergus Craig , Starlee Kine , Josie Long , Susan Orlean , Paul F. Tompkins , and Janet Varney [ 6 ] Reception [ edit ] The Daily Dot listed International Waters at #6 on its roundup of the ten best podcasts of 2012. It said of the show, "You may not learn much, but you’ll laugh... a lot." [ 3 ] Pete Naughton of The Daily Telegraph put the show on his list of best podcasts in October 2014, saying it "makes for some good (and often strongly worded) transatlantic banter." [ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Pilot" .

libsyn . March 18, 2012 . Retrieved October 17, 2014 .

^ "Ep 18: The Dave Holmes Era" .

libsyn . January 15, 2014 . Retrieved October 17, 2014 .

^ a b "The 10 best new podcasts of 2012" .

The Daily Dot . December 31, 2012 . Retrieved October 17, 2014 .

^ a b "Ep 36: MaxFunWeek Special" .

libsyn . October 15, 2014 . Retrieved October 17, 2014 .

^ "International Waters Ep 95: Psychics and Brussels Sprouts" .

MaximumFun.org . April 3, 2017 . Retrieved April 6, 2017 .

^ "International Waters" .

libsyn . Retrieved October 17, 2014 .

^ "The best comedy podcasts" .

The Daily Telegraph . October 13, 2014 . Retrieved October 17, 2014 .

External links [ edit ] Official website International Waters RSS feed External podcast links (?) Apple Podcasts Castbox fyyd iHeart Listen Notes Player.fm Pocket Casts Podbay Podbean Podcast Addict Podcast Index Podchaser Spotify RSS feed Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Waters_(podcast)&oldid=1278399874 " Categories : Maximum Fun Audio podcasts 2012 podcast debuts Comedy podcasts American podcasts British podcasts Hidden categories: Use mdy dates from March 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 2 March 2025, at 06:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International Waters (podcast) Add languages Add topic

