Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Women's writing Toggle Women's writing subsection 1.1 Science fiction 2 Women's films 3 Women's music 4 Riot grrrl movement 5 Pornography Toggle Pornography subsection 5.1 Anti-pornography movement 5.2 Sex-positive movement 6 Sex work and sex industry 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Feminism in culture 3 languages العربية فارسی தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Influence of feminism on culture Main article: Feminism This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: though a main article fork from the Feminism article, this article fails to expand on the original section in the source article, and also covers much tangential content.

Please help improve this article if you can.

( December 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Feminism has affected culture in many ways, and has famously been theorized in relation to culture by Angela McRobbie , Laura Mulvey and others. Timothy Laurie and Jessica Kean have argued that "one of [feminism's] most important innovations has been to seriously examine the ways women receive popular culture, given that so much pop culture is made by and for men." [ 1 ] This is reflected in a variety of forms, including literature, music, film and other screen cultures.

Women's writing [ edit ] Virginia Woolf Main article: Women's writing (literary category) See also: Feminist literary criticism and Écriture féminine Women's writing came to exist as a separate category of scholarly interest relatively recently. In the West, second-wave feminism prompted a general reevaluation of women's historical contributions, and various academic sub-disciplines, such as Women's history (or herstory ) and women's writing (including in English ) (a list is available), developed in response to the belief that women's lives and contributions have been underrepresented as areas of scholarly interest.

[ 2 ] Virginia Blain et al. characterize the growth in interest since 1970 in women's writing as "powerful".

[ 2 ] Much of this early period of feminist literary scholarship was given over to the rediscovery and reclamation of texts written by women. Studies such as Dale Spender's Mothers of the Novel (1986) and Jane Spencer's The Rise of the Woman Novelist (1986) were ground-breaking in their insistence that women have always been writing. Commensurate with this growth in scholarly interest, various presses began the task of reissuing long-out-of-print texts. Virago Press began to publish its large list of nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century novels in 1975 and became one of the first commercial presses to join in the project of reclamation. In the 1980s, Pandora Press , responsible for publishing Spender's study, issued a companion line of eighteenth-century novels written by women.

[ 3 ] More recently, Broadview Press has begun to issue eighteenth- and nineteenth-century works, many hitherto out of print, and the University of Kentucky has a series of republications of early women's novels. There has been commensurate growth in the area of biographical dictionaries of women writers due to a perception, according to one editor, that "most of our women are not represented in the 'standard' reference books in the field".

[ 2 ] Science fiction [ edit ] Main article: Feminist science fiction In the 1960s, the genre of science fiction combined its sensationalism with political and technological critiques of society to produce feminist science fiction . With the advent of feminism, questioning women's roles became fair game to this "subversive, mind expanding genre".

[ 4 ] Two early texts are Ursula K. Le Guin 's The Left Hand of Darkness (1969) and Joanna Russ ' The Female Man (1970). They serve to highlight the socially constructed nature of gender roles by creating utopias that do away with gender.

[ 5 ] Both authors were also pioneers in feminist criticism of science fiction in the 1960s and '70s, in essays collected in The Language of the Night (Le Guin, 1979) and How To Suppress Women's Writing (Russ, 1983). Another major work of feminist science fiction has been [ 6 ] Kindred by Octavia Butler .

Women's films [ edit ] Main article: Women's cinema See also: Feminist film theory This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Feminism in culture" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The term "women's cinema" usually refers to the work of women film directors . It can also designate the work of other women behind the camera such as cinematographers and screenwriters . Although the participation of women film editors , costume designers , and production designers is usually not considered to be decisive enough to justify the term "women's cinema", it does have a large influence on the visual impression of any movie.

In a film from popular culture although not in women's film, an early reference to the "feminist movement" is heard from Katharine Hepburn in the 1942 movie Woman of the Year .

Another film, She Is Beautiful When She's Angry , released in 2014, details the women's liberation movement in the United States with real accounts from women involved.

Women's music [ edit ] Main article: Women's music Lady Gaga is an example of recent female feminist musicians.

Women's music (or womyn's music or wimmin's music) is the music by women, for women, and about women.

[ 7 ] The genre emerged as a musical expression of the second-wave feminist movement [ 8 ] as well as the labor , civil rights , and peace movements .

[ 9 ] The movement was started by lesbians such as Cris Williamson , Meg Christian , and Margie Adam , African-American women activists such as Bernice Johnson Reagon and her group Sweet Honey in the Rock , and peace activist Holly Near .

[ 9 ] Other women such as Madonna , Cyndi Lauper and Lady Gaga have also revolutionized feminist music today by breaking barriers and allowing artists from all walks of life to have their time in the spotlight.

[ 10 ] Women's music also refers to the wider industry of women's music that goes beyond the performing artists to include studio musicians , producers , sound engineers , technicians , cover artists, distributors , promoters , and festival organizers who are also women.

[ 7 ] Riot grrrl movement [ edit ] Main article: Riot Grrrl Kathleen Hanna was the lead singer of Bikini Kill , a riot grrrl music band formed in 1990.

Riot grrrl (or riot grrl ) is an underground feminist punk movement that started in the 1990s and is often associated with third-wave feminism (it is sometimes seen as its starting point). It was grounded in the DIY philosophy of punk values . Riot grrrls took an anti-corporate stance of self-sufficiency and self-reliance .

[ 11 ] Riot grrrls' emphasis on universal female identity and separatism often appears more closely allied with second-wave feminism than with the third wave.

[ 12 ] Riot grrrl bands often address issues such as rape, domestic abuse, sexuality, and female empowerment. Some bands associated with the movement are Bikini Kill , Bratmobile , Excuse 17 , Free Kitten , Heavens to Betsy , Huggy Bear , L7 , and Team Dresch . In addition to a music scene, riot grrrl is also a subculture ; zines , the DIY ethic, art, political action, and activism are part of the movement. Riot grrrls hold meetings, start chapters, and support and organize women in music.

[ 13 ] The riot grrrl movement sprang out of Olympia, Washington , and Washington, D.C.

, in the early 1990s. It sought to give women the power to control their voices and artistic expressions.

[ 11 ] Riot grrrls took a growling double or triple r, placing it in the word girl as a way to take back the derogatory use of the term.

[ 11 ] The riot grrrls' links to social and political issues are where the beginnings of third-wave feminism can be seen. The music and zine writings are strong examples of "cultural politics in action, with strong women giving voice to important social issues though an empowered, a female oriented community, many people link the emergence of the third-wave feminism to this time".

[ 11 ] The movement encouraged and made "adolescent girls' standpoints central", allowing them to express themselves fully.

[ 14 ] Pornography [ edit ] Main article: Feminist views on pornography The feminist sex wars is a term for the acrimonious debates within the feminist movement in the late 1970s through the 1980s around the issues of feminism, sexuality, sexual representation, pornography , sadomasochism , the role of trans women in the lesbian community, and other sexual issues. The feminist debate on porn pitted anti-pornography feminism against sex-positive feminism , and parts of the feminist movement were deeply divided by these debates.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Anti-pornography movement [ edit ] Anti-pornography feminists , such as Catharine MacKinnon , Andrea Dworkin , Robin Morgan , and Dorchen Leidholdt , put pornography at the center of a feminist explanation of women's oppression.

[ 20 ] Some feminists, such as Diana Russell , Andrea Dworkin , Catharine MacKinnon , Susan Brownmiller , Dorchen Leidholdt , Ariel Levy , Robin Morgan , and Page Mellish , argue that pornography is degrading of women and complicit in violence against women both in its production (whereby, they charge, abuse and exploitation of women performing in pornography is rampant) and in its consumption (whereby, they charge, pornography eroticizes the domination, humiliation, and coercion of women and reinforces sexual and cultural attitudes that are complicit in rape and sexual harassment ).

[ 21 ] Beginning in the late 1970s, anti-pornography radical feminists formed organizations such as Women Against Pornography and Feminists Fighting Pornography that provided educational events, including slide-shows, speeches, and guided tours of the sex industry in Times Square , New York City , in order to raise awareness of the content of pornography and the sexual subculture in pornography shops and live sex shows.

[ 22 ] Andrea Dworkin and Robin Morgan began articulating a vehemently anti-porn stance based in radical feminism beginning in 1974 and anti-porn feminist groups, such as Women Against Violence in Pornography and Media in San Francisco, became highly active in various U.S. cities during the late 1970s.

[ 21 ] Sex-positive movement [ edit ] Main article: Sex-positive feminism Sex-positive feminism is a movement that was formed in order to address issues of women's sexual pleasure, freedom of expression, sex work , and inclusive gender identities.

Ellen Willis ' 1981 essay, "Lust Horizons: Is the Women's Movement Pro-Sex?" is the origin of the term, "pro-sex feminism"; the more commonly used variant, "sex positive feminism" arose soon after.

[ 23 ] Although some sex-positive feminists, such as Betty Dodson , were active in the early 1970s, much of sex-positive feminism largely began in the late 1970s and 1980s as a response to the increasing emphasis in radical feminism on anti-pornography activism.

Sex-positive feminists are also strongly opposed to radical feminist calls for legislation against pornography, a strategy they decried as censorship , and something that could, they argued, be used by social conservatives to censor the sexual expression of women, gay people, and other sexual minorities. The initial period of intense debate and acrimony between sex-positive and anti-pornography feminists during the early 1980s is often referred to as the feminist sex wars . Other sex-positive feminists became involved not in opposition to other feminists but in direct response to what they saw as patriarchal control of sexuality.

[ citation needed ] Sex work and sex industry [ edit ] Main article: Feminist views on prostitution Feminist views on sex work and prostitution vary. Feminist supporters of sex worker rights and decriminalization argue that women's right to control their own bodies and sexuality includes the right to engage in consensual sexual commerce. They also argue that criminalization and social stigmatization of sex work and sex workers only worsens the existing marginalization and victimization that sex workers are often subjected to. On the other hand, feminist opponents of prostitution argue that prostitution is so tangled with forced prostitution, human trafficking , exploitation, and violence as to be inseparable from these ills in practice. They also argue that prostitution and other forms of sex work are inherently a product of patriarchy and sexism , and that the presence even of consensual sex work is harmful to society and women in particular. While feminists across all positions generally agree that direct criminalization of women in prostitution should be ended, there is little or no consensus on much else on the topics of legal approaches to the sex trade, the status of sex workers, or the nature of sex work itself.

See also [ edit ] Feminist art References [ edit ] ^ Laurie, Timothy; Kean, Jessica (2015).

"Why consenting adults should see 50 Shades of Grey - and take their teens" .

The Sydney Morning Herald .

February 19 ^ a b c Blain, Virginia; Clements, Patricia; Grundy, Isobel (1990).

The Feminist Companion to Literature in English: Women Writers From the Middle Ages to the Present . New Haven: Yale University Press. p.

1231 .

ISBN 0-300-04854-8 .

^ Gilbert, Sandra M., Paperbacks: From Our Mothers' Libraries: Women Who Created the Novel , in New York Times , May 4, 1986 .

^ Clute, John; Nicholls, Peter (1995).

The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction . New York: St. Martin's Griffin. p. 1386.

ISBN 0-312-13486-X .

^ Helford, Elyce Rae, in Westfahl, Gary, The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy (Greenwood Press, 2005), 290.

^ Sturgis, Susanna, Octavia E. Butler: June 22, 1947 — February 24, 2006 , in The Women's Review of Books , 23 (3): 19 May 2006.

^ a b Lont, Cynthia, Women's Music: No Longer a Small Private Party , in Reebee Garofalo, ed., Rockin' the Boat: Mass Music & Mass Movements (Cambridge, MA: South End Press, 1992 ( ISBN 0-89608-427-2 ), p. 242).

^ Peraino, Judith, Girls with Guitars and Other Strange Stories , in Journal of the American Musicological Society , vol. 54, no. 3 (2001), p. 693.

^ a b Mosbacher, Dee, Radical Harmonies , Woman Vision (2002 (OCLC 53071762)). See also [1] [ usurped ] .

^ Reddington, Helen.

The Lost Women of Rock Music: Female Musicians of the Punk Era . Vol. 2nd ed, Equinox Publishing Ltd, 2012.

^ a b c d Rowe-Finkbeiner, Kristin (2004).

The F-Word: Feminism In Jeopardy—Women, Politics and the Future . Seal Press.

ISBN 1-58005-114-6 .

^ Rosenberg, Jessica; Gitana Garofalo (1998). "Riot Grrrl: Revolutions From Within; Spring 1998".

Signs .

23 (Feminisms and Youth Cultures, number 3): 809.

doi : 10.1086/495289 .

S2CID 144109102 .

^ Schilt, Kristen (2003).

" 'A Little Too Ironic': The Appropriation and Packaging of Riot Grrrl Politics by Mainstream Female Musicians" (PDF) .

Popular Music and Society .

26 (1): 5– 16.

doi : 10.1080/0300776032000076351 .

S2CID 37919089 .

^ Code, Lorraine (2004).

Encyclopedia of Feminist Theories . London: Routledge. p.

560 .

ISBN 0-415-30885-2 .

^ Duggan, Lisa; Hunter, Nan D. (1995).

Sex Wars: Sexual Dissent and Political Culture . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-91036-6 .

^ Hansen, Karen Tranberg; Philipson, Ilene J. (1990).

Women, Class, and the Feminist Imagination: A Socialist-Feminist Reader . Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

ISBN 0-87722-630-X .

^ Gerhard, Jane F. (2001).

Desiring Revolution: Second-Wave Feminism and the Rewriting of American Sexual Thought, 1920 to 1982 . New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 0-231-11204-1 .

^ Leidholdt, Dorchen ; Raymond, Janice G. (1990).

The Sexual Liberals and the Attack on Feminism . New York: Pergamon Press.

ISBN 0-08-037457-3 .

^ Vance, Carole S. (1989).

Pleasure and Danger: Exploring Female Sexuality . Thorsons Publishers.

ISBN 0-04-440593-6 .

^ McElroy, Wendy (1995).

XXX: A Woman's Right to Pornography . New York: St. Martin's Press. p.

243 .

ISBN 0-312-13626-9 .

^ a b Dworkin, Andrea (1989).

Pornography: Men Possessing Women . New York: Plume. p. 300.

ISBN 0-452-26793-5 .

^ Brownmiller, Susan (1999).

In Our Time: Memoir of a Revolution . New York: Dial Press. p.

360 .

ISBN 0-385-31486-8 .

^ Willis, Ellen (1981-06-17). "Lust Horizons: Is the Women's Movement Pro-Sex?".

Village Voice . No. 17 June 1981.

v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminism_in_culture&oldid=1297811407 " Categories : Feminism Women's culture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from December 2014 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from December 2014 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from December 2014 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles needing additional references from May 2020 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2008 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 17:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminism in culture 3 languages Add topic

