Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Park establishment 1.2 Expansion 2 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 2.1 Location 3 Geology Toggle Geology subsection 3.1 Landforms 3.2 Mountains 3.3 Karst 3.4 Coastal region 4 Ecology Toggle Ecology subsection 4.1 Fauna 5 Conservation and human interaction Toggle Conservation and human interaction subsection 5.1 Protection from mining 5.2 Activities 5.2.1 Paparoa Track and Pike29 Memorial Track 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Paparoa National Park 21 languages Basa Bali Български Cebuano Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 ქართული Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk پنجابی Polski Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°5′S 171°30′E ﻿ / ﻿ 42.083°S 171.500°E ﻿ / -42.083; 171.500 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia National park in New Zealand Paparoa National Park IUCN category II ( national park ) Pancake Rocks Interactive map of Paparoa National Park Location West Coast, New Zealand Coordinates 42°5′S 171°30′E ﻿ / ﻿ 42.083°S 171.500°E ﻿ / -42.083; 171.500 Area 429.7 km 2 (165.9 sq mi) Established 1 January 1987 Governing body Department of Conservation Paparoa National Park Visitor Centre (2021) Paparoa National Park is on the west coast of the South Island of New Zealand .
The park was established in 1987 and encompasses 430 km 2 (170 sq mi).

[ 1 ] The park ranges from or near the coastline to the peaks of the Paparoa Range . A separate section of the park lies to the north and is centred at Ananui Creek. The park protects a limestone karst area. The park contains several caves , of which Metro Cave / Te Ananui Cave is a commercial tourist attraction. The majority of the park is forested with a wide variety of vegetation. The park was the site of the 1995 Cave Creek disaster where fourteen people died as a result of the collapse of a scenic viewing platform.

The Paparoa Track , one of New Zealand's Great Walks , runs through the park.

[ 2 ] The small settlement of Punakaiki , adjacent to the Pancake Rocks and Blowholes tourist attraction, lies on the edge of the park. The park is also located near the towns of Westport , Greymouth and Barrytown .

History [ edit ] Park establishment [ edit ] In 1976, the Federated Mountain Clubs had identified the northern part of the Paparoa Ranges as a potential wilderness area. In 1979, the Native Forest Action Council proposed a 130,000 hectare national park, including the northern Paparoa Ranges and land to the north and east. This eventually led to the National Parks and Reserves Authority identifying the western Paparoa Range as a prospective national park. Meanwhile, a joint proposal by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research and the National Museum succeeded in having a core area of great ecological significance –  the forests of the lowland karst syncline – gazetted as the Pororari Ecological Area in 1979.

The initial proposal for a large park incorporating the wilderness area was rejected, but after seven rounds of submissions and help from other environment groups including the Royal Forest and Bird Protection Society , an area of 30,327 hectares was gazetted as Paparoa National Park on 23 November 1987.

[ 3 ] Expansion [ edit ] Following the liquidation of Pike River Coal , Solid Energy purchased the assets of the company.

[ 4 ] The government then purchased the 3,580 hectares (8,800 acres) of land around the Pike River Mine. The environment minister, Nick Smith , announced on 15 November 2015 that the 3,580 ha of land was to be added to the Park.

[ 5 ] Geography [ edit ] Location [ edit ] Paparoa National Park is located in the northern West Coast region of the South Island, between the Buller River (Kawatiri) and the Grey River (Māwheranui). It includes the western side of the Paparoa Range and some separate eastern sections along the Inangahua River . The park covers the catchment areas of the Punakaiki , Pororari and Fox (Potikohua) rivers and Bullock Creek (Punungairo) , and also the Metro / Te Ananui cave system and the southern side of the Tiropahi River catchment.

[ 6 ] Geology [ edit ] Landforms [ edit ] The park has unusually diverse geology with a wide variety of coastal, lowland and mountain landforms. The major geological structures that form the park are the Barrytown syncline , the Punakaiki anticline , the Paparoa Tectonic Zone, the Cape Foulwind fault and the Hawera fault.

[ 3 ] Most of the land area of the park is mountainous. The eastern side of the main range has deep glaciated valleys that run north and south, with towering bluffs and cirques , hanging valleys, and truncated spurs . The western coastline is known for its spectacular and varied scenery and its accessibility.

[ 3 ] Mountains [ edit ] The Paparoa mountains were uplifted during the late Pliocene or early Quaternary periods. Mt Lodge, the highest mountain in the park at 1,447 metres (4,747 ft), has rocks that are the oldest in New Zealand.

[ 3 ] Over the last 10 million years, the movement of the Alpine Fault has separated the predominantly granite and gneiss rocks of the Paparoas from their original neighbours, so that they now more closely resemble the rocks in Fiordland , far to the southwest, than to the relatively nearby main range of the Southern Alps .

[ 7 ] Karst [ edit ] Cave Creek resurgence Pororari River Track Rivers flowing from the Paparoa Ranges pass through the limestone syncline, creating subterranean waterways and extensive cave systems that are one of the features of the park.

[ 3 ] The main rivers are the Fox , Pororari and Punakaiki . Another of the rivers is Cave Creek, site of the 1995 Cave Creek disaster . Cave Creek is fed by a complex cave system.

Upstream of the Xanadu and Taurus Major sinkholes , on Bullock Creek (the most northerly on the west coast, [ 8 ] others being near Ross [ 9 ] and Fox Glacier [ 10 ] ), a polje of up to about 1 km (0.62 mi) [ 11 ] square and 1 m (3 ft 3 in) deep can form after heavy rain. Bush felling and drainage took place in the polje from the 1870s, but the wetland ecology has been undergoing restoration since 1986.

[ 12 ] The other large polje in this country is at Lake Disappear in Waikato.

The river gorges, confined by high, forest-crowned limestone cliffs, provide a means of access to the park's karst interior. However, in many of the tributaries the gorges are narrow, steep and include waterfalls. Dry, mossy streambeds, karren, [ 13 ] sinkholes (or dolines), [ 14 ] blind valleys and basins where water emerges from caves or vanishes into sinks are all indicators of the complex subterranean system beneath. Intricate systems of shafts, passages and caverns have been slowly formed by the continual effects of water through the soluble limestone. The forest ensures that this process continues by supplying decaying vegetation to add to the acidity in the flowing water. The largest single feature in the karst region is the Barrytown syncline. Limestone is exposed on both flanks of the syncline with more recent gravels and mudstones occupying the low-lying area in between. These more easily erodible rocks overlie interstratal karst. The majority of known cave systems are in the western side of the limestone syncline where underground drainage patterns are concentrated mainly along horizontal lines of weakness in the bedding planes .

[ 15 ] Coastal region [ edit ] The "Pancake Rocks" at Paparoa National Park Fox River- Paparoa National Park The Paparoa coastline is characterised by high cliffs cut away by waves from the Tasman Sea , with indented coves and sandy beaches. There are small islands offshore and rock pillars. These terraces were once islands, which became part of the mainland when New Zealand was uplifted quite recently in its geological history. The most well known feature of the coastal region is the Pancake Rocks and Blowholes at Dolomite Point, near Punakaiki, where evenly layered stacks of platey limestone have been eroded in places to form surge pools and blowholes .

[ 15 ] Ecology [ edit ] Fauna [ edit ] Bird habitats within the park range from on or near the coastline to the peak of the Paparoa Ranges. Several species such as tūī , bellbird, kākā , kererū (New Zealand pigeon) and parakeets migrate from winter habitat in the lower forests to summer habitat in the upland forests.

[ 16 ] A significant feature of the coast is the colony of the rare seabird, the Westland petrel (tāiko), that is located on densely forested terraces just south of Punakaiki river.

[ 17 ] The Westland petrel breeding site at Punakaiki has been identified as an Important Bird Area by BirdLife International .

[ 18 ] Large colonies of New Zealand fur seals have been established adjacent areas around Westport such as at Cape Foulwind . Rare southern elephant seals and leopard seals also visit.

[ 19 ] Hector's dolphins (some of the highest population densities in the nation) and some other dolphins including killer whales can be observed close to shores as well.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] For whales, their number is still very small, but various species have been observed.

[ 23 ] Conservation and human interaction [ edit ] Protection from mining [ edit ] Although Paparoa National Park is protected from mining by Schedule 4 of the Crown Minerals Act, there have been proposals to allow some mining within the park's borders. On 22 March 2010, Gerry Brownlee (Minister of Energy and Resources)  and Kate Wilkinson (Minister of Conservation) released a discussion paper including a proposal to remove 7,058 hectares of land from Schedule Four of the Crown Minerals Act 1991 , including the Inangahua sector of Paparoa National Park.

[ 24 ] The area of the Inangahua sector included in this proposal was 3,315 hectares, or 8 per cent of the park.

[ 25 ] The proposed change would remove the prohibition on mining for the area concerned. On 26 March 2010, a spokesman for Gerry Brownlee said that opencast mining in Paparoa National Park could not be ruled out.

[ 26 ] On 20 July 2010, in a joint statement by Brownlee and Wilkinson, the Government announced that it had received 37,552 submissions on its discussion paper, and that it had decided not to remove any land from Schedule 4 of the Crown Minerals Act for the purposes of further mineral exploration or extraction. Ms Wilkinson said the government had agreed to continue with its proposal to add 14 areas with a total of 12,400 hectares of land to Schedule 4, including 240 hectares of Paparoa National Park (the northwest addition).

[ 27 ] Activities [ edit ] The park is a popular location for tramping, walking, and viewing scenery and caves. The Truman Track , located 3 kilometres (1.9 mi) north of Punakaiki, provides access from State Highway 6 to a headland via a short walk through coastal forest of ferns, nīkau palms, podocarps and rātā, with flax nearer the coastline.

[ 28 ] The Paparoa Track is another popular route.

Paparoa Track and Pike29 Memorial Track [ edit ] A 55 km (34 mi) walkway, the Paparoa Track from Blackball to Punakaiki and the Pike29 Memorial Track were constructed through the park as a memorial to the 29 miners lost in the 2010 Pike River Mine disaster . Most of the families of the victims approved, [ 29 ] [ 30 ] but there has been some criticism because Solid Energy decided in 2014 that it was too risky to re-enter the mine to recover any remains from the mine.

[ 31 ] Paparoa Track (Pororari river) The formation of the Paparoa Track has been a catalyst for the emerging adventure sports community on the West Coast with events such as The Paparoa [ 32 ] which features trail running and mountain biking over the track. The event is based around the regions mining history and also celebrates the number of exceptional female adventure athletes the region has produced such as Casey Brown, Ruth Croft and Emily Miazga.

See also [ edit ] National parks of New Zealand Forest parks of New Zealand Regional parks of New Zealand Protected areas of New Zealand Conservation in New Zealand References [ edit ] ^ "Data Table – Protected Areas – LINZ Data Service" .

Land Information New Zealand .

Archived from the original on 18 October 2017 . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

^ "Great Walks" . Department of Conservation.

Archived from the original on 1 April 2020 . Retrieved 28 March 2020 .

^ a b c d e Paparoa National Park Resource Summary (PDF) .

Department of Conservation . 1990.

ISBN 0-478-01193-8 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 March 2022 . Retrieved 8 January 2012 .

^ "Pike River mine sold to Solid Energy" .

Stuff . 3 December 2015.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 5 December 2015 .

^ "Pike River walkway confirmed for West Coast" .

Stuff . 15 November 2015.

Archived from the original on 11 September 2017 . Retrieved 9 July 2022 .

^ "Paparoa National Park Management Plan" (PDF) .

Department of Conservation . 2017. p. 22 . Retrieved 3 July 2022 .

^ Paparoa National Park Management Plan (PDF) . Department of Conservation. 1992.

ISBN 0-478-01468-6 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 March 2022 . Retrieved 8 January 2012 .

^ "Bullock Creek, West Coast" .

NZ Topo Map .

Archived from the original on 24 November 2021 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 .

^ "Bullock Creek, West Coast" .

NZ Topo Map .

Archived from the original on 24 November 2021 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 .

^ "Bullock Creek, West Coast" .

NZ Topo Map .

Archived from the original on 24 November 2021 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 .

^ Paul W Williams (2005).

"Karst Evolution on the West Coast" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 November 2021 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 .

^ Sorrell, Brian (28 February 2007).

"Freshwater feature: the Bullock Creek polje" .

NIWA .

Archived from the original on 24 November 2021 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 .

^ "Karst Geology: Karren" . www.showcaves.com. 2011.

Archived from the original on 15 December 2011 . Retrieved 10 January 2012 .

^ "Karst Geology: Doline or sink hole" . www.showcaves.com. 2011.

Archived from the original on 7 June 2020 . Retrieved 10 January 2012 .

^ a b Paparoa National Park Management Plan (PDF) . Department of Conservation. 1992.

ISBN 0-478-01468-6 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 March 2022 . Retrieved 8 January 2012 .

^ "Birding sites – Paparoa National Park" . New Zealand Birds Limited.

Archived from the original on 28 March 2020 . Retrieved 28 March 2020 .

^ "Westland petrel – tāiko" (PDF) . Department of Conservation. 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 May 2010 . Retrieved 8 January 2012 .

^ BirdLife International. (2012). Important Bird Areas factsheet: Punakaiki. Downloaded from http://www.birdlife.org Archived 10 July 2007 at the Wayback Machine on 16 February 2012.

^ "Leopard seal encounter New Zealand" .

YouTube .

Archived from the original on 5 December 2021.

^ "North Beach, South Island, New Zealand, Buller, Westport" . Archived from the original on 11 April 2016 . Retrieved 6 May 2014 .

^ http://www.epa.govt.nz/Publications/STOS_Ruru_2_and_Maui_Appendix_5_PART%20_C_Reduced.pdf Archived 4 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Near-shore distribution and abundance of dolphins along the West Coast of the South Island, New Zealand – ResearchGate" . Archived from the original on 15 May 2014.

^ "West Coast Marine Protection Forum" . Archived from the original on 19 December 2010 . Retrieved 6 May 2014 .

^ "Time to discuss maximising our mineral potential" . New Zealand Government. 22 March 2010.

Archived from the original on 26 February 2012 . Retrieved 11 January 2012 .

^ "Maximising our Mineral Potential – Summary of Government proposals" (PDF) . New Zealand Government. 22 March 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 January 2015 . Retrieved 11 January 2012 .

^ "Open cast mining in Paparoa not ruled out" .

The Press . 26 March 2010.

Archived from the original on 29 March 2010 . Retrieved 11 January 2012 .

^ "No land to be removed from Schedule 4" . New Zealand Government. 20 July 2010.

Archived from the original on 26 February 2012 . Retrieved 11 January 2012 .

^ "Walks in the Punakaiki area" (PDF) .

Department of Conservation . December 2020 . Retrieved 23 March 2022 .

^ "Pike River tragedy memorial walking track wanted" .

Stuff . 29 January 2015.

Archived from the original on 2 February 2015 . Retrieved 9 July 2022 .

^ "Tourist track an insult to dead Pike River miners says widow" .

Stuff . 15 November 2015.

Archived from the original on 9 September 2017 . Retrieved 5 December 2015 .

^ "Solid-Energy wont reenter Pike River Mine" .

Stuff . 6 November 2014.

Archived from the original on 13 November 2015 . Retrieved 5 December 2015 .

^ "The Paparoa – New Zealand's Premium Mountain Race" .

Archived from the original on 22 January 2019 . Retrieved 28 March 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Paparoa National Park .

Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Punakaiki .

Paparoa National Park map Paparoa National Park Short Walks Archived 20 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine Inland Pack Track Archived 24 January 2015 at the Wayback Machine March Against Mining in Paparoa National Park v t e Paparoa National Park , New Zealand Mountain ranges Paparoa Range Caves and rock features Ballroom Overhang Metro Cave / Te Ananui Cave Pancake Rocks and Blowholes Rivers and streams Bullock Creek Cave Creek / Kotihotiho Fox River Four Mile River Pororari River Punakaiki River Waitakere / Nile River Walking tracks Inland Pack Track Paparoa Track Croesus Track Pike29 Memorial Track Truman Track Settlements Punakaiki Events Cave Creek disaster v t e Protected areas of New Zealand Conservation parks Ahuriri Aorangi Aotea Catlins Coromandel Craigieburn Eyre Mountains/Taka Ra Haka Hakatere Hāwea Hanmer Kaimai Mamaku Kaimanawa Kaweka Ka Whata Tu O Rakihouia Korowai / Torlesse Tussocklands Lake Sumner Mavora Lakes Mount Richmond Northland North-west Nelson Oteake Pirongia Pureora Remutaka Ruahine Raukumara Ruataniwha Tararua Te Kahui Kaupeka Te Papanui Victoria Whakarewarewa Whirinaki Te Pua-a-Tāne Ecological islands Brook Waimārama Sanctuary Bushy Park Sanctuary Mountain Maungatautari Orokonui Ecosanctuary Tawharanui Open Sanctuary Zealandia Government purpose reserves Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Pukaha / Mount Bruce National Wildlife Centre Historic reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Maungauika / North Head Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Stony Batter Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Marine reserves Akaroa Auckland Islands Cape Rodney-Okakari Point Hautai Hawea (Clio Rocks) Hikurangi Horoirangi Kahukura (Gold Arm) Kahurangi Kapiti Kermadec Islands Kutu Parera (Gaer Arm) Long Bay-Okura Long Island-Kokomohua Moana Uta (Wet Jacket Arm) Motu Manawa-Pollen Island Moutere Hauriri / Bounty Islands Moutere Ihupuku / Campbell Island Moutere Mahue / Antipodes Island Parininihi Piopiotahi (Milford Sound) Pohatu / Flea Bay Poor Knights Islands Punakaiki Taipari Roa (Elizabeth Island) Tapuae Taputeranga Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Tauparikākā Tāwharanui Te Angiangi Te Awaatu Channel (The Gut) Te Hapua (Sutherland Sound) Te Matuku Te Paepae o Aotea (Volkner Rocks) Te Tapuwae o Hua (Long Sound) Te Tapuwae o Rongokako Tonga Island Tuhua (Mayor Island) Ulva Island-Te Wharawhara Waiau Glacier Coast Westhaven (Te Tai Tapu) Whanganui-A-Hei (Cathedral Cove) Whangarei Harbour National parks Current Abel Tasman Aoraki / Mount Cook Arthur's Pass Egmont Fiordland Kahurangi Mount Aspiring Nelson Lakes Paparoa Rakiura Tongariro Westland Tai Poutini Whanganui Former Te Urewera National reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Lewis Pass Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Subantarctic Islands Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Recreation reserves Bastion Point Otago Central Rail Trail Truby King Recreation Reserve Regional parks Akatarawa Ambury Ashley Rakahuri Ātiu Creek Auckland Botanic Gardens Āwhitu Battle Hill Farm Belmont Duder East Harbour Ferrymead Glenfern Sanctuary Hunua Ranges Kaitoke Lake Tekapo Long Bay Mahurangi Motukorea Browns Island Muriwai Mutukaroa / Hamlins Hill Ōmana Onekawa Te Mawhai Orere Point Pākiri Pakuratahi Papamoa Hills Queen Elizabeth Scandrett Shakespear Tāpapakanga Tāwharanui Tawhitokino Te Ārai Te Muri Te Rau Pūriri Waharau Waimakariri River Wainuiomata Regional Park Waitākere Ranges Waitawa Wenderholm Whakanewha Whakatīwai Scenic reserves Alice Eaves Reserve Bruce Park Goldie Bush Peel Forest Park Waro Limestone Wetlands Awarua Wetland Farewell Spit Firth of Thames Kopuatai Peat Dome Manawatū Estuary Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Wairarapa Moana Whangamarino Other areas Fensham Reserve Hutt Water Collection Area Northern Pegasus Bay Wainuiomata Water Collection Area Whitireia Other Amenity area Ecological area Sanctuary area Wilderness area Wildlife management area v t e Buller District , New Zealand Seat : Westport Populated places Inangahua Ward Big River Blacks Point Cronadun Crushington Ikamatua Inangahua Junction Lyell Maruia Reefton Springs Junction Waiuta Seddon Ward Arapito Denniston Granity Hector Karamea Little Wanganui Millerton Mokihinui Ngakawau Seddonville Stockton Summerlea Waimangaroa Westport Ward Cape Foulwind Carters Beach Charleston Punakaiki Sergeants Hill Te Kuha Westport Geographic features Allen River Awakari River Awarau River Ballroom Overhang Beautiful River Blackwater River (Buller River tributary) Blackwater River (Little Grey River tributary) Buller Gorge Buller River Bullock Creek Denniston Plateau Fox River Glasgow Range Kahurangi Point Karamea Bight Lake Christabel Lewis Pass Metro Cave / Te Ananui Cave Mount Augustus Mount Haast Ngākawau River Ōpārara Basin Ōpārara Basin Arches Ōtūmahana Estuary Papahaua Range Paparoa Range Perpendicular Point Pororari River Scotts Beach Waitakere / Nile River Wharepapa / Arthur Range Facilities and attractions Big Rimu Walk Charming Creek Tramway Conns Creek Branch Fenian Track Granity Community Library Heaphy Track Inland Pack Track Kahurangi Marine Reserve Kahurangi National Park Karamea Centennial Museum Koranui Incline Mokihinui Hydro Ngakawau Hydro Project Old Ghost Road Pancake Rocks and Blowholes Paparoa National Park Punakaiki Marine Reserve Reefton Hospital Rockies Incline Seddonville Branch Stillwater–Ngākawau line Stockton Mine Truman Track Victoria Forest Park Wangapeka Track Westport Airport Government District Council Mayor Regional Council Iwi Ngāi Tahu Ngāti Apa ki te Rā Tō v t e Grey District , New Zealand Seat : Greymouth Populated places Greymouth Central Ward Blaketown Cobden Greymouth Central Karoro Wharemoa Eastern Ward Ahaura Blackball Brunner Dobson Haupiri Inchbonnie Kokiri Moana Ngahere Stillwater Taylorville Wallsend Northern Ward Barrytown Dunollie Runanga Southern Ward Paroa Shantytown Geographic features Ahaura River Alexander River Barrytown Flats Big River Lake Brunner Clarke River Crooked River Eastern Hohonu River Greenstone River / Hokonui Grey River / Māwheranui Harper Pass Kangaroo Lake Little Hohonu River Nancy River Ōrangipuku River Otto River Paparoa Range Lake Poerua Poerua River Rough River Taramakau River Upper Grey River Waiheke River Waikiti River Facilities and attractions Arnold Power Station Bell Hill mill tramway Blackball Branch Blackball Museum of Working Class History Greymouth Airport Hannah's Building History House Museum John Sturgeon Park Kotuku Model Bungalow Left Bank Art Gallery Omoto locomotive dump Paparoa National Park Paparoa Track Pike29 Memorial Track Pike River Mine Rapahoe Branch Rewanui Branch Ross Branch Runanga Miners' Hall Shantytown Heritage Park Stillwater–Ngākawau line Tyneside Mine Wingham Park Government District Council Mayor Regional Council Organisations Greymouth High School Greymouth Star John Paul II High School Pike River Coal Scenicland FM Tai Poutini Polytechnic West Coast Historical and Mechanical Society West Coast Rugby Football Union Authority control databases VIAF Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paparoa_National_Park&oldid=1303728100 " Categories : IUCN Category II Paparoa National Park National parks of New Zealand Buller District Grey District Protected areas established in 1987 Important Bird Areas of New Zealand Protected areas of the West Coast Region Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2022 Use New Zealand English from February 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 18:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paparoa National Park 21 languages Add topic

