Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nomenclature 2 Types 3 Construction 4 Building methods 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Igloo 72 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Davvisámegiella Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ / inuktitut Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Ladino Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of shelter built of snow For other uses, see Igloo (disambiguation) .

Community of igluit (Illustration from Charles Francis Hall 's Arctic Researches and Life Among the Esquimaux , 1865) An igloo ( Inuit languages : iglu , [ 1 ] Inuktitut syllabics ᐃᒡᓗ [iɣˈlu] ; plural: igluit ᐃᒡᓗᐃᑦ [iɣluˈit] ), also known as a snow house or snow hut , is a type of shelter built of suitable snow .

Although igloos are often associated with all Inuit , they were traditionally used only by the people of Canada's Central Arctic and the Qaanaaq area of Greenland . Other Inuit tended to use snow to insulate their houses, which were constructed from whalebone and hides.

Snow is used because the air pockets trapped in it make it an insulator . Known as the igloo effect , on the outside, temperatures may be as low as −45 °C (−49 °F), but on the inside, the temperature may range from −7 to 16 °C (19 to 61 °F) when warmed by body heat alone.

[ 2 ] Nomenclature [ edit ] Inuit building an igloo (1924) In the Inuit languages , the word iglu (plural igluit ) can be used for a house or home built of any material.

[ 1 ] The word is not restricted exclusively to snowhouses (called specifically igluvijaq , plural igluvijait ), but includes traditional tents, sod houses , homes constructed of driftwood and modern buildings.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Outside Inuit culture , however, igloo refers exclusively to shelters constructed from blocks of compacted snow, generally in the form of a dome.

[ 5 ] Several Inuit language dialects throughout the Canadian Arctic ( Sallirmiutun (Siglitun), Inuinnaqtun , Natsilingmiutut , Kivalliq , North Baffin ) use iglu for all buildings, including snowhouses, and it is the term used by the government of Nunavut .

[ 1 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] An exception to this is the dialect used in the Igloolik region of Nunavut .

Iglu is used for other buildings, while igluvijaq [ 8 ] (plural igluvijait , Inuktitut syllabics: ᐃᒡᓗᕕᔭᖅ ) is specifically used for a snowhouse.

Types [ edit ] Interior of an igloo (early 1900s) There are three traditional types of igloos. Each has a different size from small to large and is  used for a different purpose.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] The smallest-sized igloos are constructed as temporary shelters. They are usually used for one or two nights, and therefore, are easier to build. On rare occasions, these small types of igloos are used during hunting trips which are often on open sea ice .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Intermediate-sized igloos were for semi-permanent, family dwelling. This was usually a single room dwelling that housed one or two families. Often there were several of these in a small area, which formed an Inuit village.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] The largest-sized igloos were normally built in groups of two. One of the buildings was a temporary structure built for special occasions, while the other one was built nearby for living. These large igloos could have up to five rooms and house 20 people. A large igloo could be constructed from several smaller igloos attached by their tunnels, giving common access to the outside. These large igloos were used to hold community feasts and traditional dances.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Construction [ edit ] Film clip of the construction of an igloo from beginning to end (1922) Snow igloos are not spherical, but are built in a catenary , a curved shape more closely resembling a paraboloid . Using this shape, the stresses of snow as it ages and compresses are less likely to cause it to buckle because in an inverted paraboloid or catenoid the pressures are nearer to being exclusively compressive.

[ 12 ] The individual snow bricks are cut out of the ground with saws and machete-like blades. They are originally cut out in a four-sided shape. However, later the snow bricks are often cut into five- or six-sided shapes to increase structural interlocking, [ 13 ] similar to the stones used in the architecture of the Inca Empire .

Igloos gradually become shorter with time due to the compressive creep of the snow.

[ 12 ] Building methods [ edit ] Closeup of snow, revealing how much air there is between the snow crystals.

The snow used to build an igloo must have enough structural strength to be cut and stacked appropriately. The best snow to use for this purpose is snow which has been blown by wind, which can serve to compact and interlock the ice crystals . Snow that has settled gently to the ground in still weather is not useful. The hole left in the snow, where the blocks are cut, is usually used as the lower half of the shelter.

[ 14 ] Snow's insulating properties enable the inside of the igloo to remain relatively warm. In some cases, a single block of clear freshwater ice is inserted to allow light into the igloo. Igloos used as winter shelters had beds made of loose snow, skins, and caribou furs.

[ 14 ] Sometimes, a short tunnel is constructed at the entrance, to reduce wind and heat loss when the door is opened. Animal skins or a snow block can be used as a door.

The igloo is architecturally unique in that it is a dome that can be raised out of independent blocks leaning on each other and polished to fit without an additional supporting structure during construction. An igloo that is built correctly will support the weight of a person standing on the roof.

Traditionally, an igloo might be deliberately consolidated immediately after construction [ 15 ] by making a large flame with a qulliq ( kudlik , stone lamp), briefly making the interior very hot, which causes the walls to melt slightly and settle.

[ 14 ] Body heat is also adequate, although slower. This melting and refreezing builds up a layer of ice that contributes to the strength of the igloo.

[ 16 ] Igloo construction An igloo side view diagram; opening to the right, the optional window may be composed of a sheet of freshwater ice An igloo's snowbrick laying method The sleeping platform is a raised area. With warmer air rising and cooler air settling, the entrance area acts as a cold trap whereas the sleeping area will hold whatever heat is generated by a stove, lamp, body heat, or other device. The Central Inuit , especially those around the Davis Strait , lined the living area with skin, which could increase the temperature within from around 2 °C (36 °F) to 10–20 °C (50–68 °F).

Igloos Process of building an igloo with snowbrick method in mid-way A nearly complete, medium-sized igloo, with excavation under the door and the exterior unfinished Interior of an igloo, facing the passageway leading to the entrance See also [ edit ] Architecture portal Indigenous peoples of the Americas portal Canada portal Glacier cave – Cave formed within the ice of a glacier Quinzhee – Canadian indigenous snow shelter Snow cave – Type of building shelter Snow fort – Structure made of snow Vernacular architecture – Architecture based on local needs, materials, traditions Kamakura (snow dome) – Traditional festival in northern Japan Alachig – Portable housing of Shahsevan nomads in Iran References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Iglu" .

Asuilaak Living Dictionary . Archived from the original on 2019-08-27 . Retrieved 2011-07-19 .

^ "How Warm is an Igloo?, BEE453 Spring 2003 (PDF)" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2012-04-17 . Retrieved 2012-07-10 .

^ "The Mackenzie Inuit Winter House" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2012-04-01 . Retrieved 2012-07-10 .

^ "Reconstructing traditional Inuit house forms using three-dimensional interactive computer modelling" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2009-03-26 . Retrieved 2012-07-10 .

^ "Definition: Igloo" .

Cambridge dictionary .

^ "About the Flag and Coat of Arms" . Gov.nu.ca. 1999-04-01. Archived from the original on 2013-03-07 . Retrieved 2012-07-10 .

^ Inuinnaqtun English Dictionary . Cambridge Bay, Nunavut: Nunavut Arctic College, 1996.

^ "Igluvijaq" .

Asuilaak Living Dictionary . Retrieved 2011-06-29 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b c d Gadacz, René R. (April 24, 2020).

"Igloo" .

The Canadian Encyclopedia . Retrieved January 22, 2024 .

^ a b c d Wielgopolan, Anna.

"Igloo" . Polarpedia . Retrieved January 22, 2024 .

^ Smith, Craig S. (June 21, 2017).

"A Lost Art in the Arctic: Igloo Making" .

^ a b Handy, Richard L. (Dec 1973).

"The Igloo and the Natural Bridge as Ultimate Structures" (PDF) .

Arctic .

26 (4). Arctic Institute of North America: 276– 277.

doi : 10.14430/arctic2926 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-03-04.

^ kitikmeotheritage (2012-07-25), Building An Igloo , archived from the original on 2021-12-11 , retrieved 2019-07-05 ^ a b c Roald Amundsen (1908).

"Chapter 8" .

The North West Passage, being the record of a voyage of exploration of the ship "Gyöa" 1903-1907 . Vol. 2. London, Constable. p.

1 -14.

(a Norwegian observer's account of the building a family's winter igloo, not a short-term hunting one, by Atikleura and Nalungia, Netsilik Inuit ) ^ Amundsen, Roald (1908).

"3" .

The North West Passage, being the record of a voyage of exploration of the ship "Gyöa" 1903-1907; . Vol. 1. London, Constable. p.

145 .

We were inexperienced at that time, and did not know that the hut ought to be heated inside in order to consolidate it.

^ "What house-builders can learn from igloos, 2008, Dan Cruickshank, BBC" .

BBC News . 2008-04-02.

Archived from the original on 2009-03-11 . Retrieved 2012-07-10 .

Further reading [ edit ] Richard Guy Condon , Julia Ogina and the Holman Elders , The Northern Copper Inuit ( ISBN 0-8020-0849-6 ) Igloo – the Traditional Arctic Snow Dome An article on igloos from The Canadian Encyclopedia Watch How to Build an Igloo Archived 2010-11-20 at the Wayback Machine (National Film Board of Canada) Field Manual for the U.S. Antarctic Program , Chapter 11: "Snow Shelters", pp. 140-145 Traditional Dwellings: Igloos (1) (Interview; Library and Archives Canada) Roald Amundsen (1908).

"Chapter 8" .

The North West Passage, being the record of a voyage of exploration of the ship "Gyöa" 1903-1907 . Vol. 2. London, Constable. p.

1 -14.

(a Norwegian observer's account of the building a family's winter igloo, not a short-term hunting one, by Atikleura and Nalungia, Netsilik Inuit ) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Igloo .

Look up igloo in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

How to Build an Igloo (wikiHow) v t e Hut dwelling designs and semi-permanent human shelters Traditional immobile Bahay kubo (Nipa hut) Barabara Beehive house Bothy Bunong Burdei Bure Cleit Clochán (beehive hut) Crotto Dugout Earth lodge Funco Girna Goahti Hogan Humpy Icelandic turf house Igloo Jacal Kapar Log cabin Maloca Menstruation Mitato Musgum mud huts Oca Orri Palloza Pit-house Qargi Qarmaq Quiggly hole Quinzhee Rondavel Roundhouse Ruka Sassi di Matera Shieling Sod house Sukkah Tongkonan Trullo Tukul Wigwam, wickiup and wetu Zemlyanka Housing portal Traditional mobile Chum Lavvu Shepherd's hut Tipi Yaranga Yurt and ger Ger district Open-air Beach fale Cabana Chickee Gazebo Lean-to Palapa Pergola Ramada Toguna Modern Beach hut Hexayurt Hopper hut Iris hut Logging camp Nissen hut Quonset hut Jamesway hut Romney hut Rondavel Slab hut Twynham hut Wilderness hut Alpine club hut Mountain hut Winter room Related topics Cabanes du Breuil Circular linhay Earth sheltering Shack Shed Skellig Michael Stilt house Tent Thatching Transhumance Tree house Vernacular architecture Village des Bories Category Portal v t e Native American architecture Styles Inca Muisca Neo-Andean Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Puuc Río Bec San Bartolo Mayan Revival Pueblo Revival Deco Territorial Territorial Revival Building types Barabara Corn crib Chickee Earth lodge Guachimontón Hogan Igloo Jacal Kiva Longhouse Maloca Mesoamerican pyramids ( Triadic Twin-pyramids ) Oca Plank house Pukara Qargi Qarmaq Quiggly hole Qullqa Ramada Ruka Shabono Sweat lodge Inipi Temazcal Tipi Tupiq Wigwam Structures Ballcourt Chultun Cuel E-Group Moki steps Platform mound Rope bridge Sacbe Ushnu Elements Ashlar Corbel arch Roof comb Sascab Sipapu Talud-tablero Other topics Mohawk skywalkers v t e Architecture of the United States Native and indigenous Mound Builders Pueblo Colonial and post-colonial Creole First Period Colonial Georgian Dutch Colonial French Colonial German Colonial Spanish Colonial Territorial Early Republic Adam Federal Jeffersonian Neoclassical Antebellum Mid-19th century Greek Revival Italianate Gothic Revival Victorian Richardsonian Romanesque Second Empire American Renaissance Folk Stick style Queen Anne Shingle Late-19th to mid-20th century Art Deco ( Streamline Moderne ) American Craftsman American Foursquare Beaux-Arts California bungalow Chicago School Colonial Revival Dutch Colonial Revival Georgian Revival Googie International style Mayan Revival Mediterranean Revival Mission Revival Pueblo Revival Deco Prairie School Pre-war PWA Moderne Sarasota School of Architecture Rustic Spanish Colonial Revival Territorial Revival Tudor Revival Post–World War II Blobitecture Brutalist Deconstructivism Dingbat Earthship High-tech Mid-century modern Modern Neo-eclectic Neo-futurism Neomodern New Classical architecture Postmodern Ranch Shed style Tiny-house Usonian Building types and vernacular Adirondack Adobe Barabara Cape Cod Central-passage house Chickee Corn crib Cowboy church Critical regionalism Dogtrot house Earth lodge Hogan Hall and parlor house I-house Igloo Jacal Kiva Log cabin Longhouses Moki steps Plank house Platform mound Qargi Quiggly hole Ramada Saltbox Shotgun house Sipapu Skyscraper Sod house Sweat lodge Temples Tipi Town square Tupiq Wigwam Cities Atlanta Boston Buffalo Chicago Columbus Detroit Houston Jacksonville Kansas City Las Vegas Los Angeles Miami New Orleans New York City Omaha Philadelphia Portland San Antonio San Francisco Seattle Spokane St. Louis Washington, D.C.

States California Hawaii Texas v t e Ice The solid state of water Major phases Amorphous solid Crystalline phases Superionic Formations Anchor Cap Cave Dune Field Glacier Iceberg ( calving ) Icicle Jam Sea Sheet Spike Stalactites Volcano Phenomena Albedo feedback Black Circle or disc Clear Crystals Firn Fog Frazil Frost Frost heave Frost flower ( sea ice ) Glaze Hail Hair ice Jacking Névé Needle Nucleus Rime Shove Shuga Slurry Slush Snow Storm Ice-related activities Bathing Blasting Blocking Climbing Fishing Rafting Sculpture Skating Sports Bandy Iceboating Cricket Curling Cycling Figure skating Ice hockey Ice racing Speed skating Short-track speed skating Tour skating Constructions Bar Bridge Hotel Igloo Palace Pier Pykrete Rink Road Work Cutting Icebox Icehouse Iceman (occupation) Pick Trade Yakhchāl Other uses Chips Core Cream Cube Pack Ice ages Glaciology Little Ice Age Pleistocene Snowball Earth Category Wikimedia Commons Wiktionary Authority control databases National United States Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Igloo&oldid=1304477055 " Categories : Buildings and structures made of snow or ice Indigenous architecture House types Snow Inuit culture Buildings and structures in North America Culture of Greenland Domes Native American architecture Huts Traditional Native American dwellings Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Inuktitut-language text Pages with Inuktitut IPA Webarchive template wayback links Commons link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 07:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Igloo 72 languages Add topic

