Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Philosophical approach Toggle Philosophical approach subsection 2.1 Doctrines 2.2 Bridge building 2.3 Reconstructing philosophy 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Analytical feminism 7 languages العربية অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca فارسی 한국어 Igbo Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Line of philosophy Part of a series on Feminist philosophy Major works A Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792) The Subjection of Women (1869) The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State (1884) The Second Sex (1949) The Feminine Mystique (1963) Sexual Politics (1969) The Dialectic of Sex (1970) Speculum of the Other Woman (1974) This Sex Which is Not One (1977) Gyn/Ecology (1978) Throwing Like a Girl (1980) In a Different Voice (1982) The Politics of Reality (1983) Women, Race, and Class (1983) Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center (1984) The Creation of Patriarchy (1986) Toward a Feminist Theory of the State (1989) Gender Trouble (1990) Sexual Personae (1990) Black Feminist Thought (1990) Feminism and the Mastery of Nature (1993) Whipping Girl (2007) The Promise of Happiness (2010) Major thinkers Bartky Baier de Beauvoir Bebel Boggs Butler Cixous Cleyre De la Cruz Cobain Collins Daly Davis Démar Dworkin Faust Federici Firestone Fourier Friedan Frye Gamond Goldman Grosz Hanna Haslanger hooks Irigaray Jaggar Kristeva Lerner Lorde Lugones Luxemburg MacKinnon Mama Michel Mill Taylor Mill Millett Nussbaum Paglia Pankhurst Pateman Plumwood Rubin Saadawi Showalter Solanas Spivak Voilquin Whedon Wittig Wollstonecraft Young Zetkin Ideas Feminism analytical epistemology ethics existentialism metaphysics science Gender equality Gender performativity Social construction of gender Care ethics Intersectionality Standpoint theory Journals Feminist Philosophy Quarterly Hypatia philoSOPHIA Radical Philosophy Signs Category Feminist philosophy v t e Analytical feminism is  a line of philosophy that applies analytic concepts and methods to feminist issues and applies feminist concepts and insights to issues that have traditionally been of interest to analytic philosophers . Like all feminists , analytical feminists insist on recognizing and contesting sexism and androcentrism .

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The term “analytical feminism” dates back to the early 1990s when the Society for Analytical Feminism was opened in at the University of Massachusetts Lowell .

[ 2 ] It is used as an opportunity to discuss and examine issues concerning analytical feminism, in part to contrast the more prevalent influences of postmodernism and post-structuralism , and also to demonstrate that analytic philosophy is neither inherently or  irredeemably male-biased. Analytic feminists have attempted to rehabilitate certain key concepts, such as truth, reason, objectivity, agency and autonomy, both because they are normatively compelling as well as in some ways liberating and empowering for women. Not limited to these concepts, analytical feminism has contributed to the historical arena of analytic philosophy such as the philosophy of language, epistemology , metaphysics and the philosophy of science .

[ 3 ] In 1995, the American philosophical magazine Hypatia published a special issue [ 4 ] clarifying the meaning of analytic feminism in the mainstream Anglo-American analytical context and in the range of feminist philosophical positions . In this issue, the authors such as Ann Cudd , then with the University of Kansas , Ann Garry of California State University Los Angeles , and Lynn Hankinson Nelson of the University of Washington proposed that analytic feminism typically was unrecognized and  somewhat depreciated by not only analytical philosophers but academic  feminist agenda as well.

[ 5 ] Considered a sub-category of both analytic philosophy and feminism, analytic feminism acknowledges the philosophical traditions of both fields while simultaneously addressing prominent issues within said fields.

Philosophical approach [ edit ] Analytical feminism, as defined by Ann E. Cudd: "Analytic feminism holds that the best way to counter sexism and androcentrism is through forming a clear conception of and pursuing truth, logical consistency, objectivity, rationality, justice, and the good while recognising that these notions have often been perverted by androcentrism throughout the history of philosophy." (1996: 20) Analytic feminists engage the literature traditionally thought of as analytic philosophy, but also draw on other traditions in philosophy as well as work by feminists working in other disciplines, especially sociology and biology . They, like most analytic philosophers , value clarity and precision in argument and tend to use more rigorously structured logical and linguistic analysis in reaching their conclusions and positions as compared to other philosophical approaches.

The majority of philosophers, including feminist philosophers, have at least some formal training in analytic philosophy, with some possessing extensive education and experience regarding analyticity. There has been a conscious effort to use the word ‘analytical’, the reason being that within the field of philosophy there is sometimes an inclination to assume all feminist work as tied to other methods to philosophy, whereas upon review much of the work in feminism is closer in method to analytic conventions.

[ 6 ] According to most analytic feminists, the  best method for scholars to counter sexism and androcentrism in their respective areas of inquiry is by forming a clear conception of and practicing logical consistency and neutrality .

[ 7 ] Doctrines [ edit ] Even though analytical feminists retain only some traditional concepts [ clarification needed ] , it is not doctrinaire—indeed, there is even a spirit of contrarianism within it. Nevertheless, analytic feminists share a thing that we may call a "core desire" rather than a core principle, that is to say, the need to hold on to enough of the essential normative notions of the modern European tradition to aid the kind of normativity which is necessary for both feminist political theory and philosophy. This "core desire"  finds its appearance by means of the core concepts of analytical feminism.

[ 8 ] Bridge building [ edit ] Analytic feminists' use of core ideas and their excerpt to the work of traditional analytic philosophers permit them to communicate with and build bridges amongst different types of scholars, for example, traditional analytic philosophers, other feminist philosophers, and, in some cases, scientists or scholars in social studies.

[ 9 ] Reconstructing philosophy [ edit ] One tenet of analytic feminism holds that if philosophers positions are applicable universally, they must be usable by men and women alike, and from a range of social situations. This is a basis for what can be considered the reconstruction of philosophy via analytic feminism. This approach, which somewhat mirrors the construction of feminist philosophy tradition, attempts to limit the creation of areas or categories of philosophy that apply to only some women and feminists. It's an attempt to apply to 'all' (men and women) instead of 'some' (women and/or feminists) with specific examples of topics being feminine ethics, gynocentric ethics, or lesbian ethics. The basis for this universal approach would be an analytic feminist ethics and metaphysics which would create and establish a new criterion of adequacy for the fields of ethics and metaphysics. The goal of Miranda Fricker and Jennifer Hornsby , editors of The Cambridge Companion to Feminism in Philosophy , is to have this position included in the mainstream of the discipline  (Fricker and Hornsby 2000).

Not basing the approach on any 'essential' characteristics, be they experiences or otherwise, it can maintain the importance of a variety of perspectives, while crafting a 'working' theory. 'Working' is defined as being particularly inclusive, of both men and women, but also simultaneously eliminating oppressive consequences. A wide range of experiences, interests, and background must be reflected with the theory 'working' only if it is applicable to all these issues and concerns.

There are a variety of approaches regarding the reconstruction of philosophy within analytic feminism. Some philosophers, such as Bailey (Bailey 2010) and Gary (Garry 2012), include the use of intersectionality in their approach. Miranda Fricker (2007) and Kristie Dotson (2011) make use of concept of Privilege (social inequality) in theirs, particularly with regard to epistemic ignorance and epistemic injustice .

[ 10 ] In 2018, Alice Crary offered a critique of some of these recent trends in analytic feminism.

[ 11 ] References [ edit ] ^ Ann E. Cudd.

"One Woman's Attempt at a Definition" . Archived from the original on 2012-03-24.

^ Norco College - Riverside Community College District.

"Society for Analytical Feminism" .

^ Monash University Publishing.

"History of Analytical Feminism" .

^ "Hypatia-Special Issue: Analytic Feminism-August 1995" .

Hypatia .

10 (3). 1995.

doi : 10.1111/hypa.1995.10.issue-3 .

^ Alessandra Allegrini.

"THE NATURALISM QUESTION. HOW TO RE-THINK THE ANALYTIC – CONTINENTAL DICOTHOMY FROM A FEMINIST EPISTEMOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE" . Archived from the original on 2011-09-28 . Retrieved 2011-06-14 .

^ Brennan, Samantha J.

; Superson, Anita M.

(2005). "Hypatia".

Hypatia: A Journal of Feminist Philosophy (Indiana University Press) : 1– 9.

ISSN 0887-5367 .

^ bookrags.

"Analytic Feminism" .

^ Nelson, Jack; Nelson, Lynn Hankinson (2003).

Feminist Interpretations of W. V. Quine (2003 ed.).

ISBN 978-0-271-02295-6 .

^ Moulton, Janice (1989).

Women, knowledge, and reality: explorations in feminist philosophy (1996 ed.).

ISBN 978-0-415-90712-5 .

^ Garry, Ann (September 2010). "Analytic Feminism".

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2011 ed.).

ISBN 978-1-158-37777-0 .

^ Crary, Alice .

"The methodological is political: What’s the matter with ‘analytic feminism’?" Radical Philosophy RP 2.02, June 2018 External links [ edit ] Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Analytic Feminism v t e Feminist philosophy Major works Early François Poullain de la Barre De l’Égalité des deux sexes , 1673 Mary Astell A Serious Proposal to the Ladies , 1694 Mary Wollstonecraft A Vindication of the Rights of Woman , 1792 Sarah Moore Grimké Letters on the Equality of the Sexes and the Condition of Women , 1837 Flora Tristan The Emancipation of Working Class Women , 1843 Elizabeth Cady Stanton Declaration of Sentiments , 1848 Harriet Taylor Mill The Enfranchisement of Women , 1851 John Stuart Mill The Subjection of Women , 1869 Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State , 1884 1940s–1960s Simone de Beauvoir The Second Sex , 1949 Betty Friedan The Feminine Mystique , 1963 1970s Kate Millett Sexual Politics , 1970 Shulamith Firestone The Dialectic of Sex , 1970 Germaine Greer The Female Eunuch , 1970 Robin Morgan Sisterhood Is Powerful , 1970 Andrea Dworkin Woman Hating , 1974 Sandra Bartky "Toward a Phenomenology of Feminist Consciousness", 1974 Susan Brownmiller Against Our Will , 1975 Hélène Cixous "Le Rire de la Méduse", 1975 Mary Daly Gyn/Ecology , 1978 Dale Spender Man Made Language , 1978 Audre Lorde "The Master's Tools Will Never Dismantle the Master's House", 1979 1980s Monique Wittig "On ne naît pas femme", 1980 bell hooks Ain't I a Woman?

, 1981 Marilyn Frye The Politics of Reality , 1983 Sheila Jeffreys The Spinster and Her Enemies , 1985 Gerda Lerner The Creation of Patriarchy , 1986 Catharine MacKinnon Toward a Feminist Theory of the State , 1989 Kimberlé Crenshaw "Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex", 1989 1990s Judith Butler Gender Trouble , 1990 Patricia Hill Collins Black Feminist Thought , 1990 Naomi Wolf The Beauty Myth , 1990 Drucilla Cornell Beyond Accommodation , 1991 Val Plumwood Feminism and the Mastery of Nature , 1993 Christina Hoff Sommers Who Stole Feminism?

, 1994 Martha Nussbaum Sex and Social Justice , 1998 Other theorists Elizabeth Anderson Martha Albertson Fineman Nancy Fraser Donna Haraway Sandra Harding Sally Haslanger Luce Irigaray Anna Jónasdóttir Ideas Écriture féminine Feminism analytical aesthetics empiricism epistemology ethics existentialism justice ethics legal theory metaphysics method philosophy radical standpoint theory theory Gender equality performativity Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Matriarchy Patriarchy Women's studies Journals Hypatia transracialism controversy philoSOPHIA Radical Philosophy Signs Categories Feminist philosophers Feminist theorists Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Analytical_feminism&oldid=1253836578 " Categories : Feminist theory Social theories Analytic philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2013 This page was last edited on 28 October 2024, at 04:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Analytical feminism 7 languages Add topic

