Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Late Antiquity 2 Middle Ages 3 Neo-Platonism in Orthodox theology 4 Renaissance 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Neoplatonism and Christianity 5 languages Eesti Ελληνικά Español 日本語 Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Relationship between Neoplatonism and Christianity Part of a series on Neoplatonism Reconstructed bust believed to represent Plotinus, the founder of Neoplatonism Concepts Emanationism Hypostasis Porphyrian tree Demiurge Anima mundi Henology Henosis Theurgy Okhema Kenoma Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Works Chaldean Oracles Enneads Isagoge On the Cave of the Nymphs On the Mysteries Elements of Theology De Coelesti Hierarchia Commentarii in Somnium Scipionis The Consolation of Philosophy Theology of Aristotle Book of Causes De divisione naturae People Plotinus ( students ) Porphyry Iamblichus Julian the Apostate Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius of Cilicia Olympiodorus the Younger Asclepius of Tralles Pseudo-Dionysius Martianus Capella Macrobius Boethius Maximus the Confessor Al-Kindi Johannes Scotus Eriugena Related topics Platonic Academy Platonism Middle Platonism Neopythagoreanism Commentaries on Plato Commentaries on Aristotle Neoplatonism and Christianity / Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Isma'ilism Druze Kabbalah School of Chartres Platonism in the Renaissance Cambridge Platonists Philosophy portal v t e Part of a series on Christian mysticism Theology and philosophy Apophatic Ascetical Cataphatic Catholic spirituality Hellenistic Mystical theology Neoplatonic Henosis Practices Monasticism Monasticism New Silence Asceticism Mendicant Spiritual direction Meditation Meditation Lectio Divina Invoking of Mystic Saints Active asceticism Contemplation Hesychasm Jesus Prayer Quietism Stages of Christian perfection Hesychia Divinization Catharsis Theosis Kenosis Spiritual dryness Religious ecstasy Passive asceticism Abstinence Esoteric Charismatic Esoteric People (by era or century) Antiquity Ancient African Origen Thomasines Gregory of Nyssa Pseudo-Dionysius Desert Fathers Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Moses the Black Syncletica Athanasius John Chrysostom Hilarion John Cassian 11th · 12th Bernard of Clairvaux Guigo II Hildegard of Bingen Symeon the New Theologian Saint Sava of Serbia 13th · 14th Dominican Dominic de Guzmán Franciscan Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Bonaventure Jacopone da Todi Angela of Foligno English Richard Rolle Walter Hilton Julian of Norwich Margery Kempe Flemish Beatrice of Nazareth Lutgardis Hadewijch John van Ruysbroeck German Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Henry Suso Female Beatrice of Nazareth Bridget of Sweden Catherine of Siena Mechthild of Magdeburg Marguerite Porete 15th · 16th Spanish Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Others Catherine of Genoa 17th · 18th French Margaret Mary Alacoque Pierre de Bérulle Jean-Jacques Olier Louis de Montfort Charles de Condren John Eudes John of St. Samson Others Mary of Jesus of Ágreda Anne Catherine Emmerich Veronica Giuliani Francis de Sales 19th Dina Bélanger Catherine Labouré Mélanie Calvat Maximin Giraud Bernadette Soubirous Conchita de Armida Luisa Piccarreta Mary of the Divine Heart Thérèse of Lisieux Gemma Galgani 20th Padre Pio Therese Neumann Marthe Robin Alexandrina of Balazar Faustina Kowalska Sister Lúcia of Fátima Edgar Cayce Simone Weil Alfred Delp Thomas Merton Charles de Foucauld Edvige Carboni Elena Aiello Contemporary papal views Aspects of meditation ( Orationis Formas , 1989) Reflection on the New Age (2003) Literature and media Lingua ignota Ordo Virtutum Scivias Ascent of Mount Carmel Dark Night of the Soul Spiritual Canticle Way of Perfection Book of the First Monks The Interior Castle Abbey of the Holy Ghost A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation From Willow Creek to Sacred Heart The Glories of Mary The Imitation of Christ The Ladder of Divine Ascent Philokalia Revelations of Divine Love The Story of a Soul Theologia Germanica Devotio Moderna Fatima in Lucia's Own Words Calls from the Message of Fatima The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima Sol de Fátima The Cloud of Unknowing On the Consolation of Philosophy The Mirror of Simple Souls Sister Catherine Treatise Tractatus de Purgatorio Sancti Patricii The Vision of Adamnán Divine Comedy Inferno Purgatorio Paradiso Fatima v t e Neoplatonism was a major influence on Christian theology throughout Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages in the East, and sometimes in the West as well. In the East, major Greek Fathers like Basil , Gregory of Nyssa and Gregory of Nazianzus were influenced by Platonism and Neoplatonism, but also Stoicism often leading towards asceticism and harsh treatment of the body, for example stylite asceticism . In the West, St. Augustine of Hippo was influenced by the early Neoplatonists Plotinus and Porphyry . Later on, in the East, the works of the Christian writer Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite , who was influenced by later Neoplatonists such as Proclus and Damascius , became a critical work on which Greek church fathers based their theology, like Maximus believing it was an original work of Dionysius the Areopagite .

Late Antiquity [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( April 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Early Christians including Origen , Gregory of Nyssa , and Augustine were influenced by Neoplatonism, but none accepted it uncritically and they accepted absolute monism and its emanationists ' views.

[ 1 ] Certain central tenets of Neoplatonism served as a philosophical interim for the Christian theologian Augustine of Hippo on his journey from dualistic Manichaeism to Christianity. As a Manichee, Augustine had held that evil has substantial being and that God is made of matter; when he became a Neoplatonist, he changed his views on these things. As a Neoplatonist, and later a Christian, Augustine believed that evil is a privation of good and that God is not material. Perhaps more importantly, the emphasis on mystical contemplation as a means to directly encounter God or the One, found in the writings of Plotinus and Porphyry , deeply affected Augustine. According to his own account of his important discovery of 'the books of the Platonists' in Confessions Book 7, Augustine owes his conception of both God and the human soul as incorporeal substance to Neoplatonism. But Augustine was also critical of Neoplatonism doctrines and their formulations, and he rejected the Neoplatonists' immaterialism .

[ 2 ] Other Christians assimilated Neoplatonist ideas, [ 3 ] especially in their identifying the Neoplatonic One, or God, with Yahweh . The most influential of these would be Origen , who potentially took classes from Ammonius Saccas (but this is not certain because there may have been a different philosopher, now called Origen the Pagan , at the same time), and the late 5th century author known as Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite .

Neoplatonism also had links with Gnosticism , which Plotinus rebuked in his ninth tractate of the second Enneads : "Against Those That Affirm The Creator of The Kosmos and The Kosmos Itself to Be Evil" [ a ] (generally known as "Against The Gnostics").

[ b ] Due to their belief being grounded in Platonic thought, the neoplatonists rejected Gnosticism's vilification of Plato's demiurge , the creator of the material world or cosmos discussed in the Timaeus . Although neoplatonism has been referred to as orthodox Platonic philosophy by scholars like Professor John D. Turner , this reference may be due in part to Plotinus' attempt to refute certain interpretations of Platonic philosophy, through his Enneads . Plotinus believed the followers of gnosticism had corrupted the original teachings of Plato.

Despite the influence this philosophy had on Christianity, Justinian I would hurt later neoplatonism by ordering the closure of the refounded Academy of Athens in 529.

[ 4 ] Nevertheless, members of the rhetorical school of Gaza such as Aeneas of Gaza or Procopius of Gaza would synthesize neoplatonism with early orthodox Christian ideas without any disturbances.

[ 5 ] Middle Ages [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( April 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Pseudo-Dionysius proved significant for both the Byzantine and Roman branches of Christianity. His works were translated into Latin by John Scotus Eriugena in the 9th century.

Neo-Platonism in Orthodox theology [ edit ] From the days of the Early Church until the present, the Eastern Orthodox Church has made positive selective [ citation needed ] use of ancient Greek philosophy, particularly Socrates, Plato, Aristotle and the Stoics.

[ 6 ] For example, the term logos (Greek Λόγος ) originated with Heraclitus and meant reason or thought. In the Christian context, Logos takes on a deeper meaning and becomes a name for the second person of the Trinity. The writer and theologian Gregory Palamas in the 14th century gave four distinct meanings for the term.

[ 7 ] The most important principle to keep in mind is that early Christianity developed in a Greek milieu and a common vocabulary was used in philosophical, spiritual and theological writing. However, the meanings of words sometimes evolved along different lines. In other cases, philosophical ideas and concepts were sometimes adapted and changed by Christian writers. Any exegetical endeavor trying to unravel the influence of neoplatonic thought on Christian theology needs to keep these principles in mind. One should also note that philosophy was used quite differently in the Eastern and Western theological traditions.

The writings attributed to Dionysius the Areopagite are among the most enigmatic works of late antiquity. Byzantine scholars such as Gregory Palamas cited Dionysius especially in matters of Mystical Theology such as theoria, the divine energies and the unknowability of God.

[ 8 ] At present, modern theologians and philosophers [ 9 ] are still debating whether Dionysius was a Neoplatonist with Christian influences or a Christian writer with Neoplatonic influences. Among Orthodox scholars, the latter view seems to be shared by such writers as Andrew Louth [ 10 ] and Vladimir Lossky .

[ 11 ] However, other Orthodox scholars such as John Meyendorff believe that the Neoplatonism of Dionysius exerted both positive and negative influences on Orthodox theology.

[ 12 ] Meyendorff maintains that Dionysius has led to some confusion in the areas of liturgical and ecclesiological formulations.

Renaissance [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( April 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Marsilio Ficino , who translated Plotinus, Proclus, as well as Plato's complete works into Latin, was the central figure of a major Neoplatonist revival in the Renaissance. His friend, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola , was also a major figure in this movement. Both were students of Jewish mystical Kabbalah , which was heavily influenced by neoplatonism. Renewed interest in Plotinian philosophy contributed to the rational theology and philosophy of the " Cambridge Platonist " circle ( B. Whichcote , R. Cudworth , J. Smith , H. More , etc.). Renaissance Neoplatonism also overlapped with or graded into various forms of Christian esotericism .

See also [ edit ] Augustine of Hippo Augustinian soteriology Basil the Great Cambridge Platonists Cappadocian Fathers Christ the Logos Christian materialism Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Irenaeus Maximus Confessor Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Origen Pseudo-Dionysius Allegorical interpretations of Plato Notes [ edit ] ^ Ancient Greek : Προς τους κακον τον Δημιουργον του κοσμου και τον κοσμον κακον ειναι λεγοντας ^ Ancient Greek : Προς τους Γνωστικους References [ edit ] ^ Olson, Roger E. (2017-03-14).

The Essentials of Christian Thought: Seeing Reality through the Biblical Story . Zondervan Academic.

ISBN 978-0-310-52156-3 .

^ O'Meara, Dominic J. (1981-06-30).

Neoplatonism and Christian Thought . SUNY Press.

ISBN 978-1-4384-1511-6 .

^ Liebregts, P. Th M. G. (2004).

Ezra Pound and Neoplatonism . Fairleigh Dickinson Univ Press.

ISBN 978-0-8386-4011-1 .

^ See Rainer Thiel, Simplikios und das Ende der neuplatonischen Schule in Athen , and a review by Gerald Bechtle, University of Berne, Switzerland, in the Bryn Mawr Classical Review 2000.04.19 . Online version retrieved June 15, 2007.

^ Masalha, Nur (24 February 2022).

Palestine Across Millennia: A History of Literacy, Learning and Educational Revolutions . Bloomsbury Publishing. pp.

81– 88.

ISBN 978-0-7556-4296-0 . Retrieved 8 January 2024 .

^ Constantine Cavarnos , Orthodoxy and Philosophy, The Institute for Byzantine and Modern Greek Studies, 2003 pages ^ Gregory Palamas, 'The One Hundred and Fifty Chapters', in The Philokalia, The Complete Text Volume 4, translated by Palmer, Sherrand and Ware, published 1995 Faber and Faber. pages 360-361 ^ Gregory Palamas, The Triads, edited by John Meyendorff, Paulist Press 1983.

^ Sarah Coakley and Charles M. Stang, Re-thinking Dionysius the Areopagite, John Wiley and Sons, 2009 ^ Andrew Louth, Denys the Areopagite, Continuum Books, 1989, Pages 20-21 ^ Vladimir Lossky, The Mystical Theology of the Eastern Church, St. Vladimir's Seminary Press, page 29 ^ John Meyendorff, Byzantine Theology, Historical Trends and Doctrinal Themes, Fordham University Press, 1974, pages 27-28) Further reading [ edit ] Edwards, Mark. 2006.

Culture and Philosophy in the Age of Plotinus.

Classical Literature and Society Series.   London:  Duckworth.

Finan, Thomas and Vincent Twomey. eds. 1992.

The Relationship between Neoplatonism and Christianity.

Dublin: Four Courts Press.

Jurdjevic, Mark (2004). "Prophets and Politicians: Marsilio Ficino, Savonarola and the Valori Family".

Past & Present (183): 41– 77.

doi : 10.1093/past/183.1.41 .

JSTOR 3600860 .

Gertz, Sebastian R. P. 2016. "Plotinos". In: Reallexikon für Antike und Christentum Bd. 27 (Lfg. 210/217), 988-1009 Martin, Francis X. and John A. Richmond. 1991.

From Augustine to Eriugena: Essays on Neoplatonism and Christianity in Honor of John O'Meara.

Washington: Catholic University of America Press.

Matthews, Alfred Warren. 1980.

The Development of St. Augustine, From Neoplatonism to Christianity, 386-391 A.D.

Washington: University Press of America.

O'Daly, Gerard. 2001.

Platonism Pagan and Christian: Studies in Plotinus and Augustine.

Aldershot; Burlington, VT: Ashgate.

Rist, John M. 1994.

Augustine: Ancient Thought Baptized.

Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press.

Schott, Jeremy (2013). "Plotinus's Portrait and Pamphilus's Prison Notebook: Neoplatonic and Early Christian Textualities at the Turn of the Fourth Century C.E".

Journal of Early Christian Studies .

21 (3): 329– 362.

doi : 10.1353/earl.2013.0032 .

S2CID 170163349 .

Smith, Andrew. 2004.

Philosophy in Late Antiquity.

London/New York:  Routledge.

Stang, Charles M. 2016.

Our Divine Double.

Cambridge, MA; London:  Harvard University Press.

Trembovler, Larissa. 2000. "A Sound Mind in a Diseased Body: A Medical Aspect of the Soul-Body Relationship in Later Greek and Early Christian Philosophy. In From Athens to Jerusalem: Medicine in Hellenized Jewish Lore and in Early Christian Literature: Papers of the Symposium in Jerusalem, 9-11 September 1996.

Edited by Samuel S. Kottek, 171-179.  Rotterdam: Erasmus.

External links [ edit ] Christian Platonism and Christian Neoplatonism v t e Plato Works Apology Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Laws Lysis Menexenus Meno Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Timaeus Of doubtful authenticity Axiochus Definitions Demodocus Epigrams Epinomis Epistles Seventh Letter Eryxias Halcyon Hipparchus Minos On Justice On Virtue Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Theages Life The Academy in Athens Socratic problem List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Legacy Unwritten doctrines List of manuscripts of Plato's dialogues 23 24 228 229 Commentaries Middle Platonism Neoplatonism and Christianity and Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Plato's Dream Poitier Meets Plato Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neoplatonism_and_Christianity&oldid=1254074818 " Categories : Neoplatonism Christian philosophy Catholic theology and doctrine Christian theological movements Christianity and Hellenistic philosophy Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2020 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 This page was last edited on 29 October 2024, at 09:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neoplatonism and Christianity 5 languages Add topic

