Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Meteorological reckoning 3 Astronomical and solar reckoning 4 Ecological reckoning 5 Natural events 6 Cultural associations Toggle Cultural associations subsection 6.1 Carnival 6.2 Easter 6.3 May Day 6.4 Passover 6.5 Allhallowtide 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Spring (season) 190 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Արեւմտահայերէն Armãneashti অসমীয়া Asturianu Atikamekw Avañe'ẽ Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Dolnoserbski डोटेली Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Galego ГӀалгӀай 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî Хальмг 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Ирон IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kapampangan ქართული کٲشُر Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kiswahili Коми Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Кырык мары Ladin Лакку ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Ligure Livvinkarjala Lombard Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Мокшень မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pangcah پنجابی پښتو Перем коми Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Sardu Scots Seediq Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça Tayal ไทย Тоҷикӣ ᏣᎳᎩ Tshivenda Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro Walon 文言 West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia One of the Earth's four temperate seasons Spring Temperate season Blooming flowers and trees in spring Northern temperate zone Astronomical season 21 March – 21 June Meteorological season 1 March – 31 May Solar (Celtic) season 1 February – 30 April Southern temperate zone Astronomical season 23 September – 22 December Meteorological season 1 September – 30 November Solar (Celtic) season 1 August – 31 October Summer Spring Autumn Winter Part of a series on Weather Temperate and polar seasons Winter Spring Summer Autumn Tropical seasons Dry season Harmattan Wet season Storms Cloud Cumulonimbus cloud Arcus cloud Downburst Microburst Heat burst Derecho Lightning Volcanic lightning Thunderstorm Air-mass thunderstorm Thundersnow Dry thunderstorm Mesocyclone Supercell Tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Dust devil Fire whirl Anticyclone Cyclone Polar low Extratropical cyclone European windstorm Nor'easter Subtropical cyclone Tropical cyclone Atlantic hurricane Typhoon Storm surge Dust storm Simoom Haboob Monsoon Amihan Gale Sirocco Firestorm Winter storm Ice storm Blizzard Ground blizzard Snow squall Precipitation Drizzle Freezing Graupel Hail Megacryometeor Ice pellets Diamond dust Rain Freezing Cloudburst Snow Rain and snow mixed Snow grains Snow roller Slush Topics Air pollution Atmosphere Chemistry Convection Physics River Climate Cloud Physics Fog Mist Season Cold wave Heat wave Jet stream Meteorology Severe weather List Extreme Severe weather terminology Canada Japan United States Weather forecasting Weather modification Glossaries Meteorology Climate change Tornado terms Tropical cyclone terms Weather portal v t e Spring , also known as springtime , is one of the four temperate seasons , succeeding winter and preceding summer . There are various technical definitions of spring, but local usage of the term varies according to local climate, cultures and customs. When it is spring in the Northern Hemisphere , it is autumn in the Southern Hemisphere and vice versa. At the spring equinox , also called the vernal equinox, days and nights are approximately twelve hours long, with daytime length increasing and nighttime length decreasing as the season progresses until the summer solstice . The spring equinox is in March in the Northern Hemisphere and in September in the Southern Hemisphere, while the summer solstice is in June in the Northern Hemisphere and in December in the Southern Hemisphere.

Spring and "springtime" refer to the season, and also to ideas of rebirth, rejuvenation, renewal, resurrection and regrowth.

Subtropical and tropical areas have climates better described in terms of other seasons, e.g. dry or wet, monsoonal or cyclonic. Cultures may have local names for seasons which have little equivalence to the terms originating in Europe.

Etymology According to the Online Etymological Dictionary , "spring" in the sense of the season comes from phrases such as "springing time" (14th century) and "the spring of the year". This use is from an archaic noun meaning "act or time of springing or appearing; the first appearance; the beginning, birth, rise, or origin". Spring as a word in general appeared via the Middle English springen , via the Old English springan . These were verbs meaning to rise up or to burst forth, (see also the modern German springen 'jump') and are not believed to have originally related to the season.  These all originate from Proto-Germanic *sprenganan.

[ 1 ] Meteorological reckoning Further information: Meteorological seasons Meteorologists generally define four seasons in many climatic areas: spring, summer, autumn (fall), and winter. These are determined by the values of their average temperatures on a monthly basis, with each season lasting three calendar months. The three warmest months are by definition summer , the three coldest months are winter , and the intervening gaps are spring and autumn . Meteorological spring can therefore, start on different dates in different regions.

In the United States and United Kingdom , spring months are March, April, and May.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In Ireland , following the Irish calendar , spring is often defined as February, March, and April.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In Sweden , meteorologists define the beginning of spring as the first occasion on which the average 24 hours temperature exceeds zero degrees Celsius for seven consecutive days, thus the date varies with latitude and elevation (but no earlier than 15 February, and no later than 31 July).

[ 6 ] In Australia , [ 7 ] New Zealand , [ 8 ] South Africa [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] and Brazil the spring months are September, October, and November.

Astronomical and solar reckoning In the Northern Hemisphere (with countries such as Germany, the United States, Canada, and the UK), [ 12 ] solar reckoning was traditionally used with the solstices and equinoxes representing the midpoints of each season, however, the astronomical vernal equinox (varying between 19 and 21 March) can be taken to mark the first day of spring with the summer solstice (around 21 June) marked as first day of summer. By solar reckoning, Spring is held to begin 1 February until the first day of Summer on May Day , with the summer and winter solstices being marked as Midsummer and Midwinter respectively, instead of as the beginning of the season as is the case with astronomical reckoning.

In Persian culture the first day of spring is the first day of the first month (called Farvardin ) which begins on 20 or 21 March.

In the traditional Chinese calendar , the "spring" season ( 春 ) consists of the days between Lichun (3–5 February), taking Chunfen (20–22 March) as its midpoint, then ending at Lixia (5–7 May). Similarly, according to the Celtic tradition , which is based solely on daylight and the strength of the noon sun, spring begins in early February (near Imbolc or Candlemas ) and continues until early May ( Beltane ), with Saint Patrick's Day (17 March) being regarded as the middle day of spring.

[ 13 ] Late Roman Republic scholar Marcus Terentius Varro defined spring as lasting from the seventh day before the Ides of Februarius (7 February) to the eighth day before the Ides of Maius (8 May).

[ 14 ] The spring season in India is culturally in the months of March and April, with an average temperature of approx 32 °C.

[ 15 ] Some people in India especially from Karnataka state celebrate their new year in spring, Ugadi .

Ecological reckoning The beginning of spring is not always determined by fixed calendar dates. The phenological or ecological definition of spring relates to biological indicators, such as the blossoming of a range of plant species, the activities of animals, and the special smell of soil that has reached the temperature for micro flora to flourish. These indicators, along with the beginning of spring, vary according to the local climate and according to the specific weather of a particular year.

[ citation needed ] In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the National Trust runs the # BlossomWatch campaign, which encourages people to share images of blossom with one another, as an early indicator of the arrival of the season.

[ 16 ] Some ecologists divide the year into six seasons. In addition to spring, ecological reckoning identifies an earlier separate prevernal (early or pre-spring) season between the hibernal (winter) and vernal (spring) seasons. This is a time when only the hardiest flowers like the crocus are in bloom, sometimes while there is still some snowcover on the ground.

[ 17 ] Natural events As a result of global warming , average springtime temperatures have risen in the 48 contiguous US states since the middle of the 20th century.

[ 18 ] Hundreds of sour cherry blooming in Extremadura , Spain , during spring Late April in the Alps . At high elevations [ 19 ] (or latitudes), [ 20 ] spring is often the snowiest period of the year.

A willow in Stockholm in April 2016 Sowing at spring in Estonia Blooming trees of Cherry blossom in Japan During early spring, the axis of the Earth is increasing its tilt relative to the Sun, and the length of daylight rapidly increases for the relevant hemisphere. The hemisphere begins to warm significantly, causing new plant growth to "spring forth", giving the season its name.

[ 21 ] Any snow begins to melt, swelling streams with runoff and any frosts become less severe. In climates that have no snow, and rare frosts, air and ground temperatures increase more rapidly.

Many flowering plants bloom at this time of year, in a long succession, sometimes beginning when snow is still on the ground and continuing into early summer.

[ 22 ] In normally snowless areas, "spring" may begin as early as February (Northern Hemisphere) or August (Southern Hemisphere), heralded by the blooming of deciduous magnolias, cherries, and quince.

[ 23 ] Many temperate areas have a dry spring, and wet autumn (fall), which brings about flowering in this season, more consistent with the need for water, as well as warmth.

Subarctic areas may not experience "spring" at all until May.

While spring is a result of the warmth caused by the changing orientation of the Earth's axis relative to the Sun, the weather in many parts of the world is affected by other, less predictable events. The rainfall in spring (or any season) follows trends more related to longer cycles—such as the solar cycle —or events created by ocean currents and ocean temperatures—for example, the El Niño effect and the Southern Oscillation Index .

Unstable spring weather may occur more often when warm air begins to invade from lower latitudes , while cold air is still pushing from the Polar regions . Flooding is also most common in and near mountainous areas during this time of year, because of snow-melt which is accelerated by warm rains. In North America, Tornado Alley is most active at this time of year, especially since the Rocky Mountains prevent the surging hot and cold air masses from spreading eastward, and instead force them into direct conflict. Besides tornadoes , supercell thunderstorms can also produce dangerously large hail and very high winds, for which a severe thunderstorm warning or tornado warning is usually issued. Even more so than in winter, the jet streams play an important role in unstable and severe Northern Hemisphere weather in springtime.

[ 24 ] In recent decades, season creep has been observed, which means that many phenological signs of spring are occurring earlier in many regions by around two days per decade.

[ citation needed ] Spring in the Southern Hemisphere is different [ how?

] in several significant ways to that of the Northern Hemisphere for several reasons, including: There is no land bridge between Southern Hemisphere countries and the Antarctic zone capable of bringing in cold air without the temperature-mitigating effects of extensive tracts of water; The vastly greater amount of ocean in the Southern Hemisphere at most latitudes; There is a circumpolar flow of air ( the roaring 40s and 50s ) uninterrupted by large land masses; No equivalent jet streams; and The peculiarities of the reversing ocean currents in the Pacific.

[ 25 ] Cultural associations Divine female personification of Yenningtha ( Meitei for 'spring season') in Meitei mythology and folklore Holi in Nepal Carnival Main article: Carnival Further information: Mardi Gras Carnival is practiced by many Christians around the world in the days before Lent (40 days, without Sundays, before Easter).  It is the first spring festival of the new year for many.

[ 26 ] Easter Main article: Easter Easter procession, commemorating the Resurrection of Jesus Easter is the most important religious feast in the Christian liturgical year .

[ 27 ] Christians believe that Jesus was resurrected from the dead on the "third day" [ note 1 ] (two days after his crucifixion ), and celebrate this resurrection on Easter Day, two days after Good Friday . Since the Last Supper was a Passover Seder , the date of Easter can be calculated as the first Sunday after the start of Passover. This is usually (see Passover below) the first Sunday after the first full moon following the spring equinox. The date of Easter varies between 22 March and 25 April (which corresponds to between 4 April and 8 May in the Gregorian Calendar for the Eastern and Oriental Orthodox Churches using the Julian Calendar ). In this celebration, the children do an easter egg hunt.

May Day Main article: May Day Further information: Beltane The First of May is the date of many public holidays .

[ 28 ] In many countries, May Day is synonymous with International Workers' Day , or Labour Day , which celebrates the social and economic achievements of the labour movement . As a day of celebration, the holiday has ancient origins, and it can relate to many customs that have survived into modern times. Many of these customs are due to May Day being a cross-quarter day , meaning that (in the Northern Hemisphere where it is almost exclusively celebrated) it falls approximately halfway between the spring equinox and summer solstice . In the Celtic tradition, this date marked the end of spring and the beginning of summer.

Passover Main article: Passover The Passover begins on the 15th day of the month of Nisan , which typically falls in March or April of the Gregorian calendar on the night of a full moon after the northern spring equinox .

[ 29 ] However, due to leap months falling after the vernal equinox, Passover sometimes starts on the second full moon after vernal equinox, as in 2016. Jewish people celebrate this holiday to commemorate their escape from slavery in Egypt as described in the book of Exodus in the Torah .
Foods consumed during Passover seders , such as lamb and barley, are tied to springtime seasonal availability. In this celebration, children recite the Four Questions during the seder and hunt for the afikoman afterwards.

Allhallowtide The Western Christian season encompassing the triduum of All Saints' Eve ( Halloween ), All Saints' Day (All Hallows') and All Souls' Day are observed in the spring in the Southern hemisphere .

See also Akitu (Ancient Mesopotamia, Sumer, Babylonia) Bihu (India) Chinese New Year Floriade (Australia) Holi (India, Nepal) Mărțișor (Romania) Nowruz (Iran) Pahela Falgun (Bangladesh) Saint Patrick's Day (Northern Hemisphere) Sham el-Nessim (Egypt) Sinhala New Year (Sri Lanka) Spring break Spring Carnival (Australia) Spring cleaning Spring Day (Many countries) St Brigid's Day (Ireland) Tết (Vietnam) Vasant panchami (India) Notes ^ This resurrection is commonly said to have occurred "on the third day after resting for the Sabbath (Friday sundown to Saturday sundown), including the day of crucifixion." (e.g. Luke 24:21 KJV) References ^ "Etymology of Spring" .

etymonline.com . Retrieved 14 March 2024 .

^ "Spring" .

Glossary of Meteorology . Retrieved 5 March 2018 .

^ "Met Office: Spring" . Retrieved 5 March 2018 .

^ "Get ready for the seasons in Ireland" .

www.durbanresidence.com .

^ Farrell, Conor (5 February 2014).

"Column: When does spring really start? Let's clear this is up once and for all" .

TheJournal.ie .

^ "Season arrival dates, Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute" . Retrieved 20 March 2023 .

^ "Australian Bureau of Meteorology – Climate Glossary – Seasons" .

Australian Bureau of Meteorology . bom.gov.au . Retrieved 18 March 2022 .

^ Gorman, Paul (2 September 2019).

"When does spring officially start in NZ? It's complicated" .

Stuff . Retrieved 18 December 2023 .

^ Ngema, Thobeka (23 August 2023).

"Western and southern parts of South Africa had a colder June and July this winter" .

Independent Online .

^ "South Africa's weather and climate" . 28 February 2023.

^ "1 September: Today is technically not 'Spring Day' " . September 2022.

^ "Met Office: Spring" . Retrieved 5 March 2018 .

^ Danaher, Kevin (1972).

The Year in Ireland: Irish Calendar Customs . Dublin: Mercier. p. 65.

ISBN 1-85635-093-2 .

^ Varro . "4 Concerning the Agricultural Seasons".

Res Rusticae (Country Matters) . Vol. Book 1 – via Wikisource .

^ "Seasons in India | Different types of seasons in India with months" .

gupshups . October 2019.

^ "Blossom watch day: National Trust urges UK to share blooms" .

the Guardian . 24 April 2021 . Retrieved 15 July 2022 .

^ Allaby, Michael (1999).

"A Dictionary of Zoology" .

Archived from the original on 2 June 2013 . Retrieved 30 May 2012 .

^ Bebernes, Mike (20 March 2025).

"How climate change is making spring warmer, rainier and earlier" . Yahoo News.

Archived from the original on 22 March 2025.

News source cites data source: NOAA.

^ "Mean Snow Depths, 1983–2002" (maps, see April) , Hydrological Atlas of Switzerland , Federal Office for the Environment ^ Warren, Stephen G.; Rigor, Ignatius G.; Untersteiner, Norbert; Radionov, Vladimir F.; Bryazgin, Nikolay N.; Aleksandrov, Yevgeniy I.; Colony, Roger (June 1999).

"Snow Depth on Arctic Sea Ice" .

Journal of Climate .

12 (6): 1814– 1829.

Bibcode : 1999JCli...12.1814W .

doi : 10.1175/1520-0442(1999)012<1814:SDOASI>2.0.CO;2 . Retrieved 6 May 2021 .

The deepest snow is just north of Greenland and Ellesmere Island, peaking in early June at more than 40 cm ^ Hiskey, Daven (26 September 2013).

"Why Do We Call the Seasons Spring, Summer, Fall and Winter?" .

Mental Floss . Retrieved 8 August 2019 .

^ "How do flowers bloom?" .

UCSB Science Line .

UC Santa Barbara . 25 December 2008 . Retrieved 9 August 2019 .

^ Lelong-Lehoang, Claire (11 October 2019).

"Flower trees – top 5 spring-blooming shrubs and trees" .

Nature & Garden . Retrieved 9 September 2019 .

^ US Department of Commerce, NOAA.

"NWS JetStream – The Jet Stream" .

www.weather.gov .

^ "El Niño: Pacific Wind and Current Changes Bring Warm, Wild Weather" .

earthobservatory.nasa.gov . 14 February 2017.

^ "Carnival / Ash Wednesday" .

www.timeanddate.com .

^ Anthony Aveni , "The Easter/Passover Season: Connecting Time's Broken Circle", The Book of the Year: A Brief History of Our Seasonal Holidays (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004), 64–78.

^ Anthony Aveni, "May Day: A Collision of Forces", The Book of the Year: A Brief History of Our Seasonal Holidays (Oxford: Oxford University Press , 2004), 79–89.

^ Hopkins, Edward J. (1996).

"Full Moon, Easter & Passover" .

University of Wisconsin . Retrieved 10 April 2017 .

External links Spring at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Word Lore Online Etymology Dictionary Glossary of Meteorology (archived 15 March 2012) Solstice, Equinox & Cross-Quarter Moments for 2011 and other years, for several time zones [ usurped ] (archived 7 July 2011) Earth's Seasons, Equinoxes, Solstices, Perihelion, and Aphelion, 2000–2020 (from the United States Naval Observatory 's Astronomical Applications Department) (archived 13 October 2007) Seasons and Seasonal Cusps as Pagan and Religious Holidays [ usurped ] (from Archaeoastronomy [ usurped ] ) What day does spring start?

(BBC, UK News Magazine) Status of Spring – Maps of Spring Leaf and Bloom Indices for the United States Tunno, Bianca Barr.

"What's the difference between meteorological and astronomical spring?" .

AccuWeather . Retrieved 1 March 2020 .

v t e Seasons Temperate seasons Spring Summer Autumn Winter Weather portal Tropical seasons Wet season Dry season Specific Cyclone season Fog season Harmattan (West Africa) Monsoon season Mud / breakup / minoskamin bezdorizhzhia / rasputitsa Rainy season Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine İslâm Ansiklopedisi NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐xx25s
Cached time: 20250814215111
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.887 seconds
Real time usage: 1.106 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3997/1000000
Revision size: 24408/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 102456/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6875/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 123648/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.623/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24941929/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  967.689      1 -total
 28.71%  277.847      2 Template:Reflist
 19.84%  191.965     22 Template:Cite_web
 12.88%  124.593      1 Template:Lang
  9.27%   89.686      1 Template:Weather
  9.19%   88.906      6 Template:Fix
  9.05%   87.623      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.44%   81.630      1 Template:Sister_project_links
  7.83%   75.792      1 Template:Short_description
  5.40%   52.248      6 Template:Delink Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:316532:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215111 and revision id 1287000634. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spring_(season)&oldid=1287000634 " Category : Spring (season) Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from January 2020 Articles containing Chinese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2019 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2023 Articles containing Meitei-language text Pages using Sister project links with wikidata mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 23 April 2025, at 10:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Spring (season) 190 languages Add topic

