Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Objectives 3 Members 4 COST Actions Toggle COST Actions subsection 4.1 Funding COST Actions 5 Governance 6 References Toggle the table of contents European Cooperation in Science and Technology 8 languages Čeština Deutsch Español Français עברית Polski Српски / srpski Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia .

See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.

( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "European Cooperation in Science and Technology" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) COST logo Grant proposal for DNAqua-Net, a COST-funded project The European Cooperation in Science and Technology ( COST Association ) is running an EU -funded programme which enables researchers and innovators to set-up their own research networks in a wide range of scientific topics, called COST Actions. While COST does not fund research activities as such, it provides funding for scientific collaboration in the form of conferences, meetings, training schools and scientific exchanges.

To date, COST has 41 Full Members, 1 Cooperating Member and 1 Partner Member. Salvatore Grimaldi has been appointed as President of the COST Association in July 2023 and will serve as President until 21 June 2025.

History [ edit ] In the 1960s, European countries felt the need to begin framing science policies in order to bridge the gap in science and technology between Europe and the USA. As a result, COST was founded in 1971 to connect the research systems of individual European countries. The Ministerial Conference of 22 and 23 November 1971 is generally presented as the official entry into force of COST and at which the first intergovernmental agreements were signed.

Objectives [ edit ] The COST governing board, the Committee of Senior Officials, approved the mission that will drive COST throughout the end of Horizon Europe: “COST provides networking opportunities for researchers and innovators in order to strengthen Europe’s capacity to address scientific, technological and societal challenges.” [ 1 ] The organisation engages about 45,000 researchers and innovators. In all, nearly half a million researchers have participated in COST over the years.

Members [ edit ] COST members as of 2022 The 41 COST Members are: Albania, Armenia, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Moldova, Montenegro, The Netherlands, The Republic of North Macedonia, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, United Kingdom, Ukraine.

[ 2 ] These countries govern COST via their representatives in the COST Committee of Senior Officials (CSO) – the General Assembly of the COST Association.

Israel is a Cooperating Member and South Africa a Partner Member.

COST Near Neighbour Countries include Algeria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Egypt, the Faroe Islands, Jordan, Kosovo, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Palestine, Russia, Syria, and Tunisia. Once their participation is approved, researchers from Near Neighbour Countries’ institutions are eligible to participate in the COST Action on the same basis as the COST Members that have signed the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) – with the exception of the right to vote in the Management Committees or Working Groups of the Action.

International Partner Countries are non-COST Members who are not a Near-Neighbour Country i.e. any country (worldwide) that is not included in the previous lists. Once their participation is approved, researchers from International Partner Countries can participate in the Management Committee meetings as Observers, with no voting rights. Researchers connected to institutions from International Partner Countries whose participation in a COST Action has been approved are not eligible for reimbursement. Currently, South Africa is a COST Partner Country.

COST Actions [ edit ] Since its inception, COST has operated according to one main instrument, the COST Action.

A COST Action is a network open to researchers and innovators, collaborating in all fields of science and technology of common interest to at least seven COST Members/Cooperating Members. A huge variety of topics can be covered in COST Actions, including established research areas like history, biology, ecology, astronomy, criminal justice, but also newly emerging areas like systems biology, renewable energy, sustainable architecture or behavioural economics. Actions can adapt as science advances.

Funding COST Actions [ edit ] COST provides international funding for networking, enabling researchers to set up their interdisciplinary research networks in Europe and beyond. Since 1971, COST has been receiving EU funding under the various research and innovation framework programmes, such as Horizon 2020 and Horizon Europe .

COST provides funding for a period of four years which is used for organising meetings, workshops, conferences, training schools, short-term scientific missions as well as communication and dissemination activities. This way it promotes global networking of nationally funded research.

The average COST Action support is EUR 140,000 per annum (dependent on budget availability) for participation by typically 30 COST Member Countries. The sum covers travel and meeting support.

Governance [ edit ] The COST Association, an international not-for-profit association under Belgian law, is located in Brussels and carries out all activities related to the Open Call. It integrates governance, management, and implementation functions into a single structure.

The decision-making body of the COST Association is the general assembly of Members, the Committee of Senior Officials (CSO). The CSO is chaired by the President of the COST Association, Salvatore Grimaldi.

[ 3 ] Another legal body is the Executive Board (EB) which prepares all decisions to be taken by the general assembly and oversees the activities of the COST Administration - the Executive Board is chaired by the COST Vice-President. The COST Administration, based in Brussels, is currently headed by Dr Ronald de Bruin.

References [ edit ] ^ "COST | European Cooperation in Science and Technology" .

COST . Retrieved 2019-09-20 .

^ "COST members" .

www.cost.eu . Retrieved 2022-04-08 .

^ "Prof. Salvatore Grimaldi appointed President of COST" . 18 July 2023.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic 2 Norway Latvia Croatia Poland Israel Catalonia Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=European_Cooperation_in_Science_and_Technology&oldid=1303010928 " Categories : Intergovernmental organizations Science and technology in Europe Funding bodies 1971 establishments in Belgium Organizations established in 1971 1971 in science Organisations based in Brussels Science and technology in Belgium Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles with style issues from August 2023 All articles with style issues Articles needing additional references from August 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 16:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents European Cooperation in Science and Technology 8 languages Add topic

