Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Names 2 History of the yoga concept 3 On the origin of the concept of yoga 4 Determination of Yoga 5 Lengths of Yoga -s 6 A different system of yoga -s Toggle A different system of yoga -s subsection 6.1 Names of the 28 yoga -s in the different system 6.2 Rule for assigning the yoga -s in the different system 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Nityayoga Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Orbital simulation illustrating the calculation of nityayoga In Indian astronomy, yoga (also called nityayoga ) is a period of time, of varying lengths,  during which the sum of the nirayana longitudes of the Sun and the Moon increases by an amount of 13 degrees 20 minutes (or, equivalently, 800 minutes).

[ 1 ] While considering the sum, when the sum is 360 degrees or more, then 360 degrees is subtracted from the sum to make the sum an angle between 0 degree and 360 minutes. Consider a moment T 1 when the sum of the longitudes of the Sun and the Moon is 0 degree and let T 2 be the next immediate moment when the sum of the longitudes of the Sun and the Moon is 13 degree 20 minutes. The duration of time between the moments T 1 and T 2 is the first yoga . Similarly, let the next immediate moment when the sum of the longitudes of the Sun and Moon is 26 degrees 40 minutes. The duration of time between the moments T 2 and T 3 is the second yoga . The third, fourth and higher yoga -s are defined in a similar way. Since 27 X  13 degrees 20 minutes = 360 degrees, at the end-moment of the 27th yoga , the sum of the nirayana longitudes of the Sun and Moon would be 0 degree. The numbering of the yoga -s then starts afresh from that point. It appears that the astronomical yoga -s are in no way related to any astronomical phenomena.

[ 2 ] S. B. Dikshit in his Bhāratīya Jyotiṣ Śāstra observes: "It is not known what planetary position in the sky is indicated by yoga , and it is useful only in astrology." [ 3 ] Not to be confused with yoga (Hindu astrology) .

In Indian astrology, the term yoga has been used to indicate luni-solar distances and planetary situations, associations, and combinations. When one planet or house is related to another by placement, aspect or conjunction in a particular way  then it is said that the planets and houses are in a particular yoga .

In the traditional Indian calendars or almanacs, that is in Pañcāṅg -s, Yoga or Nityayoga is one of the five elements or organs or limbs that constitute the Pañcāṅg -s, the "five organs" in the literary meaning of the term Pañcāṅg . The other four elements are Nakṣatra , Tithi , Vāra and Karaṇa .

Names [ edit ] The names of the 27 nitayoga are: Viṣkaṃbha (Support or obstacle) Prīti (Kindness, fondness) Āyuṣmān (Long lived) Saubhāgya (Good fortune) Śobhana (Prosperity, splendor) Atigaṇḑa (Having large cheeks or temples) Sukarmā (Virtuous) Dhṛti (Courage, determination) Śūla (Spear, pike) Gaṇḑa (Spot, mark, pimple) Vṛddhi (Growth) Dhruva (Unchangeable, constant) Vyāghāta (Hindrance, defeat) Harṣaṇa (Thrilling) Vajra (Diamond, thunderbolt) Siddhi (Success) Vyātīpāta (Calamity) Varīyān (Very welcome) Parigha (Obstacle) Śiva (Benign, gracious) Siddha (Accomplished) Sādhya (Amenable) Śubha (Auspicious) Śukla (White substance) Brahma (Supreme spirit, priest) Indra (Chief) Vaidhṛta (Great calamity) History of the yoga concept [ edit ] Nityayoga or yoga has a prominent place in traditional Indian almanac known as Pañcāṅg . It is one of the five elements that constitutes the pañcāṅg -s, that is,  the five elements that define a Pañcāṅg . However, the yoga -s entered the Pañcāṅg calculations only several centuries after the other four elements became parts of the Indian alamanac.

Pancha-siddhantika , a text on astronomy composed around 505 CE by Varāhamihira gives the methods of calculating nakṣatra -s and tithi -s but does not give any method for calculating yoga -s. Similarly, Bṛhat Saṃhitā , a work on astrology also by Varāhamihira has long discussions on the effects of nakṣatra -s but is silent on the effects of yoga -s. These facts indicate that the concept of yoga -s did not exist at the time of Varāhamihira. The currently available Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta composed by Brahmagupta in c.628 CE has just one verse containing a reference to yoga , but all internal evidences point to the possibility of the verse being a much later interpolation.

Khaṇḍakhādyaka , another treatise composed by Brahmagupta in c.665 CE has a couplet of verses referring to yoga . These verses have also been determined as later interpolations. All these point to the fact that the concept of yoga in astronomy arose post Brahmagupta.

Lalla (c. 720–790 CE) in his Śiṣyadhīvṛddhidatantra mentions the yoga -s in detail.

Surya Siddhanta , the founding text of the Saura-pakṣa in Indian astronomy, of undetermined authorship believed to have been composed in the 4th-5th century CE but again believed to have undergone a substantial revision in around 800 CE presents the list of all the 27 yoga -s as they are used in modern Pañcāṅg -s and also methods of calculating the yoga -s. All these evidences suggest that the concept of yoga arose sometime around 700 CE and became an integral part of the Pañcāṅg -s only after around 700 CE.

[ 3 ] On the origin of the concept of yoga [ edit ] The word vyātīpāta occurs in two verses in Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta , but from the context of the occurrence of the word, it is clear that it is not referring to the vyātīpāta that occurs as the 17th yoga in the list of 27 yoga -s. It is referring to one of two mahāpāta -s which occur when the Sun and the Moon are in parallel declination and this happens when the sum of the longitudes of the Sun and Moon is 180°. There are two moments in every lunar month when this happens. One of them is called the vyātīpāta and other vaidhṛti . In order to find these mahāpāta -s one has find the sum of the longitudes of the Sun and the Moon. This must have led to the idea of finding yoga -s by finding the sum of longitudes just as tithi is determined by the difference of longitudes.

[ 3 ] There is another theory regarding the origin of the yoga concept in Indian astronomy. According this view, the astronomical yoga came into being in attempts to predict the phenomena of eclipses.

[ 4 ] Determination of Yoga [ edit ] Robert Sewell's The Indian Calendar contains a section which explains in meticulous detail how the Yoga at sunrise on a day specified by a date in the Common Era can be determined. The procedure also explains how to find how much time has elapsed at the moment of sunrise since the beginning of the Yoga .

[ 5 ] Lengths of Yoga -s [ edit ] The lengths of the various yoga -s varies from yoga to yoga . The following table gives the mean length, the greatest length and the least length of the yoga -s.

[ 6 ] It follows that the total length of a yoga -cycle consisting of 27 yoga -s is 26 days  10 hours 12 minutes 47 seconds.

Lengths of Yoga -s Hours Minutes Seconds Mean 22 35 44.7 Greatest 24 36 24 Least 20 52 58 A different system of yoga -s [ edit ] There is a different system of yoga -s in use in India. This system consists of 28 yoga -s, in contrast to 27 yoga -s in the system already explained,  and the names and the rules for the determination of these yoga -s are different from the ones given earlier. In this system, the succession of the yoga -s depends the day of the week. Hence it has absolutely no connection whatsoever with any astronomical phenomena as the week has no definable relation to the motion of the moon or the sun. This system of yoga -s do not find any mention in Sūrya-sddhānta . In some Hindu calendars yoga -s of this system are also given for each day of the month. But these yogas are only of astrological interest.

The names as well as the rules for the determination of the 28 yoga -s as given in Śrīpati 's Jyotiṡa Ratnamāla are given below.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Names of the 28 yoga -s in the different system [ edit ] Ānanda Kāladaṇḍa Dhūmra Prajāpati Saumya Dhvānkṣa Dhvaja Śrīvatsa Vajra Mudgara Chattra Maitra Mānasa Padma Lambaka Utpāta Mrtyu Kāṇa Siddhi Śubha Amṛta Musala Gada Mātaṅga Rākṣasa Cara Sthira Pravardha Rule for assigning the yoga -s in the different system [ edit ] The rule assumes a cycle of 28 nakṣatra -s which includes the 28th nakṣatra , namely, Abhijit . The 28 yoga -s are assigned as follows: [ 7 ] If on a day, if the week day is Sunday and the nakṣatra is Aśvinī , the yoga is Ānanda , if the nakṣatra is Bharaṇī the yoga is Kāladaṇḍa , and so on.

If on a day, if the week day is Monday and the nakṣatra is Mṛgaśīrṣa , the yoga is Ānanda , if the nakṣatra is Ārdrā the yoga is Kāladaṇḍa , and so on.

If on a day, if the week day is Tuesday and the nakṣatra is Āśleṣa , the yoga is Ānanda , if the nakṣatra is Magha the yoga is Kāladaṇḍa , and so on.

If on a day, if the week day is Wednesday and the nakṣatra is Hasta , the yoga is Ānanda , if the nakṣatra is Citra the yoga is Kāladaṇḍa , and so on.

If on a day, if the week day is Thursday and the nakṣatra is Anurādha , the yoga is Ānanda , if the nakṣatra is Jyeṣtha the yoga is Kāladaṇḍa , and so on.

If on a day, if the week day is Friday and the nakṣatra is Uttara-āṣādha , the yoga is Ānanda , if the nakṣatra is Śrāvaṇa the yoga is Kāladaṇḍa , and so on.

If on a day, if the week day is Saturday and the nakṣatra is Śatabhiṣaj , the yoga is Ānanda , if the nakṣatra is Pūrva-bhādrapada the yoga is Kāladaṇḍa , and so on.

See also [ edit ] Nakshatra Karaṇa Tithi Vāra Vyatipāta References [ edit ] ^ S. Balachandra Rao (2000).

Indian Astronomy: An Introduction . Hyderabad: Universities Press. p. 68.

ISBN 81 7371 205 0 . Retrieved 1 January 2024 .

^ "The astronomical definition of Yoga" .

www.wisdomlib.org . Retrieved 1 January 2024 .

^ a b c Sankar Balakrishna Dikshit (1981).

English translation of "Bharatiya Jyotish Shastra" (History of Indian Astronomy) Part II . Kolkota: India Metereological Department, Govt of India. p. 277 - 279 . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

(Translated by R. V. Vaidya from Marathi originally published in 1896.) ^ Shakti Dhara Sharma (1998).

"Development of Pancanga from vedic times upto the present" .

Bulletin of the Astronomical Society of India .

26 : 75– 90 . Retrieved 1 January 2024 .

^ Robert Sewell and Sankara Balakrishna Dikshit (1896).

The Indian Calendar . London: Swan Sonnenschein & Co. p. 3 . Retrieved 1 January 2024 .

^ Robert Sewell and Sankara Balakrishna Dikshit (1896).

The Indian Calendar . London: Swan Sonnenschein & Co. p. 97 . Retrieved 1 January 2024 .

^ a b Ebenezer Burgess (1858).

"Translation of the Sûrya-Siddhânta" .

Journal of the American Oriental Society .

6 : 141– 498 . Retrieved 25 January 2024 .

^ H. T. Colebrooke (1872).

Miscellaneous Essays Vol. II . Higginbotham & Co. p. 363 . Retrieved 25 January 2024 .

v t e Calendars Systems Lunar Lunisolar Solar In wide use Astronomical Buddhist Chinese Ethiopian Gregorian Hindu Lunar Hijri Solar Hijri ISO Unix time In more limited use Akan Armenian Assamese (Bhāshkarābda) Assyrian Baháʼí Badí‘ Bali Pawukon Saka Bengali Bangladeshi Berber Borana Burmese Chinese Earthly Branches Heavenly Stems Minguo Solar term Germanic heathen Georgian Hebrew Hindu Vikram Samvat Saka Hmong Igbo Iranian Jalali medieval Zoroastrian Irish Gaelic Islamic Fasli Tabular Jain Japanese Javanese Korean Juche Kurdish Lithuanian Maithili Malayalam Mandaean Manipuri (Meitei) Melanau Mizo (Lushai) Mongolian Nepal Nepal Sambat Vikram Samvat Yele Sambat Nanakshahi Nisg̱a'a Odia Punjabi Romanian Shona Somali Sesotho Slavic Slavic Native Faith Macedonian Tamil Thai lunar solar Tibetan Tripuri Tulu Vietnamese Wicca Xhosa Yoruba Zulu Types Runic Mesoamerican Long Count Calendar round Christian variants Coptic Ethiopian and Eritrean Julian Revised Liturgical year Eastern Orthodox Saints Historical Arabian Attic Aztec Tōnalpōhualli Xiuhpōhualli Babylonian Bulgar Byzantine Cappadocian Celtic Cham Culāsakaraj Coligny Egyptian Enoch Florentine French Republican Germanic Greek Hindu Inca Macedonian Maya Haabʼ Tzolkʼin Muisca Pentecontad Pisan Qumran Rapa Nui Roman Rumi Sexagenary Soviet Swedish Turkmen By specialty Holocene anthropological Proleptic Gregorian / Proleptic Julian historiographical Darian Martian Dreamspell New Age Discordian 'Pataphysical Reform proposals Hanke–Henry Permanent International Fixed Pax Positivist Sexagesimal Symmetry454 World Displays and applications Electronic Perpetual Wall Year naming and numbering Terminology Era Epoch Leap year New Year Regnal name Regnal year Year zero Systems Ab urbe condita Anka year Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Lucis Anno Martyrum Anno Mundi Assyrian Before Present Chinese Imperial Chinese Minguo English and British regnal year Hijri year Human (Holocene) Japanese Korean Nirayana system Seleucid Spanish Yugas Satya Treta Dvapara Kali Vietnamese Fictional Discworld ( Discworld ) Greyhawk ( Dungeons & Dragons ) Middle-earth ( The Lord of the Rings ) Stardate ( Star Trek ) List of calendars Category Links to related articles v t e Indian astronomy Astronomers Apastamba Aryabhata I Aryabhata II Vainu Bappu Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Baudhayana Brahmagupta Sandip Chakrabarti Radhagobinda Chandra Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar Amil Kumar Das P. Devadas Gautama Siddha M. K. Das Gupta Jyesthadeva Kamalakara Katyayana Lagadha Lalla Madhava of Sangamagrama Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis Mahavira Manava Jayant Narlikar Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Venkatraman Radhakrishnan J. J. Rawal Megh Nad Saha Jagannatha Samrat Bapudeva Sastri Jai Singh II of Amber Nilakantha Somayaji Sripati Mahendra Suri Govind Swarup Utpala Varahamihira Shankara Variyar Vasistha Yajnavalkya Pathani Samanta Works Aryabhatiya Brahmanas Aitareya Brahmana Shatapatha Brahmana Bṛhat Saṃhitā Ganitagannadi Jyotirmimamsa Shulba Sutras Panchangam Khandakhadyaka Mahādevī Makarandasarini Siddhantas Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Maha-Siddhanta Pancha-Siddhantika Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Rājamṛgāṅka (astronomy book) Romaka Siddhanta Surya Siddhanta Vasishtha Siddhanta Tantrasangraha Treatise on Astrology of the Kaiyuan Era Vākyakaraṇa Vedanga Jyotisha Vedas Atharvaveda Rigveda Yavanajataka Zij Instruments Armillary sphere Astrolabe Celestial globe Compass Cross-staff Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorial sundial Globe Gnomon Mural instrument Quadrant Sextant Sundial Triquetrum Water clock Yantraraja Concepts Axial tilt Azimuth Cardinal direction Celestial equator Celestial sphere Celestial spheres Center of mass Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Geocentrism Geoheliocentrism Globe Gravity Heliocentrism Hindu units of time Jyotiṣa Kali ahargaṇa Kalpa Karana Manvantara Moonlight Nakshatra Nityayoga Parallax Precession Ritu Spherical Earth Sunlight Tithi Vāra Yuga Zodiacal sign Centres Jantar Mantar Jaipur New Delhi Ujjain Varanasi Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Other regions Babylonian astronomy Ancient Greek astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Islamic astronomy Chinese astronomy European astronomy Months of the Vedic calendar Chaitra Vaisakha Jyeshta Aashaadha Shraavana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartik Margashirsha Pausha Maagha Phalguna v t e India topics History Overviews Timeline Years Astronomy Clothing Coinage Economics LGBTQ Linguistics Maritime Mathematics Metallurgy Military Paper currency Postal Science and technology Ancient Stone Age Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic period Mahajanapadas Mauryas Indo-Greek Kingdom Achaemenid conquest of the Indus Valley Indo-Parthian kingdom Kushan Empire Alchon Huns Seleucid–Mauryan war Middle Kingdoms Middle kingdoms Chola Middle Ages Medieval India Hoysala Pala Kakatiya Delhi Sultanate Vijayanagara Early Modern Mughals Marathas European trade Bengal War Late modern Colonial Princely state East India Company Plassey 1857 rebellion British Raj Railways Economy Army Commander-in-Chief Zamindari Bengal Renaissance Political reforms Partition of Bengal Independence movement 1943 famine World War II Partition Republic Integration Non-Aligned Movement Five-Year Plans Sino-Indian War Indo-Pakistani wars Green Revolution White Revolution Naxal Insurgency Smiling Buddha Space programme The Emergency Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) Contemporary History of India (1947–present) Economic liberalisation Pokhran-II COVID-19 pandemic Geography Geology Fossil Parks Geology of India Indian Plate Heritage National Geological Monuments of India Sacred groves of India Sacred mountains of India Sacred rivers of India Stones of India Environment Biogeographic classification Biosphere reserves Climate Climate change Earthquakes Ecoregions Environmental issues Fauna Forests Flora Geology National parks Protected areas Wildlife sanctuaries Landforms Beaches Canals Coasts Desert ECZ Extreme points Glaciers Highest point by states Islands Lakes Mountains Mountain passes Plains Indo-Gangetic Eastern coastal Western coastal Rivers Valleys Volcanoes Waterfalls Regions Central East North Northwest Northeast South Southwest Southeast West Subdivisions Autonomous administrative divisions Borders Towns Cities Districts Municipalities States and union territories See also National monuments of India National parks of India Nature worship in Indian-origin religions World Heritage Sites in India Culture of India History of India Tourism in India Politics Government Agencies Energy policy Foreign relations Parliament Lok Sabha Rajya Sabha President Vice President Prime Minister Union Council of Ministers Civil Services Cabinet Secretary State governments State legislative assemblies State legislative councils Governors, Lieutenant Governors and Administrators Chief Ministers Chief Secretaries Law Constitution Penal Code Fundamental rights, principles and duties Human rights Supreme Court Chief Justice High Courts District Courts Enforcement Federal Border Security Force (BSF) Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) National Security Guard (NSG) Railway Protection Force (RPF) Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) Special Protection Group (SPG) Intelligence Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D) Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) Enforcement Directorate (ED) Intelligence Bureau (IB) Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC) Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) National Investigation Agency (NIA) Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW) Military Army Navy Air Force Politics Censorship Citizenship Elections Democracy Nationalism Political parties Reservations Scandals Scheduled groups Secularism Women in politics Economy Companies BSE SENSEX NIFTY 50 NIFTY Next 50 NIFTY 500 GIFT Nifty Governance Ministry of Finance Finance ministers Ministry of Commerce and Industry Finance Commission Economic Advisory Council Central Statistical Office Securities and Exchange Board of India Enforcement Directorate External debt Foreign trade Foreign direct investment Foreign exchange reserves Remittances Taxation Subsidies Industrial licensing Voluntary guidelines NITI Aayog Make in India Atmanirbhar Bharat Currency Indian rupee Sign History Historical Forex Digital rupee Coinage Paisa Reserve Bank of India Governor Mint Inflation Financial services Banking Insurance Multi Commodity Exchange Bullion BSE NSE India INX History COVID-19 impact Economic development Liberalisation Licence Raj Green revolution Government initiatives Numbering system People By net worth Demography Income Poverty Labour law Pensions EPFO NPS PPF States Andhra Pradesh Assam Bihar Delhi Goa Gujarat Haryana Himachal Pradesh Jammu and Kashmir Jharkhand Karnataka Kerala Ladakh Madhya Pradesh Maharashtra Mizoram Odisha Punjab Rajasthan Tamil Nadu Telangana Uttarakhand Uttar Pradesh West Bengal Sectors Agriculture Livestock Fishing Automotive Chemical Construction Defence Education Energy Electricity Nuclear Oil and gas Solar Wind Electronics and semiconductor Entertainment Forestry Gambling Healthcare Hospitals Information technology Media Cinema FM Radio Television Printing Mining Coal Iron and Steel Pharmaceuticals Pulp and paper Retail Science and technology Biotechnology Space Telecommunications Textiles Tourism Transport Aviation Civil Ports Rail Roads Electricity Water Power Regulator IRDAI RBI SEBI IBBI PFRDA Other NCLT NCLAT BIFR IBBI IBC SARFESI Act Income Tax Act Companies Act Banking Act Insurance Act FEMA Mumbai Consensus Society and culture Society Caste system Corruption Crime Demographics Indians Education Universities in India Medical colleges in India Law colleges in India Engineering colleges in India Ethnic relations Health Languages Life expectancy Literacy Poverty Prisons Religion Socio-economic issues Standard of living Water supply and sanitation Women Sexuality Youth Culture Arts and entertainment Architecture Blogging Cinema Comics Webcomics Cuisine wine Dance Dress Folklore Festivals Literature Media television Martial arts Music Painting Physical culture Public holidays Sculpture tallest Sport Traditional v t e Astronomy Outline History Timeline Astronomer Astronomical symbols Astronomical object Glossary ... in space Astronomy by Manner Amateur Observational Sidewalk Space telescope Celestial subject Galactic / Extragalactic Local system Solar EM methods Radio Submillimetre Infrared ( Far-infrared ) Visible-light (optical) Ultraviolet X-ray History Gamma-ray Other methods Neutrino Cosmic rays Gravitational radiation High-energy Radar Spherical Multi-messenger Culture Australian Aboriginal Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Greek Hebrew Indian Inuit Maya Medieval Islamic Persian Serbian folk Tibetan Optical telescopes List Category Extremely large telescope Extremely Large Telescope Gran Telescopio Canarias Hale Telescope Hubble Space Telescope Keck Observatory Large Binocular Telescope Southern African Large Telescope Very Large Telescope Related Archaeoastronomy Astrobiology Astrochemistry Astroinformatics Astrology and astronomy Astrometry Astronomers Monument Astroparticle physics Astrophysics Astrotourism Binoculars Constellation IAU Cosmogony Photometry Planetarium Planetary geology Physical cosmology Quantum cosmology List of astronomers French Medieval Islamic Russian Women Telescope X-ray telescope history lists Zodiac Category Commons v t e Science and technology in India Architecture Astronomy Cartography Coinage Logic Mathematics National calendar Engineering History Inventions and discoveries Maritime history Military Measurement systems Metallurgy Education Higher education Research institutes Supercomputing Science museums Sectors Auto Biotechnology Chemical High-speed rail IT Software Nuclear power Technology Pharmaceuticals Renewable energy Telecommunications 4G People Engineers Inventors Nobel laureates Science writers Scientists Technology writers Institutes and programs Ministry of Science and Technology National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research ISRO DRDO Council of Scientific and Industrial Research Category Commons v t e Days and months of the Hindu calendar Days Pratipada Dvitiya Tritiya Chaturthi Panchami Shashthi Saptami Ashtami Navami Dashami Ekadashi Dvadashi Trayodashi Chaturdashi Amavasya Purnima Months Lunar Chaitra Vaishakha Jyeshtha Ashadha Shravana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartika Margashirsha (Agrahayana) Pausha Magha Phalguna Adhika-masa Solar Meṣa Vṛṣabha Mithuna Karkaṭa Siṃha Kanya Tulā Vṛścika Dhanu Makara Kumbha Mīna NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐jqgpb
Cached time: 20250816154037
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.569 seconds
Real time usage: 0.824 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1858/1000000
Revision size: 13634/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 381037/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 102697/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 85489/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.315/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18063868/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  534.663      1 -total
 57.00%  304.756     16 Template:Navbox
 46.28%  247.438      1 Template:Navboxes
 30.10%  160.954      1 Template:Indian_astronomy
 28.70%  153.447      2 Template:IAST
 28.33%  151.445      2 Template:Transliteration
 25.61%  136.905      1 Template:Reflist
 18.59%   99.384      5 Template:Cite_book
 16.60%   88.765      1 Template:Calendars
  7.83%   41.887      1 Template:India_topics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:75699590:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816154037 and revision id 1267180558. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nityayoga&oldid=1267180558 " Categories : Calendars Units of time Hindu astronomy Astronomy in India History of astronomy This page was last edited on 4 January 2025, at 00:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nityayoga Add languages Add topic

