Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 In art 3 In fiction 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Faun 38 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Italiano Latina Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Creature from Greek and Roman mythology For other uses, see Faun (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Fawn (a young deer ).

A faun, as painted by Hungarian painter Pál Szinyei Merse in 1867 A drawing of a Faun.

The faun ( Latin : Faunus , pronounced [ˈfäu̯nʊs̠] ; Ancient Greek : φαῦνος , romanized : phaûnos , pronounced [pʰâu̯nos] ) is a half- human and half- goat mythological creature appearing in Greek and Roman mythology .

Originally fauns of Roman mythology were ghosts ( genii ) of rustic places, lesser versions of their chief, the god Faunus . Before their conflation with Greek satyrs , they and Faunus were represented as naked men (e.g. the Barberini Faun ). Later fauns became copies of the satyrs of Greek mythology, who themselves were originally shown as part-horse rather than part-goat.

By the Renaissance , fauns were depicted as two-footed creatures with the horns, legs, and tail of a goat and the head, torso, and arms of a human; they are often depicted with pointed ears. These late-form mythological creatures borrowed their look from the satyrs, who in turn borrowed their look from the god Pan of the Greek pantheon. They were symbols of peace and fertility, and their Greek chieftain, Silenus , was a minor deity of Greek mythology.

[ 1 ] Origins [ edit ] Nymph and Faun (cast in lead) in the National Museum of Scotland , Edinburgh Romans believed fauns stirred fear in men traveling in lonely, faraway or wild places. They were also capable of guiding men in need, as in the fable of The Satyr and the Traveller , in the title of which Latin authors substituted the word Faunus . Fauns and satyrs were originally quite different creatures: whereas late-period fauns are half-man and half-goat, satyrs originally were depicted as stocky, hairy, ugly dwarves or woodwoses , with the ears and tails of horses. Satyrs also were more woman-loving than fauns, and fauns were rather foolish where satyrs tended to be sly.

Ancient Roman mythological belief included a god named Faunus often associated with bewitched woods, and conflated with the Greek god Pan [ 2 ] [ 3 ] and a goddess named Fauna who were goat people .

In art [ edit ] The Barberini Faun (located in the Glyptothek in Munich , Germany ) is a Hellenistic marble statue from about 200 BCE, found in the Mausoleum of the Emperor Hadrian (the Castel Sant'Angelo ) and installed at Palazzo Barberini by Cardinal Maffeo Barberini (later Pope Urban VIII ).

Gian Lorenzo Bernini restored and refinished the statue.

[ 4 ] The House of the Faun in Pompei, dating from the 2nd century BCE, was so named because of the dancing faun statue that was the centerpiece of the large garden. The original now resides in the National Museum in Naples and a copy stands in its place.

[ 5 ] The French symbolist Stéphane Mallarmé 's well-known masterpiece L'après-midi d'un faune (published in 1876) describes the sensual experiences of a faun who has just woken up from his afternoon sleep and discusses his encounters with several nymphs during the morning in a dreamlike monologue.

[ 6 ] The composer Claude Debussy based his symphonic poem Prélude à l'après-midi d'un faune (1894) [ 7 ] on the poem, which also served as the scenario for a ballet entitled L'après-midi d'un faune (or Afternoon of a Faun ) choreographed to Debussy's score in 1912 by Vaslav Nijinsky .

Barberini Faun ( Glyptothek , Munich) c.

200 BCE Statue of a faun; Vatican , Brooklyn Museum Archives, Goodyear Archival Collection Fauns in a wooded landscape. The second version of a composition by Bril from 1620 now in the City Art Gallery in Bradford. The figures have been attributed to Pietro Paolo Bonzi ( c.

1575–1636 ) Ivory Faun by Baron Triqueti, c.

1860 Faun and goat, Ludwig Knaus ( c.

1868 ).

Sleeping Diana Watched by Two Fauns, 1877–1885, by Arnold Böcklin .

Faun by Wilhelm von Gloeden c.

1895 Maenad and Fauns, 1902–1912, by Isobel Lilian Gloag .

Young Faun, 1902, by Franz Stuck .

In fiction [ edit ] Faun (satyr) of Praxiteles in the Capitoline Museum , Rome Nathaniel Hawthorne 's  (1860) romance The Marble Faun is set in Italy, and was said to have been inspired by his viewing the Faun of Praxiteles in the Capitoline Museum .

[ 8 ] In H.G. Wells ' (1895) The Time Machine , in the year 802,701 CE, while exploring the far future, the Time Traveller sees "a statue – a faun, or some such figure, minus the head." [ 9 ] Mr. Tumnus , in C. S. Lewis 's The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe (1949), is a faun. Lewis said that the famous The Chronicles of Narnia story all came to him from a single picture he had in his head of a faun carrying an umbrella and parcels through a snowy wood. In the film series , fauns are distinct from satyrs, which are more goat-like in form.

In Lolita , the protagonist is attracted to pubescent girls whom he dubs "nymphets" ; "faunlets" are the male equivalent.

In the 1981 film My Dinner with Andre , it is related how fauns befriend and take a mathematician to meet Pan .

In Guillermo del Toro 's 2006 film El Laberinto del Fauno ( Pan's Labyrinth ), a faun guides the film's protagonist, Ofelia, to a series of tasks, which lead her to a wondrous netherworld.

In Rick Riordan 's The Son of Neptune (2011), the character Don is a faun. In the book, several fauns appear, begging for money. Due to his memory of the Greek satyrs, Percy Jackson feels like there should be more to fauns. Also, in the prequel to The Son of Neptune , The Lost Hero , Jason Grace calls Gleeson Hedge a faun upon learning that he is a satyr. In the third instalment in the series, The Mark of Athena , Frank Zhang calls Hedge a faun.

[ citation needed ] In The Goddess Within , a visionary fiction novel written by Iva Kenaz, the main heroine falls in love with a faun.

In the Spyro video game series, Elora is a faun from Avalar, who helps Spyro the dragon navigate the world around him.

In Carnival Row , fauns or ' pucks ' are one of the mythical creatures that are part of the series.

See also [ edit ] Media related to Fauns at Wikimedia Commons Baphomet Centaur Cernunnos Faunus Glaistig Goatman (urban legend) Khnum Kinnara Krampus Minotaur Pan (god) Puck (mythology) Satyr Se'irim Silvanus (mythology) Yaksha References [ edit ] ^ Canadian Oxford Dictionary (2nd ed.). Oxford University Press. 2004. p. 541.

^ "Phaunos" . Greek Mythology.

Theoi.com . Retrieved 2014-06-23 .

^ "faun (mythical character)" .

Encyclopaedia Britannica . Retrieved 2017-09-04 .

^ Barberini Faun . Introduction to Greece lecture 34 (image).

University of Texas . Archived from the original on 2012-10-20 . Retrieved 2014-06-23 .

^ Dancing faun statuette .

Edgar L. Owen, Ltd. (gallery) (image) . Retrieved 2022-10-22 .

^ Mallarmé, S.

(n.d.) [1876].

L'après-midi d'un faune . Translated by Fry, Roger . Retrieved 2022-10-22 – via angelfire.com.

^ composer Claude Debussy , Leopold Stokowski conducting the London Symphony Orchestra (16 May 2009).

Debussy – Prelude to the Afternoon of a Faun (orchestral audio recording illustrated with images of classical paintings) – via YouTube.

^ "Online discussion of The Marble Faun (1860) and its connection with the statue" . English Department. San Louis Obispo, CA: California Polytechnical University. Archived from the original on 2011-09-27.

^ Wells, H.G.

(1961) [1895].

The Time Machine (reprint ed.). New York, NY: Dolphin Books . p. 246.

v t e Ancient Roman religion and mythology Deities ( Dii Consentes ) Agenoria Angerona Anna Perenna Apollo Aurora Bellona Bona Dea Carmenta Castor and Pollux Ceres Cloacina Cupid Dea Dia Diana Dies Dīs Pater Egeria Fauna Faunus Flora Genius Hercules Janus Juno Jupiter Lares Lares Familiares Liber Libertas Luna Mars Mercury Minerva Neptune Nox Ops Orcus Penates Pluto Pomona Priapus Proserpina Quirinus Salacia Saturn Silvanus Sol Summanus Venus Veritas Vesta Vertumnus Vulcan Abstract deities Abundantia Aequitas Aeternitas Africa Annona Averruncus Bonus Eventus Caelus Concordia Feronia Fides Fortuna Fontus Laverna Pax Pietas Roma Salus Securitas Spes Tranquillitas Terra Victoria Legendary figures Aeneas Rhea Silvia Romulus and Remus Numa Pompilius Tullus Hostilius Servius Tullius Ancus Marcius Lucius Tarquinius Priscus Lucius Tarquinius Superbus Kings of Alba Longa Hersilia Legendary beings She-wolf Barnacle goose Texts Virgil Aeneid Ovid Fasti Metamorphoses Propertius Varro Res divinae Sibylline Books Apuleius The Golden Ass Concepts and practices Festivals Interpretatio graeca Imperial cult Charity Palladium Theology of victory Pomerium Temples Capitolium Cella Celtic Philosophy Cynicism Epicureanism Neoplatonism Peripateticism Pythagoreanism Stoicism Events Golden Bough Founding of Rome Natale di Roma Rape of the Sabine Women Battle of Lacus Curtius Objects Gubernaculum Parabiago Plate Pignora imperii Variations Gallo-Roman Mysteries Cybele Isis Mithraism See also Classical mythology Decline Persecution Etruscan religion Glossary Greek mythology Myth and ritual Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Faun&oldid=1299405353 " Categories : Fauns Mythological caprids Legendary creatures in Roman mythology Mythological human–animal hybrids Forest spirits Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Pages with Latin IPA Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages with Ancient Greek (to 1453) IPA Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2012 Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using div col with small parameter This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 05:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Faun 38 languages Add topic

