Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Fashion designers Toggle Fashion designers subsection 1.1 Structure 1.2 Designing a garment 2 Technology within fashion 3 History 4 Types of fashion Toggle Types of fashion subsection 4.1 Haute couture 4.2 Ready-to-wear (prêt-à-porter) 4.3 Mass market 5 Income 6 Fashion industry Toggle Fashion industry subsection 6.1 United States 6.2 Belgium 6.3 United Kingdom 6.4 France 6.5 Spain 6.6 Germany 6.7 India 6.8 Italy 6.9 Japan 6.10 China 6.11 Soviet Union 6.12 Switzerland 6.13 Mexico 7 Fashion design terms 8 See also 9 References 10 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Fashion design 40 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bikol Central Български Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Lëtzebuergesch Македонски مصرى Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Português Română Shqip සිංහල Simple English Српски / srpski తెలుగు ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art of applying design and aesthetics to clothing and accessories Fashion designers in 1974 in Dresden.

Fashion design is the art of applying design , aesthetics , clothing construction, and natural beauty to clothing and its accessories . It is influenced by diverse cultures and different trends and has varied over time and place. "A fashion designer creates clothing, including dresses, suits, pants, and skirts, and accessories like shoes and handbags, for consumers. They can specialize in clothing, accessory, or jewelry design, or may work in more than one of these areas." [ 1 ] Fashion designers typically use a runway of models to showcase their work.

Fashion designers [ edit ] Fashion designers work in a variety of ways when designing their pieces and accessories such as rings, bracelets, necklaces, earrings and clothes. Due to the time required to put a garment out on the market, designers must anticipate changes to consumer desires . Fashion designers are responsible for creating looks for individual garments, involving shape, color, fabric, trimming, and more.

[ 2 ] Fashion designers attempt to design clothes that are functional as well as aesthetically pleasing. They consider who is likely to wear a garment and the situations in which it will be worn, and they work with a wide range of materials, colors, patterns , and styles. Though most clothing worn for everyday wear falls within a narrow range of conventional styles, unusual garments are usually sought for special occasions such as evening wear or party dresses .

Some clothes are made specifically for an individual, as in the case of haute couture or bespoke tailoring . Today, most clothing is designed for the mass market , especially casual and everyday wear, which are commonly known as ready to wear or fast fashion .

Structure [ edit ] There are different lines of work for designers in the fashion industry. Fashion designers who work full-time for a fashion house , as 'in-house designers, create designs owned by the company and may either work independently or as a part of a design team.  Freelance designers who work for themselves sell their designs to fashion houses, directly to shops, or to clothing manufacturers. There are quite a few fashion designers who choose to set up their labels, which offers them full control over their designs. Others are self-employed and design for individual clients. Other high-end fashion designers cater to specialty stores or high-end fashion department stores. These designers create original garments, as well as those that follow established fashion trends. Most fashion designers, however, work for apparel manufacturers, creating designs of men's, women's, and children's fashions for the mass market. Large designer brands that have a 'name' as their brand such as Abercrombie & Fitch , Justice , or Juicy are likely to be designed by a team of individual designers under the direction of a design director.

Designing a garment [ edit ] Garment design includes components of "color, texture, space, lines, pattern, silhouette, shape, proportion, balance, emphasis, rhythm, and harmony".

[ 3 ] All of these elements come together to design a garment by creating visual interest for consumers.

Fashion designers work in various ways, some start with a vision in their head and later move into drawing it on paper or on a computer, while others go directly into draping fabric onto a dress form, also known as a mannequin. The design process is unique to the designer and it is rather intriguing to see the various steps that go into the process. Designing a garment starts with patternmaking . The process begins with creating a sloper or base pattern. The sloper will fit the size of the model a designer is working with or a base can be made by utilizing standard size charting.

Three major manipulations within patternmaking include dart manipulation, contouring, and added fullness.

[ 4 ] Dart manipulation allows for a dart to be moved on a garment in various places but does not change the overall fit of the garment. Contouring allows for areas of a garment to fit closer to areas of the torso such as the bust or shoulders. Added fullness increases the length or width of a pattern to change the frame as well as fit of the garment. The fullness can be added on one side, unequal, or equally to the pattern.

A designer may choose to work with certain apps that can help connect all their ideas together and expand their thoughts to create a cohesive design. When a designer is completely satisfied with the fit of the toile (or muslin), they will consult a professional pattern maker who will then create the finished, working version of the pattern out of paper or using a computer program. Finally, a sample garment is made up and tested on a model to make sure it is an operational outfit. Fashion design is expressive, the designers create art that may be functional or non-functional.

Technology within fashion [ edit ] Over the years, there has been an increase in the use of technology within fashion design.

Iris van Herpen , a Dutch designer, incorporated 3D printing in her Crystallization collection.

[ 5 ] Software can aid designers in the product development stage. Designers can use artificial intelligence and virtual reality to prototype clothing.

[ 5 ] 3D modeling within software allows for initial sampling and development stages for partnerships with suppliers before the garments are produced.

[ 6 ] . Product managers can use product lifecycle management software to develop multiple items to multiple product lines to assist in planning, assigning, and tracking tasks from concept to completion.

History [ edit ] The Chéruit salon on Place Vendôme in Paris, 1910 Main article: History of fashion design Modern Western fashion design is often considered to have started in the 19th century with Charles Frederick Worth who was the first designer to have his label sewn into the garments that he created, although tailors had sewn in labels with their name since at least 1828. Before the former draper set up his maison couture (fashion house) in Paris , clothing design and creation of the garments were handled largely by anonymous seamstresses. At the time high fashion descended from what was popularly worn at royal courts. Worth's success was such that he was able to dictate to his customers what they should wear, instead of following their lead as earlier dressmakers had done. The term couturier was in fact first created in order to describe him. While all articles of clothing from any time period are studied by academics as costume design , only clothing created after 1858 is considered fashion design.

[ 7 ] It was during this period that many design houses began to hire artists to sketch or paint designs for garments. Rather than going straight into manufacturing, the images were shown to clients to gain approval, which saved time and money for the designer. If the client liked their design, the patrons commissioned the garment from the designer, and it was produced for the client in the fashion house. This designer-patron construct launched designers sketching their work rather than putting the completed designs on models.

Types of fashion [ edit ] Garments produced by clothing manufacturers fall into three main categories, although these may be split up into additional, different types.

Haute couture [ edit ] Main article: Haute couture Until the 1950s, fashion clothing was predominately designed and manufactured on a made-to-measure or haute couture basis ( French for high-sewing), with each garment being created for a specific client. A couture garment is made to order for an individual customer, and is usually made from high-quality, expensive fabric, sewn with extreme attention to detail and finish, often using time-consuming, hand-executed techniques. Look and fit take priority over the cost of materials and the time it takes to make.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Due to the high cost of each garment, haute couture makes little direct profit for the fashion houses, but is important for prestige and publicity.

[ 10 ] Ready-to-wear (prêt-à-porter) [ edit ] Main article: Ready-to-wear Ready-to-wear, or prêt-à-porter, clothes are a cross between haute couture and mass market. They are not made for individual customers, but great care is taken in the choice and cut of the fabric. Clothes are made in small quantities to guarantee exclusivity, so they are rather expensive. Ready-to-wear collections are usually presented by fashion houses each season during a period known as fashion week or fashion month. This takes place on a citywide basis and occurs twice a year. The main seasons of Fashion Week include spring/summer, fall/winter, resort, swim, and bridal.

Half-way garments are an alternative to ready-to-wear, "off-the-peg", or prêt-à-porter fashion.  Half-way garments are intentionally unfinished pieces of clothing that encourage co-design between the "primary designer" of the garment, and what would usually be considered, the passive "consumer".

[ 11 ] This differs from ready-to-wear fashion, as the consumer is able to participate in the process of making and co-designing their clothing.  During the Make{able} workshop, Hirscher and Niinimaki found that personal involvement in the garment-making process created a meaningful "narrative" for the user, which established a person-product attachment and increased the sentimental value of the final product.

[ 11 ] Otto von Busch also explores half-way garments and fashion co-design in his thesis, "Fashion-able, Hacktivism and engaged Fashion Design".

[ 12 ] Mass market [ edit ] Main article: Mass market Currently, the fashion industry relies more on mass-market sales. The mass market caters for a wide range of customers, producing ready-to-wear garments using trends set by the famous names in fashion. They often wait around a season to make sure a style is going to catch on before producing their versions of the original look. To save money and time, they use cheaper fabrics and simpler production techniques which can easily be done by machines. The end product can, therefore, be sold much more cheaply.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] There is a type of design called "kutch" originated from the German word kitschig , meaning "trashy" or "not aesthetically pleasing".

Kitsch can also refer to "wearing or displaying something that is therefore no longer in fashion".

[ 16 ] Income [ edit ] The median annual wages for salaried fashion designers was $79,290 in May 2023, approximately $38.12 per hour. The middle 50 percent earned an average of 76,700. The lowest 10 percent earned $37,090 and the highest 10 percent earned $160,850.

[ 17 ] The highest number of employment lies within Apparel , Piece Goods , and Notions Merchant Wholesalers with a percentage of 5.4. The average is 7,820 based on employment. The lowest employment is within Apparel Knitting Mills at .46% of the industry employed, which averages to 30 workers within the specific specialty.

[ 17 ] In 2016, 23,800 people were counted as fashion designers in the United States.

[ 18 ] Geographically, the largest employment state of Fashion designers is New York with an employment of 7,930.

[ 17 ] New York is considered a hub for fashion designers due to a large percentage of luxury designers and brands.

Fashion industry [ edit ] Men pulling carts of women's clothing in Garment District , New York, 1955 Fashion today is a global industry, and most major countries have a fashion industry. Seven countries have established an international reputation in fashion: the United States , France , Italy , United Kingdom , Japan , Germany and Belgium . The "big four" fashion capitals of the fashion industry are New York City , Paris , Milan , and London .

United States [ edit ] Main article: Fashion in the United States Fashion show at a fashion designing college, US, 2015 The United States is home to the largest, wealthiest, and most multi-faceted fashion industry. Most fashion houses in the United States are based in New York City , with a high concentration centered in the Garment District neighborhood. On the US west coast, there is also to a lesser extent a significant number of fashion houses in Los Angeles , where a substantial percentage of high fashion clothing manufactured in the United States is actually made.

Miami has also emerged as a new fashion hub, especially in regards to swimwear and other beach-oriented fashion. A semi-annual event held every February and September, New York Fashion Week is the oldest of the four major fashion weeks held throughout the world.

Parsons The New School for Design , located in the Greenwich Village neighborhood of Lower Manhattan in New York City, is considered one of the top fashion schools in the world. There are numerous fashion magazines published in the United States and distributed to a global readership. Examples include Vogue , Harper's Bazaar , and Cosmopolitan .

American fashion design is highly diverse, reflecting the enormous ethnic diversity of the population, but is largely dominated by a clean-cut, urban, hip aesthetic, and often favors a more casual style, reflecting the athletic , health-conscious lifestyles of the suburban and urban middle classes. The annual Met Gala ceremony in Manhattan is widely regarded as the world's most prestigious haute couture fashion event and is a venue where fashion designers and their creations are celebrated.

Social media is also a place where fashion is presented most often. Some influencers are paid huge amounts of money to promote a product or clothing item, where the business hopes many viewers will buy the product off the back of the advertisement. Instagram is the most popular platform for advertising, but Facebook, Snapchat, Twitter and other platforms are also used.

[ 19 ] In New York, the LGBT fashion design community contributes very significantly to promulgating fashion trends, and drag celebrities have developed a profound influence upon New York Fashion Week .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Prominent American brands and designers include Calvin Klein , Ralph Lauren , Coach , Nike , Vans , Marc Jacobs , Tommy Hilfiger , DKNY , Tom Ford , Caswell-Massey , Michael Kors , Levi Strauss and Co.

, Estée Lauder , Revlon , Kate Spade , Alexander Wang , Vera Wang , Victoria's Secret , Tiffany and Co.

, Converse , Oscar de la Renta , John Varvatos , Anna Sui , Prabal Gurung , Bill Blass , Halston , Carhartt , Brooks Brothers , Stuart Weitzman , Diane von Furstenberg , J. Crew , American Eagle Outfitters , Steve Madden , Abercrombie and Fitch , Juicy Couture , Thom Browne , Guess , Supreme , and The Timberland Company .

Belgium [ edit ] In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Belgian fashion designers brought a new fashion image that mixed East and West, and brought a highly individualised, personal vision on fashion. Well known Belgian designers are the Antwerp Six : Ann Demeulemeester , Dries Van Noten , Dirk Bikkembergs , Dirk Van Saene , Walter Van Beirendonck and Marina Yee, as well as Martin Margiela , Raf Simons , Kris Van Assche , Bruno Pieters , Anthony Vaccarello .

[ 22 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Main article: British fashion British fashion draws on the diverse cultural traditions, craftsmanship, and materials of England , Scotland , Wales , and Northern Ireland , and is celebrated for its diversity, creativity, and historical depth. It has played a significant role in shaping global trends; from the formal tailoring of Savile Row to the rebellious subcultures of mod and punk .

In the late-18th and 19th centuries London became a hub for refined tailoring and is now recognized as the UK's fashion capital. While interest in heritage styles, such as British country clothing , continues to grow globally, [ 23 ] modern priorities such as sustainability , gender fluidity , inclusivity , and slow fashion have shaped new expressions of British style; often blending heritage with innovation.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Some traditional brands, like Lyle & Scott , have refocused their appeal towards youth and urban markets, paving the way for a new generation of designers and labels such as A-COLD-WALL* , who quickly gained international recognition, have established London's reputation as a centre for streetwear .

[ 26 ] London Fashion Week is a major global event, showcasing both established names and emerging designers from the UK’s influential art and fashion schools.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Well-known British designers include Thomas Burberry , Alfred Dunhill , Paul Smith , Vivienne Westwood , Stella McCartney , Jimmy Choo , John Galliano , John Richmond , Alexander McQueen , Matthew Williamson , Gareth Pugh , Hussein Chalayan and Neil Barrett .

France [ edit ] Main article: French fashion Chanel Haute Couture Fall-Winter 2011–2012 Fashion Show Most French fashion houses are in Paris , which is the capital of French fashion . Traditionally, French fashion is chic and stylish, defined by its sophistication, cut, and smart accessories. French fashion is internationally acclaimed.

Spain [ edit ] Madrid and Barcelona are the main fashion centers in Spain. Spanish fashion is often more conservative and traditional but also more 'timeless' than other fashion cultures. Spaniards are known not to take great risks when dressing.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Nonetheless, many of the fashion brands and designers coming from Spain.

The most notable luxury houses are Loewe and Balenciaga . Famous designers include Manolo Blahnik , Elio Berhanyer , Cristóbal Balenciaga , Paco Rabanne , Adolfo Domínguez , Manuel Pertegaz , Jesús del Pozo , Felipe Varela and Agatha Ruiz de la Prada .

Spain is also home to large fashion brands such as Zara , Massimo Dutti , Bershka , Pull&Bear , Mango , Desigual , Pepe Jeans and Camper .

Germany [ edit ] Main article: German fashion Berlin is the centre of fashion in Germany (prominently displayed at Berlin Fashion Week ), while Düsseldorf holds Europe's largest fashion trade fairs with Igedo . Other important centres of the scene are Munich , Hamburg , and Cologne .

German fashion is known for its elegant lines as well as unconventional young designs and the great variety of styles.

India [ edit ] Most of the Indian fashion houses are in Mumbai, Lakme Fashion Week is considered one of the premier fashion events in the country.

[ 31 ] Lakme Fashion Week in India takes place twice a year and is held in the populous city of Mumbai. The first show occurs during April featuring summer collections. The second show takes place in August to showcase the winter collection.

Lakme , a cosmetic brand for Indian women, hosts the event. This fashion week started in 1999 and originally partnered with the FDCI , Fashion Design Council of India then later  switched to a sponsorship with Lakme.

[ 31 ] Italy [ edit ] Red carpet fashion : Italian actors Gabriel Garko and Laura Torrisi wearing designer formal wear at Venice Film Festival , 2009 Main article: Italian fashion Milan is Italy's fashion capital. Most of the older Italian couturiers are in Rome . However, Milan and Florence are the Italian fashion capitals, and it is the exhibition venue for their collections. Italian fashion features casual and glamorous elegance. In Italy, Milan Fashion Week takes place twice a year in February and September. Milan Fashion week puts fashion in the spotlight and celebrates it in the heart of Milan with fashion lovers, buyers and media.

Japan [ edit ] Most Japanese fashion houses are in Tokyo which is home to Tokyo Fashion Week , Asia's largest fashion week. The Japanese look is loose and unstructured (often resulting from complicated cutting), colors tend to the sombre and subtle, and richly textured fabrics. Famous Japanese designers include Kenzo Takada , Issey Miyake , Yohji Yamamoto and Rei Kawakubo .

China [ edit ] Chinese clothing has historically been associated with lower quality both inside and outside China, leading to a stigma on Chinese brands. Due to government censorship, Chinese citizens were only able to access fashion magazines in the 1990s.

[ 32 ] However, as more and more Chinese designers matriculate from the world's top fashion schools, Chinese designers such as Shushu/Tong and Rui Zhou have made their way into the world's top fashion weeks, and Shanghai has become a fashion hub in China.

[ 33 ] [ 32 ] In the early 2020s, Gen Z shoppers pioneered the guochao ( Chinese : 国潮 ; pinyin : Guó cháo ) movement , a trend of preferring homegrown designers which incorporate aspects of Chinese history and culture.

[ 33 ] Hong Kong clothing brand Shanghai Tang 's design concept is inspired by Chinese clothing and set out to rejuvenate Chinese fashion of the 1920s and 30s, with a modern twist of the 21st century and its usage of bright colours.

[ 34 ] Additionally, a revival in interest in traditional Han clothing has led to interest in haute couture clothing with historical Chinese details, particularly around Chinese New Year .

[ 35 ] Soviet Union [ edit ] Main article: Fashion in the Soviet Union Fashion in the Soviet Union largely followed general trends of the Western world. However, the state's socialist ideology consistently moderated and influenced these trends. In addition, shortages of consumer goods meant that the general public did not have ready access to pre-made fashion.

Switzerland [ edit ] Most of the Swiss fashion houses are in Zürich .

[ 36 ] The Swiss look is casual elegant and luxurious with a slight touch of quirkiness. Additionally, it has been greatly influenced by the dance club scene.

Mexico [ edit ] In the development of Mexican indigenous dress, the fabrication was determined by the materials and resources that are available in specific regions, impacting the "fabric, shape and construction of a people's clothing".

[ 37 ] Textiles were created from plant fibers including cotton and agave. Class status differentiated what fabric was worn. Mexican dress was influenced by geometric shapes to create the silhouettes. Huipil a blouse characterized by a "loose, sleeveless tunic made of two or three joined webs of cloth sewn lengthwise" [ 37 ] is an important historical garment, often seen today. After the Spanish Conquest, traditional Mexican clothing shifted to take a Spanish resemblance.

Mexican indigenous groups rely on specific embroidery and colors to differentiate themselves from each other.

[ 38 ] Mexican Pink is a significant color to the identity of Mexican art and design and general spirit. The term "Rosa Mexicano" as described by Ramón Valdiosera was established by prominent figures such as Dolores del Río and designer Ramón Val in New York.

[ 38 ] When newspapers and magazines such as El Imparcial and El Mundo Ilustrado circulated in Mexico, became a significant movement, as it informed the large cities, such as Mexico City, of European fashions. This encouraged the founding of department stores, changing the existent pace of fashion.

[ 39 ] With access to European fashion and dress, those with high social status relied on adopting those elements to distinguish themselves from the rest. Juana Catarina Romero was a successful entrepreneur and pioneer in this movement.

Fashion design terms [ edit ] A fashion designer conceives garment combinations of line, proportion, color, and texture. While sewing and pattern-making skills are beneficial, they are not a pre-requisite of successful fashion design. Most fashion designers are formally trained or apprenticed.

A technical designer works with the design team and the factories overseas to ensure correct garment construction, appropriate fabric choices and a good fit. The technical designer fits the garment samples on a fit model, and decides which fit and construction changes to make before mass-producing the garment.

A pattern maker ( also referred as pattern master or pattern cutter ) drafts the shapes and sizes of a garment's pieces. This may be done manually with paper and measuring tools or by using a CAD computer software program. Another method is to drape fabric directly onto a dress form. The resulting pattern pieces can be constructed to produce the intended design of the garment and required size. Formal training is usually required for working as a pattern marker.

A tailor makes custom designed garments made to the client's measure; especially suits (coat and trousers, jacket and skirt, et cetera). Tailors usually undergo an apprenticeship or other formal training.

A textile designer designs fabric weaves and prints for clothes and furnishings. Most textile designers are formally trained as apprentices and in school.

A stylist co-ordinates the clothes, jewelry, and accessories used in fashion photography and catwalk presentations. A stylist may also work with an individual client to design a coordinated wardrobe of garments. Many stylists are trained in fashion design, the history of fashion, and historical costume, and have a high level of expertise in the current fashion market and future market trends. However, some simply have a strong aesthetic sense for pulling great looks together.

A fashion buyer selects and buys the mix of clothing available in retail shops, department stores, and chain stores. Most fashion buyers are trained in business and/or fashion studies.

A seamstress sews ready-to-wear or mass-produced clothing by hand or with a sewing machine, either in a garment shop or as a sewing machine operator in a factory. She (or he) may not have the skills to make (design and cut) the garments, or to fit them on a model.

A dressmaker specializes in custom-made women's clothes: day, cocktail, and evening dresses, business clothes and suits, trousseaus, sports clothes, and lingerie.

A fashion forecaster predicts what colours , styles and shapes will be popular ("on-trend") before the garments are on sale in stores.

A model wears and displays clothes at fashion shows and in photographs.

A fit model aids the fashion designer by wearing and commenting on the fit of clothes during their design and pre-manufacture. Fit models need to be a particular size for this purpose.

A fashion journalist writes fashion articles describing the garments presented or fashion trends, for magazines or newspapers.

A fashion photographer produces photographs about garments and other fashion items along with models and stylists for magazines or advertising agencies.

[ 40 ] See also [ edit ] Fashion portal Fashion Fashion design copyright History of western fashion List of fashion designers List of fashion education programs List of fashion topics Met Gala List of individual dresses Runway (fashion) Deconstruction (fashion) Sustainable fashion Textile design Time 100 Western dress codes References [ edit ] ^ McKay, Dawn Rosenberg.

"What Does a Fashion Designer Do?" .

the balance careers . Archived from the original on 2022-07-04 . Retrieved 2021-05-10 .

^ Sterlacci, Francesca.

"What Is a Fashion Designer?" .

Love to Know .

^ Fan, J. (2009), "Psychological comfort of fabrics and garments" , Engineering Apparel Fabrics and Garments , Elsevier, pp.

251– 260, ISBN 978-1-84569-134-9 , retrieved 2024-10-24 ^ McKinney, Ellen Carol; Bye, Elizabeth; LaBat, Karen (November 2012).

"Building patternmaking theory: a case study of published patternmaking practices for pants" .

International Journal of Fashion Design, Technology and Education .

5 (3): 153– 167.

doi : 10.1080/17543266.2012.666269 .

ISSN 1754-3266 .

^ a b "Latest Technology Trends Shaping the Fashion Industry" .

Computools . Retrieved 2024-10-24 .

^ "Introduction: Fashion, Nature and Technology" .

fashionvalues.org . Retrieved 2024-10-24 .

^ "fashion industry | Design, Fashion Shows, Marketing, & Facts" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2020-10-14 .

^ "What is Haute Couture?" .

Haute Couture Hot . HauteCoutureNews.com. Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 13 May 2012 .

^ Pauline Weston Thomas.

"Haute Couture Fashion History" (Article) .

Fashion-Era.com . Retrieved 13 May 2012 .

^ "Haute couture: Making a loss is the height of fashion" .

telegraph.co.uk .

^ a b Hirscher and Niinimaki. Fashion Activism through Participatory Design. 10th European Academy of Design Conference, Crafting the Future, April 2013, Helsinki, Finland.

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/304354045_Fashion_Activism_through_Participatory_Design ^ von Busch, O. Fashion-able, Hacktivism and engaged Fashion Design, Ph.D. Thesis, School of Design and Crafts (HDK), Gothenburg. 2008, https://gupea.ub.gu.se/bitstream/2077/17941/3/gupea_2077_17941_3.pdf .

^ Catherine Valenti (1 May 2012).

"Designers Flock to Mass-Market Retailers" (Article) .

ABC News . Retrieved 13 May 2012 .

^ Sameer Reddy (31 October 2008).

"Out from Underground" (Article) .

The Daily Beast . Newsweek Magazine . Retrieved 13 May 2012 .

^ Stephania Lara (22 June 2010).

"Mass market broached by high-end fashion" .

The Prospector . College Media Network. Archived from the original (Article) on 2 November 2013 . Retrieved 13 May 2012 .

^ Bethan Cole (2 May 2012).

"Kitsch pickings" (Article) .

Financial Times Online: Style . The Financial Times Ltd . Retrieved 13 May 2012 .

^ a b c "Fashion Designers" .

Bureau of Labor Statistics . Retrieved 2024-10-24 .

^ "The Starting Salary Range for a Fashion Designer | Chron.com" . Archived from the original on 2018-09-10 . Retrieved 2018-09-10 .

^ Wetzler, Tiahn (2020). "Social media influencer marketing".

Adjust .

^ Tyler McCall (September 15, 2022).

"Drag Queens Are the New VIPs of Fashion Week" . The CUT, New York magazine . Retrieved September 19, 2022 .

^ Claire, Marie (2023).

"The Black Designers Who Shaped Fashion History" . MSN.com . Retrieved 1 December 2023 .

^ Holgate, Mark, ′How Anthony Vaccarello Is Making Saint Laurent His Own′, (Feb. 13, 2018), Vogue March 2018, https://www.vogue.com/article/anthony-vaccarello-interview-vogue-march-2018-issue , Retrieved 3 March 2018.

^ "Why heritage style is here to stay" . Luxury Lifestyle Magazine . Retrieved 6 July 2025 .

^ Rindfuss, Bryan (30 December 2009).

"Arts: What ought to wear" . San Antionio Current . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "How the 'beauty of fluidity' went mainstream in fashion" . BBC . Retrieved 6 July 2025 .

^ "The Evolution of London's Streetwear Scene – From Mods to Modernity" . Pause . Retrieved 6 July 2025 .

^ Bradford, Julie (2014).

Fashion Journalism . Routledge. p. 129.

ISBN 9781136475368 .

^ Dillon, Susan (2011).

The Fundamentals of Fashion Management . A&C Black. p. 115.

ISBN 9782940411580 .

^ Castiglione, Baldassare (1903).

The Book of the Courtier (PDF) . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. p. 103.

^ "En España se viste muy bien" .

GQ Magazine . December 3, 2018 . Retrieved 2020-01-23 .

^ a b "Lakmé Fashion Week" .

fashionabc . Retrieved 2024-10-24 .

^ a b Kurata, Yoshiko (2019-01-02).

"The Dawn of a New History: SHUSHU/TONG" .

ssense . Retrieved 2024-05-09 .

^ a b Nan, Lisa (2021-07-07).

"Can Shushu/Tong Go Global?" .

Jing Daily . Retrieved 2024-05-09 .

^ Broun, Samantha (6 April 2006).

"Designing a global brand" .

CNN World . Archived from the original on 26 October 2012 . Retrieved 2 June 2012 .

^ Lam, Linzy (2024-03-20).

"How brands can tap the booming Chinese 'old money style' " .

Jing Daily . Retrieved 2024-05-10 .

^ "Zurich labels" .

Zurich labels: Media Information . Zurich Tourism. January 2012 . Retrieved 13 May 2012 .

^ a b Anawalt, Patricia Rieff (2007).

The worldwide history of dress: with over 1000 illustrations, 900 in color . Thames & Hudson.

ISBN 978-0-500-51363-7 .

OCLC 864489266 .

^ a b Valdiosera, Ramón. “Rosa Mexicano: Moda y Marca.” Artes De México, no. 111, 2013, pp. 60–65.

^ Chassen-López, Francie. "The Traje de Tehuana as National Icon: Gender, Ethnicity, and Fashion in Mexico." The Americas, vol. 71 no. 2, 2014, p. 281-314. Project MUSE, doi : 10.1353/tam.2014.0134 ^ Aspers, Patrik (2001).

"A MARKET IN VOGUE Fashion photography in Sweden" .

European Societies .

3 (1): 1– 22.

doi : 10.1080/14616690120046923 .

ISSN 1461-6696 .

S2CID 144948226 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Breward, Christopher, The culture of fashion: a new history of fashionable dress , Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2003, ISBN 978-0-7190-4125-9 Hollander, Anne, Seeing through clothes , Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993, ISBN 978-0-520-08231-1 Hollander, Anne, Sex and suits: the evolution of modern dress , New York: Knopf, 1994, ISBN 978-0-679-43096-4 Hollander, Anne, Feeding the eye: essays , New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1999, ISBN 978-0-374-28201-1 Hollander, Anne, Fabric of vision: dress and drapery in painting , London: National Gallery, 2002, ISBN 978-0-300-09419-0 Kawamura, Yuniya, Fashion-ology: an introduction to Fashion Studies , Oxford and New York: Berg, 2005, ISBN 1-85973-814-1 Lipovetsky, Gilles (translated by Catherine Porter), The empire of fashion: dressing modern democracy , Woodstock: Princeton University Press, 2002, ISBN 978-0-691-10262-7 McDermott, Kathleen, Style for all: why fashion, invented by kings, now belongs to all of us (An illustrated history) , 2010, ISBN 978-0-557-51917-0 — Many hand-drawn color illustrations, extensive annotated bibliography and reading guide Mckay Rosenberg, Dawn, Fashion designer job description: Salary, skills, & more. Retrieved May 10, 2021, from https://www.thebalancecareers.com/fashion-designer-526016 Perrot, Philippe (translated by Richard Bienvenu), Fashioning the bourgeoisie: a history of clothing in the nineteenth century , Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994, ISBN 978-0-691-00081-7 Steele, Valerie, Paris fashion: a cultural history , (2. ed., rev. and updated), Oxford: Berg, 1998, ISBN 978-1-85973-973-0 Steele, Valerie, Fifty years of fashion: new look to now , New Haven: Yale University Press, 2000, ISBN 978-0-300-08738-3 Steele, Valerie, Encyclopedia of clothing and fashion , Detroit: Thomson Gale, 2005 Strijbos, Bram. (2021, May 10). All the news about Milan Fashion week on FashionUnited. Retrieved May 10, 2021, from https://fashionweekweb.com/milan-fashion-week Sterlacci, Francesca. (n.d.). What is a fashion designer? Retrieved May 10, 2021, from https://fashion-history.lovetoknow.com/fashion-clothing-industry/what-is-fashion-designer Wikimedia Commons has media related to Design of fashion .

Wikiversity has learning resources about Fashion Design v t e Fashion articles Index of fashion articles General Environmental impact of fashion Fashion accessory Fashion design Fashion design copyright Fashion matrix Fashion museum Fashion plate Fashion tourism Semiotics of fashion History History of clothing and textiles History of Western fashion History of fashion design Timeline of clothing and textiles technology 19th century 21st century Events Fashion show Fashion week Industry Awards Clothing industry Designer clothing Digital fashion Fashion blog Fashion capital Fashion entrepreneur Fashion editor Fashion forecasting Fashion illustration Fashion influencer Fashion journalism Fashion law Fashion photography Fashion merchandising Fast fashion in China Red carpet fashion Social media in the fashion industry Sweatshop Trickle-up fashion Trickle-down fashion Traditional clothing Ceremonial Court Diplomatic Academic Military Full Mess Service Sailor Combat Folk Western dress codes Formal Morning dress White tie Ball gown Semi-formal Black lounge suit Black tie Evening gown Informal Suit Cocktail dress Pantsuit Religious Christian Jewish Islamic Modest fashion Casual Smart casual British country clothing Business casual Nautical style Chic Cruise collection Preppy Ivy League Mod Sloane Ranger Teddy Boys Young fogey Street fashion Streetwear Hip hop Hippie Hipster Sportswear Athleisure Gorpcore Sportswear fashion Surfwear Ghetto fabulous Bling-bling Vintage fashion Alternative Androgyny Bohemian Emo Fetish Gothic Lolita Queer Skinhead Steampunk Thrift store chic Rocker Greaser Glam Grunge Heavy metal Punk Skate Rockabilly By country American fashion British fashion Canadian fashion Chinese fashion Filipino fashion French fashion German fashion Indian fashion Iranian fashion Israeli fashion Italian fashion History Japanese fashion Nigerian fashion Russian fashion South Korean fashion Swedish fashion Taiwanese fashion Thai fashion Vietnamese clothing Fashion activism Anti-fashion Anti-sweatshop movement Circular fashion Environmental sustainability of vintage fashion Ethical consumerism Fair trade certification Sustainable fashion Slow fashion Textile recycling Trashion Zero-waste fashion Related Androgyny Dandy Effeminacy Fop Macaroni Metrosexual Ballet and fashion Capsule wardrobe Chinoiserie in fashion Dress code Undress Fashion victim Genderless fashion in Japan List of boots List of bra designs List of hat styles List of headgear List of fur headgear List of individual dresses List of shoe styles Music and fashion Tattoo Fashion portal v t e Clothing History Industry Technology Terminology Timeline Headwear List of hat styles List of headgear List of fur headgear Beret Cap baseball flat knit Crown Hat boater bowler fedora homburg top Helmet Hood Kerchief Mask Turban Veil Neckwear Bands Choker Collar Clerical Lavallière Neckerchief Neck gaiter Necktie ascot bolo bow kipper school stock Scarf Tippet Underwear and lingerie Top Bra List of bra designs Camisole Undershirt Bottom Diaper Training pants Leggings Panties Plastic pants Slip Thong Underpants boxer briefs boxer shorts briefs Full Bodysuit, adult Bodysuit, infant Long underwear See-through Teddy Tops Blouse cache-cœur crop top halterneck tube top Cycling Kurta Mantle Shirt dress Henley polo sleeveless T crew neck Sweater cardigan guernsey hoodie jersey polo neck shrug sweater vest twinset Waistcoat Bottoms Trousers Bell-bottoms Bondage Capri Cargo Chaps Formal Go-to-hell High water Lowrise Jeans Jodhpurs Overalls Palazzo Parachute Pedal pushers Phat Shorts Bermuda cycling dolphin gym hotpants running Slim-fit Sweatpants Windpants Yoga pants Skirts A-line Ballerina Denim Men's Miniskirt Pencil Prairie Rah-rah Sarong Skort Tutu Wrap Full-Body Wear Suits and uniforms Ceremonial dress academic court diplomatic Folk Jodhpuri Jumpsuit Military full mess service sailor combat Miner Pantsuit Political Religious cassock clerical vestment School Prison Workwear boilersuit cleanroom hazmat space scrubs Dresses and gowns Formal, semi- formal, informal Backless Bouffant gown Coatdress Cocktail little black Evening ball gown debutante Plain Prairie Princess line Strapless Wedding Wrap Casual House Jumper Romper suit Sheath Shirtdress Slip Sundress Coats and outerwear Overcoats Car Chesterfield Covert Duffel Duster Greatcoat British Warm Guards Coat Greca Over-frock Riding shadbelly Trench Ulster Cloak opera Paletot Pea Polo Raincoat Mackintosh Suit coats Frock coat bekishe rekel Mess jacket Suit jacket Blazer smoking sports Teba Tailcoat dress morning Other Apron pinafore Blouson Cagoule Cape ferraiolo Inverness Mantle monastic royal mozzetta pellegrina Coatee Cut-off Gilet Jacket down flight goggle Harrington leather mackinaw Norfolk safari Jerkin Lab coat Parka Poncho Robe bathrobe dressing gown Shawl Ski suit Sleeved blanket Windbreaker Nightwear Babydoll Babygrow Blanket sleeper Negligee Nightgown Nightshirt Pajamas Swimwear Bikini Burkini Boardshorts Dry suit Monokini One-piece Rash guard Sling Square leg suit Swim briefs Swim diaper Trunks Wetsuit Legwear Sock Hold-ups Garter Pantyhose Stocking Tights Footwear List of shoe styles List of boots Boot Dress boot Flip-flops Sandal Shoe Dress shoe Court shoe Sneaker Slipper Accessories Adornments Armband Belt Boutonnière Coin purse Cufflink Cummerbund Gaiters Glasses Sunglasses Gloves Headband Handbag Inro Jewellery Livery Muff Pocket protector Pocket watch Sash Spats Suspenders Wallet Watch Non-worn items Hand fan Umbrella Walking stick Dress codes Western Formal morning dress white tie Semi-formal black lounge suit black tie Informal Business casual Smart casual Casual Related Clothing fetish Clothing swap Costume creature suit Halloween costume Cross-dressing Environmental impact Fashion haute couture made-to-measure ready-to-wear Fur clothing types Fursuit Global trade of secondhand clothing Laundry Laws List of individual dresses Reconstructed clothing Right to clothing Vintage clothing Clothing portal v t e Design Outline Designer Disciplines Communication design Advertising Book design Brand design Exhibit design Film title design Graphic design Motion Postage stamp design Print design Illustration Information design Instructional design News design Photography Retail design Signage / Traffic sign design Typography / Type design Video design Visual merchandising Environmental design Architecture Architectural lighting design Building design Passive solar Ecological design Environmental impact design Garden design Computer-aided Healthy community design Hotel design Interior architecture Interior design EID Keyline design Landscape architecture Sustainable Landscape design Spatial design Urban design Industrial design Automotive design Automotive suspension design CMF design Corrugated box design Electric guitar design Furniture design Sustainable Hardware interface design Motorcycle design Packaging and labeling Photographic lens design Product design Production design Sensory design Service design Interaction design Experience design EED Game design Level design Video game design Hardware interface design Icon design Immersive design Information design Interactive design Sonic interaction design User experience design User interface design Web design Other applied arts Public art design Ceramic / glass design Fashion design Costume design Jewellery design Floral design Game art design Property design Scenic design Sound design Stage/set lighting design Textile design Other design & engineering Algorithm design Behavioural design Boiler design Database design Drug design Electrical system design Experimental design Filter design Geometric design Work design Integrated circuit design Circuit design Physical design Power network design Mechanism design Nuclear weapon design Nucleic acid design Organization design Process design Processor design Protein design Research design Social design Software design Spacecraft design Strategic design Systems design Test design Approaches Active Activity-centered Adaptive web Affective Brainstorming By committee By contract C-K theory Closure Configuration Contextual Continuous Cradle-to-cradle Creative problem-solving Creativity techniques Critical Design fiction Defensive Design–bid–build Design–build architect-led Diffuse Domain-driven Ecological design Energy neutral Engineering design process Probabilistic design Ergonomic Error-tolerant Evidence-based Fault-tolerant Feminist For assembly For behaviour change For manufacturability For Six Sigma For testing For the environment For X Framework-oriented Functional Generative Geodesign HCD High-level Hostile Inclusive Integrated Integrated topside Intelligence-based Iterative KISS principle Low-level Metadesign Mind mapping Modular New Wave Object-oriented Open Over Parametric Participatory Platform-based Policy-based Prevention through Process-centered Public interest Opinion poll Public opinion Rational Regenerative Reliability engineering Research-based Responsibility-driven RWD Safe-life Speculative Sustainable Systemic SOD Tableless web Theory of constraints Top-down and bottom-up Transformation Transgenerational TRIZ Universal Design for All Usage-centered Use-centered User-centered Empathic User innovation Value-driven Value sensitive Privacy by Quality by Secure by Design choice computing controls culture flow justice leadership management marker methods pattern research science sprint strategy theory thinking Tools Intellectual property Organizations Awards Tools AAD Architectural model Blueprint Comprehensive layout CAD CAID Virtual home design software CAutoD Design quality indicator Electronic design automation Flowchart Mockup Design specification Design system Prototype Sketch Storyboard Technical drawing HTML editor Website wireframe Intellectual property Clean-room design Community design Design around Design infringement Design patent Fashion design copyright Geschmacksmuster Industrial design rights European Union Organizations American Institute of Graphic Arts Chartered Society of Designers Design and Industries Association Design Council International Forum Design Design Research Society Awards European Design Award German Design Award Good Design Award (Museum of Modern Art) Good Design Award (Chicago Athenaeum) Graphex IF Product Design Award James Dyson Award Prince Philip Designers Prize Related topics Agile Concept art Conceptual design Creative industries Cultural icon .design Dominant design Enterprise architecture Form factor Futures studies Indie design Innovation management Intelligent design Lean startup New product development OODA loop Philosophy of design Process simulation Reference design Slow design STEAM fields Unintelligent design Visualization Wicked problem Design attributes brief change classic competition architectural student director education elements engineer firm history knowledge language life load museum optimization paradigm principles rationale review specification studies studio technology Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Latvia Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐7d8s4
Cached time: 20250817143237
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.699 seconds
Real time usage: 0.865 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3603/1000000
Revision size: 43058/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 238411/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2049/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 196013/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.381/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6631531/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  598.750      1 -total
 43.55%  260.729      1 Template:Reflist
 27.55%  164.941     24 Template:Cite_web
 19.11%  114.414     14 Template:Navbox
 12.53%   75.008      1 Template:Fashion
  9.47%   56.689      1 Template:Short_description
  7.81%   46.759      1 Template:Commons_category
  7.73%   46.255      2 Template:Sister_project
  7.46%   44.671      2 Template:Side_box
  5.70%   34.104     10 Template:Main Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:10799117:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817143237 and revision id 1305747156. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fashion_design&oldid=1305747156 " Categories : Fashion design Design occupations Arts occupations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 21:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fashion design 40 languages Add topic

