Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Activities 3 GOA victories 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Gun Owners of America 6 languages العربية Español Français 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°48′27″N 77°13′11″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.8075°N 77.2196°W ﻿ / 38.8075; -77.2196 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia US gun rights organization This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Gun Owners of America" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Gun Owners of America Founded November 9, 1976 ; 48 years ago ( 1976-11-09 ) [ 3 ] Tax ID no.

52-1256643 [ 2 ] Legal status 501(c)(4) [ 2 ] Headquarters Springfield, Virginia , US Coordinates 38°48′27″N 77°13′11″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.8075°N 77.2196°W ﻿ / 38.8075; -77.2196 Membership 2,000,000+ [ 1 ] Founder H.L. Richardson Senior Vice President Erich Pratt Revenue $2,152,940 [ 2 ] (2015) Expenses $2,319,763 [ 2 ] (2015) Employees 14 [ 2 ] (2015) Website www .gunowners .org Gun Owners of America ( GOA ) is a gun rights organization in the United States. It makes efforts to differentiate itself from the larger National Rifle Association (NRA) and has publicly criticized the NRA on multiple occasions for what it considers to be compromising on gun rights.

The GOA was outspoken in opposing John McCain 's 2008 presidential bid, describing his gun-rights voting record as "abysmal, wretched, and pathetic" [ 4 ] and giving him an F− grade on Second Amendment issues since 2004, while the NRA (through its political action committee , the NRA-PVF) gave him a C+.

[ 5 ] The GOA has been described by Congressman Ron Paul as "The only no-compromise gun lobby in Washington." This quote from Paul is displayed on the home page of the Gun Owners of America website. Paul was the only 2008 presidential candidate to receive an A+ grade from Gun Owners of America.

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] Gun Owners of America (GOA) was founded in 1976 by California state senator H. L. Richardson . The GOA lobbies both state and federal legislatures to promote Second Amendment rights. Richardson was chairman of Gun Owners of America until he retired in 2017. Tim Macy, who had been on the board since the organization’s founding, then became chairman.

[ 1 ] Tim Macy [ 7 ] is president and chairman of the Board of Gun Owners of America. He has been on the Board of Directors for over 35 years since the inception of GOA. Macy is involved with GOA’s sister organization as well. Serving on the boards of Gun Owners Foundation, Gun Owners of America’s Political Victory Fund and Gun Owners of California.

John Velleco [ 1 ] serves as the executive vice president. He previously served as the director of federal affairs for the organization.

Erich Pratt [ 1 ] is the senior vice president for GOA, having worked in gun politics for over three decades. Erich served under several titles at GOA – from federal and state directors to communications director for the organization. He now serves as the chief national spokesman and focuses on policy for both the federal and state levels of government.

Sam Paredes [ 1 ] is a board member of GOA and currently serves as the executive director for GOA’s sister organization, Gun Owners of California. Paredes is a certified firearms instructor.

Activities [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Gun Owners of America is a 501(c)(4) nonprofit organization .

[ 8 ] According to Gun Owners of America's website, its board contends that Americans have lost some of their gun rights, and GOA strives to get them back.

[ 8 ] By its own account, Gun Owners of America spent over $1.75 million lobbying Congress in 2004, and over $18 million between 1998 and 2004.

[ 9 ] Gun Owners of America's Federal Political Action Committee is "Gun Owners of America Inc. Political Victory Fund" (C00278101).

[ 10 ] It raises funds to support the election of pro-gun candidates at all levels of government.

Gun Owners Foundation is an educational nonprofit foundation. It acts as the research arm for GOA. Its main objective is to hold seminars around the country to inform the public, media outlets, and various government officials on Second Amendment issues.

[ 8 ] The Gun Owners Foundation around 2008 began a new campaign by creating Public Service Announcements to promote what it calls "PROPER Gun Safety". According to Gun Owners Foundation, its campaign objective is "to generate public awareness of the dangers of not having a gun ready for protection and to encourage gun owners not to lock up their best means of self-defense".

[ 11 ] GOA victories [ edit ] On July 13, 2006, Senator David Vitter saw an 84–16 vote for his amendment prohibiting the use of federal money for federal agents to confiscate weapons during a declared state of emergency.

[ 12 ] On June 27, 2007, the Pence Amendment passed. The bill, named after then-representative and future vice president Mike Pence , was passed by a vote of 309–115. According to Gun Owners of America, the amendment blocked the Federal Communications Commission 's ability to use the Fairness Doctrine to limit the free speech allowed by organizations like Gun Owners of America over the airwaves.

[ 13 ] On August 9, 2007, Gun Owners of America supported Vitter's work in pushing through a bill stating that no U.S. funds can be used by the United Nations or any group affiliated with the United Nations to restrict or tax Second Amendment rights. If they attempt to do so, the U.S. can withdraw their funds from the organization. This bill, HR-2764, also known as the Consolidated Appropriations Act, passed by an 81–10 vote.

[ 14 ] On February 25, 2008, Senator Jim DeMint amended bill S-1200, the Indian Health Care Improvement Act. The act stated that the funds were to be used for "violence prevention". Once the funds were attempted to be used for gun buybacks, DeMint pushed through an amendment to the act stating that the money cannot be used for any anti-gun programs. DeMint's amendment passed by a margin of 78–11.

[ 15 ] 2010, GOA campaigns for and helps pass the Firearms Freedom Act laws across the country including Alaska, Arizona, Idaho, South Dakota, Utah and Wyoming.

[ 16 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e "About GOA | GOA" . Retrieved 2021-06-05 .

^ a b c d e " Form 990: Return of Organization Exempt from Income Tax ".

Gun Owners of America .

Guidestar . December 31, 2015.

^ " C0802572 Gun Owners of America, Inc.

Archived 2021-05-02 at the Wayback Machine " Business Search . Office of the Secretary of State of California. Retrieved February 23, 2018.

^ "GOA's Take on John McCain | Gun Owners of America" .

gunowners.org . Retrieved Mar 31, 2020 .

^ "Project Vote Smart - National Rifle Association Ratings" . Oct 22, 2004. Archived from the original on October 22, 2004 . Retrieved Mar 31, 2020 .

^ "GOA House Ratings For The 110th Congress" . Gunowners.org. Archived from the original on February 16, 2008 . Retrieved 2008-05-06 .

^ "About GOA | GOA" . Retrieved 2021-06-09 .

^ a b c "Who Is GOA" . Retrieved 2008-11-20 .

^ "Gun Owners of America on LobbyWatch" . Archived from the original on December 10, 2007 . Retrieved 2008-05-06 .

^ "FEC Disclosure Report on GOA" . Query.nictusa.com. Archived from the original on 2008-12-03 . Retrieved 2008-05-06 .

^ "GOF Public Service Announcements Promoting PROPER Gun Safety" . Gunowners.org. Archived from the original on 2008-10-02 . Retrieved 2008-11-20 .

^ "No Gun Confiscation During Emergencies" . Gunowners.org . Retrieved 2008-11-16 .

^ "Vetoing the Unfairness Doctrine" . Gunowners.org . Retrieved 2008-11-16 .

^ "No Funds for Anti-gun UN" . Gunowners.org. Archived from the original on 2008-11-12 . Retrieved 2008-11-16 .

^ "No Funds for Gun Control" . Gunowners.org . Retrieved 2008-11-16 .

^ "2010 End of the Year Report | GOA" . Retrieved 2021-06-05 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Gun Owners Foundation FEC filings for GOA's PAC v t e Gun politics interest groups in the United States Pro- gun rights A Girl & A Gun Black Guns Matter GeorgiaCarry.org Huey P. Newton Gun Club Liberal Gun Club Gun Owners of America International Association for the Protection of Civilian Arms Rights Jews for the Preservation of Firearms Ownership Law Enforcement Alliance of America National African American Gun Association National Association for Gun Rights National Rifle Association of America National Shooting Sports Foundation New York State Rifle and Pistol Association Pink Pistols Redneck Revolt Rocky Mountain Gun Owners Second Amendment Foundation Second Amendment Sisters Socialist Rifle Association Students for Concealed Carry Virginia Citizens Defense League Pro- gun control 50 Miles More Americans for Responsible Solutions American State Legislators for Gun Violence Prevention Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence Coalition to Stop Gun Violence Everytown for Gun Safety Faiths United to Prevent Gun Violence March for Our Lives Action Fund Million Mom March National Gun Victims Action Council Stop Handgun Violence Violence Policy Center Related Evolve USA Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gun_Owners_of_America&oldid=1260877938 " Categories : 501(c)(4) nonprofit organizations 1975 establishments in Virginia Conservative organizations in the United States Gun rights advocacy groups in the United States Lobbying organizations in the United States Organizations established in 1975 Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from June 2021 All articles lacking reliable references Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates not on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 3 December 2024, at 02:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gun Owners of America 6 languages Add topic

