Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Profile 3 Statler Hotel 4 The Leland C. and Mary M. Pillsbury Institute for Hospitality Entrepreneurship 5 Center for Hospitality Research Toggle Center for Hospitality Research subsection 5.1 Publications 6 Notable alumni 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Nolan School of Hotel Administration 1 language Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Business school in Cornell University For the parent college, see Cornell SC Johnson College of Business .

This article contains promotional content .

Please help improve it by removing promotional language and inappropriate external links , and by adding encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view .

( June 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Cornell University Nolan School of Hotel Administration Statler Hall, west facade along East Avenue Type Private Established 1922 Dean Kate Walsh Academic staff 60 [ 1 ] Undergraduates 894 Postgraduates 67 Location Ithaca , New York , U.S.

42°26′45″N 76°28′54″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.4458011°N 76.48158639999997°W ﻿ / 42.4458011; -76.48158639999997 Website sha .cornell .edu The Nolan School of Hotel Administration ( SHA , more commonly known as the Hotel School ) is a specialized business school in the Cornell Johnson Graduate School of Management at Cornell University , a private Ivy League university located in Ithaca, New York .

[ 2 ] Founded in 1922, it was the world's first four-year intercollegiate school devoted to hospitality management .

The undergraduate business curriculum at SHA is one of only three such Ivy League programs accredited by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB).

[ 3 ] Students in the Hotel School are referred to as Hotelies .

[ 4 ] Participants come from all over the world to take classes at such locations as Ithaca, New York ; Brussels , Belgium ; Singapore ; and site visits in Las Vegas and New York City .

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] Statler Hotel entrance on Statler Drive The nature of SHA was in large part the creation of professor Howard B. Meek . He was supported in his efforts by New York City hotel men, a number of whom testified in Albany , urging the legislature to appropriate $11,000 per year for the school. Edward M. Tierney of the Ansonia Hotel stated "There is a dearth of competent hotel employes [ sic ], and such a course at Cornell would have the endorsement and co-operation of the hotel men generally throughout the country... The war brought a great change in the hotel worker, and the old-time attitude of servility has been replaced by efficient service giving and courtesy. Young men now enter the hotel business just as they would banking, railroad, or commercial life, to find a future in it, and the hotel man must offer the same attractions of commensurate pay and advancement." In 1927, at the 2nd Annual Hotel Ezra Cornell , Meek convinced a skeptical Ellsworth Milton Statler of the value of the concept; Statler declared "I'm converted. Meek can have any damn thing he wants." Statler and his wife became major benefactors of the school, eventually donating a total of more than $10 million.  In 1950, the school was transformed from being a part of, Cornell's School of Home Economics (now the School of Human Ecology), a statutory college , into becoming a separate, endowed unit of Cornell.

In 1948, the Statler Foundation funded the construction of a 50-room Statler Inn and the adjoining class-room building called Statler Hall. The building also housed Cornell's faculty club. The 750-seat Alice Statler Auditorium was added to the southern end in 1956.

[ 6 ] In 1986, the original Statler Inn was torn down and replaced with the current 150-room Statler Hotel & J. Willard Marriott Executive Education Center. The Statler Hotel underwent another renovation in 2006 and now has 153 guest rooms. The Statler Hotel is the only hotel on campus.

On January 28, 2016, the Cornell Board of Trustees authorized the design and implementation of a plan for a Cornell College of Business, comprising the university's three exceptional accredited business schools: the Nolan School of Hotel Administration (SHA), the Charles H. Dyson School of Applied Economics and Management (Dyson), and the Samuel Curtis Johnson Graduate School of Management (Johnson).

[ 7 ] The new Cornell College of Business began enrollment in the fall of 2016.

Profile [ edit ] The Robert A. and Jan M. Beck Center addition to Statler Hall was dedicated in 2004 The school enrolled 895 undergraduates and 67 graduate students in 2011, hailing from almost 50 countries; it is Cornell's second smallest undergraduate college. Its curriculum encompasses all facets of general business management with a focus on the hospitality industry. Although not required, many students choose to work at the Statler Hotel to supplement their education at the school. SHA employs 65 full-time faculty members, most with field management experience.

In 1954, Conrad Hilton , who was closely associated with the school after his company bought the Statler hotel chain, called it "the greatest hotel school in the world." [ 8 ] Conrad Hilton later became more closely associated with another school after he founded the Hilton College of Hotel and Restaurant Management at the University of Houston in 1969.

SHA's course catalog includes several offerings for students in other Cornell colleges, notably HADM 4300, Introduction to Wines, a wine tasting course which enrolls 600–900 students each semester, as well as a 2-credit cooking course.

SHA also runs technical courses such as Real Estate Finance and Investments (HADM 4428), Securitization and Structured Finance (HADM 4425), and Investment Portfolio Analysis (HADM 4429). Roughly 40% of undergraduates go into banking or consulting fields after graduation.

In a 2007 Newsweek article dubbing Cornell the "Hottest Ivy", SHA was mentioned to be "considered the world's best." [ 9 ] The School was ranked the No. 1 hospitality and hotel management school in the world for 2015 by CEOWORLD magazine.

[ 10 ] Fictional Hotelies have included: In Absurdistan by Gary Shteyngart , a hotel manager attended the Cornell University Nolan School of Hotel Administration In Dirty Dancing , Neil graduated from Cornell's School of Hotel Management In Hotel by Arthur Hailey , Peter McDermott, manager of the St. Gregory.

In 30 Rock , Tracy Jordan 's friend, Fat Balls [ 11 ] In Veep , Gary Walsh says he graduated with a degree in Hotel Management from Cornell University.

Some notable alumni of the school include the founders of Alamo Rent-A-Car ; Arby's ; Burger King ; Dunkin' Donuts ; billionaire and philanthropist Chuck Feeney of Duty Free Shoppers Group ; Shake Shack ; HVS Global Hospitality Services ; Lyft and PriceWaterhouseCoopers Global Hospitality Consulting. (For more, List of Cornell University alumni ) Statler Hotel [ edit ] Lobby and students at the Statler Hotel The full-service Statler Hotel has 153 guest rooms at the center of Cornell's campus. The hotel also serves as a primary teaching tool for the Nolan School of Hotel Administration. Each year more than 200 SHA students work alongside professionals in a range of hotel and restaurant operations.

In 2011, 2012, and 2013, the Statler Hotel was awarded a 4-diamond rating by AAA.

[ 12 ] In January 2020, hotel executive Arthur Keith was named its new general manager.

[ 13 ] The Leland C. and Mary M. Pillsbury Institute for Hospitality Entrepreneurship [ edit ] The Leland C. and Mary M. Pillsbury Institute for Hospitality Entrepreneurship [ 14 ] Center for Hospitality Research [ edit ] The Cornell Center for Hospitality Research (CHR) is a service of the Cornell University Nolan School of Hotel Administration [ 15 ] for the hospitality industry. With the support of industry partners [ 16 ] the center promotes, supports, and distributes hospitality research. Three series of center publications are posted at no charge on its site chr.cornell.edu.

[ 17 ] They are Cornell Hospitality Reports, Cornell Hospitality Tools, and Industry Perspectives. In addition, the center is the publisher of the Cornell Hospitality Quarterly, now entering its sixth decade of publication, which is available by subscription only.

[ 18 ] The center's research agenda promotes studies that have direct implications for improving hospitality operations, but must be based on solid theoretical and procedural principles. The free reports and tools are more practitioner oriented, while the award-winning Quarterly includes more of the theory and educational content appropriate for students and academics.

[ 19 ] The center also produces a series of industry roundtables and participates in high level industry conferences [ 20 ] to share research findings.

Publications [ edit ] Cornell Hospitality Reports [ 21 ] shares the knowledge created by center fellows and other researchers.

Cornell Hospitality Tools [ 22 ] - web-based interactive tools for the hospitality industry.

Cornell Hospitality Quarterly [ 23 ] - a leading academic journal for the hospitality industry.

Industry Perspective:  A White Paper Series from Cornell [ 24 ] - provide insight from hospitality industry leaders on the issues that matter most to senior executives and hospitality practitioners.

Hospitality Roundtable Proceedings [ 25 ] - offer a thorough report on roundtable's deliberations.

Best Practices [ 26 ] - identified and recognized Best Practive Champions across all segments of the U.S. lodging industry.

Notable alumni [ edit ] Alan Rosen (born 1969), restaurant and bakery owner, and author John Zimmer ,  co-founder and former president of Lyft Brandon Maxwell,  co-founder and former president of M Culinary Concepts Notes [ edit ] ^ "The School and the Industry - Cornell Nolan School of Hotel Administration" . Hotelschool.cornell.edu . Retrieved January 18, 2014 .

^ Cornell also offers general business degrees, at the undergraduate level through the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences and at the graduate level through the Johnson School .

^ "AACSB Accredited Schools Listing" . Aacsb.net. Archived from the original on June 5, 2019 . Retrieved January 18, 2014 .

^ "Egyptian Tourism Federation signs landmark agreement with Cornell University School of Hotel Administration – Egyptian Tourist Authority (ETA)" . October 11, 2007. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007.

^ "Professional Development Program – Executive Education – Cornell SHA" .

sha.cornell.edu .

^ "Cornell College of Business" . Archived from the original on June 14, 2010 . Retrieved February 18, 2010 .

^ "2033-STATLER HALL & AUDITORIUM Facility Information" . Retrieved January 30, 2016 .

^ At Cornell School, No Expense Spared; Tim Minton; The New York Times April 25, 1979, p. C4: "In 1954 Conrad Hilton... was addressing the celebrants. 'He had just said that it was a distinct honor to speak at the greatest hotel school in the world,' recounts Dr. Beck, who was then a doctoral candidate, 'when just at that moment—it couldn't have been timed more perfectly—a wagon went over in the kitchen. It sounds like every plate, bowl and glass in the place had hit the floor.'" ^ "25 Hottest Schools" .

^ Susan Kelley.

"Best hospitality and hotel management school the world for 2015" . CEOWORLD magazine . Retrieved March 8, 2016 .

^ "30 Rock Quotes" .

www.30rockquotes.net .

^ "The Statler Hotel Wins AAA Four Diamond Award - Cornell Nolan School of Hotel Administration" . sha.cornell.edu. March 1, 2011 . Retrieved January 18, 2014 .

^ Johnson, Cornell SC (February 5, 2020).

"Hotel executive Arthur Keith '84 is new Statler general manager | Hotelie" .

Cornell SC Johnson . Retrieved February 6, 2020 .

^ "Pillsbury Institute for Hospitality Entrepreneurship" . October 13, 2023.

^ "Nolan School of Hotel Administration" (URL) . Cornell University . Retrieved August 18, 2009 .

^ "industry partners" (URL) . Cornell University . Retrieved August 18, 2009 .

^ "chr.cornell.edu" (URL) . Cornell University . Retrieved August 18, 2009 .

^ "Sage Publications" (URL) . Sage Publications . Retrieved August 18, 2009 .

^ "Students" (URL) . Central NY Business Journal . Retrieved February 8, 2008 .

^ "Industry Conferences" (URL) . Hotelnewsresource.com . Retrieved June 10, 2009 .

^ "Cornell Hospitality Reports" (URL) . Cornell University . Retrieved August 18, 2009 .

^ "Cornell Hospitality Tools" (URL) . Cornell University . Retrieved August 18, 2009 .

^ "Cornell Hospitality Quarterly" (URL) . Cornell University . Retrieved August 18, 2009 .

^ "Industry Perspective" (URL) . Cornell University . Retrieved August 18, 2009 .

^ "Hospitality Roundtable Proceedings" (URL) . Cornell University . Retrieved August 18, 2009 .

^ "Best Practices" (URL) . Cornell University . Retrieved August 18, 2009 .

References [ edit ] Huxtable, Ada Louise (1973), "Hospitality and the Plastic Esthetic", The New York Times , October 14, 1973, p. 153 New York Times , January 22, 1922, p. 33: "Hotel Men Approve Cornell Training: Hope Legislature Will Appropriate $11,000 a Year for Educating Help." History of the Hotel School "Meek can have any damn thing he wants." Brad Edmonson, Hospitality Leadership: The Cornell Hotel School.

(1996) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cornell University School of Hotel Administration .

Official website Cornell Center for Hospitality Research v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nolan_School_of_Hotel_Administration&oldid=1292455834 " Categories : 1922 establishments in New York (state) Colleges and schools of Cornell University Cornell University Hospitality schools in the United States Hotels in New York (state) Universities and colleges established in 1922 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from April 2025 Articles with a promotional tone from June 2023 All articles with a promotional tone Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Commons category link is on Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 01:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nolan School of Hotel Administration 1 language Add topic

