Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Views Toggle Views subsection 2.1 Nationalism 2.2 Veiling 3 Work Toggle Work subsection 3.1 A Border Passage (1999) 3.2 Women and Gender in Islam (1992) 4 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 4.1 Books and book chapters 4.2 Articles 5 Filmography 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Leila Ahmed 24 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Fulfulde Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kiswahili മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Português Shqip Türkçe اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Egyptian-American writer and professor Leila Ahmed ليلى أحمد Leila Ahmed in 2013 Born ( 1940-05-29 ) 29 May 1940 (age 85) Heliopolis, Cairo, Egypt Education University of Cambridge ( BA , MA , PhD ) Occupations Professor scholar Awards Grawemeyer Award in Religion for A Quiet Revolution Leila Ahmed ( Arabic : لیلى أحمد ; born 29 May 1940) [ 1 ] is an Egyptian-American scholar of women's studies and religion.

[ 2 ] In 1992 she published her book Women and Gender in Islam , which is regarded as a pioneering historical analysis of the position of women in Arab Muslim societies.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] She became the first professor of women's studies in religion at Harvard Divinity School in 1999, and has held the Victor S. Thomas Professor of Divinity chair since 2003. She was later awarded the Victor S. Thomas Research Professor of Divinity in 2020.

[ 5 ] Biography [ edit ] Born in the Heliopolis district of Cairo to a middle-class Egyptian father and an upper class Turkish mother in 1940, [ 6 ] Ahmed's childhood was shaped both by Muslim Egyptian values and the liberal orientation of Egypt's aristocracy under the ancien régime . The Ahmed family became politically ostracized following the Free Officers Movement in 1952. Her father, a civil engineer, was a vocal opponent of Gamal Abdel Nasser 's construction of the Aswan High Dam on ecological principles.

[ 7 ] She earned her undergraduate and doctorate degrees from University of Cambridge during the 1960s before moving to the United States to teach and write, where she was appointed to professorship in Women's Studies and Near Eastern studies [ 8 ] at the University of Massachusetts Amherst , and the position of director in said programs [ 9 ] in 1981. A professorship in Women's Studies and Religion at the Harvard Divinity School followed in 1999, where she currently teaches.

[ 8 ] Views [ edit ] Nationalism [ edit ] Ahmed has been a strong critic of Arab nationalism in Egypt and the Middle East . She devotes an entire chapter in her autobiography to the question of Arab nationalism , and the political factors and efforts which went into constructing an Arab identity for Egypt after the army's coup d'état . According to Ahmed's research, the idea that Egyptians were "Arab" was virtually unheard of well into the 20th century. She describes Arab nationalism , like many other forms of pan-nationalism , as a type of cultural imperialism . This cultural imperialism eats away at the diversity and cultural creativity of not only the Arabic -speaking national majorities (who often speak widely divergent vernaculars ), but also the non-Arabic speaking minorities throughout the Middle East and North Africa .

[ 10 ] Veiling [ edit ] In 2013, Ahmed, who had previously opposed the veil, received the University of Louisville Grawemeyer Award in Religion for her analysis of the veiling of Muslim women in the United States, in which she describes how some women wore the veil as a symbol of activism for justice and social change.

[ 11 ] As such, she no longer believes that the resurgence of the veil was solely driven by patriarchy, a view she held when she was younger, as she noted how many women in the United States wore it as a symbol of their Islamic identity, social justice, and to raise other women's awareness of society's sexist messages about women's bodies and dress. However, she believes that the veil has no universal meaning and is still driven by forces of patriarchy in other places around the world.

[ 12 ] From a description of Ahmed's work provided by Yale University Press: "Ahmed observed that Islamism, with its commitments to activism in the service of the poor and in pursuit of social justice, is the strain of Islam most easily and naturally merging with western democracies' own tradition of activism in the cause of justice and social change. It is often Islamists, even more than secular Muslims, who are at the forefront of such contemporary activist struggles as civil rights and women's rights. Ahmed's surprising conclusions represent a near reversal of her thinking on this topic." [ 13 ] Work [ edit ] A Border Passage (1999) [ edit ] This section of a biography of a living person does not include any references or sources .

Please help by adding reliable sources . Contentious material about living people that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately .

Find sources: "Leila Ahmed" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In her 1999 memoir A Border Passage, Ahmed describes her multicultural Cairene upbringing and her adult life as an expatriate and an immigrant in Europe and the United States. She tells of how she was introduced to Islam through her grandmother during her childhood, and she came to distinguish it from "official Islam" as practiced and preached by a largely male religious elite. This realization would later form the basis of her first acclaimed book, Women and Gender in Islam (1992), a now-classic work on Islamic history , Muslim feminism , and the historical role of women in Islam as well as Muslim discourses about women.

Ahmed speaks of her experience in Europe and the United States as one that was often fraught with tension and confusion as she tried to reconcile her Muslim Egyptian identity with Western values. Faced with racism and anti-Muslim prejudice, and after deconstructing traditionalist male-centered beliefs in her own culture, she set out to dispel equally damaging myths and misconceptions held by the West about Islam and Muslim women.

Women and Gender in Islam (1992) [ edit ] In her germinal work, Women and Gender in Islam (1992), Ahmed argues that the oppressive practices to which women in the Middle East are subjected are caused by the prevalence of patriarchal interpretations of Islam rather than Islam itself. She maintains that as Islam evolved, two divergent voices emerged in the religion: An ethical structure that advocates the moral and spiritual equality of all human beings; A hierarchical structure as the basis of male/female relations; a gender-based/sexual hierarchy.

[ 14 ] Islamic doctrine developed within an androcentric , misogynist society, that of Abbasid Iraq , the customs of which were largely inherited from the Sasanian Empire after its conquest.

[ 15 ] This society emphasised and institutionalised the gendered hierarchical voice and silenced the voice of equity and justice. Islam as a religion therefore became a discourse of the politically dominant elite, i.e.; male society. There were early signs of resistance to establishment Islam. For example, the thoughts of Sufi and Qarmatians groups, philosophers such as Ibn al-Arabi and the liberal stance of powerful families and individuals towards their daughters in respect of marriage and education (e.g.; imposing a monogamy clause in marriage contracts or one for providing private education).

[ citation needed ] Despite such resistance, establishment Islam experienced little serious challenge until early 19th-century colonial encroachment. European colonialisms' remit was essentially economic; however, female emancipation was used as an argument to legitimate geopolitical incursion. Colonial feminism was a Western discourse of dominance which, "introduced the notion that an intrinsic connection existed between the issue of culture and the status of women, and … that progress for women could be achieved only through abandoning the native culture." [ 16 ] Inevitably, the initial reaction to this was a rejection of Western values by political Islamists . This rejection saw the conflation of Islam and culture where Islamic authenticity became defined in terms of cultural authenticity and, specifically, the role of women within Islam. This led to a reaffirmation of indigenous customs relating to women and restoration of the customs and laws of past Islamic societies. The underlying assumption was that there is an authentic interpretation of Islam that is based on the texts and institutions developed in Abbasid Iraq. According to such assumptions, the meaning of gender and the position of women within Islam is "unambiguous and ascertainable in some precise and absolute sense." [ 17 ] Since this initial reaction, Muslim women scholars have argued that the values of the Abbasid era in Iraq are not universal to Islam — rather they were specific to a particular time, culture and people. Islamic texts and institutions need to be separated from patriarchal culture and reappraised in terms of merit, and listening to the voice of equality and justice. Ahmed concludes by exhorting feminists, both Muslim and Western, to undertake this task by critically engaging with, challenging and redefining the Middle East regions' diverse religious and cultural heritage.

[ citation needed ] Women and Gender in Islam was republished by Yale University Press in 2021 in its Veritas paperback series with a foreword by Kecia Ali.

Bibliography [ edit ] Books and book chapters [ edit ] Edward W. Lane: A study of his life and works and of British ideas of the Middle East in the Nineteenth century . London: Longman (1978) "A Traditional Ceremony in an Islamic Milieu in Malaysia", in Muslim Women (1984) "Between Two Worlds: The Formation of a Turn-of-the-Century Egyptian Feminist", in Life/Lines: Theorizing Women's Autobiography (1988) "Arab Women: 1995", in The Next Arab Decade: Alternative Futures (1988) "Feminism and Cross-Cultural Inquiry: The terms of discourse in Islam" In Coming to Terms: Feminism, Theory and Politics.

Ed. Elizabeth Weed. New York: Routledge (1989) Women and Gender in Islam: Historical Roots of a Modern Debate.

New Haven: Yale University Press (1992, 2021) A Border Passage: From Cairo to America—A Woman's Journey.

New York: Farrar Straus & Giroux (1999) A Quiet Revolution: The Veil's Resurgence, from the Middle East to America.

New Haven. Yale University Press (2011) Articles [ edit ] "Women in the rise of Islam." The new Voices of Islam : Rethinking Politics and Modernity : a Reader.

Ed. Mehran Kamrava. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2006. 177–200.

"The Discourse of the Veil." Post Colonialisms: an Anthology of Cultural Theory and Criticism . Ed. Gaurav Desai and Supriya Nair. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2005. 315–338.

"The Veil Debate Again: a View from America in the Early Twenty-first Century".

On Shifting Ground: Muslim Women in the Global Era.

Ed. Fereshteh Nourale-Simone. New York: Feminist Press at the City University of New York, 2005.

"Gender and literacy in Islam." Nothing Sacred: Women Respond to Religious Fundamentalism and Terror.

Ed. Betsy Reed. New York: Thunder's Mouth Press/Nation Books, 2002.

"The Women of Islam".

Transition 83 (2000): 78–97.

"Early Islam and the position of Women: the problem of interpretation." Women in Middle Eastern History: Shifting Boundaries in Sex and Gender.

Ed. Nikki R. Keddie, Beth Baron. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993.

"Arab Culture and Writing Woman's Bodies." Gender Issues 9.1 (March 1, 1989): 41–55.

"Women and the Advent of Islam." Signs 11.4 (Summer, 1986): 665–691.

"Feminism and Feminist Movements in the Middle East, a Preliminary Exploration: Turkey, Egypt, Algeria, People's Democratic Republic of Yemen." Women and Islam.

Ed. Ellen Skinner. Virginia: Pergamon Press: 1982. 153.

"Western Ethnocentrism and Perceptions of the Harem." Feminist Studies 8.3 (Autumn, 1982): 521–534.

Ahmed, Leila, Krishna Ahooja-Patel, Charlotte Bunch, Nilufer Cagatay, Ursula Funk, Dafna N. Izraeli, Margaret McIntosh, Helen I. Safa, and Aline K. Wong. "Comments on Tinker's 'A Feminist view of Copenhagen".

Signs 6.4 (Summer, 1981): 771–790.

"Encounter with American Feminism: A Muslim Woman's View of Two Conferences".

Women's Studies Newsletter 8.3 (Summer, 1980): 7–9.

Filmography [ edit ] Ahmed was an advisor to the award-winning, PBS-broadcast documentary Muhammad: Legacy of a Prophet (2002), produced by Unity Productions Foundation .

References [ edit ] ^ Profile of Leila Ahmed ^ "Leila Ahmed - Harvard Divinity School" .

hds.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2024-11-18 .

Ahmed was professor of women's studies and Near Eastern studies at the University of Massachusetts-Amherst ^ Mehran Kamrava, ed. (2006).

The New Voices of Islam: Rethinking Politics and Modernity : a Reader . University of California Press. p. 177.

^ Theodoore Gabriel; Rabiha Hannan, eds. (2011).

Islam and the Veil: Theoretical and Regional Contexts . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 83.

^ "Leila Ahmed" .

hds.harvard.edu .

Archived from the original on 2014-07-12 . Retrieved 2022-05-14 .

^ Abdelrazek, Amal Talaat (2007).

Contemporary Arab American women writers: hyphenhated identities and border crossings . Cambria Press. p. 21.

ISBN 978-1-934043-71-4 .

^ Crawford, Hazel (October 2010).

"Representations: Memoirs, Autobiographies, Biographies: United States of America" .

Encyclopedia of Women and Islamic Cultures .

Archived from the original on 2017-10-02 . Retrieved 2017-10-02 – via Brill Reference Online.

^ a b Mehran Kamrava (2006).

The new voices of Islam: rethinking politics and modernity : a reader . University of California Press.

ISBN 9780520250987 .

^ "Professor Leila Ahmed, Ph.D., speaks in the Distinguished Lecture Series" .

Carnegie Mellon University in Qatar . 22 March 2010.

^ Ben Jemia, Hatem (2022).

"Revisiting Nasserite Egyptianness in Leila Ahmed's Memoir A Border Passage: From Cairo to America ‒ A Woman's Journey" .

Journal of Mediterranean Studies .

31 (2): 171– 186.

ISSN 2523-9465 .

^ "Ahmed's analysis of increased 'veiling' wins religion prize" . Archived from the original on 2014-10-31.

^ "Veil of Ignorance" . 25 April 2011.

Archived from the original on 14 July 2023 . Retrieved 14 July 2023 .

^ "Yale University Press London: A Quiet Revolution" . 2023.

Archived from the original on 2023-12-07 . Retrieved 2023-12-07 .

^ Ahmed, Leila.

Women and Gender in Islam . Yale University Press, 1992, p. 66.

^ Ahmed 1992, p. 79-83 ^ Ahmed 1992, p. 244 ^ op cit.

, p. 238 External links [ edit ] Ahmed's faculty profile at Harvard Divinity School Interview with Ahmed ("Muslim Women and Other Misunderstandings) Archived 2015-09-24 at the Wayback Machine at On Being (radio show) on December 7, 2006 Professor Leila Ahmed, Ph.D., speaks in the Distinguished Lecture Series March 22, 2010 A Border Passage: From Cairo to America -- A Woman's Journey, Leila Ahmed, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1999.

Profile of Leila Ahmed By Julia Lieblich, The Associated Press, August 12, 1999 v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Netherlands Norway Croatia Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Leila_Ahmed&oldid=1299163137 " Categories : 1940 births Living people American feminists Egyptian scholars Egyptian academics Egyptian emigrants to the United States Egyptian Islamists American people of Egyptian descent Muslim reformers Egyptian feminists Feminist studies scholars University of Massachusetts Amherst faculty Harvard Divinity School faculty Neo-Marxism Egyptian people of Turkish descent American academics of Turkish descent Proponents of Islamic feminism Writers from Cairo Fellows of Clare Hall, Cambridge Women scholars of Islam Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Arabic-language text BLP articles lacking sources from May 2022 All BLP articles lacking sources All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2022 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 21:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Leila Ahmed 24 languages Add topic

