Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Buildings Toggle Buildings subsection 1.1 Palazzo Vecchio 1.2 Loggia dei Lanzi 1.3 Tribunale della Mercanzia 1.4 Palazzo Uguccioni 1.5 Palazzo delle Assicurazioni Generali 1.6 Other palaces 2 Statues 3 Gallery 4 Restrictions 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Piazza della Signoria 32 languages Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lëtzebuergesch Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 43°46′11″N 11°15′20″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.76972°N 11.25556°E ﻿ / 43.76972; 11.25556 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Public square in front of the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence, Italy Piazza della Signoria Public square Features Statues Judith and Holofernes by Donatello and David by Michelangelo , Neptune Fountain Opening date 1330 Surface stone Location Florence , Italy Piazza della Signoria Location of the piazza in Florence Coordinates: 43°46′11″N 11°15′20″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.76972°N 11.25556°E ﻿ / 43.76972; 11.25556 Piazza della Signoria ( Italian pronunciation: [ˈpjattsa della siɲɲoˈriːa] ) is a w-shaped square in front of the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence , Central Italy . It was named after the Palazzo della Signoria, also called Palazzo Vecchio . It is the main point of the origin and history of the Florentine Republic and still maintains its reputation as the political focus of the city.

[ 1 ] It is the meeting place of Florentines as well as the numerous tourists, located near Palazzo Vecchio and Piazza del Duomo , and gateway to the Uffizi Gallery .

Designated a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1982, Florence's Historic Centre is anchored by the iconic Piazza della Signoria, one of its most historically significant squares.

Buildings [ edit ] The 14th-century Palazzo Vecchio is still preeminent with its crenellated tower. The square is also shared with the Loggia della Signoria , the Uffizi Gallery , the Palace of the Tribunale della Mercanzia (1359) (now the Bureau of Agriculture), and the Palazzo Uguccioni (1550, with a facade attributed to Raphael , who however died thirty years before its construction). Located in front of the Palazzo Vecchio is the Palace of the Assicurazioni Generali (1871, built in Renaissance style).

Palazzo Vecchio [ edit ] Palazzo Vecchio The Palazzo Vecchio ("Old Palace") is the town hall of the city. This massive, Romanesque , crenellated fortress-palace is among the most impressive town halls of Tuscany .

[ 2 ] Overlooking the square with its copy of Michelangelo 's David statue as well the gallery of statues in the adjacent Loggia dei Lanzi , it is one of the most significant private places in Italy, and it hosts cultural points and museums.

Originally called the Palazzo della Signoria , after the Signoria of Florence , the ruling body of the Republic of Florence , it was also given several other names: Palazzo del Popolo , Palazzo dei Priori , and Palazzo Ducale , in accordance with the varying use of the palace during its long history. The building acquired its current name when the Medici duke's residence was moved across the Arno to the Palazzo Pitti .

Painting of Savonarola's execution in the Piazza della Signoria Giuseppe Zocchi , The Piazza della Signoria in Florence, first half 18th ct.

The Piazza della Signoria in c.

1873–1881 , photo by Giacomo Brogi Loggia dei Lanzi [ edit ] The Loggia dei Lanzi consists of wide arches open to the street, three bays wide and one bay deep. The arches rest on clustered columns with Corinthian capitals. The wide arches appealed so much to the Florentines, that Michelangelo even proposed that they should be continued all around the Piazza della Signoria .

[ citation needed ] The vivacious construction of the Loggia is in stark contrast with the severe architecture of the Palazzo Vecchio . It is effectively an open-air sculpture gallery of antique and Renaissance art including the Medici lions .

The former Palazzo del Tribunale della Mercanzia, now the Gucci Museum Tribunale della Mercanzia [ edit ] The Tribunale della Mercanzia (Tribunal of Merchandise) is a building where in the past lawyers judged in the trial between merchants. Here was a porch painted by Taddeo Gaddi , Antonio del Pollaiuolo and Sandro Botticelli , today stored in the Uffizi gallery .

Palazzo Uguccioni [ edit ] Built for Giovanni Uguccioni since 1550, its design has been variously attributed to Raphael , Michelangelo , Bartolomeo Ammannati or Raffaello da Montelupo .

Palazzo delle Assicurazioni Generali [ edit ] The Palazzo delle Assicurazioni Generali was designed in the Neo-Renaissance style in 1871, and is one of the very few purpose-built commercial buildings in the centre of the city. On the ground floor of this palace is the historical cafè Rivoire .

Other palaces [ edit ] Other palaces are the palazzo dei Buonaguisi and the palazzo dell'Arte dei Mercatanti .

The piazza was already a central square in the original Roman town Florentia , surrounded by a theatre, Roman baths and a workshop for dyeing textiles. Later there was a church San Romolo, a loggia and an enormous 5th-century basilica. This was shown by the archaeological treasures found beneath the square when it was repaved in the 1980s. Even remains of a Neolithic site were found. The square started taking shape from 1268 on, when houses of Ghibellines were pulled down by the victorious Guelphs . The square remained a long time untidy, full of holes. In 1385 it was paved for the first time. In 1497 Girolamo Savonarola and his followers carried out on this square the famous Bonfire of the Vanities , burning in a large pile books, gaming tables, fine dresses, and works of poets. In front of the Fountain of Neptune , a round marble plaque marks the exact spot where  Savonarola was hanged and burned on May 23, 1498.

[ 3 ] Panorama of the piazza The statues in front of the Palazzo Vecchio Statues [ edit ] Various imposing statues ring this square including: Equestrian Monument of Cosimo I , honoring Cosimo I de' Medici and sculpted by Giambologna (1594) Fountain of Neptune by Bartolomeo Ammannati (1575) [ 4 ] Il Marzocco , ("the lion") Judith and Holofernes , by Donatello .

[ 5 ] Copy of Michelangelo's David , [ 5 ] over 5 meters high, at the entrance of the Palazzo Vecchio; the original by Michelangelo is housed in the Galleria dell'Accademia .

Hercules and Cacus by Bandinelli (1533), to the right of the Palazzo's entrance [ 5 ] Loggia dei Lanzi Perseus with the Head of Medusa by Cellini (1554) The Abduction of the Sabine Women by Giambologna (1583) [ 6 ] Medici lions , one of which was a 2nd century Roman lion in relief the otherwise little known Giovanni di Scherano Fancelli carved  free and reworked. The pendant was made by Flaminio Vacca (since 1598) Gallery [ edit ] Equestrian Monument of Cosimo I by Giambologna (1594), honoring Cosimo I de' Medici Fountain of Neptune by Bartolomeo Ammannati (1575) Neptune and the copy of Donatello 's Marzocco , presenting the Florentine Lily (copy, original in the Bargello ) Donatello 's original bronze group Judith and Holofernes , (c. 1440) still in the Loggia dei Lanzi at the end of the 19th ct. (photo: anonyme). (copy, original at Palazzo Vecchio) A reproduction of Michelangelo 's David ; the original (1501–1504) is housed in the Galleria dell'Accademia .

Bartolommeo Bandinelli 's Hercules and Cacus (1533) Benvenuto Cellini 's statue Perseus with the Head of Medusa (1554) Pio Fedi 's The Rape of Polyxena The Pasquino Group Giambologna 's Heracles and Nessus Giambologna 's Abduction of a Sabine Woman (1583) Restrictions [ edit ] There are several restrictions on car movements in the city with various areas designated as zona a traffico limitato (ZTL), which translates to "restricted traffic zone." Areas such as the Piazza della Signoria , as well as those of Piazza del Duomo , Via Tornabuoni , and Piazza Pitti , are entirely reserved for pedestrian use. An exception is made for fire trucks , ambulances , and local taxis .

[ 7 ] In March 2023, an American tourist drove his red, Swiss-registered Ferrari in Piazza della Signoria and received a fine of $500.

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ Florence: The City Layout . Encyclopædia Britannica. 2007.

^ "Style is referred to as Gothic" .

Michigan State University . Archived from the original on 24 June 2007 . Retrieved 25 October 2018 .

^ Italy: Savonarola . Encyclopædia Britannica. 2007.

^ Ammannati, Bartolommeo . Encyclopædia Britannica. 2007.

^ a b c Vecchio, Palazzo . Encyclopædia Britannica. 2007.

^ "Rape of the Sabine Women: Sculpture by Giambologna" .

Archived from the original on 2020-06-27 . Retrieved 2020-06-28 .

^ "The Limited Traffic Zone (ZTL) in Florence" .

Visit Florence.com . Discover Tuscany. 22 June 2022 . Retrieved March 21, 2023 .

^ DiDonato, Valentina (21 March 2023).

"US tourist fined $500 for driving Ferrari into Florence's famous piazza" .

BBC . Retrieved 21 March 2023 .

Further reading [ edit ] Piccolomini, Mandrefi (Nov 1989). "See Italy before it's too late".

ARTnews : 190.

ISSN 0004-3273 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Piazza della Signoria .

Virtual Tour of Piazza della Signoria v t e Tourism in Florence Museums , galleries and palaces Bargello Casa Buonarroti Casa Guidi Galleria dell'Accademia David Garden of Archimedes Loggia del Bigallo Loggia dei Lanzi Loggia del Mercato Nuovo Loggia del Pesce Loggia Rucellai Museo dell'Opera del Duomo Museo Galileo Museo Nazionale Alinari della Fotografia Museo Nazionale di San Marco Museo di Storia Naturale di Firenze La Specola National Archaeological Museum Orsanmichele Ospedale degli Innocenti Palazzo dell'Arte dei Beccai Palazzo Davanzati Palazzo Della Stufa Palazzo Gondi Palazzo Medici Riccardi Magi Chapel Palazzo Pitti Museo delle Porcellane Palazzo Spini Feroni Palazzo Strozzi Palazzo Vecchio Studiolo of Francesco I Stibbert Museum Uffizi Vasari Corridor Religious sites Basilicas Cathedral of Santa Maria del Fiore S Croce Baroncelli Chapel Pazzi Chapel S Lorenzo Medici Chapels S Maria Novella Tornabuoni Chapel SS Annunziata S Marco S Maria del Carmine Brancacci Chapel S Miniato al Monte S Spirito S Trinita Bartolini Salimbeni Chapel Sassetti Chapel Churches Badia Fiorentina Battistero di San Giovanni Certosa del Galluzzo Ognissanti Oratorio dei Vanchetoni Oratory of Gesù Pellegrino Oratory of S Thomas Aquinas Orsanmichele S Ambrogio Ss Apostoli S Felicita S Frediano in Cestello S Gaetano S Giovannino degli Scolopi S Giovannino dei Cavalieri S Jacopo sopr'Arno S Maria degli Angeli S Maria Maddalena dei Pazzi S Maria Maggiore S Martino del Vescovo S Pancrazio S Salvatore al Vescovo S Salvi Ss Simone e Giuda S Stefano al Ponte Other Great Synagogue Towers (Torri) degli Amidei degli Alberti dei Belfredelli dei Della Bella dei Gianfigliazzi dei Mannelli dei Pulci Giotto's Campanile Library Biblioteca Riccardiana ( Palazzo Medici Riccardi ) British Institute of Florence Gabinetto Vieusseux ( Palazzo Strozzi ) Kunsthistorisches Institut Laurentian Library National Central Library Landmarks Fountain of Neptune Giotto's Campanile Monument to Dante Ponte Vecchio Theatres Teatro Comunale Teatro della Pergola Teatro Verdi Squares Piazza del Duomo Piazza della Repubblica Piazza della Signoria Piazza Santa Croce Piazza San Lorenzo Piazzale Michelangelo Streets Via Cavour Via de' Tornabuoni Forts Belvedere Fortezza da Basso Gardens and parks Bardini Gardens Boboli Gardens Giardino dell'Iris Giardino delle Rose Orto Botanico di Firenze Parco delle Cascine Villas Medici villas di Castello La Petraia di Careggi Medicea L'Ambrogiana del Poggio Imperiale Gamberaia I Tatti Il Gioiello La Pietra Rusciano Events and traditions Buchette del vino Calcio storico fiorentino Maggio Musicale Fiorentino Scoppio del carro Districts of Florence Trams in Florence Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Piazza_della_Signoria&oldid=1290511146 " Categories : Piazzas in Florence Uffizi Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Italian-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Pages with Italian IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2008 Commons link is on Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 15 May 2025, at 07:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Piazza della Signoria 32 languages Add topic

