Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 1.1 Aircraft and automobiles 1.2 Cooling systems 1.3 Vacuum brakes 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Inch of mercury 20 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Simple English Svenska தமிழ் Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Measurement unit for pressure See also: Inch of water This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Inch of mercury" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Inch of mercury Early American barometer calibrated in inches of mercury General information Unit of Pressure Symbol inHg, ″Hg Conversions 1 inHg in ...

... is equal to ...

SI units 3.38639 kPa United States customary units 0.491154 psi Inch of mercury ( inHg , ″Hg , or in ) is a non- SI unit of measurement for pressure . It is used for barometric pressure in weather reports , refrigeration and aviation in the United States .

It is the pressure exerted by a column of mercury 1 inch (25.4 mm) in height at the standard acceleration of gravity .  Conversion to metric units depends on the density of mercury, and hence its temperature; typical conversion factors are: [ 1 ] Conditions Pressure conventional 3386.389 pascals 32 °F (0 °C) 3386.38 pascals 60 °F (16 °C) 3376.85 pascals In older literature, an "inch of mercury" is based on the height of a column of mercury at 60 °F (15.6 °C).

[ 1 ] 1 inHg 60 °F = 3,376.85 pascals (33.7685 hPa) In Imperial units: 1 inHg 60 °F = 0.489 771 psi , or 2.041 771 inHg 60 °F = 1 psi.

Applications [ edit ] Aircraft and automobiles [ edit ] Aircraft altimeters measure the relative pressure difference between the lower ambient pressure at altitude and a calibrated reading on the ground.  In North America [ 2 ] and Japan, [ 3 ] these altimeter readings are provided in inches of mercury, but most other nations use hectopascals . Ground readings vary with weather and along the route of the aircraft as it travels, so current readings are relayed periodically by air traffic control. Aircraft operating at higher altitudes (at or above what is called the transition altitude , which varies by country) set their barometric altimeters to a standard pressure of 29.92 inHg (1 atm = 29.92 inHg) or 1013.25 hPa (1 hPa = 1 mbar ) regardless of the actual sea level pressure. The resulting altimeter readings are known as flight levels .

Piston engine aircraft with constant-speed propellers also use inches of mercury to measure manifold pressure , which is indicative of engine power produced in engines equipped with a supercharger or turbosupercharger (naturally aspirated engines measure manifold vacuum instead). In automobile racing, particularly United States Auto Club and Champ Car Indy car racing , inches of mercury was the unit used to measure turbocharger inlet pressure. However, the inch of mercury is still used today in car performance modification to measure the amount of vacuum or pressure within the engine's intake manifold. This can be seen on "boost gauges (forced induction) or vacuum gauges (natural induction), which give a rough indication of the relative power being produced at any given time.

Cooling systems [ edit ] In air conditioning and refrigeration, inHg is often used to describe "inches of mercury vacuum", or pressures below ambient atmospheric pressure, for recovery of refrigerants from air conditioning and refrigeration systems, as well as for leak testing of systems while under a vacuum, and for dehydration of refrigeration systems. The low-side gauge in a refrigeration gauge manifold indicates pressures below ambient in "inches of mercury vacuum" (inHg), down to a 30 inHg vacuum.

Inches of mercury is also used in automotive cooling system vacuum test and fill tools. A technician will use this tool to remove air from modern automotive cooling systems, test the system's ability to hold vacuum, and subsequently refill using the vacuum as suction for the new coolant. Typical minimum vacuum values are between 22 and 27 inHg.

Vacuum brakes [ edit ] Inches of mercury was the usual unit of pressure measurement in railway vacuum brakes .

See also [ edit ] Torr (millimeters of mercury) Bar (unit) Mercury barometer Millimetre of mercury References [ edit ] ^ a b Barry N. Taylor, Guide for the Use of the International System of Units (SI), 1995, NIST Special Publication 811, Appendix B [1] ^ From the Ground Up – 29th Edition [ ISBN missing ] [ page needed ] ^ "Full automation of aeronautical meteorological observations and reports at aerodromes" (PDF) .

Japan Meteorological Agency . August 2016. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 May 2025 . Retrieved 7 May 2025 .

v t e United States customary units Comparison with imperial unit system Length Thousandth of an inch Inch Hand Link Foot Yard Rod Chain Furlong Mile Statute mile Area Square inch Square foot Square yard Acre Square mile Volume Derived Cubic inch Cubic foot Cubic yard Cubic mile Cooking Teaspoon Tablespoon Fluid ounce Cup Pint Quart Gallon Wood Board foot Cord Face cord Other Minim Gill Peck Bushel Barrel Acre-foot Speed Foot per second Miles per hour Mass Grain Dram Ounce Pound Hundredweight Ton Long Short Force Poundal Pound-force Kip Pressure Inch of mercury Pound per square inch Kilopound per square inch Other units and measures Bolt (cloth) British thermal unit Degree (angle) Fahrenheit Foot-candle Foot-lambert Foot-pound (energy) Horsepower Perm Pound-foot (torque) Spinning count Ton of refrigeration Related systems American wire gauge Avoirdupois system Body jewelry sizes English Engineering Units Foot–pound–second system of units Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Inch_of_mercury&oldid=1302716670 " Categories : Units of pressure Mercury (element) Customary units of measurement in the United States Hidden categories: Pages with missing ISBNs Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2022 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2016 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 03:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Inch of mercury 20 languages Add topic

