Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation 2 Evolution 3 Observational manifestations 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Common envelope 11 languages العربية Català Deutsch Français 한국어 Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Português Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Common gas atmosphere of a binary star system Key stages in a common envelope phase. Top: A star fills its Roche lobe. Middle: The companion is engulfed; the core and companion spiral towards one another inside a common envelope. Bottom: The envelope is ejected or the two stars merge.

In astronomy , a common envelope ( CE ) is gas that contains a binary star system.

[ 1 ] The gas does not rotate at the same rate as the embedded binary system. A system with such a configuration is said to be in a common envelope phase or undergoing common envelope evolution.

During a common envelope phase the embedded binary system is subject to drag forces from the envelope which cause the separation of the two stars to decrease. The phase ends either when the envelope is ejected to leave the binary system with much smaller orbital separation, or when the two stars become sufficiently close to merge and form a single star. A common envelope phase is short-lived relative to the lifetime of the stars involved.

Evolution through a common envelope phase with ejection of the envelope can lead to the formation of a binary system composed of a compact object with a close companion.

Cataclysmic variables , X-ray binaries and systems of close double white dwarfs or neutron stars are examples of systems of this type which can be explained as having undergone common envelope evolution. In all these examples there is a compact remnant (a white dwarf, neutron star or black hole) which must have been the core of a star which was much larger than the current orbital separation. If these systems have undergone common envelope evolution then their present close separation is explained. Short-period systems containing compact objects are sources of gravitational waves and Type Ia supernovae .

Predictions of the outcome of common envelope evolution are uncertain.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] A common envelope is sometimes confused with a contact binary . In a common envelope binary system the envelope does not generally rotate at the same rate as the embedded binary system; thus it is not constrained by the equipotential surface passing through the L 2 Lagrangian point .

[ 1 ] In a contact binary system the shared envelope rotates with the binary system and fills an equipotential surface.

[ 5 ] Formation [ edit ] Stages in the life of a binary system as a common envelope is formed. The system has mass ratio M1/M2=3. The black line is the Roche equipotential surface. The dashed line is the rotation axis. (a) Both stars lie within their Roche lobes, star 1 on the left (mass M1 in red) and star 2 on the right (mass M2 in orange).  (b) Star 1 has grown to nearly fill its Roche lobe.  (c) Star 1 has grown to overfill its Roche lobe and transfer mass to star 2: Roche lobe overflow.  (d) Transferred too fast to be accreted, matter has built up around star 2.  (e) A common envelope, represented schematically by an ellipse, has formed. Adapted from Fig. 1 of Izzard et al. (2012).

[ 6 ] A common envelope is formed in a binary star system when the orbital separation decreases rapidly or one of the stars expands rapidly.

[ 2 ] The donor star will start mass transfer when it overfills its Roche lobe and as a consequence the orbit will shrink further causing it to overflow the Roche lobe even more, which accelerates the mass transfer, causing the orbit to shrink even faster and the donor to expand more.  This leads to the run-away process of dynamically unstable mass transfer. In some cases the receiving star is unable to accept all the material, which leads to the formation of a common envelope engulfing the companion star.

[ 7 ] Evolution [ edit ] The donor's core does not participate in the expansion of the stellar envelope and the formation of the common envelope, and the common envelope will contain two objects: the core of the original donor and the companion star.  These two objects (initially) continue their orbital motion inside the common envelope.  However, it is thought that because of drag forces inside the gaseous envelope, the two objects lose energy, which brings them in a closer orbit and actually increases their orbital velocities. The loss of orbital energy is assumed to heat up and expand the envelope, and the whole common-envelope phase ends when either the envelope is expelled into space, or the two objects inside the envelope merge and no more energy is available to expand or even expel the envelope.

[ 7 ] This phase of the shrinking of the orbit inside the common envelope is known as a spiral-in .

Observational manifestations [ edit ] Common envelope events (CEEs) are difficult to observe. Their existence has been mainly inferred indirectly from presence in the galaxy of binary systems that can not be explained by any other mechanism. Observationally CEEs should be brighter than typical novae but fainter than typical supernovae . The photosphere of the common envelope should be relatively cool—at about 5,000 K—emitting a red spectrum. However its large size should lead to a large luminosity—on the order of that of a red supergiant . A common envelope event should begin with a sharp rise in luminosity followed by a few months long plateau of constant luminosity (much like that of type II-P supernova ) powered by the recombination of hydrogen in the envelope. After that the luminosity should decrease rapidly.

[ 7 ] Several events that resemble the description above have been observed in past. These events are called luminous red novae (LRNe). They are a subset of a broader class of events called intermediate-luminosity red transients (ILRTs). They have relatively slow expansion velocities of 200–1000 km/s and total radiated energies are 10 38 to 10 40 J.

[ 7 ] The possible CEEs that have been observed so far include: M85 OT2006-1 , possible ejection of the whole envelope.

V1309 Scorpii , a possible star merger.

M31 RV V838 Monocerotis [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Ou 5 , a planetary nebula whose progenitor was a common envelope binary See also [ edit ] Binary star Binary system (astronomy) Contact binary Post common envelope binary References [ edit ] ^ a b Paczyński, B. (1976). "Common Envelope Binaries". In Eggleton, P.; Mitton, S.; Whelan, J. (eds.).

Structure and Evolution of Close Binary Systems . IAU Symposium No. 73. Dordrecht: D. Reidel . pp.

75– 80.

Bibcode : 1976IAUS...73...75P .

^ a b Iben, I.; Livio, M. (1993).

"Common envelopes in binary star evolution" .

Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific .

105 : 1373– 1406.

Bibcode : 1993PASP..105.1373I .

doi : 10.1086/133321 .

^ Taam, R. E.; Sandquist, E. L. (2000). "Common Envelope Evolution of Massive Binary Stars".

Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics .

38 : 113– 141.

Bibcode : 2000ARA&A..38..113T .

doi : 10.1146/annurev.astro.38.1.113 .

^ Ivanova, N.; Justham, S.; Chen, X.; De Marco, O.; Fryer, C. L.; Gaburov, E.; Ge, H.; Glebbeek, E.; Han, Z.; Li, X. D.; Lu, G.; Podsiadlowski, P.; Potter, A.; Soker, N.; Taam, R.; Tauris, T. M.; van den Heuvel, E. P. J.; Webbink, R. F. (2013). "Common envelope evolution: where we stand and how we can move forward".

The Astronomy and Astrophysics Review .

21 : 59.

arXiv : 1209.4302 .

Bibcode : 2013A&ARv..21...59I .

doi : 10.1007/s00159-013-0059-2 .

^ Eggleton, P. (2006).

Evolutionary Processes in Binary and Multiple Stars . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0521855570 .

^ Izzard, R. G.; Hall, P. D.; Tauris, T. M.; Tout, C. A. (2012).

"Common envelope evolution" .

Proceedings of the International Astronomical Union .

7 : 95– 102.

Bibcode : 2012IAUS..283...95I .

doi : 10.1017/S1743921312010769 .

^ a b c d e Ivanova, N.; Justham, S.; Nandez, J. L. A.; Lombardi, J. C. (2013). "Identification of the Long-Sought Common-Envelope Events".

Science .

339 (6118): 433– 435.

arXiv : 1301.5897 .

Bibcode : 2013Sci...339..433I .

doi : 10.1126/science.1225540 .

PMID 23349287 .

^ "Mystery of Strange Star Outbursts May Be Solved" .

Space.com . 24 January 2013 . Retrieved 2015-08-30 .

v t e Stars List Formation Accretion Molecular cloud Bok globule Young stellar object Protostar Pre-main-sequence Herbig Ae/Be T Tauri Herbig–Haro object Hayashi track Henyey track Evolution Main sequence Red-giant branch Horizontal branch Red clump Asymptotic giant branch post-AGB super-AGB Blue loop Planetary nebula Protoplanetary Wolf–Rayet nebula PG1159 Dredge-up OH/IR Instability strip Luminous blue variable Stellar population Supernova Superluminous Hypernova Classification Early Late Main sequence O B A F G K M Subdwarf O B WR OB Subgiant Giant Blue Red Yellow Bright giant Supergiant Blue Red Yellow Hypergiant Yellow Carbon S CN CH White dwarf Chemically peculiar Am Ap/Bp CEMP HgMn He-weak Barium Lambda Boötis Lead Technetium Be Shell B[e] Helium Extreme Blue straggler Remnants Compact star Parker's star White dwarf Helium planet Neutron Radio-quiet Pulsar Binary X-ray Magnetar Stellar black hole X-ray binary Burster SGR Hypothetical Blue dwarf Black dwarf Exotic Boson Electroweak Strange Preon Planck Dark Dark-energy Quark Q Black hole star Black Hawking Quasi-star Gravastar Thorne–Żytkow object Iron Blitzar White hole Nucleosynthesis Deuterium burning Lithium burning Proton–proton chain CNO cycle Helium flash Triple-alpha process Alpha process C burning Ne burning O burning Si burning s-process r-process p-process Nova Symbiotic Remnant Luminous red nova Recurrent Micronova Supernova Structure Core Convection zone Microturbulence Oscillations Radiation zone Atmosphere Photosphere Starspot Chromosphere Stellar corona Alfvén surface Stellar wind Bubble Bipolar outflow Accretion disk Protoplanetary disk Proplyd Asteroseismology Helioseismology Circumstellar dust Cosmic dust Circumstellar envelope Eddington luminosity Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism Properties Designation Dynamics Effective temperature Luminosity Kinematics Magnetic field Absolute magnitude Mass Metallicity Rotation Gravity darkening Starlight Variable Photometric system Color index Hertzsprung–Russell diagram Color–color diagram Strömgren sphere Kraft break Star systems Binary Contact Common envelope Eclipsing Symbiotic Multiple Cluster Open Globular Super Planetary system Earth-centric observations Sun Solar eclipse Solar radio emission Solar System Sunlight Pole star Circumpolar Constellation Asterism Magnitude Apparent Extinction Photographic Radial velocity Proper motion Parallax Photometric-standard Lists Proper names Arabic Chinese Extremes Most massive Highest temperature Lowest temperature Largest volume Smallest volume Brightest Historical brightest Most luminous Nearest bright Most distant With resolved images With multiple exoplanets Brown dwarfs Red dwarfs White dwarfs Milky Way novae Supernovae Candidates Remnants Planetary nebulae Timeline of stellar astronomy Related Substellar object Brown dwarf Desert Sub Planet Galactic year Galaxy Guest Gravity Intergalactic Neutron star merger Planet-hosting stars Stellar collision Stellar engulfment Tidal disruption event Category Stars portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Common_envelope&oldid=1290698822 " Categories : Binary stars Common envelope binary stars Stellar astronomy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 May 2025, at 13:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Common envelope 11 languages Add topic

