Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics 2 Distribution and habitat Toggle Distribution and habitat subsection 2.1 Distribution of subspecies 3 Ecology and behaviour 4 Threats 5 Conservation Toggle Conservation subsection 5.1 In captivity 6 In culture 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Barasingha 53 languages العربية অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Diné bizaad Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kotava Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 ଓଡ଼ିଆ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский سنڌي Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Species of deer Barasingha Male Adult female and yearling Conservation status Vulnerable ( IUCN 3.1 ) [ 1 ] CITES Appendix I ( CITES ) [ 1 ] Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Order: Artiodactyla Family: Cervidae Genus: Rucervus Species: R. duvaucelii Binomial name Rucervus duvaucelii ( G. Cuvier , 1823) [ 2 ] Historic range (yellow); relict populations: duvaucelii (red); branderi (green); ranjitsinhi (blue) The barasingha ( Rucervus duvaucelii ), sometimes barasinghe , also known as the swamp deer , is a deer species distributed in the Indian subcontinent . Populations in northern and central India are fragmented, and two isolated populations occur in southwestern Nepal . It has been extirpated in Pakistan and Bangladesh , and its presence is uncertain in Bhutan .

[ 1 ] The specific name commemorates the French naturalist Alfred Duvaucel .

[ 3 ] The swamp deer differs from all other Indian deer species in that the antlers carry more than three tines . Because of this distinctive character it is designated bārah-singgā , meaning "twelve-horned" in Hindi .

[ 4 ] Mature stags usually have 10 to 14 tines, and some have been known to have up to 20.

[ 5 ] Characteristics [ edit ] The barasingha is a large deer with a shoulder height of 44 to 46 in (110 to 120 cm) and a head-to-body length of nearly 6 ft (180 cm). Its hair is rather woolly and yellowish brown above but paler below, with white spots along the spine. The throat, belly, inside of the thighs and beneath the tail is white. In summer, the coat becomes bright rufous-brown. The neck is maned. Females are paler than males. Young are spotted. Average antlers measure 30 in (76 cm) round the curve with a girth of 5 in (13 cm) at mid beam.

[ 6 ] A record antler measured 104.1 cm (41.0 in) round the curve.

[ 5 ] Stags weigh 170 to 280 kg (370 to 620 lb). Females are less heavy, weighing about 130 to 145 kg (287 to 320 lb).

[ 7 ] Large stags have weighed from 460 to 570 lb (210 to 260 kg).

[ 4 ] Barasingha herd in Kanha National Park , Madhya Pradesh Barasingha stag Illustration of barasingha antlers [ 6 ] Distribution and habitat [ edit ] Swamp deer were once common in many areas, including parts of the Upper Narmada Valley and to the south, in Bastar , prior to the 19th century.

[ 6 ] They frequent flat or undulating grasslands , floodplains and marshes, and generally stay on the outskirts of forests. At times, they are also found in open forest.

[ 4 ] In the 1960s, the total population was estimated to be between 1,600-2,150 individuals in India, with about 1,600 in Nepal . Today, the distribution is further reduced and fragmented, due to major losses in the 1930s–1960s following unregulated hunting and conversion of large tracts of habitat into cropland.

In Nepal, they can be primarily found in the western areas of the country, south of the Himalayas , in Shuklaphanta and Bardiya National Parks . Within India, barasingha can be found in six localities in Uttar Pradesh . They are found in Kanha National Park , in Madhya Pradesh , and have also been observed across the state border in Chhattisgarh (near to Dhamtari ), [ 8 ] likely the most southerly extent of their distribution. They are regionally extinct in West Bengal , [ 9 ] and are also likely extirpated from Arunachal Pradesh , Bihar , Jharkhand , Meghalaya , Nagaland and Odisha .

[ 10 ] A few barasingha still survive in Assam's Kaziranga and Manas National Parks .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] In 2005, a small population of about 320 individuals was discovered in the Jhilmil Jheel Conservation Reserve in Haridwar district , Uttarakhand , on the east bank of the Ganges . This likely represents the most northerly limit of the species.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Distribution of subspecies [ edit ] Three subspecies are currently recognized: [ 17 ] Swamp deer in Dudhwa National Park , Uttar Pradesh Western swamp deer R. d. duvauceli (Cuvier, 1823) – the nominate subspecies, and most abundant, this water-loving deer has splayed hooves and is adapted to the flooded grassland habitat of the Indo-Gangetic plain ; [ 18 ] in the early 1990s, populations in India were estimated at 1,500–2,000 individuals, and 1,500–1,900 individuals in the Shuklaphanta Wildlife Reserve of Nepal; [ 9 ] the latter population reached 2,170 individuals, including 385 fawns, in spring 2013.

[ 19 ] Swamp deer at Kahna National Park, Madhya Pradesh Swamp deer in Satpura Tiger Reserve Southern swamp deer (or hard ground swamp deer) R. d. branderi ( Pocock 1943) – has hard hooves and is adapted to hard ground in open sal forest with a grass understorey; [ 18 ] survives only in Kanha National Park , to the west of Chhattisgarh and east of Madhya Pradesh. The population numbered about 500 individuals in 1988; 300–350 individuals were estimated at the turn of the century; [ 9 ] and 750 in 2016. It was reintroduced into Satpura Tiger Reserve .

[ 20 ] Swamp deer stag in Kaziranga National Park, Assam Eastern swamp deer R. d. ranjitsinhi (Grooves 1982) –  occurs only in Assam, where the population numbered about 700 individuals in 1978; 400–500 individuals were estimated in Kaziranga National Park at the turn of the century.

[ 9 ] After a census conducted in 2021, 868 individuals were estimated in the park, with a further 121 in Manas National Park .

[ 21 ] Ecology and behaviour [ edit ] Swamp deer are mainly grazers .

[ 4 ] They largely feed on grasses and aquatic plants, foremost on Saccharum , Imperata cylindrica , Narenga porphyrocoma , Phragmites karka , Oryza rufipogon , Hygroryza and Hydrilla . They feed throughout the day with peaks during the mornings and late afternoons to evenings. In winter and monsoon, they drink water twice, and thrice or more in summer. In the hot season, they rest in the shade of trees during the day.

[ 9 ] In central India, the herds comprise on average about 8–20 individuals, with large herds of up to 60. There are twice as many females than males. During the rut they form large herds of adults. The breeding season lasts from September to April, and births occur after a gestation of 240–250 days in August to November. The peak is in September and October in Kanha National Park .

[ 7 ] They give birth to single calves.

[ 7 ] Herd of swamp deer grazing in Kahna National Park, Madhya Pradesh Barasingha stags rutting in Kanha National Park, Madhya Pradesh A barasingha mother and fawn in Assam When alarmed, they give out shrill, baying alarm calls.

[ 5 ] Compared to other deer species, barasingha are more relaxed when it comes to guarding. They have fewer sentries and they spend most of their time grazing, unlike deer species like spotted deer or sambar deer.

[ 22 ] Threats [ edit ] The swamp deer populations outside protected areas and seasonally migrating populations are threatened by poaching for antlers and meat, which are sold in local markets. Swamp deer lost most of its former range because wetlands were converted and used for agriculture so that suitable habitat was reduced to small and isolated fragments.

[ 9 ] The remaining habitat in protected areas is threatened by the change in river dynamics, reduced water flow during summer, increasing siltation , and is further degraded by local people who cut grass, timber and fuelwood, [ 1 ] and by illegal farming on government land.

[ 23 ] George Schaller wrote: "Most of these remnants have or soon will have reached the point of no return." [ 7 ] Conservation [ edit ] Rucervus duvaucelii is listed on CITES Appendix I .

[ 1 ] In India, it is included under Schedule I of the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 .

[ 9 ] An attempt to translocate some individuals to Chitwan National Park in Nepal was unsuccessful.

[ 24 ] In captivity [ edit ] In 1992, there were about 50 individuals in five Indian zoos and 300 in various zoos in North America and Europe .

[ 9 ] There is a herd of barasingha at the Port Lympne Wild Animal Park in Kent, England .

[ 25 ] Swamp deer were introduced to Texas .

[ 26 ] They exist only in small numbers on ranches.

[ 27 ] In culture [ edit ] The barasingha is the state animal of the Indian states of Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh .

[ 28 ] A barasingh (as Kipling writes the name) is mentioned ten times in The Miracle of Purun Bhagat , the second story in The Second Jungle Book . As that part of the story is set in the Himalayas, it is probably meant to be a member of the relict Rucervus duvaucelii duvaucelii population living on both sides of the India – Nepal border.

[ 29 ] See also [ edit ] Chital Sambar deer References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Duckworth, J.W.; Kumar, N.S.; Pokharel, C.P.; Sagar Baral, H. & Timmins, R. (2015).

" Rucervus duvaucelii " .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species .

2015 : e.T4257A22167675.

doi : 10.2305/IUCN.UK.2015-4.RLTS.T4257A22167675.en . Retrieved 15 January 2022 .

^ Grubb, P.

(2005).

"Species Rucervus duvaucelii " . In Wilson, D.E.

; Reeder, D.M (eds.).

Mammal Species of the World: A Taxonomic and Geographic Reference (3rd ed.). Johns Hopkins University Press. pp.

668– 669.

ISBN 978-0-8018-8221-0 .

OCLC 62265494 .

^ Cuvier, G. (1823).

Recherches sur les ossemens fossiles de quadrupèdes . Vol. Tome Quatrième (Nouvelle édition ed.). Paris, Amsterdam: Dufour & d'Ocagne.

^ a b c d Lydekker, R. (1888–1890).

"The Swamp-deer Group" .

The new natural history . Vol. 2. London: Trustees of the British Museum (Natural History). pp.

360– 361.

^ a b c Prater, S. H. (1948).

The Book of Indian animals (10th ed.). Oxford University Press.

^ a b c Blanford, W. T. (1888–1891).

The fauna of British India, including Ceylon and Burma. Mammalia . Taylor and Francis, London.

^ a b c d Schaller, G. B.

(1967).

The Deer and the Tiger – A Study of Wildlife in India . Chicago, IL, USA: University Chicago Press. pp.

93– 133.

ISBN 0-226-73633-4 .

^ "Barasingha in March 2013 by janconl" .

inaturalist.org . April 2020.

^ a b c d e f g h Qureshi Q, Sawarkar VB, Rahmani AR, Mathur PK (2004). "Swamp Deer or Barasingha ( Cervus duvauceli Cuvier, 1823".

Envis Bulletin .

7 : 181– 192.

^ Choudhury, A. U. (2003).

The mammals of Arunachal Pradesh . Regency Publications, New Delhi ISBN 81-87498-80-3 .

^ Choudhury, A. U. (1997).

Checklist of the mammals of Assam . 2nd ed. Gibbon Books & Assam Science Technology & Environment Council, Guwahati, India.

ISBN 81-900866-0-X ^ Choudhury, A. U. (2004).

Kaziranga: Wildlife in Assam . Rupa & Co., New Delhi.

^ Choudhury, A. U. (1987).

"Railway threat to Kaziranga" (PDF) .

Oryx .

21 (3): 160– 163.

doi : 10.1017/S0030605300026892 .

^ Choudhury, A. U. (1986).

Manas Sanctuary threatened by extraneous factors.

The Sentinel.

^ Tewari, R. and Rawat, G.S. (2013). Activity pattern and diurnal time budget of swamp deer ( Rucervus duvaucelii duvaucelii ) in Jhilmil Jheel Conservation Reserve, Haridwar, Uttarakhand, India. NeBIO 4 (3): 36–40.

^ Nandy, S., Kushwaha, S.P.S. and Gaur, P. 2012. Identification of swamp deer ( Cervus duvauceli duvauceli Cuvier) potential habitat in Jhilmil Jheel Conservation Reserve, Uttarakhand, India using multi-criteria analysis. Environmental Management 49 (4): 902–914.

^ Groves, C. (1982). "Geographic variation in the Barasingha or Swamp Deer ( Cervus duvauceli )".

Journal of the Bombay Natural History Society .

79 : 620– 629.

^ a b Pocock R. (1943).

The larger deer of British India . Journal of the Bombay Natural History Society 43: 553–572.

^ "Shuklaphanta sees increase swamp deer number" .

The Himalayan Times . 19 April 2013. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013.

. Kanchanpur, 19 April 2013.

^ Shukla, R. (2017).

"Barasingha breaks new ground" .

Frontline . Retrieved 3 September 2017 .

^ Goswami, R. (2022).

"Can a big flood push Kaziranga's Eastern Swamp Deer to extinction?" .

EastMojo . Assam . Retrieved 12 November 2022 .

^ Menon, Vivek.

Indian Mammals: A Field Guide .

^ Dabas, H. (12 December 2016).

"As Ganga water level dips, farmers encroach land for farming" .

The Times of India . Bijnor . Retrieved 22 December 2016 .

^ Abhaya Raj Joshi (27 July 2023).

"Translocation hurdles prompt new efforts to save rare swamp deer in Nepal" .

Mongabay . Retrieved 4 August 2023 .

^ "Picture of Barasingha at Port Lympne Wild Animal Park" .

Zoo Institutes . Retrieved 5 March 2023 .

^ McCarthy, A., Blouch, R., Moore, D., and Wemmer, C. M. (1998).

Deer: status survey and conservation action plan IUCN Deer Specialist Group. IUCN, Gland, Switzerland.

^ Long, J. L. (2003).

Introduced Mammals of the World . Collingwod, Australia: CSIRO. p. 411.

ISBN 0-643-06714-0 .

^ "State Animals, Birds, Trees and Flower" .

www.pannatigerreserve.in . Retrieved 4 April 2018 .

^ Kipling , Rudyard, The Miracle of Purun Bhagat , in The Second Jungle Book ( read online ) (accessed 3 May 2024) Further reading [ edit ] M. Acharya, M. Barad, S. Bhalani, P. Bilgi, M. Panchal, V. Shrimali, W. Solanki, D.M. Thumber.

Kanha Chronicle .

Centre for Environment Education , Ahmedabad in collaboration with the United States National Park Service .

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article  " Swamp Deer ".

Animal Info: Barasingha World Association of Zoos and Aquariums: Barasingha – Cervus duvaucelii v t e Extant Artiodactyla species Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Infraclass: Eutheria Superorder: Laurasiatheria Suborder Ruminantia Antilocapridae Antilocapra Pronghorn ( A. americana ) Giraffidae Okapia Okapi ( O. johnstoni ) Giraffa Northern giraffe ( G. camelopardalis ) Southern giraffe ( G. giraffa ) Reticulated giraffe ( G. reticulata ) Masai giraffe ( G. tippelskirchi ) Moschidae Moschus Anhui musk deer ( M. anhuiensis ) Dwarf musk deer ( M. berezovskii ) Alpine musk deer ( M. chrysogaster ) Kashmir musk deer ( M. cupreus ) Black musk deer ( M. fuscus ) Himalayan musk deer ( M. leucogaster ) Siberian musk deer ( M. moschiferus ) Tragulidae Hyemoschus Water chevrotain ( H. aquaticus ) Moschiola Indian spotted chevrotain ( M. indica ) Yellow-striped chevrotain ( M. kathygre ) Sri Lankan spotted chevrotain ( M. meminna ) Tragulus Java mouse-deer ( T. javanicus ) Lesser mouse-deer ( T. kanchil ) Greater mouse-deer ( T. napu ) Philippine mouse-deer ( T. nigricans ) Vietnam mouse-deer ( T. versicolor ) Williamson's mouse-deer ( T. williamsoni ) Cervidae Large family listed below Bovidae Large family listed below Family Cervidae Cervinae Muntiacus Bornean yellow muntjac ( M. atherodes ) Hairy-fronted muntjac ( M. crinifrons ) Fea's muntjac ( M. feae ) Gongshan muntjac ( M. gongshanensis ) Sumatran muntjac ( M. montanus ) Southern red muntjac ( M. muntjak ) Pu Hoat muntjac ( M. puhoatensis ) Leaf muntjac ( M. putaoensis ) Reeves's muntjac ( M. reevesi ) Roosevelt's muntjac ( M. rooseveltorum ) Truong Son muntjac ( M. truongsonensis ) Northern red muntjac ( M. vaginalis ) Giant muntjac ( M. vuquangensis ) Elaphodus Tufted deer ( E. cephalophus ) Dama European fallow deer ( D. dama ) Persian fallow deer ( D. mesopotamica ) Axis Chital ( A. axis ) Calamian deer ( A. calamianensis ) Bawean deer ( A. kuhlii ) Hog deer ( A. porcinus ) Rucervus Barasingha ( R. duvaucelii ) Eld's deer ( R. eldii ) Elaphurus Père David's deer ( E. davidianus ) Rusa Visayan spotted deer ( R. alfredi ) Philippine sambar ( R. mariannus ) Rusa deer ( R. timorensis ) Sambar ( R. unicolor ) Cervus Thorold's deer ( C. albirostris ) Red deer ( C. elaphus ) Elk ( C. canadensis ) Central Asian red deer ( C. hanglu ) Sika deer ( C. nippon ) Capreolinae Alces Moose ( A. alces ) Hydropotes Water deer ( H. inermis ) Capreolus European roe deer ( C. capreolus ) Siberian roe deer ( C. pygargus ) Rangifer Reindeer ( R. tarandus ) Hippocamelus Taruca ( H. antisensis ) South Andean deer ( H. bisulcus ) Mazama Red brocket ( M. americana ) Small red brocket ( M. bororo ) Merida brocket ( M. bricenii ) Dwarf brocket ( M. chunyi ) Pygmy brocket ( M. nana ) Amazonian brown brocket ( M. nemorivaga ) Little red brocket ( M. rufina ) Central American red brocket ( M. temama ) Ozotoceros Pampas deer ( O. bezoarticus ) Blastocerus Marsh deer ( B. dichotomus ) Pudu Northern pudu ( P. mephistophiles ) ?

Southern pudu ( P. pudu ) Pudella Peruvian Yungas pudu ( P. carlae ) Northern pudu ( P. mephistophiles ) Odocoileus Mule deer ( O. hemionus ) Yucatan brown brocket ( O. pandora ) White-tailed deer ( O. virginianus ) Subulo Gray brocket ( S. gouazoubira ) Family Bovidae Hippotraginae Hippotragus Roan antelope ( H. equinus ) Sable antelope ( H. niger ) Oryx East African oryx ( O. beisa ) Scimitar oryx ( O. dammah ) Gemsbok ( O. gazella ) Arabian oryx ( O. leucoryx ) Addax Addax ( A. nasomaculatus ) Reduncinae Kobus Waterbuck ( K. ellipsiprymnus ) Kob ( K. kob ) Lechwe ( K. leche ) Nile lechwe ( K. megaceros ) Puku ( K. vardonii ) Redunca Southern reedbuck ( R. arundinum ) Mountain reedbuck ( R. fulvorufula ) Bohor reedbuck ( R. redunca ) Aepycerotinae Aepyceros Impala ( A. melampus ) Peleinae Pelea Grey rhebok ( P. capreolus ) Alcelaphinae Beatragus Hirola ( B. hunteri ) Damaliscus Common tsessebe ( D. lunatus ) Bontebok ( D. pygargus ) Alcelaphus Hartebeest ( A. buselaphus ) Connochaetes Black wildebeest ( C. gnou ) Blue wildebeest ( C. taurinus ) Pantholopinae Pantholops Tibetan antelope ( P. hodgsonii ) Caprinae Large subfamily listed below Bovinae Large subfamily listed below Antilopinae Large subfamily listed below Family Bovidae (subfamily Caprinae ) Ammotragus Barbary sheep ( A. lervia ) Arabitragus Arabian tahr ( A. jayakari ) Budorcas Takin ( B. taxicolor ) Capra Wild goat ( C. aegagrus ) West Caucasian tur ( C. caucasia ) East Caucasian tur ( C. cylindricornis ) Markhor ( C. falconeri ) Domestic goat ( C. hircus ) Alpine ibex ( C. ibex ) Nubian ibex ( C. nubiana ) Iberian ibex ( C. pyrenaica ) Siberian ibex ( C. sibirica ) Walia ibex ( C. walie ) Capricornis Japanese serow ( C. crispus ) Red serow ( C. rubidus ) Mainland serow ( C. sumatraensis ) Taiwan serow ( C. swinhoei ) Hemitragus Himalayan tahr ( H. jemlahicus ) Naemorhedus Red goral ( N. baileyi ) Long-tailed goral ( N. caudatus ) Himalayan goral ( N. goral ) Chinese goral ( N. griseus ) Oreamnos Mountain goat ( O. americanus ) Ovibos Muskox ( O. moschatus ) Nilgiritragus Nilgiri tahr ( N. hylocrius ) Ovis Argali ( O. ammon ) Domestic sheep ( O. aries ) Bighorn sheep ( O. canadensis ) Dall sheep ( O. dalli ) Mouflon ( O. gmelini ) Snow sheep ( O. nivicola ) Urial ( O. vignei ) Pseudois Bharal ( P. nayaur ) Rupicapra Pyrenean chamois ( R. pyrenaica ) Chamois ( R. rupicapra ) Family Bovidae (subfamily Bovinae ) Boselaphini Tetracerus Four-horned antelope ( T. quadricornis ) Boselaphus Nilgai ( B. tragocamelus ) Bovini Bubalus Wild water buffalo ( B. arnee ) Domestic water buffalo ( B. bubalis ) Lowland anoa ( B. depressicornis ) Tamaraw ( B. mindorensis ) Mountain anoa ( B. quarlesi ) Bos American bison ( B. bison ) European bison ( B. bonasus ) Bali cattle ( B. domesticus ) Gayal ( B. frontalis ) Gaur ( B. gaurus ) Domestic yak ( B. grunniens ) Zebu ( B. indicus ) Banteng ( B. javanicus ) Wild yak ( B. mutus ) Cattle ( B. taurus ) Pseudoryx Saola ( P. nghetinhensis ) Syncerus African buffalo ( S. caffer ) Tragelaphini Tragelaphus (including kudus ) Nyala ( T. angasii ) Mountain nyala ( T. buxtoni ) Bongo ( T. eurycerus ) Lesser kudu ( T. imberbis ) Harnessed bushbuck ( T. scriptus ) Sitatunga ( T. spekeii ) Greater kudu ( T. strepsiceros ) Cape bushbuck ( T. sylvaticus ) Taurotragus Giant eland ( T. derbianus ) Common eland ( T. oryx ) Family Bovidae (subfamily Antilopinae ) Antilopini Ammodorcas Dibatag ( A. clarkei ) Antidorcas Springbok ( A. marsupialis ) Antilope Blackbuck ( A. cervicapra ) Eudorcas Mongalla gazelle ( E. albonotata ) Red-fronted gazelle ( E. rufifrons ) Thomson's gazelle ( E. thomsonii ) Heuglin's gazelle ( E. tilonura ) Gazella Arabian gazelle ( G. arabica ) Chinkara ( G. bennettii ) Cuvier's gazelle ( G. cuvieri ) Dorcas gazelle ( G. dorcas ) Mountain gazelle ( G. gazella ) Rhim gazelle ( G. leptoceros ) Speke's gazelle ( G. spekei ) Goitered gazelle ( G. subgutturosa ) Litocranius Gerenuk ( L. walleri ) Nanger Dama gazelle ( N. dama ) Grant's gazelle ( N. granti ) Bright's gazelle ( N. notatus ) Peter's gazelle ( N. petersii ) Soemmerring's gazelle ( N. soemmerringii ) Procapra Mongolian gazelle ( P. gutturosa ) Goa ( P. picticaudata ) Przewalski's gazelle ( P. przewalskii ) Saigini Saiga Saiga antelope ( S. tatarica ) Neotragini Dorcatragus Beira ( D. megalotis ) Madoqua Günther's dik-dik ( M. guentheri ) Kirk's dik-dik ( M. kirkii ) Silver dik-dik ( M. piacentinii ) Salt's dik-dik ( M. saltiana ) Neotragus Royal antelope ( N. pygmaeus ) Nesotragus Bates' pygmy antelope ( N. batesi ) Suni ( N. moschatus ) Oreotragus Klipspringer ( O. oreotragus ) Ourebia Oribi ( O. ourebi ) Raphicerus Steenbok ( R. campestris ) Cape grysbok ( R. melanotis ) Sharpe's grysbok ( R. sharpei ) Cephalophini Cephalophus Aders's duiker ( C. adersi ) Brooke's duiker ( C. brookei ) Peters' duiker ( C. callipygus ) White-legged duiker ( C. crusalbum ) Bay duiker ( C. dorsalis ) Harvey's duiker ( C. harveyi ) Jentink's duiker ( C. jentinki ) White-bellied duiker ( C. leucogaster ) Red forest duiker ( C. natalensis ) Black duiker ( C. niger ) Black-fronted duiker ( C. nigrifrons ) Ogilby's duiker ( C. ogilbyi ) Ruwenzori duiker ( C. rubidis ) Red-flanked duiker ( C. rufilatus ) Yellow-backed duiker ( C. silvicultor ) Abbott's duiker ( C. spadix ) Weyns's duiker ( C. weynsi ) Zebra duiker ( C. zebra ) Philantomba Blue duiker ( P. monticola ) Maxwell's duiker ( P. maxwellii ) Walter's duiker ( P. walteri ) Sylvicapra Common duiker ( S. grimmia ) Suborder Suina Suidae Babyrousa Buru babirusa ( B. babyrussa ) North Sulawesi babirusa ( B. celebensis ) Togian babirusa ( B. togeanensis ) Hylochoerus Giant forest hog ( H. meinertzhageni ) Phacochoerus Desert warthog ( P. aethiopicus ) Common warthog ( P. africanus ) Porcula Pygmy hog ( P. salvania ) Potamochoerus Bushpig ( P. larvatus ) Red river hog ( P. porcus ) Sus Palawan bearded pig ( S. ahoenobarbus ) Bornean bearded pig ( S. barbatus ) Visayan warty pig ( S. cebifrons ) Celebes warty pig ( S. celebensis ) Domestic pig ( S. domesticus ) Flores warty pig ( S. heureni ) Oliver's warty pig ( S. oliveri ) Philippine warty pig ( S. philippensis ) Wild boar ( S. scrofa ) Timor warty pig ( S. timoriensis ) Javan warty pig ( S. verrucosus ) Tayassuidae Tayassu White-lipped peccary ( T. pecari ) Catagonus Chacoan peccary ( C. wagneri ) Dicotyles Collared peccary ( D. tajacu ) Suborder Tylopoda Camelidae Lama Llama ( L. glama ) Guanaco ( L. guanicoe ) Alpaca ( L. pacos ) Vicuña ( L. vicugna ) Camelus Domestic Bactrian camel ( C. bactrianus ) Dromedary/Arabian camel ( C. dromedarius ) Wild Bactrian camel ( C. ferus ) Suborder Whippomorpha Hippopotamidae Hippopotamus Hippopotamus ( H. amphibius ) Choeropsis Pygmy hippopotamus ( C. liberiensis ) Cetacea see Cetacea Taxon identifiers Rucervus duvaucelii Wikidata : Q506308 Wikispecies : Rucervus duvaucelii ADW : Rucervus_duvaucelii BOLD : 462617 CoL : 4TM8M EoL : 308523 GBIF : 7261380 iNaturalist : 75046 ITIS : 898209 IUCN : 4257 MDD : 1006319 MSW : 14200429 NCBI : 43328 Observation.org : 201219 Open Tree of Life : 504972 Paleobiology Database : 473552 Species+ : 10612 TSA : 15886 Xeno-canto : Rucervus-duvaucelii Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Barasingha&oldid=1298775487 " Categories : IUCN Red List vulnerable species Cervines Fauna of South Asia Mammals of Nepal Mammals of India Mammals described in 1823 Taxa named by Georges Cuvier Symbols of Madhya Pradesh Symbols of Uttar Pradesh Fauna of Uttar Pradesh Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 16:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Barasingha 53 languages Add topic

