Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Schelling and Hegel's concepts of the absolute 2 Absolute idealism in Britain 3 Reactions 4 See also 5 Notes 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Absolute idealism 25 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Italiano ქართული Кыргызча Македонски Русский Shqip Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of idealism in metaphysics This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( September 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel Hegelianism Works The Phenomenology of Spirit The Science of Logic Encyclopedia of the Philosophical Sciences Elements of the Philosophy of Right Lectures on the Philosophy of History Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion Lectures on the History of Philosophy Lectures on Aesthetics Schools Absolute idealism British idealism German idealism Associations and Societies Hegel-Archiv Internationale Hegel-Gesellschaft Internationale Hegel-Vereinigung Hegel Society of America Hegel Society of Great Britain Centre de recherche et de documentation sur Hegel Journals Hegel-Studien Hegel-Jahrbuch Hegel Bulletin The Owl of Minerva Studia Hegeliana Revista Eletrônica Estudos Hegelianos Related topics Right Hegelians Young Hegelians v t e Absolute idealism is chiefly associated with Friedrich Schelling and G. W. F. Hegel , both of whom were German idealist philosophers in the 19th century. The label has also been attached to others such as Josiah Royce , an American philosopher who was greatly influenced by Hegel's work, and the British idealists (often referred to as neo-Hegelian).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] According to Hegel, being is ultimately comprehensible only as an all-inclusive whole ( das Absolute ). Hegel asserted that in order for the thinking subject (human reason or consciousness) to be able to know its object (the world) at all, there must be in some sense an identity of thought and being. Otherwise, the subject would never have access to the object and we would have no certainty about any of our knowledge of the world.

The absolute idealist position dominated philosophy in nineteenth-century Britain and Germany, while exerting significantly less influence in the United States . The absolute idealist position should be distinguished from the subjective idealism of Berkeley , the transcendental idealism of Kant , or the post-Kantian transcendental idealism (also known as "critical idealism") [ 3 ] of Fichte and of the early Schelling .

[ 4 ] [ clarification needed ] Schelling and Hegel's concepts of the absolute [ edit ] According to the scholar Andrew Bowie , Hegel's system depends upon showing how each view and positing of how the world is has an internal contradiction: "This necessarily leads thought to more comprehensive ways of grasping the world, until the point where there can be no more comprehensive way because there is no longer any contradiction to give rise to it." [ 5 ] For Hegel, the interaction of opposites generates, in a dialectical fashion, all concepts necessary to comprehend what is.

For Kant, reason was only for us, and the categories only emerged within the subject. However, for Hegel, reason is fully immanent. Spirit emerges from nature in history and, in art, religion, and philosophy, knows itself in its truth.

Hegel shows that the world is not other than self. With the realization that mind and world are, by logical necessity, meaningfully coherent, our access to the world is made secure, a security that was lost in Kant's proclamation that the thing-in-itself was ultimately inaccessible.

Hegel's position is a critical transformation of the concept of the absolute advanced by Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling (1775–1854), who argued for a philosophy of Identity; as articulated by Bowie: ‘Absolute identity’ is, then, the link of the two aspects of being, which, on the one hand, is the uni verse, and, on the other, is the changing multi plicity which the knowable universe also is. Schelling insists now that “The I think, I am, is, since Descartes, the basic mistake of all knowledge; thinking is not my thinking, and being is not my being, for everything is only of God or the totality” (SW I/7, p. 148), [ 6 ] so the I is ‘affirmed’ as a predicate of the being by which it is preceded.

[ 5 ] For Schelling, the absolute is a causeless 'ground' upon which relativity (difference and similarity) can be discerned by human judgement (and thus permit 'freedom' itself) and this ground must be simultaneously not of the 'particular' world of finites, but also not wholly different from them (or else there would be no commensurability with empirical reality, objects, sense data, etc. to be compared as 'relative' or otherwise).

In both Schelling and Hegel's systems (especially the latter), the project aims towards a completion of metaphysics. As Redding describes it: "While opinions divide as to how Hegel's approach to logic relates to that of Kant, it is important to grasp that for Hegel logic is not simply a science of the form of our thoughts. It is also a science of actual content as well, and as such has an ontological dimension." [ 7 ] For Schelling, reason was an organic 'striving' in nature, and this striving was one in which the subject and the object approached an identity. Schelling saw reason as the link between spirit and the phenomenal world, as Lauer explains: "For Schelling [...] nature is not the negative of reason, to be submitted to it as reason makes the world its home, but has since its inception been turning itself into a home for reason." [ 8 ] Hegel's doubts about intellectual intuition's ability to prove or legitimate that the particular is in identity with whole led him to progressively formulate a speculative dialectic in which concepts like Aufhebung came to be articulated.

Beiser summarizes the early formulation as follows: a) Some finite concept, true of only a limited part of reality, would go beyond its limits in attempting to know all of reality. It would claim to be an adequate concept to describe the absolute because, like the absolute, it has a complete or self-sufficient meaning independent of any other concept.

b) This claim would come into conflict with the fact that the concept depends for its meaning on some other concept, having meaning only in contrast to its negation. There would then be a contradiction between its claim to independence and its de facto dependence upon another concept.

c) The only way to resolve the contradiction would be to reinterpret the claim to independence, so that it applies not just to one concept to the exclusion of the other but to the whole of both concepts. Of course, the same stages could be repeated on a higher level, and so on, until we come to the complete system of all concepts, which is alone adequate to describe the absolute.

[ 9 ] [ failed verification ] Hegel's innovation in German Idealism was to theorize a historical mode of self-consciousness self-reflection capable of generating a more inclusively holistic understanding of what it ultimately means to be rational in the grand scheme of things.

Absolute idealism in Britain [ edit ] See also: British idealism By the beginning of the 19th century, German idealist philosophy, particularly that of Kant, Hegel, and Fichte, was being read by British philosophers. Figures such as Samuel Taylor Coleridge , Thomas Carlyle and J. F. Ferrier found in idealism an alternative and a response to the then-dominant empiricist views in Britain.

[ 10 ] Early authors such as James Hutchison Stirling not only attempted to introduce German idealist thought to Britain, but sought to present their own version of absolute idealism in an English medium.

[ 11 ] Edward Caird and T. H. Green were of the first generation of British idealists who took the work of Hegel and some of his successors and, from their positions as professors at the universities of Glasgow and Oxford, respectively, influenced generations of students. Absolute idealism was more fully developed in a second generation by their students, especially F. H. Bradley and Bernard Bosanquet . Bradley's 1893 Appearance and Reality and Bosanquet's two volumes of Gifford lectures, The Principle of Individuality and Value (1912) and The Value and Destiny of the Individual were the most influential volumes of absolute idealism of the period. British absolute idealism had an influence not only within philosophy, but in theology, politics, and social and public policy.

[ 12 ] Moreover, many of the students of the idealists, in turn, introduced absolute idealism to Canada , southern Africa, and India.

[ citation needed ] Reactions [ edit ] See also: Post-Hegelianism Absolute idealism has greatly altered the philosophical landscape. This influence is mostly felt in the strong opposition it engendered. Both logical positivism and analytic philosophy grew out of a rebellion against Hegelianism prevalent in England during the 19th century.

[ 13 ] Continental phenomenology , existentialism , and postmodernism also seek to 'free themselves from Hegel's thought'.

Geoffrey Warnock , writing after the demise of absolute idealism as a philosophical movement in Britain, wrote that the absolute idealists were motivated by emotional concerns, which he says Bradley and McTaggart admitted. He also criticized them for vagueness and overreliance on rhetoric as opposed to argument, he added that in the writings of some "solemnity and unclarity seem to rise not seldom to the pitch of actual fraud".

[ 14 ] Martin Heidegger , one of the leading figures of Continental philosophy in the 20th century, sought to distance himself from Hegel's work. One of Heidegger's philosophical themes in Being and Time was "overcoming metaphysics," aiming to distinguish his book from Hegelian tracts. After the 1927 publication, Heidegger's "early dismissal of them [German idealists] gives way to ever-mounting respect and critical engagement." He continued to compare and contrast his philosophy with Absolute idealism, principally due to critical comments that certain elements of this school of thought anticipated Heideggerian notions of "overcoming metaphysics." [ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Doctrine of internal relations Jena Romanticism Objective idealism Notes [ edit ] ^ Brian Duignan (October 30, 2018).

"Absolute Idealism" .

Encyclopaedia Britannica .

^ The term absoluter Idealismus occurs for the first time in Schelling's Ideen zu einer Philosophie der Natur als Einleitung in das Studium dieser Wissenschaft ( Ideas for a Philosophy of Nature: as Introduction to the Study of this Science ), Vol. 1, P. Krüll, 1803 [1797], p. 80.

^ Frederick C. Beiser , German Idealism: The Struggle Against Subjectivism, 1781-1801 , Harvard University Press, 2002, p. 3.

^ Nectarios G. Limnatis, German Idealism and the Problem of Knowledge: Kant, Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel , Springer, 2008, pp. 138, 166, 177.

^ a b Bowie, Andrew (2024), "Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling" , in Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2024 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2024-12-21 ^ Schelling, F.W.J.

Sämmtliche Werke, ed. K.F.A. Schelling, I Abtheilung Vols. 1–10, II Abtheilung Vols. 1–4, Stuttgart: Cotta, 1856–61 . Stuttgart.

^ Redding, Paul (2020), "Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2020 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2020-04-15 ^ Lauer, Christopher (2011-11-03).

The Suspension of Reason in Hegel and Schelling . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4411-1588-1 .

^ Beiser, Frederick C., ed. (2008-11-17).

The Cambridge Companion to Hegel and Nineteenth-Century Philosophy .

doi : 10.1017/ccol9780521831673 .

ISBN 9780521539388 .

^ William J. Mander, British Idealism: A History, Oxford University Press, 2011 ^ The Secret of Hegel (1st edition, 1865, in 2 vols.; revised edition, 1898, in 1 vol.) ^ William Sweet, The Moral, Social, and Political Philosophy of British Idealism , Exeter, UK: Imprint Academic, 2009.

^ "Without exception, the best philosophy departments in the United States are dominated by analytic philosophy, and among the leading philosophers in the United States, all but a tiny handful would be classified as analytic philosophers. Practitioners of types of philosophizing that are not in the analytic tradition—such as phenomenology, classical pragmatism, existentialism , or Marxism —feel it necessary to define their position in relation to analytic philosophy." John Searle (2003) Contemporary Philosophy in the United States in N. Bunnin and E.P. Tsui-James (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to Philosophy , 2nd ed., (Blackwell, 2003), p. 1.

^ Warnock, Geoffrey (1969).

English Philosophy since 1900 . Oxford University Press. pp.

3– 5.

^ Dahlstrom, Daniel (2008). "Heidegger and German Idealism".

A Companion to Heidegger : 65– 79.

Further reading [ edit ] Robert B. Pippin , Hegel's Idealism: The Satisfactions of Self Consciousness , Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1989.

Rebecca Comay , John McCumber (eds.), Endings: Questions of Memory in Hegel and Heidegger , Evanston (Ill.), Northwestern University Press, 1999.

v t e Idealism Forms Absolute British Actual Canadian German Italian Monistic Epistemological Platonic Subjective Objective Transcendental Indian Monistic (Shaivism) Magical (thaumaturgic) Buddhist (consciousness-only) Practical Political Related topics Metaphysics Idea Plato's Theory of Ideas Anti-realism Consciousness-only Rationalism Panpsychism Phenomenalism Idealistic pluralism Idealistic Studies NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐g7ph9
Cached time: 20250814233051
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.495 seconds
Real time usage: 0.615 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1561/1000000
Revision size: 14207/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 39724/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2779/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 51918/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.362/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14951012/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  561.695      1 -total
 43.14%  242.308      1 Template:Reflist
 18.90%  106.185      1 Template:Lang
 14.04%   78.881      1 Template:Hegelianism
 13.76%   77.272      1 Template:Sidebar
 13.63%   76.541      1 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
 10.81%   60.713      1 Template:Short_description
  8.83%   49.578      1 Template:No_footnotes
  7.88%   44.252      1 Template:Ambox
  6.31%   35.418      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1100734:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814233051 and revision id 1302484691. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Absolute_idealism&oldid=1302484691 " Categories : Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel German idealism Idealism Metaphysical theories Hegelianism Hidden categories: Articles containing German-language text Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from September 2010 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2023 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from July 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 18:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Absolute idealism 25 languages Add topic

