Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Typical composition 2 Possible origin 3 Lunar Prospector measurements 4 Possible use in lunar colonization 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents KREEP 20 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geochemical component of some lunar rocks, potassium, lanthanides, and phosphorus Thorium concentrations on the Moon, as mapped by Lunar Prospector . Thorium correlates with the location of KREEP.

KREEP , an acronym built from the letters K (the atomic symbol for potassium ), REE ( rare-earth elements ) and P (for phosphorus ), is a geochemical component of some lunar impact breccia and basaltic rocks. Its most significant feature is somewhat enhanced concentration of a majority of so-called "incompatible" elements [ 1 ] (those that are concentrated in the liquid phase during magma crystallization ) and the heat -producing elements, namely radioactive uranium , thorium , and potassium (due to presence of the radioactive 40 K ).

[ 2 ] Typical composition [ edit ] The typical composition of KREEP includes about one percent, by mass, of potassium and phosphorus oxides, 20 to 25 parts per million of rubidium , and a concentration of the element lanthanum that is 300 to 350 times the concentrations found in carbonaceous chondrites .

[ 3 ] Most of potassium, phosphorus and rare-earth elements in KREEP basalts are incorporated in the grains of the phosphate minerals apatite and merrillite .

[ 4 ] Possible origin [ edit ] Indirectly, it has been deduced that the origin of KREEP is contained in the origin of the Moon. This is now commonly thought to be the result of a rocky object the size of Mars that struck the Earth about 4.5 billion (4.5 billion) years ago.

[ 5 ] This collision threw a large amount of broken rock  into orbit around the Earth. This ultimately gathered together to form the Moon .

[ 6 ] Given the high energy such a collision would involve, it has been deduced that a large portion of the Moon would have been liquified, and this 
formed a lunar magma ocean . As the crystallization of this liquid rock proceeded, minerals such as olivine and pyroxene precipitated and sank to the bottom to form the lunar mantle .

After the solidification was about 75% complete, the material anorthositic plagioclase began to crystallize, and because of its low density, it floated, forming a solid crust. Hence, elements that are usually incompatible (i.e., those that usually partition in the liquid phase) would have been progressively concentrated into the magma. Thus a KREEP-rich magma was formed that was sandwiched at first between the crust and mantle. The evidence for these processes comes from the highly anorthositic composition of the crust of the lunar highlands, as well as the presence of the rocks rich in KREEP.

[ 7 ] Lunar Prospector measurements [ edit ] Before the mission of Lunar Prospector lunar satellite , it was commonly thought that these KREEP materials had been formed in a widespread layer beneath the crust. However, the measurements from the gamma-ray spectrometer on-board this satellite showed that the KREEP-containing rocks are primarily concentrated underneath the Oceanus Procellarum and the Mare Imbrium . This is a unique lunar geological province that is now known as the Procellarum KREEP Terrane .

Basins far from this province that dug deeply into the crust (and possibly the mantle), such as the Mare Crisium , the Mare Orientale , and the South Pole–Aitken basin , show only little or no enhancements of KREEP within their rims or ejecta. The enhancement of heat-producing radioactive elements within the crust (and/or the mantle) of the Procellarum KREEP Terrane is almost certainly responsible for the longevity and intensity of mare volcanism on the nearside of the Moon.

[ 8 ] Possible use in lunar colonization [ edit ] KREEP might be of interest in lunar mining if a lunar base were to be established. Potassium and phosphorus are important for plant growth ( NPK fertilizer is used on earth) whereas uranium and thorium are potential fuels for nuclear power . However, the relatively low concentrations of the desired materials compared to earthbound ores may make extraction difficult.

See also [ edit ] Solar System portal Geology of the Moon Lunar mare Lunar Prospector Moon Lunar resources References [ edit ] ^ Taylor, G. Jeffrey (August 31, 2000).

"A New Moon for the Twenty-First Century" .

Planetary Science Research Discoveries .

University of Hawaii . Retrieved August 11, 2009 .

^ Shearer, Charles K.; Hess, Paul C.; Wieczorek, Mark A.; et al. (2006).

"Thermal and Magmatic Evolution of the Moon" .

Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry .

60 (1).

Mineralogical Society of America and Geochemical Society : 365– 518.

Bibcode : 2006RvMG...60..365S .

doi : 10.2138/rmg.2006.60.4 . Retrieved August 11, 2009 .

^ Neal, C. R.; Taylor, L. A. (March 1988).

" 'K-Frac + REEP-Frac': A New Understanding of KREEP in Terms of Granite and Phosphate Petrogenesis" .

Abstracts of the Lunar and Planetary Science Conference .

19 : 831.

Bibcode : 1988LPI....19..831N . Retrieved November 24, 2013 .

^ Lucey, Paul; Korotev, Randy; Taylor, Larry; et al. (2006).

understanding the lunar surface and Space-Moon Interactions . Mineralogical society of America. p. 100.

^ Belbruno, E.; Gott III, J. Richard (2005). "Where Did The Moon Come From?".

The Astronomical Journal .

129 (3): 1724– 1745.

arXiv : astro-ph/0405372 .

Bibcode : 2005AJ....129.1724B .

doi : 10.1086/427539 .

S2CID 12983980 .

^ Taylor, G. Jeffrey (November 22, 2005).

"Gamma Rays, Meteorites, Lunar Samples, and the Composition of the Moon" .

Planetary Science Research Discoveries . University of Hawaii . Retrieved August 11, 2009 .

^ Wieczorek, Mark A.; Jolliff, Bradley L.; Khan, Amir; et al. (2006).

"The Constitution and Structure of the Lunar Interior" .

Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry .

60 (1). Mineralogical Society of America and Geochemical Society: 221– 364.

Bibcode : 2006RvMG...60..221W .

doi : 10.2138/rmg.2006.60.3 . Retrieved August 11, 2009 .

^ Jolliff, Bradley L.; Gillis, Jeffrey J.; Haskin, Larry A.; Korotev, Randy L.; Wieczorek, Mark A. (February 25, 2000).

"Major lunar crustal terranes: Surface expressions and crust-mantle origins" .

Journal of Geophysical Research .

105 (E2). Washington, D.C.: American Geophysical Union : 4197– 4216.

Bibcode : 2000JGR...105.4197J .

doi : 10.1029/1999JE001103 .

External links [ edit ] Look up KREEP in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Moon articles in Planetary Science Research Discoveries , including articles about KREEP v t e Moon Outline Physical properties Internal structure Topography Atmosphere Gravity field Hill sphere Magnetic field Sodium tail Moonlight Earthlight Orbit Orbital elements Distance Perigee and apogee Libration Nodes Nodal period Precession Syzygy New moon Full moon Eclipses Lunar eclipse Total penumbral lunar eclipse Tetrad Solar eclipse Solar eclipses on the Moon Eclipse cycle Supermoon Tide Tidal force Tidal locking Tidal acceleration Tidal range Lunar station Surface and features Selenography Terminator Limb Hemispheres Near side Far side Poles North pole South pole Face Maria List Mountains Peak of eternal light Valleys Volcanic features Domes Calderas Lava tubes Craters List Ray systems Permanently shadowed craters South Pole–Aitken basin Regolith swirls Rilles Wrinkle ridges Rocks Lunar basalt 70017 Changesite-(Y) Water Space weathering Micrometeorite Sputtering Quakes Transient lunar phenomenon Selenographic coordinate system Science Observation Libration Lunar theory Origin Giant-impact hypothesis Theia Lunar magma ocean Geology Timescale Late Heavy Bombardment Lunar meteorites KREEP Volcanism Experiments Lunar laser ranging ALSEP Lunar sample displays Apollo 11 Apollo 17 Lunar seismology Exploration Missions Apollo program Explorers Probes Landing Colonization Moonbase Tourism Lunar resources Time-telling and navigation Lunar calendar Lunisolar calendar Month Lunar month Nodal period Fortnight Sennight Lunar station Lunar distance Phases and names New Full Names Crescent Super and micro Blood Blue Black Dark Wet Tetrad Daily phenomena Moonrise Meridian passage Moonset Related Lunar deities Lunar effect Earth phase Moon illusion Pareidolia Man in the Moon Moon rabbit Craters named after people Artificial objects on the Moon Memorials on the Moon Moon in science fiction list Apollo era futuristic exploration Hollow Moon Moon landing conspiracy theories Moon Treaty " Moon is made of green cheese " Natural satellite Double planet Lilith (hypothetical second moon) Splitting of the Moon Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=KREEP&oldid=1295270651 " Categories : Geology of the Moon Mineralogy Geochemistry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from June 2013 This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 19:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents KREEP 20 languages Add topic

