Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary Toggle Summary subsection 1.1 Thesis 1.2 Definitions 1.3 Further clarification 1.4 Arguments against reductionism 1.5 Against materialism 1.6 Constraints 1.7 Speculation 2 Reception Toggle Reception subsection 2.1 Praise 2.2 Criticism 2.3 Book reviews 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Citations 5.2 Sources 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents The Conscious Mind 7 languages Eesti فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1996 philosophy book by David Chalmers The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory Cover Author David Chalmers Language English Subject Philosophy of mind Publisher Oxford University Press Publication date 1996 Publication place United States Media type Print ( hardcover and paperback ) Pages 432 ISBN 978-0195117899 The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory was published in 1996, and is the first book written by David Chalmers , an Australian philosopher specialising in philosophy of mind . Although the book has been greatly influential , Chalmers maintains that it is "far from perfect", as most of it was written as part of his PhD dissertation after "studying philosophy for only four years".

[ 1 ] Summary [ edit ] Thesis [ edit ] In The Conscious Mind , Chalmers argues that (1) the physical does not exhaust the actual, so materialism is false; (2) consciousness is a fundamental fact of nature; (3) science and philosophy should strive towards discovering a fundamental law of consciousness.

Definitions [ edit ] Psychological consciousness : publicly accessible descriptions of consciousness, such as its neurochemical correlates or role in influencing behaviour.

Phenomenal consciousness: experience; something is phenomenologically conscious if it feels like something to be it .

[ note 1 ] Every mental state can be described in psychological terms, phenomenological terms, or both.

[ 2 ] Further clarification [ edit ] Psychological and phenomenal consciousness are often conflated. Thinkers may purport to have solved consciousness (in the phenomenological sense) when really all they have solved are certain aspects of psychological consciousness.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] To use Chalmers words: they claim to have solved the " hard problem of consciousness ", [ 4 ] when really all they have solved are certain "easy problems of consciousness".

[ 4 ] [ note 2 ] Further information: explanatory gap Chalmers believes that an adequate theory of consciousness can only come by solving both the hard and easy problems. On top of discovering brain states associated with conscious experience, science must also discover why and how certain brain states are accompanied by experience.

[ 6 ] This is what Chalmers attempts to do in The Conscious Mind .

Arguments against reductionism [ edit ] The hard problem is hard, by Chalmers' account, because conscious experience is irreducible to lower-order physical facts.

[ 7 ] [ note 3 ] He supports this conclusion with three main lines of argument, which are summarised below.

Inverted qualia Appeals to conceivability : Chalmers argues that conscious experience can always be "abstracted away" from reductive explanations. This is evidenced by the conceivability and, by extension, logical possibility of philosophical zombies (exact replicas of a person that lack conscious experience).

[ 8 ] [ note 4 ] Alternatively, it is conceivable that a "partial zombie" could have been "physically identical", but not "phenomenological identical" to their nonzombie twin (they could have an inverted visible spectrum, for instance).

Appeals to epistemology : Unlike other forms of knowledge, knowledge of consciousness can only ever be gained through first-hand experience.

The problem of other minds is evidence of this.

[ 10 ] Frank Jackson's famous thought experiment Mary's Room demonstrates a similar point. Upon seeing red, Mary gains new information was not entailed by the physical facts alone.

[ note 5 ] [ 11 ] Appeals to analysis : There are no satisfying reductive accounts of consciousness, and it is not even clear what such a theory would look like. All such accounts suffer from the same core sin: the inability to explain why certain brain states are accompanied by conscious experience.

[ 12 ] The conclusion of all these arguments is the same: consciousness is irreducible to physical facts alone.

[ 13 ] Against materialism [ edit ] The only things that are irreducible to lower-level facts are fundamental laws of nature (e.g., space and time). Since consciousness is irreducible, Chalmers believes that it, too, is fundamental.

[ note 6 ] [ 14 ] Further information: property dualism Chalmers accepts that people may be reluctant to accept this conclusion, but notes that people were initially reluctant to accept the fundamental nature of electromagnetism as well. He also accepts that his conclusion sounds jarring, but notes that the brute nature of consciousness poses no more of a mystery than the brute nature of electromagnetism, gravity, or any other fundamental law.

Constraints [ edit ] So, just as scientists of the past have sought fundamental laws of gravity and electromagnetism, so too should scientists of the present seek fundamental laws of consciousness. So, after providing the disclaimer that he is "most likely to be entirely wrong", [ 15 ] Chalmers puts forward possible ways in which the search for a theory may be constrained: Phenomenal judgements : A theory of consciousness should be able to dispel epiphenominalism [ note 7 ] [ 16 ] without resorting to interactionism (a view which Chalmers rejects).

[ 17 ] The double-aspect principle : Some information must be realised both physically and phenomenologically (i.e., realised both in the mind and brain).

[ note 8 ] Structural coherence : the internal structure of consciousness (structural relations between qualia , such as the red/green blue/yellow axis of colour vision) must be accounted for.

The principle of organisational invariance : Through the thought experiments of Fading Qualia and Dancing Qualia .

[see: Further reading ] [ note 9 ] [ 18 ] Chalmers concludes that consciousness and its contents are substrate independent; structurally isomorphic computations must create qualitatively identical experiences regardless of how they are realised.

Similarly, Chalmers puts forward a number of "open questions" that a fundamental theory must answer: Why does certain information correspond to certain qualia rather than functionally equivalent qualia?

What are the relations between spatial representations in the mind and the structure of space itself?

How do the structures of our sensory and neurological apparatus influence the structure of consciousness?

What causes the unification of consciousness?

Why are some bits of information realised in experience while others are not?

Good contenders for a fundamental theory of consciousness would be one that (a) fits the above criteria; (b) is compatible with the data; (c) has predicative power; and (c) is elegant . Though, of course, there will likely be further considerations that arise as science progresses.

Speculation [ edit ] Chalmers explores a number of possibilities. Chalmers believes that information [ note 10 ] will invariably play a central role in any theory of consciousness. However, Chalmers is unsure whether or not information will ultimately play a conceptual role or an ontological one. Chalmers further constrains the role of information by concluding that it must only be phenomenally realised if it is physically realised; in other words, the information system must be active (otherwise, a computer that is turned off may have qualia). So causation may also play a role.

Interestingly, this account of consciousness has predictive power within the realm of quantum theory . Namely, it addresses objections made by the physicist Roger Penrose regarding the many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics : I do not see why a conscious being need be aware of only "one" of the alternatives in a linear superposition. What is it about consciousnesses that says that consciousness must not be "aware" of that tantalising linear combination of both a dead and a live cat ? It seems to me that a theory of consciousness would be needed for one to square the many world view with what one actually observes.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Chalmers' earlier account of consciousness is such a theory. This leaves the many-world view undoubtedly the most elegant of all interpretations of quantum mechanics (from a mathematical standpoint), albeit a counterintuitive one.

[ 21 ] Reception [ edit ] The Conscious Mind has had a significant influence on philosophy of mind and the scientific study of consciousness, as is evidenced by Chalmers easy/hard problem distinction having become standard terminology within relevant philosophical and scientific fields. Chalmers has expressed bewilderment at the book's success, writing that it has "received far more attention than I reasonably could have expected." [ 22 ] Praise [ edit ] David Lewis is a proponent of materialism whose views are criticised numerous times throughout The Conscious Mind . Despite this, Lewis praises Chalmers for his understanding of the issue and for leaving his critics with "few points to make" that Chalmers "hasn't made already". Lewis has characterised The Conscious Mind as "exceptionally ambitious and exceptionally successful", considering it "the best book in philosophy of mind for many years." [ 23 ] Steven Pinker has hailed The Conscious Mind as an "outstanding contribution" to consciousness studies, stating that Chalmers argued his thesis "with impeccable clarity and rigor".

[ 23 ] Criticism [ edit ] Patricia and Paul Churchland have criticised Chalmers claim that everything but consciousness logically supervenes on the physical, and that such failures of supervenience mean that materialism must be false. Heat and luminescence, for instance, are both physical properties that logically supervene on the physical.

[ 24 ] Others have questioned the premise that a priori entailment is required for logical supervenience.

[ 25 ] Daniel Dennett has labelled Chalmers a "reactionary", and calls the invocation of philosophical zombies "an embarrassment". By his account, the thought experiment hinges on a "hunch" and begs the question .

[ 26 ] He argues that the mysterious nature of consciousness amounts to nothing more than a cognitive illusion, [ 26 ] [ 27 ] and that philosophers ought to drop "the zombie like a hot potato".

[ 26 ] Chalmers responds to critics in his 2010 book The Character of Consciousness [ 28 ] and on his website .

Book reviews [ edit ] The Conscious Mind has been reviewed in journals such as Foundations of Physics , [ 29 ] Psychological Medicine , [ 30 ] Mind , [ 31 ] The Journal of Mind and Behavior , [ 32 ] and Australian Review of Books .

[ 33 ] The book was described by The Sunday Times as "one of the best science books of the year." See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Philosophy of Mind The Mind-Body Problem Explanatory gap Problem of other minds Brain in a vat What is it Like to be a Bat?

Qualia Supervenience Philosophical Zombie Neutral monism Chinese Room Meditations on First Philosophy Consciousness Explained Notes [ edit ] ^ Chalmers pulls Thomas Nagel's famous essay What is it Like to be a Bat?

. By Nagel's account, a bat is conscious if it feels like something to be a bat.

^ The use of the word easy is tongue in check.

[ 5 ] These problems are only easy in the sense that, in principle, they can be solved with the current frameworks of science.

^ This is a strange break from routine. Though chaos theory complicates things, nearly everything that exists can be reduced to a lower order level of analysis (in principle at least); psychology can be reduced to biology which can be reduced to chemistry which can be reduced to physics.

^ Chalmers argues that conceivability can inform logical possibility. For instance, it is inconceivable that all the properties of H 2 O could be the same without the properties of water being the same; facts about H 2 O explain everything there is to explain. Similarly, it is inconceivable that one could perfectly replicate all the facts about a wombats cellular biology without replicating facts about the wombat in question. Because these things are inconceivable, they are thereby logically impossible. Conversely, philosophical zombies "are" conceivable and are they are thereby logically possible. This argument has proven to be controversial, however.

[ 9 ] (See: Criticism ) ^ To put things more formally: (1) upon seeing the colour red, Mary is gaining new knowledge of the world (as is evidenced by the fact that the experience can be expressed as a conditional ); (2) the fact that Mary can only gain this knowledge by acquaintance (a point nearly every critic concedes) demonstrates that the experiential fact of what it is like to see red does not logically supervene on physical facts; so (3) facts about consciousness are further facts about the world over and above the physical facts.

^ Chalmers rejects materialism but embraces naturalism . In other words, while he doesn't believe that reality is governed exclusively by the laws of physics, he believes that reality is governed in full by fundamental laws of nature.

^ Chalmers uses two-two-dimensional semantics [see: Further reading ] to explain his reasoning on this point. In short, his argument is (1) a philosophical zombie would only be able to understand secondary intentions; (2) there are logically possible scenarios where two nonzombies have the same primary intentions (such as the phenomenological realisation of red) that correspond to different secondary intentions (such as different wavelengths of light); (3) In such scenarios the zombies' communication would face challenges not faced by the two nonzombies; so (4) even if consciousness lacks causal influence it still "inserts" itself into phenomenal judgements; (5) an adequate theory of consciousness must be able to reconcile this fact.

^ It may be a good idea to constrain the Double-Aspect Principle even further so only certain information is phenomenally realised. If all information is phenomenally realised then certain counterintuitive conclusions (such as thermostats being minimally conscious) must be accepted. Though, as Chalmers notes, this is not necessarily something to avoid; reality is under no obligation to align with modern intuitions. (Chalmers is open to the possibility of consciousness being ubiquitous and expresses sympathy for neutral monism (though he notes that it is not without its flaws )). In any case, the issue is worth drawing attention to.

^ Consciousness must be realised through the structure of the brain, not the substance of the brain. If this were not true, then gradually replacing one's neurons with silicon chips would cause consciousness to disappear or change in structure. But since the structure remains the same, this would happen without any corresponding changes in behaviour. This seems implausible, so Chalmers concludes that consciousness is realised through structure rather than substance.

^ Chalmers uses Claude Shannon's definition of a bit : a difference that makes a difference .

References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Chalmers 2010 , p. xii.

^ Chalmers 1996 , p. 12–16.

^ "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness" .

consc.net . Retrieved 2020-08-19 .

^ a b c Chalmers 1996 , p. xii, xiii ^ Episode 83, The David Chalmers Interview (Part 1: Consciousness).

The Panpsycast Philosophy Podcast , ep. 83 pt. 1 ^ Chalmers 1996 , pp. xi, xii.

^ David Chalmers: How do you explain consciousness?

TED2014 ^ Chalmers 1996 , pp. 95–99.

^ Chalmers 1996 , pp. 99–101.

^ Chalmers 1996 , pp. 101–103.

^ Chalmers 1996 , pp. 103–104.

^ Chalmers 1996 , pp. 104–106.

^ Chalmers 1996 , p. 123.

^ Chalmers 1996 , pp. 111, 126–127.

^ Chalmers 1996 , pp. 276–277.

^ Chalmers 1996 , pp. 158–160, see: Chapter 5, The Paradox of Phenomenal Judgements (pp. 172–203).

^ Chalmers 1996 , pp. 156–158.

^ Chalmers 1996 .

^ Chalmers 1996 , p. 348.

^ Penrose, Roger (1987).

Quantum physics and conscious thought. In B. Hiley and Peat, eds., Essays in honour of David Bohm . New York: Methuen. pp. 296. Retrieved from The Conscious Mind p. 348.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Chalmers 1996 , pp. 346–356.

^ Chalmers 1996 , p. xii.

^ a b Chalmers 1996 , backcover.

^ Chalmers 2010 , pp. 30–31.

^ Chalmers 2010 , pp. 30–32.

^ a b c Dennett 1998 .

^ Dennett 1999 .

^ Chalmers 2010 .

^ Henry P. Stapp.

Book Review -- The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory Foundations of Physics , Volume 26, Number 8, 1996, pp. 1091–1097.

^ Smythes, John (1998).

"The Conscious Mind. By D. Chalmers" .

Psychological Medicine .

28 : 233– 241.

^ Joseph Levine.

The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory Mind , Vol. 107, No. 428 (Oct., 1998), pp. 877–881.

^ "Volume 17, Number 4, Autumn - The Journal of Mind and Behavior - University of Maine" .

The Journal of Mind and Behavior . Retrieved 2020-08-19 .

^ Peter Goldsworthy.

Review of The Conscious Mind: In Search of a Fundamental Theory Australian Review of Books ,  November 1997, pp. 6–7.

Sources [ edit ] Chalmers, David (1996), The Conscious Mind , New York: Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-1951-1789-9 Chalmers, David (1999), "Absent Qualia, Fading Qualia, or Dancing Qualia" , Published in Conscious Experience, Edited by Thomas Metzinger. Imprint Academic, 1995.

Chalmers, David (2010), The Character of Consciousness , New York: Oxford University Press, pp. xiii, 30– 31, ISBN 978-0-1953-1110-5 Dennett, Daniel (1998), "The Unimagined Preposterousness of Zombies" , Journal of Consciousness Studies Dennett, Daniel (1999), "The Zombie Hunch: Extinction of an Intuition? Commentary on T. Moody, O. Flanagan and T. Polger" , Royal Institute of Philosophy Millennial Lecture , vol. 2, no. 4, pp.

322– 326 "The Unimagined Preposterousness of Zombies" , Journal of Consciousness Studies , 1998 Carroll, Sean (December 2018), Episode 25: David Chalmers on Consciousness, the Hard Problem, and Living in a Simulation , retrieved 2020-08-28 Further reading [ edit ] Papers on Consciousness David Chalmers Absent Qualia, Fading Qualia, and Dancing Qualia David Chalmers What is it Like to be a bat?

Thomas Nagel Consciousness (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) Two-Dimensional Semantics (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Consciousness Figures Philosophy Alfred North Whitehead Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Bertrand Russell Brian O'Shaughnessy Charles Augustus Strong Christopher Peacocke Colin McGinn Daniel Dennett David Chalmers David Hume David Papineau David Pearce Donald Davidson Douglas Hofstadter Edmund Husserl Frank Jackson Fred Dretske Galen Strawson George Berkeley George Henry Lewes Georges Rey Gottfried Leibniz Immanuel Kant John Eccles John Locke John Polkinghorne John Searle Joseph Levine Karl Popper Keith Frankish Kenneth M. Sayre Maurice Merleau-Ponty Max Velmans Michael Tye Martin Heidegger Ned Block Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Philip Goff René Descartes Thomas Metzinger Thomas Nagel William Kingdon Clifford William Lycan William Seager Psychology Carl Gustav Jung Donald D. Hoffman Franz Brentano Gustav Fechner Julian Jaynes Kurt Koffka Max Wertheimer Sigmund Freud Wilhelm Wundt William James Wolfgang Köhler Neuroscience Anil Seth Antonio Damasio Benjamin Libet Bernard Baars Christof Koch Francis Crick Francisco Varela Gerald Edelman Giulio Tononi Karl Pribram Lawrence Weiskrantz Michael Gazzaniga Michael Graziano Patrick Wilken Roger Sperry Stanislas Dehaene Steven Laureys Stuart Hameroff Wolf Singer Others Annaka Harris David Bohm Eugene Wigner Erwin Schrödinger Marvin Minsky Max Planck Roger Penrose Susan Blackmore Victor J. Stenger Wolfgang Pauli Theories Philosophy of mind Anomalous monism Computationalism Double-aspect theory Eliminative materialism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Idealism Interactionism Materialism Mind–body dualism Monism Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Panpsychism Parallelism Physicalism Property dualism Reflexive monism Revisionary materialism Solipsism Type physicalism (reductive materialism, identity theory) Science Attention schema theory Consciousness causes collapse Dynamic core hypothesis Damasio's theory of consciousness Electromagnetic theories of consciousness Global workspace theory Higher-order theories of consciousness Holonomic brain theory Integrated information theory Lamme's recurrent feedback hypothesis Multiple drafts model Orchestrated objective reduction Topics Agnosia Altered state of consciousness Animal consciousness Artificial consciousness Attention Attentional control Awareness Binding problem Binocular rivalry Blindsight Brain Cartesian theater Consciousness after death Disorders of consciousness Divided consciousness Dual consciousness (split-brain) Experience Explanatory gap Free will Flash suppression Hallucination Hard problem of consciousness Heterophenomenology Higher consciousness Illusion Introspection illusion Knowledge argument Locked-in syndrome Mind Mind–body problem Minimally conscious state Neural correlates of consciousness Neurophenomenology Ontology Phenomenology Philosophical zombie Philosophy of mind Primary consciousness Problem of other minds Qualia Quantum mind Reentry Sakshi Purusha Secondary consciousness Sentience Sentientism Sociology of human consciousness Soul Stream of consciousness Subconscious Subjective character of experience Subjectivity and objectivity Unconscious mind Unconsciousness Upanishads Visual masking Consciousness causes collapse Yogachara Works A Universe of Consciousness Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness Consciousness and Cognition Consciousness Explained Cosmic Consciousness How the Self Controls Its Brain Journal of Consciousness Studies Online Consciousness Conference Psyche The Astonishing Hypothesis The Conscious Mind The Emperor's New Mind The Science of Consciousness Understanding Consciousness " What Is It Like to Be a Bat?

" Wider than the Sky Category Commons NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐p825p
Cached time: 20250817052338
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.576 seconds
Real time usage: 0.670 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4011/1000000
Revision size: 21424/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 190388/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8447/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 78036/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.338/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8001261/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  548.203      1 -total
 23.81%  130.505      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
 23.50%  128.825      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 22.42%  122.914      1 Template:Infobox_book
 21.06%  115.458      1 Template:Infobox
 14.54%   79.728     26 Template:Sfn
 14.15%   77.576      2 Template:Reflist
 11.07%   60.664      1 Template:ISBNT
  7.76%   42.561     11 Template:Navbox
  7.76%   42.546      1 Template:Hlist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:22100322:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817052338 and revision id 1293870630. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Conscious_Mind&oldid=1293870630 " Categories : 1996 non-fiction books Books by David Chalmers English-language non-fiction books Oxford University Press books Philosophy books Metaphysics of mind Works about consciousness Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 June 2025, at 04:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Conscious Mind 7 languages Add topic

