Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Three scales of the hypothesis 2 Formula and variations 3 Connection with the environmental Kuznets curve 4 Real-world example 5 Areas of controversy 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Pollution haven hypothesis 7 languages العربية فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Português Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Factory with smokestacks overlooking the Yangtze River Part of a series about Environmental economics Carbon price Carbon credit Carbon emission trading Carbon fee and dividend Carbon finance Carbon offset Carbon tax Emissions trading Environmental tax Personal carbon trading Pigovian tax Social cost of carbon Climate change Carbon footprint Climate change mitigation Food miles Concepts Bright green environmentalism Circular economy Climate finance Corporate sustainability Degrowth Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Eco commerce Eco-innovation Eco-investing Ecological economics Ecological footprint Ecological modernization Ecotechnology Efficient energy use Energy conservation Environmental accounting design enterprise finance full-cost accounting impact design planning Ethical banking Fiscal environmentalism Green accounting building development economy growth job marketing paradox recovery trading vehicle High-performance buildings Impact investing Marginal abatement cost Natural resource economics Pollution haven hypothesis Social accounting Socially responsible business Social return on investment Sustainability accounting organization reporting Sustainable advertising agriculture capitalism consumer behaviour consumption design design standards development development goals energy finance food systems industries livelihood management market procurement refurbishment sourcing tourism transport Thermoeconomics Used good Value of Earth Energy transition 2000-watt society Alternative fuel , Carbon neutrality Carbon-neutral fuel Environmental technology Feed-in tariff Fossil fuel divestment Fossil fuel phase-out Low-carbon economy Net metering Renewable energy commercialization Sustainable energy Policies Carbon leakage Environmental pricing reform Environmental tariff Free public transport Green industrial policy Green New Deal Green politics Rail subsidies v t e Conjecture that businesses look for the cheapest option when locating factories abroad The pollution haven hypothesis posits that, when large industrialized nations seek to set up factories or offices abroad, they will often look for the cheapest option in terms of resources and labor that offers the land and material access they require.

[ 1 ] However, this often comes at the cost of environmentally unsound practices.

Developing nations with cheap resources and labor tend to have less stringent environmental regulations , and conversely, nations with stricter environmental regulations become more expensive for companies as a result of the costs associated with meeting these standards.  Thus, companies that choose to physically invest in foreign countries tend to (re)locate to the countries with the lowest environmental standards or weakest enforcement.

Three scales of the hypothesis [ edit ] Pollution control costs have an impact at the margins, where they exert some effect on investment decisions and trade flows.

Pollution control costs are important enough to measurably influence trade and investment.

Countries set their environmental standards below socially-efficient levels in order to attract investment or to promote their exports.

[ 2 ] Scales 1 and 2 have empirical support, but the significance of the hypothesis relative to other investment and trade factors is still controversial.  One study found that environmental regulations have a strong negative effect on a country's FDI , particularly in pollution-intensive industries when measured by employment.  However, that same study found that the environmental regulations present in a country's neighbors have an insignificant impact on that country's trade flows.

[ 2 ] Formula and variations [ edit ] Yi = αRi + XiβI + εi In the above formula, Y is economic activity, R is regulatory stringency, X is an aggregate of other characteristics that affect Y and ε is an error term .

[ 1 ] Theoretically, by changing your value of R, analysts will be able to calculate the expected effect on economic activity. According to the Pollution Haven Hypothesis, this equation shows that environmental regulations and economic activity are negatively correlated, because regulations raise the cost of key inputs to goods with pollution-intensive productions and reduce jurisdictions' comparative advantage in these goods. This lack of comparative advantage causes firms to move to countries with lower environmental standards, decreasing Y.

There is also an expanded formula, as shown below: Yit = vi + αRit + γTit + θRitTit + X’βit + εit This expanded formula takes into account whether trade liberalization (i.e. the level of trade barriers that exist in a country, labeled as T) increases the negative correlation between economic activity (Y) and regulatory stringency (R).  Some authors claim that trade barriers disproportionately effect the environment, and this equation attempts to quantify the interaction between trade barriers and regulatory stringency, and the corresponding effect with respect to output in an economy.

[ 1 ] Connection with the environmental Kuznets curve [ edit ] A simple recreation of the Environmental Kuznets Curve, made using Microsoft Excel.

See also: Kuznets curve The environmental Kuznets curve (EKC) is a conceptual model that suggests that a country's pollution concentrations rise with development and industrialization up to a turning point, after which they fall again as the country uses its increased affluence to reduce pollution concentrations, suggesting that the cleaner environment in developed countries comes at the expense of a dirtier environment in developing countries.

[ 3 ] In this sense, the EKC is potentially a reflection of the Pollution Haven Hypothesis, because one of the factors that may drive the increase in environmental degradation seen in pre-industrial economies is an influx of waste from post-industrial economies .  This same transfer of polluting firms through trade and foreign investment could lead to the decrease in environmental degradation seen in downward-sloping section of the EKC, which models post-industrial (service) economies. This model holds true in cases of national development, but cannot necessarily be applied at a local scale.

[ 4 ] Real-world example [ edit ] Used lead–acid batteries that Americans turn in to be recycled are increasingly being sent to Mexico , where the lead inside them is extracted by crude methods that are illegal in the United States. In 2009, the Environmental Protection Agency significantly tightened National Ambient Air Quality Standards for lead pollution, [ 5 ] which made domestic recycling more difficult and expensive in the United States, but did not prohibit companies from exporting the work and danger to countries where environmental standards are low and enforcement is lax. Following this change, exports of used lead-acid batteries increased four-fold, which was followed by a significant increase in babies born with low birth weight to mothers living within a two-mile (3.2 km) radius of Mexican battery-recycling plants.

[ 5 ] In this sense, Mexico serves as a pollution haven for the United States battery industry because Mexican environmental officials acknowledge that they lack the money, manpower, and technical capacity to police the flow.  According to The New York Times in 2011, 20% of spent American vehicle and industrial batteries were being exported to Mexico, up from 6% in 2007, meaning that approximately 20 million batteries would cross the border that year.  A significant proportion of this flow was being smuggled in after being mislabeled as metal scrap.

[ 6 ] Map of GDP PPP per-capita and known e-waste dump sites (2013) The world map shown here illustrates how e-waste dump sites (or sites where citizens or multinational corporations of industrialized nations dump their used electronic devices) along with the GDP PPP per-capita of those countries.

[ 7 ] Shows an estimated amount of Used EEE and E-Waste imported into Kyoto Protocol Non-Annex 1 countries, with the E-Waste generated by each country's own domestic supplies.

While GDP PPP per-capita is not a perfect indicator of economic development, and e-waste dump sites are only one small facet of what could be a greater pollution haven, this map does illustrate how e-waste dump sites are often located in poorer, relatively pre-industrial nations, which provides some rudimentary support for the Pollution Haven Hypothesis.

Despite e-waste sites in South America there is more to look into, the East Asia area where most of the global manufacturing happen. Foreign companies will relocate factories to operate in areas where there is minimal environmental regulations, saving money on waste disposal and labor. Guiyu, [ 8 ] a city in China that turned into a hub for electronic waste (e-waste) processing, attracting waste from developed countries due to its lack of environmental regulations and cheap labor. Informal recycling operations led to significant environmental contamination, with water samples showing lead levels 190 times higher than World Health Organization safety standards . Approximately 80% of children in Guiyu suffered from lead poisoning, illustrating the  health impacts on vulnerable populations.

[ 9 ] In 1979, Asia Rare Earth (ARE), partly owned by Mitsubishi Chemical Industries Ltd , established a rare earth extraction plant in Bukit Merah, Perak, Malaysia . The facility began operations in 1982, extracting yttrium from monazite, a process that produced radioactive waste. The disposal of this waste led to severe environmental contamination, resulting in health issues among local residents.

Mitsubishi is one of the top Japanese company that makes vehicles and their cars are manufactured in many countries like Japan, Thailand, Indonesia, China, the Philippines, Vietnam, and Russia. Clearly Malaysia is not among the list and their intention of operating mines of extracting radioactive chemicals materials at Malaysia is clear, for the advantage of the lack of environmental regulations.

Areas of controversy [ edit ] The first area of controversy with respect to the Pollution Haven Theory has to do with the formulas above.  Finding an appropriate measure of regulatory stringency (R) is not simple, because we want to know how much more costly production is in a given jurisdiction relative to others due to that jurisdiction's environmental regulations.  The compliance costs stemming from these regulations, however, could come in the form of environmental taxes, regulatory delays, the threat or execution of lawsuits, product redesign, or emissions limits.

[ 1 ] This proliferation of cost styles makes R hard to quantify.

Another major critique of the second formula is that it is difficult to measure regulatory stringency and trade barriers because the two effects are likely endogenous, so few studies have attempted to estimate the indirect effect of trade liberalization on pollution havens.  Furthermore, governments at times engage in inefficient competition to actually attract polluting industries through weakening their environmental standards.  However, as per conventional economic theory, welfare-maximizing governments should set standards so that the benefits justify the costs at the margin.  This does not mean that environmental standards will be equal everywhere, as jurisdictions have different assimilative capacities, costs of abatement, and social attitudes regarding the environment, meaning heterogeneity in pollution standards is to be expected.

[ 1 ] By extension, this means that industry migration to less stringent jurisdictions may not raise efficiency concerns in an economic sense.

A final area of controversy is whether the Pollution Haven Hypothesis has empirical support.  For example, studies have found statistically significant evidence that countries with poor air quality do have higher net factor exports of coal, but the magnitude of the impact is small relative to other variables.

[ 10 ] Paul Krugman , a Nobel Prize –winning economist, is skeptical as to whether pollution havens have empirical support in economic theory, as he writes, "At this point it's hard to come up with major examples of industries in which the pollution haven phenomenon, to the extent that it occurs, leads to international negative externalities. This does not, however, say that such examples cannot arise in the future." [ 11 ] Scale 3 above has had empirical arguments made specifically against it, especially in the last 20 years.  Some economists argue that once higher environmental standards are introduced in a country, larger multinational firms present in the country are likely to push for enforcement so as to reduce the cost advantage of smaller local firms.  This effect would make countries with strict environmental standards a haven for the large companies often associated with higher levels of pollution, meaning the polluting agents may be smaller companies, rather than the larger MNCs as theorized by other proponents of the Pollution Haven Hypothesis.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Environmental dumping Environmental racism Fenceline community Global waste trade Locally unwanted land use Pollution in China Race to the bottom Summers memo Trading Up (book) Toxic colonialism References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Levinson, Arik; M. Scott Taylor (2008).

"Unmasking the Pollution Haven Effect" (PDF) .

International Economic Review .

49 (1): 223– 54.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-2354.2008.00478.x .

^ a b Millimet, Daniel.

"Four New Empirical Tests of the Pollution Haven Hypothesis When Environmental Regulation is Endogenous" (PDF) . Tulane University . Retrieved 15 April 2013 .

^ Ibara, Brian (January 2007).

"Exploring the Causality between the Pollution Haven Hypothesis and the Environmental Kuznets Curve" .

Honors Projects . Retrieved 11 April 2013 .

^ Moseley, Perramond, Hapke, Laris, William G., Eric, Holly M., Paul (2014).

An Introduction to Human-Environment Geography . Oxford, UK: Wiley Blackwell. pp.

179– 180.

ISBN 978-1-4051-8932-3 – via Open edition.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b Tanaka, Shinsuke; Teshima, Kensuke; Verhoogen, Eric (2022).

"North-South Displacement Effects of Environmental Regulation: The Case of Battery Recycling" (PDF) .

American Economic Review: Insights .

4 (3): 271– 288.

doi : 10.1257/aeri.20210201 .

^ Rosenthal, Elizabeth (8 December 2013).

"Lead from Old US Batteries Sent to Mexico Raises Risks" .

New York Times . Retrieved 14 April 2013 .

^ "Where does e-waste end up?" . Greenpeace . Retrieved 17 April 2013 .

^ "Guiyu, Guangdong" , Wikipedia , 2024-09-23 , retrieved 2025-02-14 ^ "Electronic waste in Guiyu" , Wikipedia , 2024-11-26 , retrieved 2025-02-14 ^ Kellogg, Ryan (2006).

The Pollution Haven Hypothesis: Significance and Insignificance . Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics, UC Berkeley.

^ Krugman, Paul (2006).

International Economics Theory and Policy . Addison Wesley.

ISBN 9780321451347 .

^ Birdsall, Nancy; Wheeler, David (January 1993). "Trade Policy and Industrial Pollution in Latin America: Where Are the Pollution Havens?".

The Journal of Environment & Development .

2 (1): 137– 149.

doi : 10.1177/107049659300200107 .

S2CID 154239425 .

v t e Environmental social science Fields Ecological anthropology Ecological economics Environmental anthropology Environmental crime Environmental economics Environmental communication Environmental history Environmental politics Environmental psychology Environmental sociology Human ecology Human geography Political ecology Regional science Related Agroecology Anthrozoology Behavioral geography Community studies Demography Design ecological environmental Ecological humanities Economics energy thermo Environmental education ethics law science studies justice racism Ethnobiology botany ecology zoology Forestry Industrial ecology Integrated geography Permaculture Political representation of nature Rural sociology Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Sustainability science studies Systems ecology Urban ecology geography metabolism studies Applied Architecture landscape sustainable Ecopsychology Engineering ecological environmental Green criminology Health environmental epidemiology occupational public Management environmental fisheries forest natural resource waste Planning environmental land use regional spatial urban Policy energy environmental Environment portal Category Concepts Degrees Journals Research institutes Scholars v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pollution_haven_hypothesis&oldid=1303347543 " Categories : Environmental economics Economic globalization Development economics Human ecology Global inequality Environmental social science concepts Environmental racism Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 13:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pollution haven hypothesis 7 languages Add topic

