Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Stranded boats 3 Airborne contaminants 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Aralkum Desert 45 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 45°0′N 60°30′E ﻿ / ﻿ 45.000°N 60.500°E ﻿ / 45.000; 60.500 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Desert in what remains of the Aral Sea in Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan Not to be confused with Aral Karakum Desert .

Aralkum Desert Aralkum with the remaining areas of the Aral Sea in 2021 Animated map of the shrinking of the Aral Sea, and growing Aralkum Geography Countries Uzbekistan Kazakhstan Coordinates 45°0′N 60°30′E ﻿ / ﻿ 45.000°N 60.500°E ﻿ / 45.000; 60.500 The Aralkum Desert ( Uzbek : Orolqum choʻli, Оролқум чўли, Kazakh : Аралқұм шөлі, Russian : Пустыня Аралкум) is a desert that has appeared since 1960 on the seabed once occupied by the Aral Sea .

[ 1 ] It lies to the south and east of what remains of the Eastern Basin Aral Sea in Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan . It is currently the youngest desert in the world.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Main article: Aral Sea § Impact on environment, economy, and public health While the level of the Aral Sea has fluctuated over its existence, the most recent level drop since the 1960s [ 3 ] was caused by the Soviet Union building massive irrigation projects in the region. The severely reduced inflow caused the water level in the Aral Sea to drop. While the North Aral Sea rose due to the Dike Kokaral , the South Aral Sea kept dropping, thus expanding the size of the desert, until 2010, when the South Aral Sea was partly reflooded. The water level of the South Aral Sea then began to drop again, this time more severely.

[ citation needed ] In August 2021, British polar athlete Rosie Stancer led the first expedition on foot across the Aralkum desert.

[ 4 ] Stranded boats [ edit ] Before its desertification , the Aral Sea sustained a large fishing industry that provided up to one-sixth of the Soviet Union's fish.

[ 5 ] As the water receded, many fishing vessels and other boats were left behind in the desert. In the former port of the city of Moʻynoq , rusting vessels have become a tourist attraction and the site of the Stihia Festival, Central Asia's largest electronic music festival.

[ 5 ] Airborne contaminants [ edit ] The bed of the former Aral Sea in Uzbekistan in 2004 The sands of the Aralkum and the dust that originates from it contain pollutants.

[ 6 ] The desert's location is on a powerful west–east airstream that carries its polluted dust around the globe. Aral dust has been found in the fields of Belarus , the forests of Norway , and in the glaciers of Greenland .

[ 7 ] Pesticides in the dust have been found in the blood of penguins in Antarctica .

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Desertification List of environmental disasters References [ edit ] ^ Aral Sea State of Environment of the Aral Sea Basin. Regional report of the Central Asian States. (2000) Archived 24 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ geographyrealm (28 May 2014).

"Aralkum Desert: The World's Newest Desert" .

Geography Realm .

Archived from the original on 28 January 2022 . Retrieved 28 January 2022 .

^ "Aral Sea Tours from 450 USD: your Travel to the Aral Sea will be unforgettable with Peopletravel!" .

Archived from the original on 20 January 2016 . Retrieved 15 January 2016 .

^ Khissimova, Dana (30 August 2021).

"British Polar Athletes Explore Aralkum desert in Kazakhstan" .

The Astana Times .

Archived from the original on 14 December 2021 . Retrieved 3 November 2022 .

^ a b Dowling, Stephen.

"The ghostly fishing fleet stranded in a desert" .

www.bbc.com .

Archived from the original on 28 January 2022 . Retrieved 28 January 2022 .

^ Pandey, Anish Chandra; Jha, Niraj K (2007).

"Central Asia: Democratic deficit and challenges of sustainable development" .

Journal of Environmental Research and Development .

1 (4): 403– 411.

Archived from the original on 17 December 2017 . Retrieved 11 February 2016 .

Salt, sand, and dust from exposed Aral Sea mud beds blow across the region, harming people and crops. The excessive use of pesticides and fertilizers from farms has poisoned food and drinking water. The human cost of the crisis has been high in the Aral Sea area. For instance, infant mortality rates have consistently been the highest in the former Soviet Union ^ "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on 1 February 2016 . Retrieved 24 May 2016 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) "...typical Aral dust has been found on Greenland's glaciers, in Norway's forests, and Byelorussia's fields, all situated thousands of kilometers away from Central Asia." ^ Nurushev, A (April 1999).

"Crisis of the Aral Sea" .

Himalayan and Central Asian Studies .

3 (2): 50– 58.

Archived from the original on 21 October 2021 . Retrieved 11 February 2016 .

... The effect of pollution is aggravated by the fact that the Aral Sea is situated on the "highway" where strong currents of air are blowing from the west to the east. ... That is why pesticides from the Aral region are found in the blood of penguins living in the Antarctic continent.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Aralkum .

Siegmar-W. Breckle: Combating desertification and rehabilitation of the salt deserts in the region at the Aral Sea Walter Wucherer: Primary succession on the dry sea floor of the Aral Sea v t e Earth 's primary regions and subregions Worlds Down Under New World Old World Three/Four Worlds First World Second World Third World Fourth World Hemispheres Eastern Land Hemisphere Northern Southern Water Hemisphere Western Landmasses Africa-Eurasia Eurasia Americas Antarctica Australia Zealandia submerged Tectonic plates Continents Africa North Maghreb Sub-Saharan Central East Horn Great Lakes Southern West Antarctica East Antarctica Antarctic Plateau Transantarctic Mountains West Antarctica Antarctic Peninsula Asia East Northeast Southeast Mainland Maritime Central Aral Sea Aralkum Desert Caspian Sea North Siberia Ural Russian Far East Northeast South Indian subcontinent Subregions West Arabian Peninsula Caucasus South Caucasus Levant Dead Sea Levantine corridor Levantine Sea Near East Other regions Himalayan Himalayan states Indian region Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Europe Eastern Balkans Caucasus North Caucasus South Caucasus Southern Russia European Russia Southeastern Northern Baltic British Isles Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Southern Mediterranean Middle East Italy Italian peninsula South-eastern Balkan Peninsula South-western Iberian Peninsula Western Atlantic Low Countries Northwestern Other regions Central Europe By language Celtic Germanic Romance Slavic Macaronesia North America Northern America Greenland Great Lakes Pacific Northwest United States Appalachia Bible Belt Eastern East Coast Northern Southeast Southwest U.S. Census regions Northeastern New England Mid-Atlantic Midwest South Western Mountain Pacific Canada Atlantic Canadian Prairies Central Eastern Northern Western Middle America Aridoamerica Greater Caribbean Caribbean West Indies Central Am.

Mesoamerica Northern Mexico Oceania Australasia Australia Mainland Australia New Guinea Tasmania Zealandia Melanesia Island Melanesia Micronesia Near Oceania Polynesia Remote Oceania South America Amazon Plain Amazon Basin Amazon Rainforest Andean States Brazilian Highlands Caribbean South America The Guianas Southern Cone Patagonia Geopolitical regions Global East Heartland North Northeast Northwest South Southeast Southwest West Asia–Pacific Far East Pacific Asia Sinosphere Greater China Indosphere Greater India Europe, the Middle East and Africa Mediterranean Greater Middle East Middle East and North Africa Middle East Arab world Mashriq Maghreb Greater Iran Iranian plateau Americas Anglo Dutch French Latin America and the Caribbean Latin Ibero Hispanic Portuguese Islands By continent Africa Americas North America Caribbean Central America South America Antarctica Asia Europe by area by population Oceania Australia New Zealand By ocean Arctic Atlantic Baltic Sea Black Sea Caribbean Sea Irish Sea Mediterranean Sea Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Ionian Sea Indian Persian Gulf Pacific East China Sea South China Sea Southern Oceans Antarctic/Southern Antarctic Convergence Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Great Barrier Reef Mariana Trench Challenger Deep Ring of Fire World Ocean Other waterbodies Lakes lists Rivers Seas Rim Arctic Atlantic Indo-Mediterranean Indian Ocean Mediterranean Pacific Polar Antarctic Arctic Continents of Earth / List of seas / Physical Earth v t e World deserts Desert Desertification Polar desert List of deserts List of deserts by area Desert exploration Africa Algerian Bayuda Black Desert Blue Chalbi Danakil Djurab Eastern Ferlo Farafra (White) Kalahari Libyan Moçâmedes Namib Nubian Nyiri Plaine des Sables Richtersveld Sahara Tanezrouft Ténéré Western Asia Arabian Peninsula Ad-Dahna Nefud Arabian Judaean Negev Ramlat al-Sab'atayn Rub' al Khali Syrian Wahiba Sands Central Asia Aral Karakum Aralkum Barsuki Betpak-Dala Dasht-e Naomid Karakum Kyzylkum Moiynkum Ryn Saryesik-Atyrau Sarykum Taukum Ustyurt East Asia Badain Jaran Gobi Gurbantünggüt Hami Lop Kumtag Ordos Kubuqi Mu Us Qaidam Taklamakan Tengger South Asia Cholistan Indus Valley Katpana Kharan Thal Thar Iranian plateau Kavir Khash Leili Lut Margo Naomid Polond Registan Southeast Asia La Paz Europe Bardenas Reales Cabo de Gata Monegros Oleshky Tabernas Deliblato North America Alvord Amargosa Baja California Black Rock Carcross Carson Channeled scablands Chihuahuan Colorado Escalante Forty Mile Gran Desierto de Altar Great Basin Great Salt Lake Great Sandy Jornada del Muerto Kaʻū Lechuguilla Mojave North American Arctic Owyhee Painted Desert Red Desert Sevier Smoke Creek Sonoran Tonopah Desert Tule (Arizona) Tule (Nevada) Yuha Yuma Oceania Australia Gibson Great Sandy Great Victoria Little Sandy Nullarbor Plain Painted Pedirka Simpson Strzelecki Sturt Stony Tanami Tirari New Zealand Rangipo South America Atacama La Guajira Los Médanos de Coro Monte Patagonian Sechura Tatacoa Polar regions Antarctic Antarctica Meyer Desert Arctic North American Arctic Greenland Russian Arctic Project Category Commons v t e Kazakhstan articles History Prehistory Saka Kangju Wusun Huns Early history Tele Rouran Khaganate Göktürks Kangar union Kimek Khanate Karluks Oghuz Yabgu State Xueyantuo Khaganate Uyghur Khaganate Kyrgyz Khaganate Kara-Khanid Khanate Mongol Empire Chagatai Khanate Golden Horde White Horde Uzbek Khanate Since 1465 Kazakh Khanate List of Kazakh khans Jüz Russian Turkestan Alash Autonomy Kazakh ASSR Kazakh SSR Republic of Kazakhstan By topic Postal Geography Aktogay Canyon Altay (Altai) Mountains Aral Karakum Desert Borders Caspian Sea Kazakh Steppe Khan Tangiri Shyngy Kyzylkum Desert Lake Balkhash Sharyn Canyon Syr Darya Tien (Tian) Shan Ural River Zhetysu Subdivisions Cities and towns Districts Regions Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government President Prime Minister Human rights Freedom of speech LGBT Law enforcement Military Parliament Political parties Economy Agriculture Energy policy National Bank Stock Exchange Science and technology Telecommunications Tenge (currency) Transport Waste management Culture Alphabet Anthem Architecture Clothing Coat of arms Cuisine ( wine ) Flag Kaznet (Internet) Kazakhs Media Music Religion Sport Squatting Television Wedding ceremony Y-DNA Kazakh tribes Demographics Education Health Language Women Peoples Armenians Azerbaijanis Dungan Germans Greeks Jews Kazakhs Koreans Poles Russians Tatars Turks Ukrainians Uyghurs Outline Index Category v t e Uzbekistan articles History Sogdia Khwarazmian Empire Chagatai Khanate Timurid Empire Emirate of Bukhara Russian Turkestan Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic Since 1991 Geography Borders Cities Districts Extreme points Forests Lakes Mountains Protected areas Regions Rivers Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Human rights LGBT Law enforcement Military Oliy Majlis (Parliament) Political parties Supreme Court President of Uzbekistan Economy Companies Sum (currency) Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Anthem Coat of arms Demographics Education Ethnic groups Flag Healthcare Mental health Languages People Public holidays Culture Architecture Cinema Clothing Cuisine Literature Media Music Religion Sport Outline Index Category Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐vl7xg
Cached time: 20250817045132
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.670 seconds
Real time usage: 0.839 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3943/1000000
Revision size: 8642/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 263762/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 22285/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 45/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 69026/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.392/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16370211/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  663.561      1 -total
 30.21%  200.442      1 Template:Infobox_valley
 29.39%  195.053      1 Template:Infobox
 21.49%  142.573     19 Template:Navbox
 17.28%  114.678      2 Template:Country_topics
 16.54%  109.778      1 Template:Reflist
 12.63%   83.787      1 Template:Native_name_checker
 12.23%   81.147      1 Template:Regions_of_the_world
 11.33%   75.166      5 Template:Cite_web
  9.61%   63.750      1 Template:Kazakhstan_topics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:972565:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045132 and revision id 1277880276. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aralkum_Desert&oldid=1277880276 " Categories : Deserts of Central Asia Deserts of Kazakhstan Deserts of Uzbekistan Desertification Aral Sea Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2020 Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2016 Commons link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 February 2025, at 06:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aralkum Desert 45 languages Add topic

