Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Beliefs and practices Toggle Beliefs and practices subsection 1.1 Differences from mainstream Wicca 2 History 3 Denominations and related traditions Toggle Denominations and related traditions subsection 3.1 McFarland Dianic 4 Criticism for transphobia 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Works cited 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Dianic Wicca 14 languages العربية Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Español Français Italiano Македонски Norsk bokmål Português Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Neopagan female-centered goddess tradition Dianic Wicca Symbol of the Goddess with the pentacle Type Wicca Orientation Feminist Wicca Theology Goddess movement Governance Woman-centered; led by priestesses or led by collective Region United States Origin 1970s United States Members Around 1,000–2,000 Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Dianic Wicca , also known as Dianic Witchcraft , [ 1 ] is a modern pagan goddess tradition focused on female experience and empowerment. Leadership is by women, who may be ordained as priestesses, or in less formal groups that function as collectives.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] While some adherents identify as Wiccan , it differs from most traditions of Wicca in that only goddesses are honored (whereas most Wiccan traditions honor both female and male deities).

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] While there is more than one tradition known as Dianic , [ 2 ] the most widely known is the female-only variety, [ 1 ] with the most prominent tradition thereof founded by Zsuzsanna Budapest in the United States in the 1970s.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] It is notable for its worship of a single, monotheistic Great Goddess (with all other goddesses—of all cultures worldwide—seen as "aspects" of this goddess) and a focus on egalitarian matriarchy. While the tradition is named after the Roman goddess Diana , Dianics worship goddesses from many cultures, within the Dianic Wiccan ritual framework.

[ 3 ] Diana (considered correlate to the Greek Artemis ) "is seen as representing a central mythic theme of woman-identified cosmology. She is the protector of women and of the wild, untamed spirit of nature." [ 4 ] The Dianic Wiccan belief and ritual structure is an eclectic combination of elements from British Traditional Wicca , Italian folk-magic as recorded by Charles Leland in Aradia , New Age beliefs, and folk magic and healing practices from a variety of different cultures.

[ 3 ] [ 2 ] Beliefs and practices [ edit ] Dianic Wiccans of the Budapest lineage worship the Goddess , who they see as containing all goddesses, from all cultures; she is seen as the source of all living things and containing all that is within her.

[ 3 ] While Diana does have a triple aspect, it is in Her aspect as Virgin Huntress that She guides Her daughters to wholeness. She is "virgin" in the ancient sense of "She Who Is Whole Unto Herself." The ancient meaning of "virgin" described a woman who was unmarried, autonomous, belonging solely to herself. The original meaning of this word was not attached to a sexual act with a man. Diana/Artemis did not associate herself or consort with men, which is why these Goddesses are often understood to be lesbian.

[ 4 ] Dianic covens practice magic in the form of meditation and visualization in addition to spell work. They focus especially on healing themselves from the wounds of the patriarchy while affirming their own womanhood.

[ 4 ] Rituals can include reenacting religious and spiritual lore from a female-centered standpoint, celebrating the female body, and mourning society's abuses of women.

[ 5 ] The practice of magic is rooted in the belief that energy or 'life force' can be directed to enact change.

[ 6 ] However it is important to note that rituals are often improvised to suit individual or group needs and vary from coven to coven.

[ 7 ] Some Dianic Wiccans eschew manipulative spellwork and hexing because it goes against the Wiccan Rede . However, many other Dianic witches (notably Budapest) do not consider hexing or binding of those who attack women to be wrong, and actively encourage the binding of rapists .

[ 3 ] Differences from mainstream Wicca [ edit ] Diana (or Artemis, by her Greek name) as a protector of women and wild nature [ 8 ] Like other Wiccans, Dianics may form covens , attend festivals , celebrate the eight major Wiccan holidays , and gather on Esbats .

[ 3 ] They use many of the same altar tools , rituals, and vocabulary as other Wiccans. Dianics may also gather in less formal Circles.

[ 9 ] The most noticeable difference between the two are that Dianic covens of Budapest lineage are composed entirely of women.

[ 3 ] [ 2 ] Central to feminist Dianic focus and practice are embodied Women's Mysteries—the celebrations and honoring of the female life cycle and its correspondences to the Earth's seasonal cycle, healing from internalized oppression , female sovereignty and agency. Another marked difference in cosmology from other Wiccan traditions is rejecting the concept of duality based in gender stereotypes.

When asked why "men and gods" are excluded from her rituals, Budapest stated: It's the natural law, as women fare so fares the world, their children, and that's everybody. If you lift up the women you have lifted up humanity. Men have to learn to develop their own mysteries. Where is the order of Attis? Pan? Zagreus? Not only research it, but then popularize it as well as I have done. Where are the Dionysian rites? I think men are lazy in this aspect by not working this up for themselves. It's their own task, not ours.

— during a 2007 interview [ 9 ] Sociological studies have shown that there is therapeutic value inherent in Dianic ritual. Healing rituals to overcome personal trauma and raise awareness about violence against women have earned comparisons to the female-centered consciousness-raising groups of the 1960s and 1970s.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Some Dianic groups develop rituals specifically to confront gendered personal trauma, such as battery, rape , incest , and partner abuse . In one ethnographic study of such a ritual, women shifted their understanding of power from the hands of their abusers to themselves. It was found that this ritual had improved self-perception in participants in the short-term, and that the results could be sustained with ongoing practice.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Dianic Wicca developed from the Women's Liberation Movement and some covens traditionally compare themselves with radical feminism . Dianics pride themselves on the inclusion of lesbian and bisexual members in their groups and leadership. It is a goal within many covens to explore female sexuality and sensuality outside of male control, and many rituals function to affirm lesbian sexuality, [ 4 ] making it a popular tradition for lesbians and bisexuals. Some covens exclusively consist of same-sex oriented women and advocate lesbian separatism .

[ 6 ] Ruth Barrett writes, For other lesbian Dianics, as well as heterosexual and bisexual Dianics, excluding males from participation in ritual is not born from a rejection of males but rather an embracing of women’s unique biological rites of passage and how living in female body in a patriarchal world informs and effects our lives. 
Many women choose Dianic separatist ritual simply because of the joy, fun, pleasure, feeling of safety, and value which they derive from being in a exclusively female space with other like-minded women.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Aradia, or the Gospel of the Witches claims that ancient Diana , Aphrodite , Aradia , and Herodias cults linked to the Sacred Mysteries are the origin of the all-female coven and many witch myths as we know them.

Z Budapest's branch of Dianic Wicca began on the Winter Solstice of 1971, when Budapest led a ceremony in Hollywood, California.

[ 3 ] [ 2 ] Self-identifying as a "hereditary witch," [ 3 ] [ 2 ] and claiming to have learned folk magic from her mother, [ 3 ] [ 2 ] Budapest is frequently considered the mother of modern Dianic Wiccan tradition.

[ 2 ] Dianic Wicca itself is named after the Roman goddess of the same name.

[ 14 ] Ruth Rhiannon Barrett was ordained by Z Budapest in 1980 and inherited Budapest's Los Angeles ministry. This community continues through Circle of Aradia, a grove of Temple of Diana, Inc.

[ 14 ] Denominations and related traditions [ edit ] Modified Triple-goddess Wiccan symbol Traditions derived from Zsuzsanna Budapest – Female-only covens run by priestesses trained and initiated by Budapest.

Independent Dianic witches – who may have been inspired by Budapest, her published work (such as The Holy Book of Women's Mysteries ) or other woman's spirituality movements, and who emphasize independent study and self-initiation.

McFarland Dianic [ edit ] McFarland Dianic is a Neopagan tradition of goddess worship founded by Morgan McFarland and Mark Roberts which, despite the shared name, has a different theology and structure than the women-only groups. In most cases, the McFarland Dianics accept male participants.

[ 2 ] McFarland largely bases their tradition on the work of Robert Graves and his book The White Goddess . While some McFarland covens will initiate men, the leadership is limited to female priestesses. Like the women-only Dianic traditions, "McFarland Dianic covens espouse feminism as an all-important concept." They consider the decision whether to include or exclude males as "solely the choice of [a member coven's] individual High Priestess." [ 15 ] Criticism for transphobia [ edit ] Dianic Wicca has been criticised by elements in the Neopagan community for being transphobic . In February 2011, Zsuzsanna Budapest conducted a ritual with the Circle of Cerridwen at PantheaCon for "genetic women only" [ 16 ] from which she barred males [ 17 ] .

[ 18 ] This caused a backlash that led many to criticize Dianic Wicca as an inherently transphobic [ 19 ] lesbian-separatist movement .

[ 18 ] The Los Angeles Times wrote that: Talia Bettcher, a professor of philosophy at Cal State L.A., said this trans exclusionary stance is common—though not universal—among women like Budapest who were grounded in lesbian separatism, a political vision that originated in the '70s. [...] The same defiance that made Budapest a feminist hero in the '70s has made her a divisive figure for many modern witches today.

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Feminist theology Goddess movement – Modern revival of divine feminine or female-centered spirituality Gynocentrism – Dominant or exclusive focus on women in theory or practice New religious movement – Religious community or spiritual group of modern origin Pachamama – Andean fertility goddess Shaktism – Goddess-centric sect of Hinduism Thealogy – Study and reflection upon the feminine divine from a feminist perspective References [ edit ] ^ a b River, Falcon (7 May 2004).

"The Dianic Wiccan Tradition" . The Witches Voice. Archived from the original on 11 November 2005 . Retrieved 23 May 2007 .

and, to some also as "Dianism," "Dianic Feminist Witchcraft," or simply "Feminist Witchcraft"' ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Adler, Margot (2006) [1979]. "Chapter 8. Women, Feminism, and the Craft".

Drawing Down the Moon: Witches, Druids, Goddess-Worshippers, and Other Pagans in America Today (Reprint rev. and expand. ed.). New York: Penguin/Arcana.

ISBN 0-14-019536-X .

| at Archive.org ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Budapest, Zsuzsanna.

Holy Book of Women's Mysteries , The. 1980 (2003 electronic).

ISBN 0-914728-67-9 .

^ a b c d e Barrett, Ruth Rhiannon (2008). "Lesbian Rituals and Dianic Tradition".

Journal of Lesbian Studies .

7 (2): 15– 28.

doi : 10.1300/J155v07n02_03 .

ISSN 1089-4160 .

PMID 24815892 .

S2CID 23866787 .

^ Foltz, Tanice G. (2000). "Women's Spirituality Research: Doing Feminism".

Sociology of Religion .

61 (4): 409– 418.

doi : 10.2307/3712524 .

ISSN 1069-4404 .

JSTOR 3712524 .

^ a b Smith, Brandy and Sharon Horne. "Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual and Transgendered (GLBT) Experiences with Earth-Spirited Faith." The Journal of Homosexuality, 52.3/4 (2007): 235-248.

^ Warwick, Lynda L. "Feminist Wicca: Paths to Empowerment." Women & Therapy 16.2-3 (1995): 121.

^ "Temple of Diana - The Tradition of Dianic Wicca" .

templeofdiana.org . Archived from the original on 2013-12-06.

^ a b Velkoborska, Kamila, Wicca in the USA: How a British-born Religion Became Americanized (PDF) , Tomas Bata University, archived (PDF) from the original on 2012-04-25 , retrieved 25 October 2011 ^ Foltz, Tanic G. and Wendy Griffin. "Ethnographic Journeys of Self Discovery", Composing Ethnography: Alternative Forms of Qualitative Writing . (1996): 301–330.

^ Lozano, Wendy G. and Tanic G. Foltz. "An Ethnographic Study of Witchcraft and Death", Qualitative Sociology , Vol. 13, No. 13. (1990): 211–234.

^ Jacobs, Janet L. "The Effects of Ritual Healing on Female Victims of Abuse: A Study of Empowerment and Transformation".

Sociological Analysis , 50.3 (1989): 265–279.

^ Jacobs, Janet L. "Women, Ritual, and Power".

Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies , 11.2–3 (1990): 39–44.

^ a b Oswald, Ramona Faith (2003).

Lesbian rites: symbolic acts and the power of community . Bringhampton, New York: Harrington Park Press. pp.

15, 16, 17 .

ISBN 1-56023-315-X .

^ "The McFarland Dianics -- A Chronology - Spring Equinox, 2000" . Archived from the original on 27 July 2011.

^ Scott (2020) .

^ Thompson (2012) , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ a b von Busack (2021) .

^ Pitzl-Waters (2012) .

^ Netburn (2021) .

Works cited [ edit ] Netburn, Deborah (September 18, 2021).

"This feminist witch introduced California to Goddess worship" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 2023-01-08 .

Pitzl-Waters, Jason (February 23, 2012).

"The PantheaCon Gender Conversation Continues" .

The Wild Hunt .

Scott, Eric O. (June 13, 2020).

"Editorial: The Pagan Imperative of Transgender Rights" .

The Wild Hunt . Retrieved 2023-01-12 .

Thompson, Sarah (2012).

Gender and Transgender in Modern Paganism . Cupertino, CA: Circle of Cerridwen Press.

ISBN 978-1105433788 .

von Busack (September 22, 2021).

"Signal Booster: Z Budapest, Mother of California Goddess Worship" .

California Local . Retrieved 2023-01-12 .

Further reading [ edit ] Barrett, Ruth.

Women's Rites, Women's Mysteries: Intuitive Ritual Creation . Llewellyn Publications; 2007, ISBN 0-7387-0924-7 . Earlier publishing: Women's Rites, Women's Mysteries: Creating Ritual in the Dianic Wiccan Tradition . Authorhouse; 2004, ISBN 1-4184-8295-1 .

Eisler, Riane , The Chalice and the Blade .

Mountainwater, Shekhinah, Ariadne 's Thread .

Ochshorn, Judith and Cole, Ellen .

Women's Spirituality, Women's Lives . Haworth Press 1995.

ISBN 1-56024-722-3 . pp 122 & 133 referring to Z Budapest and Shekinah Mountainwater, among others, in a discussion of Dianic Witchcraft.

Pond, Gina, et al.

Gender and Transgender in Modern Paganism . Circle of Cerridwen Press, 2012.

ISBN 978-1-105-43378-8 On Starhawk, the Reclaiming Tradition and feminism, M. Macha NightMare Archived 2019-03-11 at the Wayback Machine .

Interview with Starhawk in Modern Pagans: An Investigation of Contemporary Pagan Practices , ed. V. Vale and John Sulak, Re/Search, San Francisco, 2001, ISBN 1-889307-10-6 .

External links [ edit ] Dianic Wicca, Official Website Archived 2019-11-10 at the Wayback Machine Dianic Tradition, Official Website Dianic Wicca, Website Z. Budapest International Goddess Conference Susan B. Anthony Coven, Dianic Wicca Website Temple of Diana The McFarland Dianic Tradition v t e Neopagan witchcraft History History of Wicca Etymology of Wicca Wicca and LGBT people Dettmer v. Landon Traditions British Traditional Alexandrian Wicca Blue Star Wicca Central Valley Wicca Chthonioi Alexandrian Wicca Gardnerian Wicca Other 1734 Tradition Celtic Wicca Church and School of Wicca Cochrane's Craft Coven of Atho Dianic Wicca Faery Wicca Feri Georgian Wicca Odyssean Wicca Reclaiming Seax-Wica Stregheria Universal Eclectic Wicca Notable figures Gerald Gardner Doreen Valiente Alex Sanders Maxine Sanders Sybil Leek Dafo Margot Adler Victor Anderson Artemis Gavin Bone Lois Bourne Jack Bracelin Raymond Buckland Eddie Buczynski Zsuzsanna Budapest Charles Cardell Ipsita Roy Chakraverti Patricia Crowther Vivianne Crowley Robert Cochrane Scott Cunningham Phyllis Curott Cerridwen Fallingstar Janet Farrar Stewart Farrar Raven Grimassi Gavin Frost Yvonne Frost Philip Heselton Frederic Lamond Rosaleen Norton Silver RavenWolf Starhawk Joseph Wilson Deities Triple Goddess Horned God Green Man Spirit of nature Holly King / Oak King Mother goddess Key concepts Wicca Wiccan morality Wiccan Rede Rule of Three Wiccan views of divinity Coven Craft name Magic Witchcraft White magic Otherworld The Summerland Reincarnation Karma Skyclad Summoner Watchtower Familiar Animism Rites and ritual Drawing down the Moon Great rite Handfasting Wiccaning Fivefold kiss Magic circle Cone of power Herbal medicine Scrying Spellwork / Incantation Banishing Divination Invocation Initiation Rite of passage Eko Eko Azarak Solitary practitioner Spiral dance Holidays Wheel of the Year Solstice Equinox Imbolc Ostara Beltane Midsummer Lughnasadh Mabon Samhain Yule Esbat Wild Hunt Paraphernalia Magical tools in Wicca Altar Amulet Athame Bell Besom Boline Book of Shadows Candles Cauldron Censer Chalice/Goblet Horn Incense Parchment Pentacle Runes Scourge Statue Talisman Tarot deck Wand Witch's ladder Literature Aradia, or the Gospel of the Witches The Meaning of Witchcraft The Spiral Dance What Witches Do Witchcraft Today Charge of the Goddess Enchanted Feminism Related List of Wiccan organisations Bricket Wood coven New Forest coven Neopagan witchcraft Witch-cult hypothesis Left-hand path and right-hand path Cunning folk in Britain European witchcraft Malleus Maleficarum Granny woman Cunning folk Magical alphabets Runes Theban Hebrew Witching hour Witch hunt Witches' Sabbath Flying ointment Museum of Witchcraft and Magic Witchcraft Research Association Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dianic_Wicca&oldid=1288148557 " Categories : Dianic Wicca Monotheistic religions Feminist spirituality Modern paganism in the United States Wiccan feminism Diana (mythology) 1970s in modern paganism Lesbian separatism Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2023 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 30 April 2025, at 19:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dianic Wicca 14 languages Add topic

