Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Dynamics 2 Rip tide and rip currents 3 Surviving rip currents 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Rip tide Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Current caused by the tide pulling water through an inlet This article is about currents caused by the tide pulling water through an inlet. For currents appearing near beaches, see Rip current . For other uses, see Riptide (disambiguation) .

A rip tide , or riptide , is a strong offshore current that is caused by the tide pulling water through an inlet along a barrier beach , at a lagoon or inland marina where tide water flows steadily out to sea during ebb tide . It is a strong tidal flow of water within estuaries and other enclosed tidal areas. The riptides become the strongest where the flow is constricted. When there is a falling or ebbing tide, the outflow water is strongly flowing through an inlet toward the sea, especially once stabilised by jetties .

[ 1 ] Dynamics [ edit ] During these falling and ebbing tides, a riptide can carry a person far offshore.  For example, the ebbing tide at Shinnecock Inlet in Southampton, New York , extends more than 300 metres (980 ft) offshore.

[ 2 ] Because of this, riptides are typically more powerful than rip currents .

During slack tide, the water is motionless for a short period of time until the flooding or rising tide starts pushing the sea water landward through the inlet. Riptides also occur at constricted areas in bays and lagoons where there are no waves near an inlet.

These strong, reversing currents can also be termed ebb jets , flood jet , or tidal jets by coastal engineers because they carry large quantities of sand outward that form sandbars far out in the ocean or into the bay outside the inlet channel. The term "ebb jet" would be used for a tidal current leaving an enclosed tidal area, and "flood jet" for the equivalent tidal current entering it.

Rip tide and rip currents [ edit ] The term rip tide is often incorrectly used to refer to rip currents , which are not tidal flows. A rip current is a strong, narrow jet of water that moves away from the beach and into the ocean as a result of local wave motion . Rip currents can flow quickly, are unpredictable, and come about from what happens to waves as they interact with the shape of the sea bed. In contrast, a rip tide is caused by tidal movements, as opposed to wave action, and is a predictable rise and fall of the water level.

[ 3 ] The United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration comments: Rip currents are not rip tides. A specific type of current associated with tides may include both the ebb and flood tidal currents that are caused by egress and ingress of the tide through inlets and the mouths of estuaries , embayments , and harbors . These currents may cause drowning deaths, but these tidal currents or tidal jets are separate and distinct phenomena from rip currents. Recommended terms for these phenomena include ebb jet, flood jet, or tidal jet.

[ 4 ] [ dead link ] Surviving rip currents [ edit ] People often drown by swimming directly against a rip current, which tires them out.

[ 5 ] People are advised to not fight the current, which is too strong for any swimmer.

[ 5 ] People should not try to swim directly inwards, towards the beach.

[ 5 ] They should relax, and swim parallel to the beach.

[ 5 ] Eventually, they will swim clear of the rip current.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Rip current Baïne Tidal bore References [ edit ] ^ SurferToday (2024).

"The differences between rip currents, undertows and rip tides" . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ Leatherman, Stephen P. (2012-07-20).

"Undertow, Rip Current, and Riptide" .

Journal of Coastal Research .

283 (4): iii– v.

doi : 10.2112/jcoastres-d-12-00052.1 .

S2CID 128555026 .

^ Showman, Sally; KOIN 6 News staff (2014-07-04).

"Know your riptide, rip current and undertow" . Portland, Oregon: KOIN 6 . Archived from the original on 13 July 2014 . Retrieved 31 August 2017 .

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Rip Current Safety, Rip Current Science, Miscellaneous/General information, Rip Currents vs Rip Tides" . National Weather Service, NOAA. Accessed 19 September 2017.

^ a b c d e "Rip Current Survival Guide" .

Ocean Today . National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . Retrieved 28 June 2023 .

v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rip_tide&oldid=1301075750 " Categories : Oceanography Physical oceanography Bodies of water Tides Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 23:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rip tide Add languages Add topic

