Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 History 3 In fiction 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Poitou 40 languages العربية Arpetan Беларуская Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano ქართული Кыргызча Latina Lëtzebuergesch Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Picard Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 46°38′55″N 0°14′52″W ﻿ / ﻿ 46.6486°N 0.2478°W ﻿ / 46.6486; -0.2478 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Historic province of west-central France This article is about the region and former province of France. For the breeds of animal from this region, see Baudet de Poitou and Poitou goat . For other uses, see Poitou (disambiguation) .

Place in France Poitou Poetou ( Poitevin ) Flag Coat of arms Country France Area • Total 19,709 km 2 (7,610 sq mi) Population (2006 estimate) Residents known as Poitevins [ 1 ] • Total 1,375,356 Time zone CET Count 638–677, Guérin de Trèves 1403–1461, Charles VII of France Poitou ( UK : / ˈ p w ʌ t uː / PWUH -too , US : / p w ɑː ˈ t uː / pwah- TOO , [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] French: [pwatu] ; Latin : Pictaviensis, Pictavia ; Poitevin : Poetou ) was a province of west-central France whose capital city was Poitiers . Both Poitou and Poitiers are named after the Pictones Gallic tribe.

Geography [ edit ] The main historical cities are Poitiers (historical capital city), Châtellerault (France's kings' establishment in Poitou), Niort , La Roche-sur-Yon , Thouars , and Parthenay .

History [ edit ] Historically, Poitou was ruled by the count of Poitou , a continuous line of which can be traced back to an appointment of Charlemagne in 778. A marshland called the Poitevin Marsh (French Marais Poitevin ) is located along the Gulf of Poitou , on the west coast of France, just north of La Rochelle and west of Niort .

At the conclusion of the Battle of Taillebourg in the Saintonge War , which was decisively won by the French, King Henry III of England recognized his loss of continental Plantagenet territory to France. This was ratified by the Treaty of Paris of 1259 , by which King Louis annexed Normandy , Maine , Anjou , and Poitou).

During the late sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries, Poitou was a hotbed of Huguenot (French Calvinist Protestant) activity among the nobility and bourgeoisie.  The Protestants were discriminated against and brutally attacked during the French Wars of Religion (1562–1598). Under the Edict of Nantes , such discrimination was temporarily suspended but this measure was repealed by the French Crown.

Some of the French colonists, later known as Acadians , who settled beginning in 1604 in eastern North America came from southern Poitou. They established settlements in what is now Nova Scotia , and later in New Brunswick —both of which were taken over in the later 18th century by the English, (after their 1763 victory in the Seven Years' War ).

After the revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685, the French Roman Catholic Church conducted a strong Counter-Reformation effort. In 1793, this effort had contributed to the three-year-long open revolt against the French Revolutionary Government in the Bas-Poitou (Département of Vendée ). Similarly, during Napoleon 's Hundred Days in 1815, the Vendée stayed loyal to the Restoration Monarchy of King Louis XVIII . Napoleon dispatched 10,000 troops under General Lamarque to pacify the region.

As noted by historian Andre Lampert: "The persistent Huguenots of 17th Century Poitou and the fiercely Catholic rebellious Royalists of what came be the Vendée of the late 18th Century had ideologies very different, indeed diametrically opposed to each other. The common thread connecting both phenomena is a continuing assertion of a local identity and opposition to the central government in Paris , whatever its composition and identity. (...) In the region where Louis XIII and Louis XIV had encountered stiff resistance, the House of Bourbon gained loyal and militant supporters exactly when it had been overthrown and when a Bourbon loyalty came to imply a local loyalty in opposition to the new central government, that of Robespierre ." [ 5 ] [ citation needed ] In fiction [ edit ] Large parts of the Angélique series of historical novels are set in 17th century Poitou.

In Alexandre Dumas 's The Man in the Iron Mask , Aramis gives a romantic description of the marshes of Bas-Poitou as the most secluded place to lead a quiet life away from the perils of court.

The movie Kingdom of Heaven features Guy of Lusignan , a knight from Poitou.

See also [ edit ] Count of Poitiers Poitevin (language) , the French regional language spoken in Poitou (Saintongeais is for Saintonge ) Big Ghoul , folklore dragon.

References [ edit ] ^ Lance Day, Ian McNeil, ed. (1996).

Biographical Dictionary of the History of Technology . Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-19399-0 .

^ "Poitou" .

The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (5th ed.). HarperCollins . Retrieved 3 May 2019 .

^ "Poitou" (US) and "Poitou" .

Lexico UK English Dictionary .

Oxford University Press . Archived from the original on 2 March 2020.

^ "Poitou" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 3 May 2019 .

^ Andre Lampert, "Centralism and Localism in European History" (cited as an example of "A Persistant [sic] Localism" in the Introduction) External links [ edit ] Media related to Poitou at Wikimedia Commons Le Poitou, ancienne province de France : Portrait physique et humain du Poitou aux XVII e et XVIII e siècles at the Wayback Machine (archived 12 August 2002) v t e Historical provinces of France General governments Alsace Angoumois Anjou Artois Aunis Auvergne Béarn Berry Bourbonnais Brittany Burgundy Champagne Corsica Dauphiné Flanders Foix Franche-Comté Gascony Guyenne Hainaut Île-de-France Languedoc Limousin Lorraine and Barrois Lyonnais Maine Marche Lower Navarre Nivernais Normandy Orléanais Perche Picardy Poitou Provence Roussillon Saintonge Touraine Trois-Évêchés Minor provinces and regions Agenais Armagnac Beaujolais Bigorre Bresse Bugey Cambrésis Cévennes Comminges Couserans Dombes Forez Gâtinais Gévaudan Gex Labourd Nébouzan Périgord Ponthieu Quercy Rouergue Soule Valromey Velay Vermandois Vivarais Foreign territories in 1789 Créhange Dabo Menton and Roquebrune Montbéliard Mulhouse Nice Salm-Salm Sarrewerden Savoy Tende [ fr ] Comtat Venaissin Authority control databases International VIAF FAST WorldCat National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX 46°38′55″N 0°14′52″W ﻿ / ﻿ 46.6486°N 0.2478°W ﻿ / 46.6486; -0.2478 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Poitou&oldid=1296246181 " Categories : Poitou Former provinces of France Geography of Charente Geography of Charente-Maritime Geography of Deux-Sèvres Geography of Haute-Vienne Geography of Indre Geography of Loire-Atlantique Geography of Maine-et-Loire Geography of Vendée Geography of Vienne (department) History of Pays de la Loire History of Nouvelle-Aquitaine History of Centre-Val de Loire History of Charente History of Charente-Maritime History of Deux-Sèvres History of Haute-Vienne History of Indre History of Loire-Atlantique History of Maine-et-Loire History of Vendée History of Vienne (department) Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2019 Pages using infobox settlement with no coordinates Pages with French IPA Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Interlanguage link template forcing interwiki links Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 June 2025, at 20:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Poitou 40 languages Add topic

