Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mission 2 History 3 Work Toggle Work subsection 3.1 Low-enriched uranium bank 3.2 Highly enriched uranium elimination 3.2.1 Serbia 3.2.2 Kazakhstan 3.3 Nuclear Security Index 3.4 Global Health Security Index 3.5 World Health Organization–Nuclear Threat Initiative Emergency Outbreak Response Fund 3.6 Global dialogue on nuclear security priorities 3.7 Establishment of new organizations 3.8 Films 4 Leadership Toggle Leadership subsection 4.1 Board of directors 4.2 Advisors to the board of directors 4.3 Emeritus board 5 Financials 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Nuclear Threat Initiative 8 languages العربية Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands Norsk bokmål Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American foreign policy think tank "NTI" redirects here. For other uses, see NTI (disambiguation) .

Nuclear Threat Initiative Abbreviation NTI Formation 2001 ; 24 years ago ( 2001 ) Type 501(c)(3) organization Tax ID no.

52-2289435 Focus Global catastrophic risk Headquarters 1776 Eye Street, NW Location Washington, D.C., U.S.

President Ernest Moniz Expenses (2017) Website www .nti .org The Nuclear Threat Initiative , generally referred to as NTI , is a non-profit organization located in Washington, D.C. NTI was founded in 2001 by former U.S. Senator Sam Nunn and philanthropist Ted Turner and describes itself as a "a nonprofit, nonpartisan global security organization focused on reducing nuclear, biological, and emerging technology threats imperiling humanity." [ 1 ] NTI has four policy programs: the Global Nuclear Policy Program, Nuclear Materials Security, Emerging Tech, and Global Biological Policy and Programs (stylized as NTI | bio).

[ 2 ] Mission [ edit ] The Nuclear Threat Initiative is a nonprofit, nonpartisan global security organization focused on reducing nuclear, biological, and emerging technology threats imperiling humanity.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] NTI was founded in 2001 by former U.S. Senator Sam Nunn and philanthropist Ted Turner .

[ 3 ] The launch event was held at the National Press Club on January 8, 2001.

[ 4 ] An event celebrating NTI's 20th anniversary was held on April 12, 2022, with a one-year delay due to the COVID-19 pandemic .

[ 5 ] Work [ edit ] Low-enriched uranium bank [ edit ] NTI supported the development of an international low-enriched uranium bank to help prevent the proliferation of nuclear technology.

[ 6 ] NTI advisor Warren Buffett provided $50 million to jump-start the reserve, which is owned and managed by the International Atomic Energy Agency and located in Kazakhstan.

[ 6 ] The bank became fully operational in October 2019 after receiving its first shipment of uranium.

[ 7 ] Highly enriched uranium elimination [ edit ] Serbia [ edit ] In 2002, NTI provided much of the financial support for a joint US-Russian mission to remove 100 pounds of highly enriched uranium from the Vinča Nuclear Institute in Serbia , to be flown to Russia .

[ 8 ] Kazakhstan [ edit ] NTI provided technical and financial support to help convert 2,900 kilograms of highly enriched uranium to low-enriched uranium in Kazakhstan in 2005.

[ 9 ] The organization committed $1.3 million for reactor safety systems.

[ 8 ] Nuclear Security Index [ edit ] NTI has produced a biennial "Nuclear Security Index" in partnership with Economist Impact since 2012.

[ 10 ] The "NTI Index" benchmarks nuclear security conditions across 176 countries.

[ 11 ] As part of the Index, NTI also develops and releases a Radioactive Source Security Assessment that includes recommendations on securing and eliminating radiological sources used and stored at thousands of sites across more than 100 countries.

[ 11 ] Global Health Security Index [ edit ] The Global Health Security Index, produced by NTI, the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security , and Economist Impact, is a biennial index that assesses countries' preparedness to respond to pandemics and epidemics.

[ 12 ] The GHS Index assesses 195 countries' abilities to prevent, detect, and respond to health emergencies based on publicly available information.

[ 13 ] World Health Organization–Nuclear Threat Initiative Emergency Outbreak Response Fund [ edit ] In 2002, NTI partnered with the World Health Organization (WHO) to create a $500,000 rapid response fund for infectious disease outbreaks.

[ 14 ] Global dialogue on nuclear security priorities [ edit ] NTI regularly convenes meetings among global nuclear security experts and government officials to discuss issues related to nuclear security.

[ 15 ] Global Dialogue summits have taken place in France, the Netherlands, the Czech Republic, Germany, Austria, the United Kingdom, the United States, and Japan.

[ 16 ] Establishment of new organizations [ edit ] In 2003, NTI created the Middle East Consortium for Infectious Disease Surveillance (MECIDS) with participation from Israel , Jordan , and the Palestinian Authority .

[ 17 ] MECIDS shares official health data and conducts infectious disease prevention training.

In 2008, NTI helped create the World Institute for Nuclear Security (WINS), in Vienna, as part of its focus to secure nuclear materials worldwide.

[ 18 ] NTI also created Connecting Organizations for Disease Surveillance (CORDS), which launched in 2013 as an independent NGO that links international disease surveillance networks, supported by the World Health Organization and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations .

[ 19 ] Films [ edit ] The organization produced the 2005 film, Last Best Chance , a docudrama about nuclear terrorism that aired on HBO.

[ 20 ] NTI also produced the 2010 documentary film Nuclear Tipping Point , which was screened by President Obama at the White House in April 2010 [ 21 ] and featured on The Colbert Report .

[ 22 ] Leadership [ edit ] Ernest J. Moniz has served as chief executive officer since June 2017, and Joan Rohlfing serves as president and chief operating officer.

[ 23 ] Co-chaired by Moniz, Nunn, and Ted Turner , NTI is governed by a board of directors with both current and emeritus members from around the globe.

Board of directors [ edit ] Ernest J. Moniz , co-chairman and chief executive Officer, NTI Sam Nunn , co-chair, co-founder and strategic advisor, NTI Ted Turner , co-chair Des Browne , vice chairman, NTI Joan Rohlfing , president, NTI Ambassador Hamad Alkaabi, permanent representative of the United Arab Emirates to the International Atomic Energy Agency and special representative for International Nuclear Cooperation Ambassador Brooke D. Anderson , president of Pivotal Ventures Dr.

Alexey Arbatov , head, Center for International Security at Institute of World Economy and International Relations, Russian Academy of Sciences Edmund G. Brown Jr.

, former Governor of California Ambassador Rolf Ekeus , chairman emeritus of the board, Stockholm International Peace Research Institute Gideon Frank, former director general of the Israel Atomic Energy Commission Margaret A. Hamburg , M.D., former commissioner of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration Igor S. Ivanov , former minister of foreign affairs, Russia Jeong H. Kim , former president, Bell Labs Michelle McMurry-Heath , president and CEO, Biotechnology Innovation Organization Admiral Michael G. Mullen , USN (ret.), 17th chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff Ronald L. Olson , Partner, Los Angeles office of Munger, Tolles & Olson Michael A. Peterson, chairman and chief executive Officer of the Peter G. Peterson Foundation Malcolm Rifkind , former foreign secretary, UK Ray Rothrock, executive chairman, RedSeal, Inc. and partner emeritus, Venrock Louis Salkind, president, Bright Horizon Foundation Laura Turner Seydel, chair of Captain Planet Foundation and director of Turner Foundation Dr.

Nathalie Tocci , director, Istituto Affari Internazionali Ambassador Alexa Wesner , former U.S. Ambassador to Austria Dr. Peng Yuan, president, China Institutes of Contemporary International Relations Advisors to the board of directors [ edit ] Warren Buffett , CEO of Berkshire Hathaway Inc.

Siegfried S. Hecker , co-director, Stanford University Center for International Security and Cooperation Emeritus board [ edit ] Charles A. Bowsher , former comptroller general to the United States and head of the General Accounting Office Liru Cui, former president of China Institutes of Contemporary International Relations Charles B. Curtis , president emeritus of NTI Susan Eisenhower HRH Prince El Hassan bin Talal of Jordan Ambassador Jon M. Huntsman, Jr.

, former U.S. Ambassador to Russia, China, and Singapore Riaz Mohammad Khan , former foreign secretary of Pakistan Pierre Lellouche Jessica T. Mathews Ambassador Hisashi Owada William J. Perry Nafis Sadik Amartya Sen Fujia Yang Financials [ edit ] NTI receives funding from a number of sources, including foundations, individuals, non-U.S. governments, and corporations.

[ 24 ] Funders and financial information are listed in NTI’s annual report, which is published online each year. The organization does not accept U.S. government funding.

[ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Global Health Security Index References [ edit ] ^ a b "About NTI" .

The Nuclear Threat Initiative . Retrieved 2022-07-05 .

^ "NTI Programs and Projects" .

The Nuclear Threat Initiative . Retrieved 2022-07-05 .

^ "Nuclear Threat Initiative" .

New Georgia Encyclopedia . Retrieved 2022-07-05 .

^ Nunn, Sam; Turner, R. E.

"2001 Annual Report" (PDF) .

Nuclear Threat Initiative .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-06-08 . Retrieved 2023-02-24 .

^ "NTI Celebrates 20 Years of Working to Build a Safer World" .

The Nuclear Threat Initiative . Retrieved 2022-07-05 .

^ a b Filipov, David; Warrick, Joby (2017-08-29).

"A uranium bank just opened in Kazakhstan to stop the spread of nukes" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 2022-07-05 .

^ "IAEA LEU Bank Becomes Operational with Delivery of Low Enriched Uranium" .

www.iaea.org . 2019-10-17 . Retrieved 2022-07-05 .

^ a b Warrick, Joby (August 23, 2002).

"Risky Stash of Uranium Secured" .

The Washington Post .

^ "Czech Uranium Removed | Arms Control Association" .

www.armscontrol.org . Retrieved 2022-07-05 .

^ "Nuclear security is improving almost everywhere" .

The Economist .

ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 2022-07-05 .

^ a b "About the Index" .

NTI Nuclear Security Index . Retrieved 2022-07-05 .

^ Anthes, Emily (2021-12-08).

"The World Is Unprepared for the Next Pandemic, Report Says" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2022-07-05 .

^ "Two years into this pandemic, the world is dangerously unprepared for the next one, report says" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 2022-07-05 .

^ "New WHO Fund to Probe Disease Outbreaks" .

The Edwardsville Intelligencer . 2002-12-02 . Retrieved 2022-07-05 .

^ "The Role of Civil Society in Strengthening Nuclear Security • Stimson Center" .

Stimson Center . 2021-06-29 . Retrieved 2022-07-05 .

^ "Global Dialogue on Nuclear Security Priorities" .

The Nuclear Threat Initiative . Retrieved 2022-07-05 .

^ Leventhal, Alex; Ramlawi, Assad; Belbiesi, Adel; Sheikh, Sami; Haddadin, Akhtam; Husseini, Sari; Abdeen, Ziad; Cohen, Dani (2013-01-01).

"Enhanced Surveillance for Detection and Management of Infectious Diseases: Regional Collaboration in the Middle East" .

Emerging Health Threats Journal .

6 (1): 19955.

doi : 10.3402/ehtj.v6i0.19955 .

PMC 3557910 .

PMID 23362413 .

^ Broad, William J. (2008-09-29).

"New Security Organization Will Try to Prevent Nuclear Theft" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2022-07-05 .

^ S. Gresham, Louise; S. Smolinski, Mark; Suphanchaimat, Rapeepong; Marie Kimball, Ann; Wibulpolprasert, Suwit (2013-01-01).

"Creating a Global Dialogue on Infectious Disease Surveillance: Connecting Organizations for Regional Disease Surveillance (CORDS)" .

Emerging Health Threats Journal .

6 (1): 19912.

doi : 10.3402/ehtj.v6i0.19912 .

PMC 3557909 .

PMID 23362412 .

^ "Rain and Fire" .

The New Yorker . 2005-09-26 . Retrieved 2022-07-05 .

^ Broad, William J. (2010-09-13).

"The Bomb Chroniclers" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2022-07-05 .

^ Sam Nunn - The Colbert Report , 2010-06-10, archived from the original on December 7, 2021 , retrieved 2022-07-05 ^ "Who We Are" .

The Nuclear Threat Initiative . Retrieved 2022-07-05 .

^ "2020 NTI Annual Report" (PDF) .

Nuclear Threat Initiative .

^ "Financials" .

The Nuclear Threat Initiative . Retrieved 2022-07-05 .

External links [ edit ] Official website "Nuclear Threat Initiative" . Internal Revenue Service filings.

ProPublica Nonprofit Explorer .

Nuclear Security Index JSTOR Nuclear Threat Initiative, Research Reports v t e Effective altruism Concepts Aid effectiveness Charity assessment Demandingness objection Disability-adjusted life year Disease burden Distributional cost-effectiveness analysis Earning to give Equal consideration of interests Incremental cost-effectiveness ratio Longtermism Marginal utility Moral circle expansion Psychological barriers to effective altruism Quality-adjusted life year Utilitarianism Venture philanthropy Key figures Sam Bankman-Fried Liv Boeree Nick Bostrom Hilary Greaves Holden Karnofsky William MacAskill Dustin Moskovitz Yew-Kwang Ng Toby Ord Derek Parfit Kelsey Piper Peter Singer Brian Tomasik Cari Tuna Eliezer Yudkowsky Organizations 80,000 Hours Against Malaria Foundation Animal Charity Evaluators Animal Ethics Centre for Effective Altruism Centre for Enabling EA Learning & Research Center for High Impact Philanthropy Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Development Media International Evidence Action Faunalytics Fistula Foundation Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Founders Pledge GiveDirectly GiveWell Giving Multiplier Giving What We Can Good Food Fund The Good Food Institute Good Ventures The Humane League Mercy for Animals Machine Intelligence Research Institute Malaria Consortium Open Philanthropy Raising for Effective Giving Sentience Institute Unlimit Health Wild Animal Initiative Focus areas Biotechnology risk Climate change Cultured meat Economic stability Existential risk from artificial general intelligence Global catastrophic risk Global health Global poverty Intensive animal farming Land use reform Life extension Malaria prevention Mass deworming Neglected tropical diseases Risk of astronomical suffering Wild animal suffering Literature Doing Good Better The End of Animal Farming Famine, Affluence, and Morality The Life You Can Save Living High and Letting Die The Most Good You Can Do Practical Ethics The Precipice Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies What We Owe the Future Events Effective Altruism Global v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nuclear_Threat_Initiative&oldid=1271770050 " Categories : 2001 establishments in Washington, D.C.

Anti–nuclear weapons movement Foreign policy and strategy think tanks in the United States Nuclear proliferation Nuclear safety in the United States Organizations established in 2001 Think tanks based in Washington, D.C.

Think tanks established in 2001 Existential risk organizations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 January 2025, at 16:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nuclear Threat Initiative 8 languages Add topic

