Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Gallery 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Drift ice 25 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Pack ice ) Sea ice that is not attached to land Drift ice, Greenland Fast ice (left, along shoreline) versus drift ice (right) in a hypothetical sea ice dynamics scenario Drift ice , also called brash ice , is sea ice that is not attached to the shoreline or any other fixed object (shoals, grounded icebergs, etc.).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Unlike fast ice , which is "fastened" to a fixed object, drift ice is carried along by winds and sea currents , hence its name. When drift ice is driven together into a large single mass (>70% coverage), it is called pack ice .

[ 1 ] Wind and currents can pile up that ice to form ridges up to dozens of metres in thickness. These represent a challenge for icebreakers and offshore structures operating in cold oceans and seas.

Drift ice consists of ice floes , individual pieces of sea ice 20 metres (66 ft) or more across. Floes are classified according to size: small – 20 metres (66 ft) to 100 metres (330 ft); medium – 100 metres (330 ft) to 500 metres (1,600 ft); big –  500 metres (1,600 ft) to 2,000 metres (6,600 ft); vast – 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) to 10 kilometres (6.2 mi); and giant – more than 10 kilometres (6.2 mi).

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Drift ice affects: Security of navigation Climatic impact (see Polar ice packs ) Geological impact Biosphere influence (see Ecology of sea ice ) Drift ice can exert tremendous forces when rammed against structures, and can shear off rudders and propellers from ships and strong structures anchored to the shore, such as piers. These structures must be retractable or removable to avoid damage. Similarly, ships can get stuck between drift ice floes.

The two major ice packs are the Arctic ice pack and the Antarctic ice pack . The most important areas of pack ice are the polar ice packs formed from seawater in the Earth's polar regions : the Arctic ice pack of the Arctic Ocean and the Antarctic ice pack of the Southern Ocean . Polar packs significantly change their size during seasonal changes of the year. Because of vast amounts of water added to or removed from the oceans and atmosphere , the behavior of polar ice packs has a significant impact on global changes in climate .

Seasonal ice drift in the Sea of Okhotsk by the northern coast of Hokkaidō , Japan , has become a tourist attraction, [ 6 ] and is one of the 100 Soundscapes of Japan . The Sea of Okhotsk is the southernmost area in the Northern Hemisphere where drift ice may be observed.

[ 7 ] Gallery [ edit ] The icebreaker Kontio , which in this picture became stuck in drift ice while towing a cargo ship in pack ice in the northern Baltic Sea Ice floes / pack ice Satellite image of drift ice in the Arctic Ocean around Wrangel Island Drift ice in the Sea of Okhotsk Aboard the Aurora icebreaker in the Sea of Okhotsk See also [ edit ] Drifting ice station – Research stations built on the ice of the high latitudes of the Arctic Ocean Iceberg – Large piece of freshwater ice broken off a glacier or ice shelf and floating in open water Ice shove – Ice pushed onshore due to water movements or wind Lead (sea ice) – Fracture that opens up in an expanse of sea ice Polynya – Area of unfrozen sea within an ice pack Pressure ridge (ice) – Linear accumulation of ice blocks resulting from the convergence between floes Seabed gouging by ice – Outcome of the interaction between drifting ice and the seabed Sea ice – Outcome of seawater as it freezes Shelf ice – Ice formed on a lake and washed up on the shore References [ edit ] ^ a b WMO Sea-Ice Nomenclature ^ Weeks, Willy F. (2010).

On Sea Ice . University of Alaska Press. p. 2.

ISBN 978-1-60223-101-6 .

^ Leppäranta, M. 2011. The Drift of Sea Ice. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

^ NSIDC All About Sea Ice ^ Environment Canada Ice Glossary ^ "A Port's Ice Is Thinning, and So Is Its Tourist Trade" , The New York Times , March 14, 2006.

^ "Honda, Meiji, Koji Yamazaki, Hisashi Nakamura, Kensuke Takeuchi, 1999: Dynamic and Thermodynamic Characteristics of Atmospheric Response to Anomalous Sea-Ice Extent in the Sea of Okhotsk. J. Climate, 12 , 3347–3358" .

Journal of Climate .

12 . Journals.ametsoc.org: 3347. 1999.

doi : 10.1175/1520-0442(1999)012<3347:DATCOA>2.0.CO;2 .

ISSN 1520-0442 .

External links [ edit ] "Ice in the Sea" : chapter from Nathaniel Bowditch 's American Practical Navigator Cryosphere Today : Current Arctic sea ice conditions Archived 2011-02-23 at the Wayback Machine Data source for sea ice picture Marine Modeling and Analysis Branch Archived 2011-04-02 at the Wayback Machine Everything you ever wanted to know about sea ice but were afraid to ask Animation of the movement of sea ice, September 2003 through May 2004 Atlas of Antarctic Sea Ice Drift The Papers of Paul Gordienko on Ice and Ice Drifts at Dartmouth College Library v t e Ice The solid state of water Major phases Amorphous solid Crystalline phases Superionic Formations Anchor Cap Cave Dune Field Glacier Iceberg ( calving ) Icicle Jam Sea Sheet Spike Stalactites Volcano Phenomena Albedo feedback Black Circle or disc Clear Crystals Firn Fog Frazil Frost Frost heave Frost flower ( sea ice ) Glaze Hail Hair ice Jacking Névé Needle Nucleus Rime Shove Shuga Slurry Slush Snow Storm Ice-related activities Bathing Blasting Blocking Climbing Fishing Rafting Sculpture Skating Sports Bandy Iceboating Cricket Curling Cycling Figure skating Ice hockey Ice racing Speed skating Short-track speed skating Tour skating Constructions Bar Bridge Hotel Igloo Palace Pier Pykrete Rink Road Work Cutting Icebox Icehouse Iceman (occupation) Pick Trade Yakhchāl Other uses Chips Core Cream Cube Pack Ice ages Glaciology Little Ice Age Pleistocene Snowball Earth Category Wikimedia Commons Wiktionary Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Drift_ice&oldid=1306571160 " Categories : Sea ice Oceanography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 13:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Drift ice 25 languages Add topic

