Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Preliminary definitions 2 Main definitions 3 Relationships between the axioms 4 Other separation axioms 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Separation axiom 23 languages العربية Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Axioms in topology defining notions of "separation" For the axiom of set theory, see Axiom schema of separation .

Separation axioms in topological spaces Kolmogorov classification T 0 (Kolmogorov) T 1 (Fréchet) T 2 (Hausdorff) T 2 ½ (Urysohn) completely T 2 (completely Hausdorff) T 3 (regular Hausdorff) T 3½ (Tychonoff) T 4 (normal Hausdorff) T 5 (completely normal Hausdorff) T 6 (perfectly normal Hausdorff) History An illustration of some of the separation axioms. Grey amorphous broken-outline regions indicate open neighbourhoods of disjoint closed sets or points: red solid-outline circles denote closed sets while black dots represent points.

In topology and related fields of mathematics , there are several restrictions that one often makes on the kinds of topological spaces that one wishes to consider. Some of these restrictions are given by the separation axioms . These are sometimes called Tychonoff separation axioms , after Andrey Tychonoff .

The separation axioms are not fundamental axioms like those of set theory , but rather defining properties which may be specified to distinguish certain types of topological spaces. The separation axioms are denoted with the letter "T" after the German Trennungsaxiom ("separation axiom"), and increasing numerical subscripts denote stronger and stronger properties.

The precise definitions of the separation axioms have varied over time . Especially in older literature, different authors might have different definitions of each condition.

Preliminary definitions [ edit ] Before we define the separation axioms themselves, we give concrete meaning to the concept of separated sets (and points) in topological spaces . (Separated sets are not the same as separated spaces , defined in the next section.) The separation axioms are about the use of topological means to distinguish disjoint sets and distinct points. It's not enough for elements of a topological space to be distinct (that is, unequal ); we may want them to be topologically distinguishable . Similarly, it's not enough for subsets of a topological space to be disjoint; we may want them to be separated (in any of various ways). The separation axioms all say, in one way or another, that points or sets that are distinguishable or separated in some weak sense must also be distinguishable or separated in some stronger sense.

Let X be a topological space. Then two points x and y in X are topologically distinguishable if they do not have exactly the same neighbourhoods (or equivalently the same open neighbourhoods); that is, at least one of them has a neighbourhood that is not a neighbourhood of the other (or equivalently there is an open set that one point belongs to but the other point does not).  That is, at least one of the points does not belong to the other's closure .

Two points x and y are separated if each of them has a neighbourhood that is not a neighbourhood of the other; that is, neither belongs to the other's closure . More generally, two subsets A and B of X are separated if each is disjoint from the other's closure, though the closures themselves do not have to be disjoint. Equivalently, each subset is included in an open set disjoint from the other subset. All of the remaining conditions for separation of sets may also be applied to points (or to a point and a set) by using singleton sets. Points x and y will be considered separated, by neighbourhoods, by closed neighbourhoods, by a continuous function, precisely by a function, if and only if their singleton sets { x } and { y } are separated according to the corresponding criterion.

Subsets A and B are separated by neighbourhoods if they have disjoint neighbourhoods. They are separated by closed neighbourhoods if they have disjoint closed neighbourhoods. They are separated by a continuous function if there exists a continuous function f from the space X to the real line R such that A is a subset of the preimage f −1 ({0}) and B is a subset of the preimage f −1 ({1}). Finally, they are precisely separated by a continuous function if there exists a continuous function f from X to R such that A equals the preimage f −1 ({0}) and B equals f −1 ({1}).

These conditions are given in order of increasing strength: Any two topologically distinguishable points must be distinct, and any two separated points must be topologically distinguishable. Any two separated sets must be disjoint, any two sets separated by neighbourhoods must be separated, and so on.

For more on these conditions (including their use outside the separation axioms), see Separated sets and Topological distinguishability .

Main definitions [ edit ] These definitions all use essentially the preliminary definitions above.

Many of these names have alternative meanings in some of mathematical literature ; for example, the meanings of "normal" and "T 4 " are sometimes interchanged, similarly "regular" and "T 3 ", etc. Many of the concepts also have several names; however, the one listed first is always least likely to be ambiguous.

Most of these axioms have alternative definitions with the same meaning; the definitions given here fall into a consistent pattern that relates the various notions of separation defined in the previous section. Other possible definitions can be found in the individual articles.

In all of the following definitions, X is again a topological space .

X is T 0 , or Kolmogorov , if any two distinct points in X are topologically distinguishable . (It will be a common theme among the separation axioms to have one version of an axiom that requires T 0 and one version that doesn't.) X is R 0 , or symmetric , if any two topologically distinguishable points in X are separated.

X is T 1 , or accessible or Fréchet , if any two distinct points in X are separated. Equivalently, every single-point set is a closed set.  Thus, X is T 1 if and only if it is both T 0 and R 0 . (Although one may say such things as "T 1 space", "Fréchet topology", and "suppose that the topological space X is Fréchet"; one should avoid saying "Fréchet space" in this context, since there is another entirely different notion of Fréchet space in functional analysis .) X is R 1 , or preregular , if any two topologically distinguishable points in X are separated by neighbourhoods. Every R 1 space is also R 0 .

X is Hausdorff , or T 2 or separated , if any two distinct points in X are separated by neighbourhoods. Thus, X is Hausdorff if and only if it is both T 0 and R 1 . Every Hausdorff space is also T 1 .

X is T 2½ , or Urysohn , if any two distinct points in X are separated by closed neighbourhoods. Every T 2½ space is also Hausdorff.

X is completely Hausdorff , or completely T 2 , if any two distinct points in X are separated by a continuous function. Every completely Hausdorff space is also T 2½ .

X is regular if, given any point x and closed set F in X such that x does not belong to F , they are separated by neighbourhoods. (In fact, in a regular space, any such x and F will also be separated by closed neighbourhoods.) Every regular space is also R 1 .

X is regular Hausdorff , or T 3 , if it is both T 0 and regular.

[ 1 ] Every regular Hausdorff space is also T 2½ .

X is completely regular if, given any point x and closed set F in X such that x does not belong to F , they are separated by a continuous function.

[ 2 ] Every completely regular space is also regular.

X is Tychonoff , or T 3½ , completely T 3 , or completely regular Hausdorff , if it is both T 0 and completely regular.

[ 3 ] Every Tychonoff space is both regular Hausdorff and completely Hausdorff.

X is normal if any two disjoint closed subsets of X are separated by neighbourhoods. (In fact, a space is normal if and only if any two disjoint closed sets can be separated by a continuous function; this is Urysohn's lemma .) X is normal regular if it is both R 0 and normal.  Every normal regular space is also completely regular.

X is normal Hausdorff , or T 4 , if it is both T 1 and normal. Every normal Hausdorff space is also both Tychonoff and normal regular.

X is completely normal if any two separated sets are separated by neighbourhoods. Every completely normal space is also normal.

X is completely normal Hausdorff , or T 5 or completely T 4 , if it is both completely normal and T 1 . Every completely normal Hausdorff space is also normal Hausdorff.

X is perfectly normal if any two disjoint closed sets are precisely separated by a continuous function. Every perfectly normal space is also both completely normal and completely regular.

X is perfectly normal Hausdorff , or T 6 or perfectly T 4 , if it is both perfectly normal and T 0 . Every perfectly normal Hausdorff space is also completely normal Hausdorff.

The following table summarizes the separation axioms as well as the implications between them: cells which are merged represent equivalent properties, each axiom implies the ones in the cells to its left, and if we assume the T 1 axiom, then each axiom also implies the ones in the cells above it (for example, all normal T 1 spaces are also completely regular).

Separated Separated by neighborhoods Separated by closed neighborhoods Separated by function Precisely separated by function Distinguishable points Symmetric [ 4 ] Preregular Distinct points Fréchet Hausdorff Urysohn Completely Hausdorff Perfectly Hausdorff Closed set and point outside Symmetric [ 5 ] Regular Completely regular Perfectly normal Disjoint closed sets always Normal Separated sets always Completely normal discrete space Relationships between the axioms [ edit ] The T 0 axiom is special in that it can not only be added to a property (so that completely regular plus T 0 is Tychonoff) but also be subtracted from a property (so that Hausdorff minus T 0 is R 1 ), in a fairly precise sense; see Kolmogorov quotient for more information. When applied to the separation axioms, this leads to the relationships in the table to the left below. In this table, one goes from the right side to the left side by adding the requirement of T 0 , and one goes from the left side to the right side by removing that requirement, using the Kolmogorov quotient operation. (The names in parentheses given on the left side of this table are generally ambiguous or at least less well known; but they are used in the diagram below.) Hasse diagram of the separation axioms.

T 0 version Non-T 0 version T 0 (No requirement) T 1 R 0 Hausdorff (T 2 ) R 1 T 2½ (No special name) Completely Hausdorff (No special name) Regular Hausdorff (T 3 ) Regular Tychonoff (T 3½ ) Completely regular Normal T 0 Normal Normal Hausdorff (T 4 ) Normal regular Completely normal T 0 Completely normal Completely normal Hausdorff (T 5 ) Completely normal regular Perfectly normal Hausdorff (T 6 ) Perfectly normal Other than the inclusion or exclusion of T 0 , the relationships between the separation axioms are indicated in the diagram to the right. In this diagram, the non-T 0 version of a condition is on the left side of the slash, and the T 0 version is on the right side. Letters are used for abbreviation as follows:
"P" = "perfectly", "C" = "completely", "N" = "normal", and "R" (without a subscript) = "regular". A bullet indicates that there is no special name for a space at that spot. The dash at the bottom indicates no condition.

Two properties may be combined using this diagram by following the diagram upwards until both branches meet. For example, if a space is both completely normal ("CN") and completely Hausdorff ("CT 2 "), then following both branches up, one finds the spot "•/T 5 ".
Since completely Hausdorff spaces are T 0 (even though completely normal spaces may not be), one takes the T 0 side of the slash, so a completely normal completely Hausdorff space is the same as a T 5 space (less ambiguously known as a completely normal Hausdorff space, as can be seen in the table above).

As can be seen from the diagram, normal and R 0 together imply a host of other properties, since combining the two properties leads through the many nodes on the right-side branch. Since regularity is the most well known of these, spaces that are both normal and R 0 are typically called "normal regular spaces". In a somewhat similar fashion, spaces that are both normal and T 1 are often called "normal Hausdorff spaces" by people that wish to avoid the ambiguous "T" notation. These conventions can be generalised to other regular spaces and Hausdorff spaces.

[NB: This diagram does not reflect that perfectly normal spaces are always regular; the editors are working on this now.] Other separation axioms [ edit ] There are some other conditions on topological spaces that are sometimes classified with the separation axioms, but these don't fit in with the usual separation axioms as completely. Other than their definitions, they aren't discussed here; see their individual articles.

X is sober if, for every closed set C that is not the (possibly nondisjoint) union of two smaller closed sets, there is a unique point p such that the closure of { p } equals C . More briefly, every irreducible closed set has a unique generic point. Any Hausdorff space must be sober, and any sober space must be T 0 .

X is weak Hausdorff if, for every continuous map f to X from a compact Hausdorff space, the image of f is closed in X . Any Hausdorff space must be weak Hausdorff, and any weak Hausdorff space must be T 1 .

X is semiregular if the regular open sets form a base for the open sets of X . Any regular space must also be semiregular.

X is quasi-regular if for any nonempty open set G , there is a nonempty open set H such that the closure of H is contained in G .

X is fully normal if every open cover has an open star refinement .

X is fully T 4 , or fully normal Hausdorff , if it is both T 1 and fully normal. Every fully normal space is normal and every fully T 4 space is T 4 . Moreover, one can show that every fully T 4 space is paracompact . In fact, fully normal spaces actually have more to do with paracompactness than with the usual separation axioms.

The axiom that all compact subsets are closed is strictly between T 1 and T 2 (Hausdorff) in strength.  A space satisfying this axiom is necessarily T 1 because every single-point set is necessarily compact and thus closed, but the reverse is not necessarily true; for the cofinite topology on infinitely many points, which is T 1 , every subset is compact but not every subset is closed.  Furthermore, every T 2 (Hausdorff) space satisfies the axiom that all compact subsets are closed, but the reverse is not necessarily true; for the cocountable topology on uncountably many points, the compact sets are all finite and hence all closed but the space is not T 2 (Hausdorff).

See also [ edit ] General topology Notes [ edit ] ^ Schechter 1997 , p. 441.

^ Schechter 1997 , 16.16, p. 442.

^ Schechter 1997 , 16.17, p. 443.

^ Schechter 1997 , 16.6(D), p. 438.

^ Schechter 1997 , 16.6(C), p. 438.

References [ edit ] Schechter, Eric (1997).

Handbook of Analysis and its Foundations . San Diego: Academic Press.

ISBN 0126227608 .

(has R i axioms, among others) Willard, Stephen (1970).

General topology . Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley Pub. Co.

ISBN 0-486-43479-6 .

(has all of the non-R i axioms mentioned in the Main Definitions, with these definitions) External links [ edit ] Separation Axioms at ProvenMath Table of separation and metrisability axioms from Schechter NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐j9vxx
Cached time: 20250816210946
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.232 seconds
Real time usage: 0.565 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1063/1000000
Revision size: 18844/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 21300/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2009/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 12322/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.140/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4702211/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  252.178      1 -total
 28.43%   71.689      2 Template:Cite_book
 24.81%   62.575      1 Template:Short_description
 23.05%   58.121      1 Template:Separation_axioms
 22.38%   56.434      1 Template:Infobox
 15.18%   38.293      2 Template:Pagetype
 11.41%   28.782      5 Template:Sfn
 11.27%   28.428      1 Template:Hlist
  8.05%   20.288      2 Template:For
  5.98%   15.069      8 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:40117302:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816210946 and revision id 1275159067. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Separation_axiom&oldid=1275159067 " Categories : Separation axioms Topology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 February 2025, at 11:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Separation axiom 23 languages Add topic

