Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Physical description 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Sandpit 46 languages العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Latviešu Livvinkarjala Magyar ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Tagalog တႆး ไทย Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Playing area for children This article is about the children's play area. For an open-pit sand mine, see Sand mining . For other uses, see Sandpit (disambiguation) .

Children play in a communal sandbox Sandpit with toy tools used by children to play in sand A sandpit (most Commonwealth countries) or sandbox (US and Canada) is a low, wide container or shallow depression filled with soft (beach) sand in which children can play. Sharp sand (as used in the building industry) is not suitable for such use. Many homeowners with children build sandpits in their backyards because, unlike most playground equipment , they can be easily and cheaply constructed.

History German sand gardens were the first organization of children's play in public spaces.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The German "sand gardens" were an 1850 offshoot of Friedrich Fröbel 's work on kindergartens.

[ 3 ] Sand gardens were introduced to America by Marie Elizabeth Zakrzewska , starting in her home city of Boston.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 2 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Inspired by the German sand gardens she observed while visiting Berlin in the summer of 1885.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Joseph Lee from Boston is considered the "founder of the playground movement ." [ 5 ] [ 13 ] [ clarification needed ] Physical description This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( October 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The "pit", or "box" itself is simply a container for storing the sand so that it does not spread outward across lawns or other surrounding surfaces. Boxes of various shapes are often constructed from planks , logs , or other large wooden frames that allow children easy access to the sand and also provide a convenient place to sit. Small sandpits are also available commercially. These are usually made from plastic or wood and are often shaped like an animal or other objects familiar to children.

They sometimes also have lids to cover the sand when not in use, so that passing animals cannot contaminate the sand by urinating or defecating in it. Having lids also prevents the sand in outdoor sandpits from getting wet when it rains, although some dampness is often desirable as it helps the sand hold together. Prefabricated sandpits may also be used indoors, especially in day care facilities. Materials other than sand are also often used, such as oatmeal , which are necessarily non-toxic and light enough to easily vacuum up.

Sandpits can have a solid bottom or they can be built directly onto the soil. The latter allows free drainage (which is useful if the top is open) but can lead to contamination of the sand with soil if the children dig down to the ground.

The sand gets dirty over time and is eventually replaced. Many schools and playgrounds in North America have replaced sand around play structures with a wood chip mixture, as it is cheaper. It also prevents health risks, such as ringworm , that would potentially come from traditional sandboxes, due to other animals, such as raccoons , being able to use the sandpits, and spreading parasites.

[ 14 ] See also Hans Dragehjelm Borrow pit Japanese rock garden Outdoor playset Sand art and play References ^ "How We Came to Play: The History of Playgrounds – National Trust for Historic Preservation" .

^ a b "The Garden and the Playground – Playscapes" . 29 August 2012. Archived from the original on 24 October 2020 . Retrieved 5 June 2018 .

^ Lange, Alexandra (18 June 2018).

"An Intellectual History of the Sandbox" .

Slate . Retrieved 18 June 2018 .

^ "What is a Sandpit? The History of Sandpits" .

www.biggamehunters.co.uk . Retrieved 12 September 2018 .

^ a b "How the American playground was born in Boston – The Boston Globe" .

The Boston Globe .

^ "blank" .

www.prm.nau.edu . Archived from the original on 23 January 2021 . Retrieved 5 June 2018 .

^ "The History of Playing Outdoors – Nature Explore Program" . 22 May 2014.

^ "The Story of the Sand Pile (1886) – Nature Explore Program" . 24 April 2014.

^ "A Brief History of the Sandbox – Playscapes" . 29 November 2009. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020 . Retrieved 5 June 2018 .

^ "U.S. Playground movement : Architektur für Kinder" .

www.architekturfuerkinder.ch . Archived from the original on 3 May 2019 . Retrieved 5 June 2018 .

^ Rainwater, Clarence Elmer (22 August 2018).

"The Play Movement in the United States: A Study of Community Recreation" . University of Chicago Press.

^ "Sand Gardens" .

www.pgpedia.com .

^ "Boston sand garden" (PDF) .

hnr.k-state.edu . Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 October 2020 . Retrieved 5 June 2018 .

^ "Health hazards lurking in the sandbox" .

www.cbsnews.com . 27 April 2016 . Retrieved 27 October 2021 .

External links Look up sandpit in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Media related to Sandboxes at Wikimedia Commons Example of Wooden Sand Pit / Sand Box Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sandpit&oldid=1303648488 " Categories : Childhood Playground equipment Sand Play (activity) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use American English from January 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from January 2021 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2025 Articles needing additional references from October 2021 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 07:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sandpit 46 languages Add topic

