Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Perspectives Toggle Perspectives subsection 2.1 Kierkegaard and Nietzsche 2.2 Max Scheler 2.3 Weber 2.4 Deleuze 2.5 Girard 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Ressentiment 27 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Română Русский Shqip Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in existentialism In philosophy , ressentiment ( / r ə ˌ s ɒ̃ .

t i ˈ m ɒ̃ / ; French pronunciation: [ʁə.sɑ̃.ti.mɑ̃] ⓘ ) is one of the forms of resentment or hostility . The concept was of particular interest to some 19th-century thinkers, most notably Friedrich Nietzsche . According to their use, ressentiment is a sense of hostility directed toward an object that one identifies as the cause of one's frustration , that is, an assignment of blame for one's frustration.

[ 1 ] The sense of weakness or inferiority complex and perhaps even jealousy in the face of the "cause" generates a rejecting/justifying value system, or morality , which attacks or denies the perceived source of one's frustration. This value system is then used as a means of justifying one's own weaknesses by identifying the source of envy as objectively inferior, serving as a defense mechanism that prevents the resentful individual from addressing and overcoming their insecurities and flaws. The ego creates an enemy to insulate themselves from culpability.

History [ edit ] Ressentiment as a concept gained popularity with Friedrich Nietzsche 's writings.

Walter Kaufmann ascribes his use of the term in part to the absence of a proper equivalent term in the German language , contending that this absence alone "would be sufficient excuse for Nietzsche", if not for a translator.

[ 2 ] The term came to form a key part of his ideas concerning the psychology of the ' master–slave ' question (articulated in Beyond Good and Evil ), and the resultant birth of morality . Nietzsche's chief development of ressentiment came in his book On the Genealogy of Morals ; see esp §§ 10–11).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The term was also studied by Max Scheler in a monograph published in 1912 and reworked a few years later.

[ 5 ] Søren Kierkegaard has been questionably included in the philosophical history of the term ressentiment .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] An English translation of Kierkegaard 's essay "The Present Age" was published in 1940.

[ 9 ] The original Danish edition of "The Present Age" was published as part of ' A Literary Review ' in 1846.

[ 10 ] The English translator of "The Present Age," Alexander Dru, translated certain uses of the Danish word that is typically translated as 'envy' instead as ' ressentiment ,' although the French word ' ressentiment ' does not appear even once in the original Danish edition. A subsequent edition of Dru's translation of "The Present Age" was published in 1962 and included an introduction by Walter Kaufmann in which Kaufmann remarks that the Danish word ' Misundelse ' was translated in both the 1940 and 1962 editions as ' ressentiment .' [ 11 ] In the 1940 edition Dru explains this translation by citing German philosopher Max Scheler 's L'homme du Ressentiment , a French translation of Scheler 's work on ressentiment .

[ 11 ] Kaufmann expresses his discontent with this explanation and states, "A detailed comparison of Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, and Scheler might be rewarding; but not giving us the original word at all and not rendering it literally, say, as envy (the best German translation says Neid, which is envy), but rather with a technical term from another man's philosophy, forestalls comparison, analysis, and needful thought." [ 11 ] A more recent English translation of "The Present Age," published as Two Ages: A Literary Review translates ' Misundelse ' as 'envy.' [ 12 ] Currently of great import as a term widely used in psychology and existentialism , ressentiment is viewed as an influential force for the creation of identities, moral frameworks and value systems. However, there is debate as to what validity these resultant value systems have, and to what extent they are maladaptive and destructive.

[ citation needed ] Perspectives [ edit ] This section contains too many or overly lengthy quotations .

Please help summarise the quotations . Consider transferring direct quotations to Wikiquote or excerpts to Wikisource .

( November 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Kierkegaard and Nietzsche [ edit ] Kierkegaard: "It is a fundamental truth of human nature that man is incapable of remaining permanently on the heights, of continuing to admire anything.

Human nature needs variety. Even in the most enthusiastic ages people have always liked to joke enviously about their superiors. That is perfectly in order and is entirely justifiable so long as after having laughed at the great they can once more look upon them with admiration; otherwise the game is not worth the candle. In that way ressentiment finds an outlet even in an enthusiastic age. And as long as an age, even though less enthusiastic, has the strength to give ressentiment its proper character and has made up its mind what its expression signifies, ressentiment has its own, though dangerous importance. …. the more reflection gets the upper hand and thus makes people indolent, the more dangerous ressentiment becomes, because it no longer has sufficient character to make it conscious of its significance. Bereft of that character reflection is a cowardly and vacillating, and according to circumstances interprets the same thing in a variety of way. It tries to treat it as a joke, and if that fails, to regard it as an insult, and when that fails, to dismiss it as nothing at all; or else it will treat the thing as a witticism, and if that fails then say that it was meant as a moral satire deserving attention, and if that does not succeed, add that it was not worth bothering about. ….

ressentiment becomes the constituent principle of want of character, which from utter wretchedness tries to sneak itself a position, all the time safeguarding itself by conceding that it is less than nothing. The ressentiment which results from want of character can never understand that eminent distinction really is distinction. Neither does it understand itself by recognizing distinction negatively (as in the case of ostracism) but wants to drag it down, wants to belittle it so that it really ceases to be distinguished. And ressentiment not only defends itself against all existing forms of distinction but against that which is still to come . …. The ressentiment which is establishing itself is the process of leveling , and while a passionate age storms ahead setting up new things and tearing down old, raising and demolishing as it goes, a reflective and passionless age does exactly the contrary; it hinders and stifles all action; it levels. Leveling is a silent, mathematical, and abstract occupation which shuns upheavals. In a burst of momentary enthusiasm people might, in their despondency, even long for a misfortune in order to feel the powers of life, but the apathy which follows is no more helped by a disturbance than an engineer leveling a piece of land. At its most violent a rebellion is like a volcanic eruption and drowns every other sound. At its maximum the leveling process is a deathly silence in which one can hear one’s own heart beat, a silence which nothing can pierce, in which everything is engulfed, powerless to resist. One man can be at the head a rebellion, but no one can be at the head of the leveling process alone, for in that case he would be leader and would thus escape being leveled. Each individual within his own little circle can co-operate in the leveling, but it is an abstract power, and the leveling process is the victory of abstraction over the individual. The leveling process in modern times, corresponds, in reflection, to fate in antiquity. ... It must be obvious to everyone that the profound significance of the leveling process lies in the fact that it means the predominance of the category ‘ generation ’ over the category ‘ individuality ’." — Søren Kierkegaard , The Present Age (Alexander Dru tr.), 1962, pp. 49–52 Nietzsche: The problem with the other origin of the “good,” of the good man, as the person of ressentiment has thought it out for himself, demands some conclusion. It is not surprising that the lambs should bear a grudge against the great birds of prey, but that is no reason for blaming the great birds of prey for taking the little lambs. And when the lambs say among themselves, "These birds of prey are evil, and he who least resembles a bird of prey, who is rather its opposite, a lamb,—should he not be good?" then there is nothing to carp with in this ideal's establishment, though the birds of prey may regard it a little mockingly, and maybe say to themselves, "We bear no grudge against them, these good lambs, we even love them:  nothing is tastier than a tender lamb." — Friedrich Nietzsche , On the Genealogy of Morality Ressentiment is a reassignment of the pain that accompanies a sense of one's own inferiority/failure on to an external scapegoat. The ego creates the illusion of an enemy, a cause that can be "blamed" for one's own inferiority/failure. Thus, one was thwarted not by a failure in oneself, but rather by an external "evil." According to Kierkegaard, ressentiment occurs in a "reflective, passionless age", in which the populace stifles creativity and passion in passionate individuals. Kierkegaard argues that individuals who do not conform to the masses are made scapegoats and objects of ridicule by the masses, in order to maintain status quo and to instill into the masses their own sense of superiority.

Ressentiment comes from reactiveness: the weaker someone is, the less their capability to suppress reaction.

[ 13 ] According to Nietzsche, the more a person is active, strong-willed, and dynamic, the less place and time is left for contemplating all that is done to them, and their reactions (like imagining they are actually better) become less compulsive. The reaction of a strong-willed person (a "wild beast" [ 14 ] ), when it happens, is ideally a short action: it is not a prolonged filling of their intellect.

[ 15 ] Another aspect according to a discussion by Stephen Mulhall , Keith Ansell-Pearson and Fiona Hughes is that after the weaker (slave) side has won out over the stronger, there is in ressentiment a general sense of disappointment that the rewards of victory are much less than was expected by the slaves. The former long-time past resentment at being a slave is perhaps increased by an inadequate outcome, leading to ressentiment .

[ 16 ] Max Scheler [ edit ] See Ressentiment in Scheler's works Max Scheler attempted to place  Nietzsche's ideas in a more sociologically articulated context. He started by considering how values are established within society and next proceeded to analyze their sharing or rejection on various grounds.

[ 17 ] Weber [ edit ] Max Weber in The Sociology of Religion relates ressentiment to Judaism, an ethical salvation religion of a "pariah people."  Weber defines ressentiment as "a concomitant of that particular religious ethic of the disprivileged which, in the sense expounded by Nietzsche and in direct inversion of the ancient belief, teaches that the unequal distribution of mundane goods is caused by the sinfulness and the illegality of the privileged, and that sooner or later God's wrath will overtake them." [ 18 ] Deleuze [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( September 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Gilles Deleuze significantly develops the concept of ressentiment as discussed by Nietzsche in his work Nietzsche and Philosophy .  According to Deleuze, ressentiment is a reactive state of being that separates us from what we can do and reduces our power to act. He follows Nietzsche's view that the challenge for both philosophy and life is to overcome the reactive state of things and become active, thereby constantly enhancing our power to act.

[ 19 ] Girard [ edit ] Further information: Violence and the Sacred René Girard differs from Nietzsche by assessing that ressentiment is a left-over of not pursuing the mimetic rival or the scapegoat. It is the price paid for turning the other cheek.

Atonement could be achieved only by moving beyond rivalry and ressentiment .

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Helmut Schoeck Peter Sloterdijk Psychological projection Scapegoating References [ edit ] ^ TenHouten W., From Ressentiment to Resentment as a Tertiary Emotion , Rev. Eur. Stud. 10 (2018) p.49-64 ^ Kaufmann, Walter . "Editor's Introduction, Section 3" On the Genealogy of Morals in Nietzsche: Basic Writings ; Walter Kaufmann, tr. New York: The Modern Library, 1967.

^ "Essays" . Nietzsche Circle. Archived from the original on 2013-06-28 . Retrieved 2022-09-24 .

^ http://www.bu.edu/wcp/Papers/Anth/AnthMore.htm [ dead link ] ^ Scheler M., Das Ressentiment im Aufbau der Moralen , 1915 ( Über Ressentiment und moralisches Werturteil , 1912), engl. transl.

Ressentiment , Marquette University press, 1994 ^ Poole, Roger.

Kierkegaard , University of Virginia Press, 1993, pp. 226–228.

^ Stivers, Richard.

Shades of loneliness , Rowman & Little Field o, 2004, pp. 14–16.

^ Davenport, John, et al.

Kierkegaard after MacIntyre , Open Court, 2001, p. 165.

^ Kierkegaard, Søren (1940).

The Present Age and Two Minor Ethico-Religious Treatises . Translated by Dru, Alexander; Lowrie, Walter. London: Oxford University Press.

^ Kierkegaard, Søren (1846).

En literair anmeldelse: To tidsaldre, novelle af for fatteren til "en hverdags-historie" ; udgiven af J.L. Heiberg, Kbhv. Reitzel 1845 (in Danish). Reitzel.

^ a b c Kierkegaard, Soren (1962-09-12).

Present Age . Harper Collins. pp.

23– 24.

ISBN 978-0-06-130094-3 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Ressentiment was translated as envy in Hong 's translation of Kierkegaard, see pages 81-87 ^ See e.g.

The Will to Power , 78.

^ On the Genealogy of Morality , 11 ^ On the Genealogy of Morality , 10, last paragraph ^ https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b087rt4z "Nietzsche's Genealogy of Morality" on In Our Time (BBC 2017) ^ Scheler M., Ressentiment , Marquette University press, 1994 ^ Weber, Max (1993).

The Sociology of Religion .

Boston : Beacon Press . p. 110.

^ Deleuze, Gilles (1983). Nietzsche and Philosophy. Translated by Hugh Tomlinson. Columbia University Press.  ISBN 0-231-05669-9.

^ Girard, René (1977). Violence and the Sacred. Translated by Patrick Gregory. Johns Hopkins University Press. ISBN 978-0-8018-1963-6.

Further reading [ edit ] Aeshbach S., Ressentiment: an anatomy . Thèse de doctorat : Univ. Genève, 2017, no. L. 909, DOI : 10.13097/archive-ouverte/unige:103621 Didier Fassin, On Resentment and Ressentiment: The Politics and Ethics of Moral Emotions , Current Anthropology Vol. 54, No. 3 (June 2013), p. 249-67, DOI: 10.1086/670390 v t e Existentialism Variants Atheistic Christian Jewish Islamic Nihilist Phenomenological Concepts Abandonment Absurdism Angst Authenticity Bad faith Being in itself Dasein Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Leap of faith Meaning Nihilism Other Ressentiment Thrownness People Artists Beckett Buzzati Camus Cioran Dostoevsky Ellison Fondane Giacometti Ionesco Kafka Mahfouz Marcel Sartre Unamuno Wilson Wright Philosophers Abbagnano Arendt Barth Berdyaev Buber Bultmann Camus Carlyle Cioran Beauvoir Fanon Flusser Fondane Heidegger Husserl James Jaspers Kaufmann Kierkegaard Levinas Marcel May Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rosenzweig Sartre Shestov Soloveitchik Tillich Unamuno Wilson Wright Zapffe Related Continental philosophy German idealism Marxist humanism Phenomenology Transcendentalism Western Marxism v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐q2fgh
Cached time: 20250814223434
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.573 seconds
Real time usage: 0.736 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2717/1000000
Revision size: 16399/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 77057/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4105/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 51428/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.378/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16912355/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  619.291      1 -total
 19.89%  123.197      1 Template:Reflist
 18.43%  114.127      1 Template:IPA
 12.76%   79.043      1 Template:Cite_web
 12.75%   78.983      1 Template:Existentialism
 12.65%   78.342      2 Template:Navbox
 11.43%   70.763      1 Template:Over-quotation
 10.79%   66.795      1 Template:Short_description
  9.67%   59.871      2 Template:Ambox
  6.93%   42.902      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3271906:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814223434 and revision id 1299177218. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ressentiment&oldid=1299177218 " Categories : Existentialist concepts Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche Social concepts Søren Kierkegaard Hatred Concepts in social philosophy Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2022 CS1 Danish-language sources (da) CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with French IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2021 Wikipedia articles with style issues from November 2022 All articles with style issues Articles needing additional references from September 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles containing German-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 23:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ressentiment 27 languages Add topic

