Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Activities 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness 2 languages Deutsch 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American nonprofit organization Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness Abbreviation ASSC Types open-access publisher Legal status 501(c)(3) organization The Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness ( ASSC ) is an American nonprofit organization for professional membership that aims to encourage research on consciousness in cognitive science , neuroscience , philosophy , and other relevant disciplines. The association aims to advance research about the nature, function, and underlying mechanisms of consciousness.

History [ edit ] The organization was created in 1994 in Berkeley. The original aim of the organization was to act as a framework by which the international academic community could generate meetings devoted to the academic study of consciousness. The original founding members included Bernard Baars , William Banks, George Buckner, David Chalmers , Stanley Klein , Bruce Mangan, Thomas Metzinger , David Rosenthal , and Patrick Wilken. Since 1994, the organization has put on eleven meetings and assumed many other activities, including an e-print archive and an online journal Psyche . However, the Psyche journal is no longer active.

Activities [ edit ] Since 1997, the ASSC has organized annual conferences to promote interaction and spread knowledge of scientific and philosophical advances in the field of consciousness research.

In addition to organizing annual meetings, the association promotes the academic study of consciousness in a number of other ways: The official journal of the society is the open-access journal Neuroscience of Consciousness .

[ 1 ] The association published the open-access journal Psyche until 2010.

The association provides a freely available e-print archive of papers relevant to the study of consciousness.

The society also publishes occasional edited books on selected topics. To date three books have been published: Thomas Metzinger , ed. (2000).

The Neural Correlates of Consciousness: Empirical and Conceptual Questions . MIT Press.

ISBN 0-262-13370-9 .

Axel Cleeremans , ed. (2003).

The Unity of Consciousness: Binding, Integration, and Dissociation . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-850857-3 .

Steven Laureys , ed. (2005).

Progress in Brain Research, The boundaries of consciousness: neurobiology and neuropathology . Elsevier.

ISBN 0-444-51851-7 .

The society awards the annual William James Prize for an outstanding published contribution to the empirical or philosophical study of consciousness by a graduate student or postdoctoral scholar within five years of receiving a PhD or other advanced degree.

See also [ edit ] The Science of Consciousness References [ edit ] ^ "Neuroscience of Consciousness" .

nc.oxfordjournals.org/ . Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on 20 January 2015 . Retrieved 27 January 2015 .

External links [ edit ] ASSC homepage E-print archive containing work by members of the ASSC v t e Consciousness Figures Philosophy Alfred North Whitehead Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Bertrand Russell Brian O'Shaughnessy Charles Augustus Strong Christopher Peacocke Colin McGinn Daniel Dennett David Chalmers David Hume David Papineau David Pearce Donald Davidson Douglas Hofstadter Edmund Husserl Frank Jackson Fred Dretske Galen Strawson George Berkeley George Henry Lewes Georges Rey Gottfried Leibniz Immanuel Kant John Eccles John Locke John Polkinghorne John Searle Joseph Levine Karl Popper Keith Frankish Kenneth M. Sayre Maurice Merleau-Ponty Max Velmans Michael Tye Martin Heidegger Ned Block Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Philip Goff René Descartes Thomas Metzinger Thomas Nagel William Kingdon Clifford William Lycan William Seager Psychology Carl Gustav Jung Donald D. Hoffman Franz Brentano Gustav Fechner Julian Jaynes Kurt Koffka Max Wertheimer Sigmund Freud Wilhelm Wundt William James Wolfgang Köhler Neuroscience Anil Seth Antonio Damasio Benjamin Libet Bernard Baars Christof Koch Francis Crick Francisco Varela Gerald Edelman Giulio Tononi Karl Pribram Lawrence Weiskrantz Michael Gazzaniga Michael Graziano Patrick Wilken Roger Sperry Stanislas Dehaene Steven Laureys Stuart Hameroff Wolf Singer Others Annaka Harris David Bohm Eugene Wigner Erwin Schrödinger Marvin Minsky Max Planck Roger Penrose Susan Blackmore Victor J. Stenger Wolfgang Pauli Theories Philosophy of mind Anomalous monism Computationalism Double-aspect theory Eliminative materialism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Idealism Interactionism Materialism Mind–body dualism Monism Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Panpsychism Parallelism Physicalism Property dualism Reflexive monism Revisionary materialism Solipsism Type physicalism (reductive materialism, identity theory) Science Attention schema theory Consciousness causes collapse Dynamic core hypothesis Damasio's theory of consciousness Electromagnetic theories of consciousness Global workspace theory Higher-order theories of consciousness Holonomic brain theory Integrated information theory Lamme's recurrent feedback hypothesis Multiple drafts model Orchestrated objective reduction Topics Agnosia Altered state of consciousness Animal consciousness Artificial consciousness Attention Attentional control Awareness Binding problem Binocular rivalry Blindsight Brain Cartesian theater Consciousness after death Disorders of consciousness Divided consciousness Dual consciousness (split-brain) Experience Explanatory gap Free will Flash suppression Hallucination Hard problem of consciousness Heterophenomenology Higher consciousness Illusion Introspection illusion Knowledge argument Locked-in syndrome Mind Mind–body problem Minimally conscious state Neural correlates of consciousness Neurophenomenology Ontology Phenomenology Philosophical zombie Philosophy of mind Primary consciousness Problem of other minds Qualia Quantum mind Reentry Sakshi Purusha Secondary consciousness Sentience Sentientism Sociology of human consciousness Soul Stream of consciousness Subconscious Subjective character of experience Subjectivity and objectivity Unconscious mind Unconsciousness Upanishads Visual masking Consciousness causes collapse Yogachara Works A Universe of Consciousness Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness Consciousness and Cognition Consciousness Explained Cosmic Consciousness How the Self Controls Its Brain Journal of Consciousness Studies Online Consciousness Conference Psyche The Astonishing Hypothesis The Conscious Mind The Emperor's New Mind The Science of Consciousness Understanding Consciousness " What Is It Like to Be a Bat?

" Wider than the Sky Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Czech Republic Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Association_for_the_Scientific_Study_of_Consciousness&oldid=1298179864 " Categories : 501(c)(3) organizations Cognitive science organizations Consciousness International scientific organizations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 23:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness 2 languages Add topic

