Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Opinions 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Privately owned public space 5 languages Deutsch עברית 日本語 Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Legally open non-governmental property The terrace of the Intercontinental Hotel in San Francisco , California, a privately owned public space The sign to the terrace of the Intercontinental Hotel in San Francisco, California, a privately owned public space Privately owned public space ( POPS ), or alternatively, privately owned public open spaces ( POPOS ), are terms used to describe a type of public space that, although privately owned , is legally required to be open to the public under a city's zoning ordinance or other land-use law. The acronym POPOS is preferentially used over POPS on the west coast of the US. Both terms can be used to represent either a singular or plural space or spaces.  These spaces are usually the product of a deal between cities and private real estate developers in which cities grant valuable zoning concessions and developers provide in return privately owned public spaces in or near their buildings. Privately owned public spaces may include walkways, plazas , arcades, small parks , and atriums , and are largely determined by where the property lot-line was initially drawn.  Depending on the law, they may be marked with public dedication plaques.   Many cities worldwide, including Auckland , [ 1 ] New York City , San Francisco , Dublin , [ 2 ] Seattle , [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Seoul , and Toronto , have privately owned public spaces.

History [ edit ] The term privately owned public space was popularized by Harvard professor Jerold S. Kayden through his 2000 book Privately Owned Public Space: The New York City Experience , written in collaboration with the New York City Department of City Planning and the Municipal Art Society of New York .

[ 5 ] It attributed this type of public space to a "legal innovation" introduced in 1961 in New York City, an "incentive zoning" mechanism offering developers the right to build 10 square feet of bonus rentable or sellable floor area in return for one square foot of plaza, and three square feet of bonus floor area in return for one square foot of arcade.

[ 5 ] Between 1961 and 2000, 503 privately owned public spaces, scattered almost entirely in downtown, midtown, and upper east and west sides of New York City's borough of Manhattan , were constructed at 320 buildings. The book cited the quantitative success of the program's public space production but reported that 41 percent of these spaces were of "marginal" quality and roughly 50 percent of buildings had one or more spaces apparently out of compliance with applicable legal requirements resulting in privatization .

[ 5 ] Privately owned public pedestrian zone in The Park office district in Prague , Czechia While privately owned public space as a term of art refers specifically to private property required to be usable by the public under zoning or similar regulatory arrangements, the phrase in its broadest sense can refer to places, like shopping malls and hotel lobbies, that are privately owned and open to the public, even if they are not legally required to be open to the public.

[ citation needed ] Opinions [ edit ] In 2017, The Guardian published a study of the phenomenon in London , [ 6 ] facing a lack of response from both landowners and local authorities they questioned on the subject. In reaction to the report, the Mayor of London , Sadiq Khan promised to publish new guidelines on how these spaces are governed.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Fourth and Madison Building List of privately owned public spaces in London List of privately owned public spaces in New York City List of privately owned public spaces in San Francisco Private protected area Privatization References [ edit ] ^ Reeves, Dorie (1 September 2016).

"Open up hidden public places in Auckland towers" .

The New Zealand Herald . Retrieved 2 September 2016 .

^ "Less of the Docklands is Public Space Than You Think" .

Dublin Inquirer . 13 June 2017.

^ "Privately Owned Public Open Spaces (POPOS)" .

Seattle City Council .

^ "Map Of Seattle POPOS" (PDF) .

City Of Seattle . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-09-08 . Retrieved 2015-09-21 .

^ a b c Kayden, Jerold S., The New York City Department of City Planning, and The Municipal Art Society of New York.

Privately Owned Public Space: The New York City Experience . New York: Wiley, 2000.

ISBN 978-0471362579 .

^ a b Shenker, Jack (24 July 2017).

"Revealed: the insidious creep of pseudo-public space in London" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 2024-10-14 .

External links [ edit ] List of privately owned public open spaces in San Francisco by the city's Planning department Privately owned public space in New York City Information on the website of the Municipal Art Society Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Privately_owned_public_space&oldid=1274489457 " Categories : Urban planning Land use Privately owned public spaces Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 This page was last edited on 7 February 2025, at 16:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Privately owned public space 5 languages Add topic

