Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Notable examples Toggle Notable examples subsection 2.1 Star Wars 2.2 Foundation and CoDominium 2.3 Dominic Flandry 2.4 Dune 2.5 Warhammer 40,000 2.6 Others 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Galactic empire 10 languages Català 한국어 Italiano Latina 日本語 Português Română Simple English Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fictional government system in science fiction For other uses, see Galactic empire (disambiguation) .

"Imperial Empire" redirects here. For empires that were "Imperial" related or use the term "Imperial", see List of empires .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Galactic empire" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( March 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Galactic empires are a science fiction setting trope , in which most or all of the habitable planets in the setting's galaxy are ruled by a single centralized political entity. Galactic empires most frequently appear in works in the sub-genres of science fantasy and space opera , although they may appear in other sub-genres as well. Works featuring galactic empires may have them as the story's focus, chronicling the empire's growth and/or decline. Alternatively, they may merely serve as a backdrop against which the events of the story play out.

While depictions of galactic empires can vary wildly from work to work, most galactic empires share several key tropes: The empire, or at least its wealthier and more powerful regions, has advanced considerably in science and technology compared to current human civilization .

Among these advances are some form of faster-than-light travel , which enables transit and communication across the empire's extent to occur in a reasonable time frame.

Habitable worlds are either directly administered by representatives of the centralized imperial government, or else their local leadership is ultimately subordinate to the central government.

Characterizations of these empires can vary wildly from work to work. They may be benevolent or malevolent; all-powerful or too weak or incompetent to exert power in anything but name; or anywhere in between.

Background [ edit ] Most of these galaxy-spanning domains depend on some form of transportation capable of quickly or instantly crossing vast cosmic distances, usually measured in light-years , many times faster than familiar particles such as photons traveling at light speed . These, instantaneous or faster-than-light (FTL) ( tachyonic ) technologies invariably require some type of propulsion or displacement technology forbidden by Albert Einstein 's theories on relativity . Described methods often rely on theories that circumvent or supersede relativity: for instance, the hypothesis of a warp drive (such as, more specifically, an Alcubierre drive ) that bends the fabric of space-time .

In many cases, the term "galactic empire" is misleading. First, the "galactic" in "galactic empire" suggests an organization encompassing far more star systems than is actually described. This may come about as a result of propaganda exaggerating the spread of an imperial entity in order to appear stronger than is actually the case — just as historical nation-states such as the ' Holy Roman Empire ' presented themselves; being roughly twice the size of modern Germany. While some of the noted fictional empires encompass a large portion of the galaxy, many other empires may be classified as interplanetary or interstellar empires, since they encompass only a local group of star systems.

[ citation needed ] When works feature galactic empires that truly do span most or all of their parent galaxy, they usually depict their capital as a "core world", a planet in a star system relatively close to a galaxy's supermassive black hole . Typically, "core worlds" will be portrayed as wealthier and more politically powerful than "rim worlds" closer to the edge of the galaxy. However, this portrayal, while common, is not universal; many works may invert this dynamic or reject it altogether.

Second, the "empire" in "galactic empire"  is also misleading, as it suggests the empire's government is authoritarian to at least some degree, if not completely autocratic. While many galactic empires do correspond to this description, many do not: galactic empires may adhere to any real-world political philosophy, or a unique form of governance created by the work's author(s). A prominent example of a non-autocratic galactic empire is the Galactic Republic of the Star Wars prequel trilogy , which is a hybrid regime parliamentary democracy (albeit one that collapses into fascist dictatorship over the course of the story).

Notable examples [ edit ] Augustus and other powerful leaders of Imperial Rome have had a wide-ranging influence upon fictional empires.

Star Wars [ edit ] The best known such organization to the general public today is the Galactic Empire from Star Wars , which was formed in turn from the Galactic Republic .

Star Wars depicts an empire ruled autocratically by Darth Sidious , supported by a powerful space navy. It is stated in the original Star Wars film that there was an Imperial Senate that was later disbanded by the Emperor. There was a galactic empire called the Sith Empire founded by Darth Revan. This galactic power was close to overthrowing the Jedi's Republic during the Jedi Civil War.

As a military dictatorship based upon fear and terror, the Empire is an explicitly villainous force with linguistic and visual traits directly reminiscent of Nazi Germany . For example, their armored forces known as " stormtroopers " are named analogously to the Sturmabteilung (often known as the SA ), a paramilitary entity created by the Nationalist Socialist German Workers' Party (NSDAP) in 1920.

[ 1 ] Massacres of local peoples and the implementation of imperial protectorates administered by the Galactic Empire also mirror that seen throughout Europe during the Second World War. Their best-known weapon is the iconic Death Star , a Moon -sized space platform that can destroy entire planets.

In the Star Wars universe, the fall of the Galactic Republic and its replacement by the Galactic Empire – as depicted in Revenge of the Sith – recall the historic fall of the Roman Republic and its replacement by the Roman Empire headed by Augustus .

The term "galactic empire" has, perhaps because of association with the Empire from Star Wars , gained a pejorative meaning.

[ citation needed ] Foundation and CoDominium [ edit ] In contrast to Star Wars, the galactic empires from the Foundation universe and the CoDominium universe are relatively benign organizations. Much of the plot of the Foundation series, authored by Isaac Asimov , revolves around who can best and most quickly revive the fallen galactic empire ; it is taken for granted that this is a positive and worthy aim. In writer Jerry Pournelle 's CoDominium series, members of the empire often work to maintain the best interests of humanity despite efforts by violent political extremists to pursue their own ends.

Galactic empires are in many cases consciously modeled on historical Earth-bound empires. Asimov stated explicitly that the Galactic Empire whose fall is depicted in his Foundation books is also modeled on the Roman Empire , with the author taking direct inspiration from the historical writings of Edward Gibbon , even to the point of basing some individual characters on historical figures. Specifically, Pebble in the Sky , which is set on Earth – a poor and backward province of the Galactic Empire – is modeled on Roman-ruled Judea in the 1st century AD. Asimov's Earth – like the historical Judea – is sharply polarized between those who accept the Imperial authority and the fanatic " Zealots " who hatch violent plots of bloody rebellion and are the book's clear villains.

[ 2 ] Foundation is depicted as having started life as a Foundation of scholars, taking up just one city on one faraway planet and setting up a modest municipal government headed, naturally, by a Mayor . Through a centuries-long series of developments which are the main subject matter of the Foundation Series , the Foundation gains enormous power and territory and comes to rule virtually as many stellar systems as the earlier fallen Empire - but continues to call itself "Foundation" rather than "Empire", and its ruler - though wielding as much power as any Emperor - retains the title of "Mayor".

Dominic Flandry [ edit ] Writer Poul Anderson makes the point that the declining empire depicted in his Dominic Flandry series does not span the entire galaxy but only a fraction of one of its spiral arms. Nevertheless, the institution is vast beyond a regular human's ability to truly comprehend, and it is in the process of collapsing under its own weight.

[ citation needed ] This series also consciously compares its imperial organization with the Roman Empire, to the point of tracing out the space equivalents of the Roman ' Principate ' and ' Dominate ' phases.

Dune [ edit ] The universe established in Frank Herbert 's Dune once again recalls the Holy Roman Empire, as well as the Byzantine and Islamic empires, especially given the role of hitherto disregarded desert-dwellers who, due to a powerful new religion, expand to topple an old empire and build a new one. For example, the Egyptian-Canadian commentator Khalid M. Baheyeldin has enumerated the obviously Islamic concepts and references appearing in Dune to the level of finding multiple similarities between the career of Herbert's Paul Atreides and that of the Islamic prophet Muhammad .

[ 3 ] In Dune , the empire's power is held within three organizations: the Imperial family; the Landsraad , representing the nobility ; and the Spacing Guild , an interstellar travel monopoly.

Warhammer 40,000 [ edit ] Another notable example of a galactic empire is the Imperium of Man from the Warhammer 40,000 universe, which is a feudal theocratic industrial and militaristic totalitarian regime (nominally an absolute monarchy ) that does in fact span almost the entirety of the Milky Way Galaxy . Despite massive strength, the institution's territories are constantly at risk due to unending conflicts with various alien races and rebel factions . The Imperium of Man is managed by a vast bureaucracy, ranging from the High Lords of Terra to various mostly-autonomous planetary governors (they can do whatever they like so long as they pay taxes), all of whom govern the Imperium's territories on behalf of the comatose God-Emperor. It is supported by several organisations, such as the Ecclesiarchy, its state church; and the Adeptus Mechanicus, which produces most of its military equipment, which also operate independently from each other and the central Terran government.

Others [ edit ] In the final arc of the Sailor Moon manga series by Naoko Takeuchi , a fictional organization called Shadow Galactica has established an empire all over the Milky Way. Shadow Galactica is stealing "starseeds", the essence of sentient life in the galaxy. Its members come from different Star Systems and Sailor Galaxia, the self-proclaimed "Golden Queen of Shadow Galactica", has built her palace around the Galaxy Cauldron, the birthplace of all life in the Milky Way located in Galactic Center .

Bertram Chandler wrote two interstellar series – one featuring a Galactic Empire ruled by a series of non-hereditary Empresses while the other has a Republican Galactic Federation . Chandler's Empire and Federation, both relatively benign, have much in common – both covering the same volume of space, having much the same kind of Space Navy and both having the same commercial spaceflight company called "The Dog Star Line", suggesting that these are two alternate history timelines which branched off from the same original space travelling culture.

In Ursula K. Le Guin 's Hainish Cycle , the interstellar entity known as "The League of All Worlds" and later as "The Ekumen" is in possession of the ' ansible ' (a tachyonic device). Technology makes possible instantaneous interstellar communications, and the ability to send instantaneous unmanned ships carrying bombs to another planet is exploited as well. However, living beings cannot survive such travel, and thus humans are limited to space exploration at relativistic speeds. Correspondingly, this organization, despite on occasion waging war across interstellar distances, ends up being looser than a true empire.

Author Orson Scott Card 's "Starways Congress", an organization featured in the work Speaker for the Dead (the follow-up to Ender's Game ), similarly relies on the ansible. Yet it is more authoritarian and less benevolent than Le Guin's creation. Much of the story-line of the book and its sequels involves attempts to avoid interstellar bloodshed despite difficult circumstances.

See also [ edit ] Legend of Galactic Heroes References [ edit ] ^ Klein, Christopher.

"The Real History That Inspired "Star Wars" " .

History . Retrieved 16 March 2021 .

^ Gallant, Joseph (1 January 1951).

"Earth People vs. the Galaxy" .

Commentary .

12 : 303– 304.

ProQuest 1290130442 .

^ "Frank Herbert's Dune – Islam and Science Fiction" .

Further reading [ edit ] Ash, Brian , ed. (1977).

"Galactic Empires" .

The Visual Encyclopedia of Science Fiction . Harmony Books. pp.

110– 115.

ISBN 0-517-53174-7 .

OCLC 2984418 .

Kerslake, Patricia (2005).

"Galactic Empire" . In Westfahl, Gary (ed.).

The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy: Themes, Works, and Wonders . Greenwood Publishing Group. pp.

325– 327.

ISBN 978-0-313-32951-7 .

Stableford, Brian ; Langford, David (2017).

"Galactic Empires" . In Clute, John ; Langford, David ; Sleight, Graham (eds.).

The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction (4th ed.) . Retrieved 18 April 2023 .

Westfahl, Gary (2021).

"Galactic Empires" .

Science Fiction Literature through History: An Encyclopedia . ABC-CLIO. pp.

309– 311.

ISBN 978-1-4408-6617-3 .

v t e Galaxies Morphology Disc Lenticular barred unbarred Spiral anemic barred flocculent grand design intermediate Magellanic unbarred Dwarf galaxy elliptical irregular spheroidal spiral Elliptical galaxy cD Irregular barred Peculiar Ring Polar Structure Active galactic nucleus Bar Bulge Central massive object Galactic Center Dark matter halo Disc Disc galaxy Halo corona Galactic plane Galactic ridge Interstellar medium Protogalaxy Galaxy filament Spiral arm Supermassive black hole Ultramassive Active nuclei Blazar BL Lacertae object LINER Little Red Dots Markarian Quasar Radio X-shaped DRAGN Relativistic jet Seyfert Energetic galaxies Lyman-alpha emitter Lyman-break Luminous infrared ULIRG HLIRG ELIRG Starburst blue compact dwarf blueberry pea faint blue Luminous infrared galaxy Hot dust-obscured Green bean galaxy Hanny's Voorwerp Wolf-Rayet galaxy Low activity Low surface brightness Ultra diffuse Dark galaxy Red nugget Blue Nugget Dead disk Interaction Binary galaxy Field Galactic tide Groups and clusters group cluster Brightest cluster galaxy fossil group Interacting merger collision cannibalism Jellyfish Satellite Stellar stream Superclusters Walls Voids and supervoids void galaxy Lists Galaxies Galaxies named after people Largest Nearest Polar-ring Ring Spiral Groups and clusters Large quasar groups Quasars List of the most distant astronomical objects Starburst galaxies Superclusters Voids Related Extragalactic astronomy Galactic astronomy Galactic coordinate system Galactic habitable zone Galactic magnetic fields Galactic orientation Galactic quadrant Galaxy color–magnitude diagram Galaxy formation and evolution Galaxy rotation curve Gravitational lens Gravitational microlensing Illustris project Intergalactic dust Intergalactic stars Intergalactic travel Population III stars Galaxy X (galaxy) Category Portal v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Galactic_empire&oldid=1289918283 " Categories : Fictional governments Galactic empires Science fiction themes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2017 Articles needing additional references from September 2014 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from March 2024 All articles that may contain original research All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017 This page was last edited on 11 May 2025, at 17:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Galactic empire 10 languages Add topic

