Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Manuscripts 2 Translations 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Rosary of the Philosophers 6 languages Català Español Italiano Русский Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 16th-century alchemical treatise Woodcut illustrating the illuminatio stage, captioned "Here Sol plainly dies again, And is drowned with the Mercury of the Philosophers." The Rosary of the Philosophers ( Rosarium philosophorum sive pretiosissimum donum Dei ) is a 16th-century alchemical treatise. It was published in 1550 as part II of De Alchimia Opuscula complura veterum philosophorum (Frankfurt). The term rosary in the title is unrelated to the Catholic prayer beads ; it refers to a " rose garden", metaphoric of an anthology or collection of wise sayings.

The 1550 print includes a series of 20 woodcuts with German-language captions, plus a title page showing a group of philosophers disputing about the production of the lapis philosophorum .
Some of the woodcut images have precedents in earlier (15th-century) German alchemical literature, especially in the Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit (ca. 1410) which has the direct precedents of woodcuts 10, 17 and 19, allegorical of the complete hieros gamos , nrs. 10 and 17 in the form of the "Hermetic androgyne" and nr. 19 in terms of Christian iconography, showing Mary flanked by the Father , Son and Holy Spirit .

[ 1 ] The Artis auriferae , printed in 1572 in Basel, reproduced the 20 illustrations as re-cut woodcuts.

Johann Daniel Mylius ' Philosophia reformata of 1622 also includes the twenty Rosarium images, re-designed in early 17th-century style by Balthazar Swan.

Manuscripts [ edit ] The Latin text also survives in numerous manuscripts, none of them predating the 1550 print edition.

late 16th century Glasgow University Library MS. Ferguson 6.

British Library Sloane MS 2560.

British Library Add MS 29895.

Bodleian Library MS. Ashmole 1487.

Paris, Bibliothèque Nationale MS. Lat. 7171.

Biblioteca Apostolica Vaticana MS. Reg. Lat. 1278.

Gotha, Forschungsbibliothek MS. Chart. B. 365.

Darmstadt, Hessiche Landesbibliothek MS. 1049.

Kassel, Landesbibliothek MS. 2° Chym. 21.

Kassel, Landesbibliothek MS. 4° Chym. 81.

Nürnberg, Germanisches Nationalmuseum MS. 16752. [8vo. NW 1482.] Leiden MS. Vossianus Chym. F. 12. (dated 1575) Rome, Biblioteca dell'Accademia dei Lincei. MS. Verginelli-Rota 6 (dated 1597) Marburg MS. 101. (c. 1600) 17th century Glasgow University Library MS. Ferguson 96.

Glasgow University Library MS. Ferguson 149.

Getty Center. Manly Palmer Hall MS. 232.

St. Gallen, Bibliothek Vadiana MS. 394 a.

St. Gallen, Bibliothek Vadiana MS. 394 b.

18th century Glasgow University Library MS. Ferguson 210.

Glasgow University Library MS. Ferguson 29.

Glasgow University Library MS. Ferguson 74.

Getty Center. Manly Palmer Hall MS. 49.

Bibliotheca Philosophica Hermetica MS. 86.

19th century Bibliotheca Philosophica Hermetica MS. 219.

Bibliotheca Philosophica Hermetica MS. 303.

London, Wellcome Library MS. 1091.

London, Wellcome Library MS. 4256.

Translations [ edit ] The text of  MS Ferguson 210, in Glasgow University Library , is the basis of an English translation that was published in the 18th century. The English translation reproduces the coloured drawings of the Ferguson MS as woodcuts.

There is also a Czech translation, dated to 1578, by Jaroš Griemiller , kept in the National Library of Prague , Czech Republic . The Czech manuscript reproduces the illustrations as line drawings.

References [ edit ] ^ Karen-Claire Voss, The Hierosgamos Theme in the Images of the Rosarium Philosophorum , Proceedings of the International Conference on the History of Alchemy , ed. by Z.R.W.M. von Martels.  E.J. Brill:  Leiden, 1990; Cod. 78 A 11 (1410s) Cgm 598 External links [ edit ] The Rosarium Philosophorum .

University of Glasgow .

Text at The Alchemy Website Woodcuts at The Alchemy Website De alchimia opuscula - Rosarium philosophorum (1550) Google Books v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rosary_of_the_Philosophers&oldid=1304499775 " Categories : Alchemical documents 1550 books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 11:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rosary of the Philosophers 6 languages Add topic

