Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mesopotamian philosophy 2 Ancient Egyptian philosophy 3 Ancient Iranian philosophy Toggle Ancient Iranian philosophy subsection 3.1 Zoroastrianism 3.2 Manichaeism 3.3 Mazdakism 3.4 Zurvanism 3.4.1 Aesthetic Zurvanism 3.4.2 Materialist Zurvanism 3.4.3 Fatalistic Zurvanism 4 Hellenistic philosophy 5 Abrahamic traditions Toggle Abrahamic traditions subsection 5.1 Jewish philosophy 5.2 Christian philosophy 5.3 Islamic philosophy 5.3.1 Early Islamic philosophy 5.3.2 Contemporary Islamic philosophy 5.4 Baháʼí philosophy 6 See also 7 References 8 Sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Middle Eastern philosophy 5 languages العربية فارسی Português Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Various philosophies of the Middle East regions This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( December 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( December 2017 ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Middle Eastern philosophy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e Middle Eastern philosophy includes the various philosophies of the Middle East regions, including the Fertile Crescent and Iran . Traditions include Ancient Egyptian philosophy , Babylonian philosophy , Christian philosophy , Jewish philosophy , Iranian/Persian philosophy , and Islamic philosophy .

Mesopotamian philosophy [ edit ] Further information: Mesopotamia § Philosophy , and Akkadian literature § Wisdom and didactic literature The origins of Babylonian philosophy, in the popular sense of the word, can be traced back to the wisdom of early Mesopotamia , which embodied certain philosophies of life, particularly ethics , in the forms of dialectic , dialogs , epic poetry , folklore , hymns , lyrics , prose , and proverbs . The reasoning and rationality of the Babylonians developed beyond empirical observation.

[ 1 ] It is possible that Babylonian philosophy had an influence on Greek philosophy , and later Hellenistic philosophy , however the textual evidence is lacking. The undated Babylonian text Dialogue of Pessimism contains similarities to the agnostic thought of the sophists , the Heraclitean doctrine of contrasts, and the dialogs of Plato , as well as a precursor to the maieutic Socratic method of Socrates and Plato.

[ 2 ] The Milesian philosopher Thales is also said to have studied philosophy in Mesopotamia.

Ancient Egyptian philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Ancient Egyptian philosophy Egyptian philosophy began with development of its ancient cosmology. By 1,000 B.C. philosophers were already proposing four constituent elements in the universe, namely: mist, earth, fire, and water.

[ 3 ] This formed the basis of their investigations of the heaven and the earth.

[ 3 ] A tradition of Holism emerged out of this development. It addressed the ontological question: What exists?

[ 4 ] Egyptian thinkers joined spirit and matter so that humans were not separated from animals and even gods.

[ 5 ] For this reason, priests also functioned as philosophers, astronomers, architects, and healers.

[ 6 ] There are scholars who cite that the ancient Egyptian philosophy influenced ancient Greek philosophy.

[ 7 ] Greek philosophers such as Plato and Pythagoras either went on pilgrimages in Egypt or received their training there.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Pythagoras, particularly, established a philosophical school based on the Mystery School of ancient Egypt, where he spent training for more than two decades.

[ 6 ] This philosophy is rooted on Egyptian metaphysics that embraced the heavens and the earth in a sweeping unity.

[ 6 ] Ancient Iranian philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Iranian philosophy See also Ancient Iranian Philosophy Zoroastrianism [ edit ] Main article: Zoroastrianism Zoroastrianism is a monotheistic religion, which originated in Iran . It has a dualistic nature ( Ahura Mazda and Angra Mainyu ), with an additional series of six important divine entities called the Amesha Spentas .

[ 9 ] In modern Zoroastrianism they are interpreted as aspects or emanations of Ahura Mazda (the Supreme Being), who form a heptad that is good and constructive. They are opposed to another group of seven who are evil and destructive. It is this persistent conflict between good and evil that distinguishes Zoroastrianism from monotheistic frameworks that have only one power as supreme. By requiring its adherents to have faith and belief in equally opposing powers Zoroastrianism characterizes itself as dualistic.

The teachings of Zarathustra (Zoroaster) appeared in Persia at some point during the period 1700-1800 BCE.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] His wisdom became the basis of the religion Zoroastrianism , and generally influenced the development of the Iranian branch of Indo-Iranian philosophy. Zarathustra was the first who treated the problem of evil in philosophical terms.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] He is also believed to be one of the oldest monotheists in the history of religion. He espoused an ethical philosophy based on the primacy of good thoughts (pendar-e-nik), good words (goftar-e-nik), and good deeds (kerdar-e-nik).

[ 13 ] The works of Zoroaster and Zoroastrianism had a significant influence on Greek philosophy and Roman philosophy . Several ancient Greek writers such as Eudoxus of Cnidus and Latin writers such as Pliny the Elder praised Zoroastrian philosophy as "the most famous and most useful".

Plato learnt of Zoroastrian philosophy through Eudoxus and incorporated much of it into his own Platonic realism .

[ 14 ] In the 3rd century BC, however, Colotes accused Plato's The Republic of plagiarizing parts of Zoroaster's On Nature , such as the Myth of Er .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Manichaeism [ edit ] Manichaeism , founded by Mani , was influential from North Africa in the West, to China in the East. Its influence subtly continues in Western Christian thought via Saint Augustine of Hippo , who converted to Christianity from Manichaeism, which he passionately denounced in his writings, and whose writings continue to be influential among Catholic, Protestant and Orthodox theologians . An important principle of Manichaeism was its dualistic nature.

Mazdakism [ edit ] The religious and philosophical teaching called Mazdakism , which its founder, Mazdak, regarded as a reformed and purified version of Zoroastrianism [ 17 ] [ 18 ] displays remarkable influences from Manichaeism as well.

[ 17 ] Zurvanism [ edit ] Zurvanism is characterized by the element of its first principle , which is time ( Zurvan ), as a primordial creator. According to Zaehner, Zurvanism appears to have three schools of thought, all with classical Zurvanism as a foundation: aesthetic , materialist , and fatalistic .

Aesthetic Zurvanism [ edit ] Aesthetic Zurvanism —apparently not as popular as the materialistic kind—viewed Zurvan as undifferentiated time, which, under the influence of desire, divided reason (a male principle) and concupiscence (a female principle).

Materialist Zurvanism [ edit ] While Zoroaster's Ormuzd created the universe with his thought, materialist Zurvanism challenged the concept that anything could be made out of nothing.

Fatalistic Zurvanism [ edit ] Fatalistic Zurvanism resulted from the doctrine of limited time with the implication that nothing could change this preordained course of the material universe and that the path of the astral bodies of the 'heavenly sphere' was representative of this preordained course. According to the Middle Persian work Menog-i Khrad : "Ohrmazd allotted happiness to man, but if man did not receive it, it was owing to the extortion of these planets." Hellenistic philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Hellenistic philosophy Abrahamic traditions [ edit ] Further information: Abrahamic religion Jewish philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Jewish philosophy Jewish philosophy includes all philosophy carried out by Jews, both within their original homeland and in the diaspora .

Christian philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Christian philosophy Christianity and Hellenistic philosophy Neoplatonism and Christianity Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Islamic philosophy [ edit ] Early Islamic philosophy [ edit ] Main articles: Islamic philosophy and Early Islamic philosophy The rise of Islam led to the emergence of various Islamic philosophical schools of thought. Schools influenced by Sufism involved esoteric philosophy, while the Mu'tazili school (partly influenced by Hellenistic philosophy ) reconstructed rationalism , and the Ash'ari school reshaped logical and rational interpretation of God , justice , destiny and the universe .

The Philosophy of Illumination founded by Sohrevardi argued that light operates at all levels and hierarchies of reality. Light produces immaterial and substantial lights, including immaterial intellects, human and animal souls and even 'dusky substances', such as bodies. Sohrevardi's works display extensive developments on the basis of Zoroastrian ideas and ancient Iranian thought.

Other schools of philosophy were centered on the works of individual authors during the Islamic Golden Age , with Averroism [ 19 ] and Avicennism being two of the most prominent such schools.

Contemporary Islamic philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Contemporary Islamic philosophy Baháʼí philosophy [ edit ] `Abdu'l-Bahá , son and successor of the founder of the Baháʼí Faith , has explained the Baháʼí philosophy in the work Some Answered Questions .

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Babylonian literature: Philosophy Early Islamic philosophy Modern Islamic philosophy References [ edit ] ^ Giorgio Buccellati (1981), "Wisdom and Not: The Case of Mesopotamia", Journal of the American Oriental Society 101 (1), p. 35-47.

^ Giorgio Buccellati (1981), "Wisdom and Not: The Case of Mesopotamia", Journal of the American Oriental Society 101 (1), p. 35-47 [43].

^ a b Wane, Njoki; Kempf, Arlo; Simmons, Marlon (2011).

The Politics of Cultural Knowledge . Rotterdam: Springer Science & Business Media. p. 100.

ISBN 978-94-6091-480-5 .

^ Verharen, Charles (July 2006). "Philosophy Against Empire: An Ancient Egyptian Renaissance".

Journal of Black Studies .

36 (6): 958– 973.

doi : 10.1177/0021934705286128 .

S2CID 143591244 .

^ Iyioke, Ike (2018).

Clinical Trials and the African Person: A Quest to Re-Conceptualize Responsibility . Leiden: BRILL. p. 56.

ISBN 978-90-04-36660-2 .

^ a b c Ozaniec, Naomi (2010).

Beat Stress With Meditation: Teach Yourself . Hachette UK.

ISBN 978-1-4441-2918-2 .

^ a b Makumba, Maurice Muhatia (2007).

An Introduction to African Philosophy: Past and Present . Nairobi: Paulines Publications Africa. pp.

26– 27.

ISBN 978-9966-082-96-1 .

^ James, George G. M. (2013).

Stolen Legacy . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-1-62793-015-4 .

^ Mary Boyce: "The Origins of Zoroastrian Philosophy" in "Persian Philosophy". Companion Encyclopedia of Asian Philosophy: Brian Carr and Indira Mahalingam. Routledge, 2009.

^ Jalal-e-din Ashtiyani. "Zarathushtra, Mazdayasna and Governance".

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ a b Whitley, C.F. (Sep 1957). "The Date and Teaching of Zarathustra".

Numen .

4 (3): 219– 223.

doi : 10.2307/3269345 .

JSTOR 3269345 .

^ Alan Williams: "Later Zoroastrianism" in "Persian Philosophy". Companion Encyclopedia of Asian Philosophy: Brian Carr and Indira Mahalingam. Routledge, 2009.

^ Philip G. Kreyenbroek: "Morals and Society in Zoroastrian Philosophy" in "Persian Philosophy". Companion Encyclopedia of Asian Philosophy: Brian Carr and Indira Mahalingam. Routledge, 2009.

^ A. D. Nock (1929), " Studien zum antiken Synkretismus aus Iran und Griechenland by R. Reitzenstein, H. H. Schaeder, Fr. Saxl", The Journal of Hellenic Studies 49 (1), p. 111-116 [111].

^ David N. Livingstone (2002), The Dying God: The Hidden History of Western Civilization , p. 144-145, iUniverse, ISBN 0-595-23199-3 .

^ A. D. Nock (1929), " Studien zum antiken Synkretismus aus Iran und Griechenland by R. Reitzenstein, H. H. Schaeder, Fr. Saxl", The Journal of Hellenic Studies 49 (1), p. 111-116.

^ a b Yarshater, Ehsan. 1983. The Cambridge history of Iran, volume 2. p.995-997 ^ Shaki, Mansour. 1985. The cosmogonical and cosmological teachings of Mazdak.

Papers in Honour of Professor Mary Boyce, Acta Iranica 25, Leiden, 1985, pp. 527-43.

^ Majid Fakhry (2001).

Averroes: His Life, Works and Influence . Oneworld Publications.

ISBN 1-85168-269-4 .

^ Kluge, Ian (2009).

Some Answered Questions: A Philosophical Perspective , in Lights of Irfan, Volume 10.

Sources [ edit ] Printed sources Bowker, John (2000), The Concise Oxford Dictionary of World Religions , Oxford University Press Flood, Gavin D.

(1996), An Introduction to Hinduism , Cambridge University Press Georgis, Faris (2010), Alone in Unity: Torments of an Iraqi God-Seeker in North America , Dorrance Publishing, ISBN 978-1-4349-0951-0 Lockard, Craig A. (2007), Societies, Networks, and Transitions. Volume I: to 1500 , Cengage Learning, ISBN 978-0618386123 Web-sources External links [ edit ] Kheper Website: Eastern Philosophy v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal v t e Asia articles History Chronology Indian Ocean trade Silk Road Imperialism Decolonisation Cold War By topic Military conflicts Sovereignty Geography Cities metropolitan areas tallest buildings urban agglomerations Countries and territories by population Extreme points Islands Lakes Mountains Rivers Geopolitical Transcontinental regions Asia–Pacific Caucasus EMEA Mediterranean world MENASA Greater Middle East / Middle East and North Africa Middle East / Near East Indo-Mediterranean Indo-Pacific Indian Ocean world Pacific Rim Pacific Asia Intracontinental regions Anatolia/Asia Minor Arabia South Arabia Cyprus Far East / Pacific Asia Greater China China proper Taiwan Tibet Xinjiang Indochina Malay world Manchuria Northeast China Outer Manchuria Greater Mongolia Inner Mongolia Mongolia Japan Korea Russian Far East Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Greater Iran Greater Khorasan Global Southeast Greater India Levant / Syria Southern Levant Mesopotamia Siberia South Caucasus Turkestan Afghan Turkestan Chinese Turkestan Russian Turkestan Continental subregions Central Asia Soviet Central Asia East Asia Northeast Asia North Asia South Asia Subregions Southeast Asia Mainland Southeast Asia Maritime Southeast Asia West Asia Cultural Austronesia Indosphere Sinosphere Nanyang Northern and southern China Physical Supercontinents Afro-Eurasia Afro-Asia Eurasia Subcontinents Arabian subcontinent Indian subcontinent Plateaus Anatolian plateau Deccan Plateau Iranian plateau Mongolian Plateau Tibetan Plateau Peninsulas Anatolian Peninsula Arabian Peninsula Indian Peninsula Indochinese Peninsula Malay Peninsula Korean Peninsula Leizhou Peninsula Liaodong Peninsula Shandong Peninsula Archipelagos Japanese Archipelago Ryukyu Islands Malay Archipelago Indonesian Archipelago Maluku Islands Sunda Islands Greater Sunda Islands Lesser Sunda Islands Philippine Archipelago Visayan Islands Mergui Archipelago Biogeographic Eastern Asia Indo-Pacific Malesia Tropical Asia Politics Heads of government Heads of state Elections political parties Democracy Human rights Law Military Pan-Asianism Intergovernmental Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD) Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Bay of Bengal Initiative (BIMSTEC) Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (CCASG / GCC) Mekong–Ganga Cooperation (MGC) Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) Economy Countries by average wage Countries by GDP (PPP) Countries by HDI Currencies Stock exchanges Technology renewable energy Transport airports high-speed rail Markets Property markets Society Demographics Education Etiquette Health Languages Life expectancy People ethnic groups Culture Art Cinema Cuisine Literature Music Philosophy Religion Sport Future Asian Century Chinese Century Indian Century Pacific Century Outline Index Category Portal Maps NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐njlx2
Cached time: 20250817193354
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.674 seconds
Real time usage: 0.924 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3446/1000000
Revision size: 14653/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 359390/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 36826/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 39/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 106276/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.391/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8210723/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  706.633      1 -total
 21.07%  148.867      2 Template:Reflist
 16.02%  113.205      1 Template:Asia_topics
 15.76%  111.352      1 Template:Region_topics
 15.24%  107.724      1 Template:Philosophy_sidebar
 15.14%  107.014      5 Template:Cite_book
 12.95%   91.482      2 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 12.59%   88.994      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 10.65%   75.249      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
  8.51%   60.105      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:52755910:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817193354 and revision id 1217618992. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Middle_Eastern_philosophy&oldid=1217618992 " Categories : Culture of Asia History of Asia Middle East Culture of the Middle East West Asian philosophy Middle Eastern philosophy Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from December 2017 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia introduction cleanup from December 2017 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from December 2017 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles needing additional references from December 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 6 April 2024, at 22:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Middle Eastern philosophy 5 languages Add topic

