Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 In Ireland 3 Exile 4 Archbishop of Armagh 5 Writings 6 Family 7 Notes 8 External links Toggle the table of contents John Bramhall 4 languages Français Norsk bokmål Português Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Anglican theologian and apologist For the former professional footballer, see John Bramhall (footballer) .

The Most Reverend John Bramhall Archbishop of Armagh Primate of All Ireland See Armagh Installed 1661 Term ended 1663 Predecessor James Ussher Successor James Margetson Other post(s) Bishop of Derry (1634–1661) Orders Consecration 16 May 1634 by James Ussher Personal details Born baptized ( 1594-11-18 ) 18 November 1594 Died 25 June 1663 (1663-06-25) (aged 68) Nationality English Denomination Church of Ireland Alma mater Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge John Bramhall, DD [ 1 ] (1594 – 25 June 1663) was an Archbishop of Armagh , and an Anglican theologian and apologist . He was a noted controversialist who doggedly defended the English Church from both Puritan and Roman Catholic accusations, as well as the materialism of Thomas Hobbes .

Early life [ edit ] Bramhall was born in Pontefract , Yorkshire, the son of Peter Bramhall (died 1635) of Carleton.

[ 2 ] He matriculated at Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge in 1609, and graduated B.A. 1612, M.A. 1616, B.D. 1623, D.D. 1630.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] He was ordained around 1616, and was presented with a Yorkshire living, South Kilvington , by Christopher Wandesford . In 1623 he took part in a public discussion at Northallerton with Hungate, a Jesuit, and Houghton, a Catholic priest.

Tobias Matthew , archbishop of York, made him his chaplain; he was also sub-dean of Ripon .

[ 2 ] In Ireland [ edit ] He went to Ireland in 1633 with Thomas Wentworth and was archdeacon of Meath . As a royal commissioner, he worked to obtain the surrender of fee farms on episcopal and clerical revenues, recovering church income. He was consecrated bishop of Derry in the chapel of Dublin Castle on 16 May 1634, succeeding the Puritan George Downham . In the Irish parliament which met on 14 July 1634, Bramhall had passed acts for the preservation of church property.

[ 2 ] By the Irish convocation which met in November 1634 the thirty-nine articles were approved, in addition to, the Irish articles of 1615. What Bramhall attempted to get the English canons of 1604 adopted in Ireland; there was conflict over this matter between him and James Ussher , ending with the passing of distinct canons, in the compiling of which Bramhall had a share. The ninety-fourth canon, endorsing a policy of William Bedell , bishop of Kilmore , provided for the use of the bible and prayer book in the vernacular in an Irish-speaking district; this was opposed by Bramhall. In August 1636 Bramhall at Belfast assisted Bishop Henry Leslie against the five ministers who would not subscribe to the new canons (see Edward Brice ).

[ 2 ] He employed the proceeds of his English property in purchasing and improving an estate at Omagh , County Tyrone , in a Catholic area. In the same year, he was made receiver-general for the crown of all revenues from the estates of the city of London in his diocese, forfeited through non-fulfilment of conditions of the holding. In 1639 he protected and recommended to Wentworth John Corbet , minister at Bonhill , who had been deposed by the Dumbarton presbytery for refusing to subscribe to the assembly's declaration against prelacy. Wentworth used Corbet as a sarcastic writer against the Scottish covenanters, and nominated him to the vicarage of Templemore , in the diocese of Achonry . Archibald Adair, bishop of Killala and Achonry , a Puritan, was tried as a favourer of the Scottish covenant over his views on Corbet. Adair was deposed on 18 May 1640; these proceedings alienated the Scottish settlers. The Irish commons in October 1640 drew up a remonstrance, in the course of which they speak of the Derry plantation as 'almost destroyed' through the policy of which Bramhall was the administrator.

[ 2 ] After the English House of Commons had impeached Wentworth (now earl of Strafford) of high treason on 11 November 1640, the Ulster presbyterians drew up a petition to the English parliament (presented by Sir John Clotworthy about the end of April 1641), containing thirty-one charges against the Irish Anglican prelates, and asking that their exiled pastors might be reinstated. Of the Ulster bishops, Bramhall was most in the firing line. The Irish Commons, on the motion of Audley Mervyn and others, 4 March 1641, impeached him, with the lord chancellor, the chief justice of the common pleas, and Sir George Radcliffe , as participants in the alleged treason of Strafford. Bramhall left Derry for Dublin, and took his place in the Irish House of Lords. He was imprisoned and accused of unconstitutional acts; his defence was that he had equitably sought the good of the church, and that his hands were clean. He wrote, on 26 April, to Ussher in London, and through the king, Bramhall was liberated without acquittal: he returned to Derry.

[ 2 ] Exile [ edit ] In 1642, he returned to England, and was in Yorkshire until the battle of Marston Moor (2 July 1644); he supported the royalist cause by preaching and writing, and sent his plate to the king. With the Marquess of Newcastle , and others, he hurried abroad, landing at Hamburg on 8 July 1644. The treaty of Uxbridge , in January 1645, excepted him, with Laud, from the proposed general pardon.

In Paris, he met Hobbes (prior to 1646), and argued with him on liberty and necessity. This led to controversies with Hobbes for years. Up to 1648, he was mainly at Brussels , preaching at the English embassy, and to the English merchants of Antwerp monthly. He then went back to Ireland, but not to Ulster, in 1648; at Limerick he received in 1649 the profession of the dying James Dillon, 3rd Earl of Roscommon . While he was in Cork , the city declared for the parliament (October 1649); he had a narrow escape, and returned to foreign parts. He corresponded with Montrose, and disputed and wrote in defence of the Church of England . He went to Spain around 1650. He was excluded from the Act of Indemnity of 1652; subsequently, he occasionally adopted in correspondence the pseudonym 'John Pierson'.

[ 2 ] Archbishop of Armagh [ edit ] After the Restoration , in October 1660, he returned to England. He then went to Ireland, and on 18 January 1661, he became Archbishop of Armagh. As archbishop, Bramhall was responsible for ensuring that the Acts of religious conformity were prosecuted with moderation in Ireland. On 27 January 1661 he presided at the consecration in St Patrick's Cathedral of two archbishops and ten bishops for Ireland. Bramhall was ex officio president of convocation, and on 8 May 1661, he was chosen speaker of the Irish House of Lords . Both houses erased from their records the old charges against Bramhall.

[ 2 ] Although Parliament passed declarations requiring conformity to the episcopacy and the liturgy, and ordering the burning of the Covenant, Bramhall could not carry his bills for a uniform tithe system, and for extending episcopal leases. Until 1667 there was no Irish act of uniformity, just the old statute of 1560 on the use of Edward VI's second prayer book. The ejection of Irish nonconformists was carried out by episcopal activity, some time before the passing of the English Act of Uniformity of 1662 . Armagh was not a specially presbyterian diocese, and Bramhall used moderation.

[ 2 ] Bramhall was defending his rights in a court of law at Omagh against Sir Audley Mervyn when a third paralytic stroke deprived him of consciousness. He died on 25 June 1663.

[ 2 ] Writings [ edit ] Bramhall's historical importance lies in his writing while in exile. Without office, he turned his hand to writing replies to all attacks on the Anglican church. In 1643, he wrote Serpent Salve, a defence of episcopacy and monarchy against the attacks of the Puritan presbyterian model and democracy. He followed this with his 1649 Fair Warning against the Scottish Discipline, which was an attack on the weaknesses of the presbyterian model and an excoriation of the Puritan religious claims. He also attacked and defended against Hobbes's Leviathan.

In 1655, Bramhall wrote Vindication of True Liberty.

Hobbes replied to Bramhall with Animadversions, and Bramhall replied to this with Castigation of Hobbes' Animadversions (with an afterpiece called "The Catching of Leviathan, the Great Whale") in 1658.

Additionally, Bramhall attempted to defend the English Church from attacks from the Roman Catholic Church. In 1653, he countered Théophile Brachet de la Milletière 's restatement of the doctrine of transubstantiation with a reply that restated the justifications of the Anglican doctrine of Real Presence . He also attacked the Ultramontanists of France. Bramhall's A Just Vindication of the Church of England from the Unjust Aspersion of Criminal Schism (1654) was answered by the titular Bishop of Chalcedon , and Bramhall replied to this with Replication in 1656, where he prays that he might live to see the day when all Christian churches united again.

His works were collected by John Vesey , Dublin, 1677. They break down as five treatises against Catholics (including a confutation of the Nag's Head fable ); three against sectaries; three against Hobbes; and seven unclassified defences of royalist and Anglican views.

[ 2 ] The works were reprinted in the Library of Anglo-Catholic Theology , Oxford, 1842–5, 5 vols.

John Milton thought, mistakenly, that Bramhall wrote the Apologia pro Rege et Populo Anglicano , 1650; the real author was John Rowland . The posthumous publication of Bramhall's Vindication of himself and the Episcopal Clergy from the Presbyterian Charge of Popery, as it is managed by Mr. Baxter , &c., 1672, with a preface by Samuel Parker , produced Andrew Marvell 's 'The Rehearsal Transpros'd,' 1672.

[ 2 ] He is remembered also for the phrase It is the last feather that breaks the horse's back (Works, 1655), an early version of The last straw that breaks the camel's back .

[ 4 ] Family [ edit ] His marriage to a clergyman's widow, Ellinor Halley, gave him a fortune and a library. Their children included: Sir Thomas Bramhall , bart., who married Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Paul Davys , and died without issue.

Isabella, married Sir James Graham, son of William Graham, 7th Earl of Menteith ; her daughter Ellinor, or Helen, married Sir Arthur Rawdon, of Moira, lineal ancestor of the Marquis of Hastings .

Jane, married Alderman Toxteith of Drogheda.

Anne, married as his second wife Sir Standish Hartstonge, 1st Baronet , one of the Barons of the Court of Exchequer (Ireland) [ 2 ] Notes [ edit ] Christianity portal ^ "Alumni Dublinenses: a register of the students, graduates, professors and provosts of Trinity College in the University of Dublin (1593–1860 George Dames Burtchaell / Thomas Ulick Sadleir p92: Dublin, Alex Thom and Co, 1935 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n "Bramhall, John" .

Dictionary of National Biography . London: Smith, Elder & Co. 1885–1900.

^ "Bramhall, John (BRML608J)" .

A Cambridge Alumni Database . University of Cambridge.

^ Dictionary of Proverbs External links [ edit ] Works by John Bramhall at Post-Reformation Digital Library Attribution This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : " Bramhall, John ".

Dictionary of National Biography . London: Smith, Elder & Co. 1885–1900.

Church of Ireland titles Preceded by George Downham Bishop of Derry 1634–1661 Succeeded by George Wilde Vacant Title last held by James Ussher to 1656 Archbishop of Armagh 1661–1663 Succeeded by James Margetson v t e Anglican archbishops of Armagh George Cromer George Dowdall Hugh Goodacre George Dowdall Adam Loftus Thomas Lancaster John Long John Garvey Henry Ussher Christopher Hampton James Ussher John Bramhall James Margetson Michael Boyle Narcissus Marsh Thomas Lindsay Hugh Boulter John Hoadly George Stone Richard Robinson, Lord Rokeby William Newcome William Stuart Lord John Beresford Marcus Beresford Robert Knox Robert Gregg William Alexander John Crozier Charles D'Arcy Godfrey Day John Gregg James McCann George Simms John Armstrong Robin Eames Alan Harper Richard Clarke v t e Bishops of Derry and of Derry and Raphoe Derry George Montgomery Brutus Babington John Tanner George Downham John Bramhall George Wilde Robert Mossom Michael Ward Ezekiel Hopkins William King Charles Hickman John Hartstonge St George Ashe William Nicolson Henry Downes Thomas Rundle Carew Reynell George Stone William Barnard Frederick Hervey (later Earl of Bristol) William Knox Richard Ponsonby (became Bishop of Derry and Raphoe) Derry & Raphoe Richard Ponsonby William Higgin William Alexander George Chadwick Joseph Peacocke Robert Boyd Charles Tyndall Cuthbert Peacocke Robin Eames James Mehaffey Ken Good Andrew Forster v t e Archdeacons of Meath Helias Radulphus Le Petit Simon de Burford Richard of Malmesbury John de Kenelye William de Sidan William Leodegario Robert de Emelden Matthew Crumpe Adam Owen Henry Poule Andrew Daundon Thomas Sprott Thomas Bache William Yonge John White Christopher Dowdall John Chambre Robert Luttrell Hugh Brady John Garvie Eugene Woods Thomas Moigne John Rider Randolph Barlow John Bramhall Robert Ussher Arthur Ware Ambrose Jones William Jones Henry Cottingham James Moorcraft George Lewis William Smyth James Smyth Charles Stone Thomas de Lacy Edward Stopford Edward Fleetwood Berry Charles Parsons Reichel Garrett Nugent Graham Craig John Rennison John Healy Thomas Brunskill Joseph Fisher Derek Morrow Thomas Corrigan Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Greece Poland Israel People Trove Ireland Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Bramhall&oldid=1266434993 " Categories : 1594 births 1663 deaths Alumni of Sidney Sussex College, Cambridge Archdeacons of Meath Anglican bishops of Derry Anglican archbishops of Armagh Irish Anglican theologians Christian apologists 17th-century Anglican archbishops Members of the Privy Council of Ireland Anglo-Catholic bishops Anglo-Catholic theologians British expatriate archbishops Hidden categories: Articles incorporating Cite DNB template Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2021 Articles incorporating DNB text with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 31 December 2024, at 16:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Bramhall 4 languages Add topic

