Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 1980s and 1990s 1.2 21st century 2 Theory and ideology Toggle Theory and ideology subsection 2.1 Treatment of fascism 2.2 Relation to other ideologies 2.3 Relation to men's antifa groups 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Fantifa 2 languages فارسی Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Feminist anti-fascist movements Part of a series on Anti-fascism Interwar Ethiopia Black Lions Central Europe Arbeiter-Schutzbund Republikanischer Schutzbund Socialist Action Germany Antifaschistische Aktion Black Band Catholic resistance to Nazi Germany Confessing Church Iron Front Reichsbanner Schwarz-Rot-Gold Roter Frontkämpferbund Three Arrows Italy 1922 Italian general strike Aventine Secession Arditi del Popolo Concentrazione Antifascista Italiana Giustizia e Libertà Manifesto of the Anti-Fascist Intellectuals TIGR Volante Rossa Spain ( Spanish Civil War ) Antifascist Worker and Peasant Militias Confederal militias International Brigades Abraham Lincoln Brigade British Battalion Dabrowski Battalion ILP Contingent Mackenzie-Papineau Battalion Palafox Battalion Thälmann Battalion World War II Resistance during World War II Albania Albanian resistance National Liberation Movement Austria Austrian resistance Baltic states Estonian resistance Latvian resistance movement Lithuanian resistance Soviet partisans Belgium Belgian Resistance Belgian National Movement Front de l'Indépendance Secret Army Witte Brigade Bulgaria Bulgarian resistance movement Fatherland Front People's Liberation Insurgent Army Burma Anti-Fascist Organisation China Second United Front Kuomintang Chinese Communist Party National Revolutionary Army Eighth Route Army East River Column Czechia Resistance in the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia Jan Žižka partisan brigade Prague uprising Denmark Danish resistance movement France French Resistance Maquis Armée Juive Armée secrète Combat Franc-Tireur Francs-Tireurs et Partisans Libération-Nord Libération-sud Mouvements Unis de la Résistance National Council of the Resistance National Front Germany German resistance to Nazism Catholic resistance to Nazi Germany Pope Pius XII and the German Resistance National Committee for a Free Germany AKFD Rote Kapelle Saefkow-Jacob-Bästlein Organization Schwarze Kapelle 20 July plot Oster conspiracy White Rose Greece Cretan resistance Greek resistance ELAS Italy Italian resistance movement National Liberation Committee Japan Political dissidence in the Empire of Japan Japanese in the Chinese resistance to the Empire of Japan Japanese People's Emancipation League Jewish Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee Jewish partisans Jewish resistance during the Holocaust Jewish Labor Committee Luxembourg Luxembourg resistance Netherlands Dutch resistance Binnenlandse Strijdkrachten Norway Norwegian resistance movement Poland Polish resistance movement in World War II ( Polish Underground State ) Anti-Fascist Bloc Armia Krajowa Armia Ludowa Bataliony Chłopskie Gwardia Ludowa Kampfgruppe Auschwitz Narodowe Siły Zbrojne Olimp Polscy Socjaliści Warsaw Ghetto Uprising Żydowska Organizacja Bojowa Zydowski Zwiazek Walki Romania Romanian resistance movement during World War II Slovakia Slovak partisans Slovak National Uprising Spain Spanish Maquis Soviet Union Soviet partisans Moldovan resistance movement Yugoslavia Yugoslav resistance movement Anti-fascist Assembly for the National Liberation of Macedonia Anti-fascist Assembly for the National Liberation of Serbia Anti-Fascist Council for the National Liberation of Yugoslavia Croatian Partisans Liberation Front of the Slovenian People Macedonian Partisans Slovene Partisans Yugoslav Partisans Postwar Post–World War II anti-fascism ( denazification ) Germany Antifa Arsch huh, Zäng ussenander Italy ANPI Bella ciao Liberation Day Netherlands Anti-fascist research group Kafka Portugal Armed Forces Movement Carnation Revolution Spain Spanish Maquis Sweden Antifascistisk Aktion Switzerland Aktion Kinder des Holocaust United Kingdom 43 Group 62 Group Anti-Fascist Action Anti-Nazi League Unite Against Fascism United States Antifa Anti-Racist Action Redneck Revolt Refuse Fascism Music and culture " A las Barricadas " " ¡Ay Carmela!

" " Bella ciao " " First they came ...

" " Fischia il vento " " Grândola, Vila Morena " " Nazi Punks Fuck Off " Rock Against Racism " Rock gegen Rechts " Skinheads Against Racial Prejudice " This machine kills fascists " " (We Don't Need This) Fascist Groove Thang " Red and anarchist black metal Tactics and methods Black bloc Deplatforming Direct action Diversity of tactics Milkshaking Popular front Squadism United front See also Red triangle Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-nationalism Anti-Germans (political current) Anti-Japaneseism Anti-racism Civil libertarianism Fantifa Left-wing politics Anarchism Anarchist communism Democratic socialism Left-libertarianism Libertarian socialism Social liberalism Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e One variant of fantifa symbol, displaying an anarcha-feminist purple flag symbolic of the female gender instead of the traditional socialist red flag of Antifaschistische Aktion .

Fantifa (sometimes rendered as f_antifa [ 1 ] or f*antifa ; [ 2 ] a contraction of German Feministische Antifa , lit.

feminist anti-fascism , or Frauen Antifa , lit.

women's anti-fascism ) is an umbrella term for anti-fascism movements centering on women as a branch of the feminist movement. The term mostly refers to a formal movement of feminist anti-fascist groups that emerged from German-speaking countries in 1985 but also encompasses historical German groups such as the 1925 Rote Frauen und Mädelbund (the women and girls' branch of the Roter Frontkämpferbund ) and broader European groups such as the 1930s Spanish anarcha-feminist group Mujeres Libres , the 1934 French women's branch of the World Committee Against War and Fascism , and the 1942 Yugoslavian partisan group Women's Antifascist Front of Yugoslavia .

[ 3 ] : 5 The main fantifa movement holds an anarcho-communist philosophy and is specifically an anti-fascist variant of anarcha-feminism, as is sometimes represented in the use of a purple and black flag with a symbol derivative of that of the men's antifa group Antifaschistische Aktion .

History [ edit ] 1980s and 1990s [ edit ] West German feminists protesting restrictions on abortion in 1988.

Fantifa has its roots in the West German antifa movement and in anti-fascist sentiments of German second-wave feminist groups such as Rote Zora , which emphasized anarchist defiance through terrorist action. In 1980, Rote Zora issued a statement urging feminists to take action against every form of oppression, including that imposed by the state. Concerns of theirs included genetic engineering as a form of eugenics and § 218 of the German Penal Law limiting abortion .

[ 4 ] 1980s Black and Jewish feminist criticism of Rote Zora in displaying aspects of white feminism coincided with women's resentment toward machismo in the antifa movement and led to the creation of fantifa, beginning with a Northern Germany women's antifa meeting in 1985.

[ 3 ] : 11–14, 18 As it came as a response to restrictive second-wave feminist politics and extended into the 1990s, this era of fantifa can be classified as third-wave feminism .

The term "fantifa" was coined in 1988, [ 5 ] with small meetings of no more than fifteen people occurring in 1989, which covered topics including violence against women .

[ 3 ] Following the fall of the Berlin Wall , the first nationwide German fantifa meeting was held on the weekend of January 20-21, 1990, [ 5 ] covering the topics of lesbophobia , eugenics, anti-abortion movements , and § 218. It was the first antifa meeting to feature daycare, to allow women with children to participate.

[ 3 ] By the end of the 1990s, there were twenty-five fantifa groups.

[ 6 ] Fantifa initially met with conflict from antifa men who viewed women's rights groups as fascist, perceiving feminism's antagonism toward patriarchy as misandry equivalent to antisemitic hatred.

[ 5 ] Further confusion was caused by the historical example of fascist woman Sophie Rogge-Börner writing to Adolf Hitler in 1933 to preach for uplifting women who wished to take on more traditionally masculine gender roles within the Nazi movement, [ 7 ] but she distanced herself from feminism and fantifa activists did not consider her one either, merely a fascist seeking an androgyny within patriarchy.

[ 5 ] In the mid-1990s, a Hamburg men's antifa group accepted fantifa and promoted feminist talking points within the context of antifa academic discourse, [ 3 ] : 23 as did a 1998 Berlin leftist newspaper.

[ 8 ] However, very few men showed up in solidarity at 1990s fantifa protests.

[ 3 ] Internal discord over how to handle the intersection of racism and sexism and if fantifa's primary focus should be lesbian rights threatened to fracture the movement early on but antisemitic violence in 1992 brought the movement together with a common enemy: neo-Nazism , manifesting in groups like the Free German Workers' Party . Like in the main German antifa movement, neo-Nazi antisemitic violence throughout the 1990s emboldened fantifa in response. 1990s fantifa feminist activism included anti-pornography efforts, distributing flyers to advocate for closing down sex shops and encouraging men not to view pornography, as well as protesting anti-abortion movements, supporting the anti-nuclear movement , and demonstrating on International Women's Day .

[ 3 ] : 23–27, 30 Another nationwide Germany fantifa meeting was held in Berlin in 1999, [ 3 ] : 111 but the movement lost momentum after that.

[ 2 ] In 2000, a fantifa member accused an antifa man of raping her in 1998.

[ 9 ] The resulting fallout caused a divide in men's antifa groups, either choosing to embrace feminism as a worthy cause or deny it as relevant to anti-fascism.

[ 10 ] Fantifa dwindled after that for a variety of reasons; [ 3 ] : 35 however, it saw a resurgence in the 2010s.

21st century [ edit ] A "women against fascism" sign with the Three Arrows symbol at the 2017 Women's March in New York City A fantifa flag is flown in 2018.

The general German antifa movement fractured in 2001, splintering off into competing anti-nationalist groups. Following the September 11 attacks , far-left movements increasingly turned their aggression toward other leftist movements instead of viewing the threat of neo-Nazism as important enough to actively target. Antifa groups lost their perceived relevancy, and fantifa likewise diminished into obscurity.

[ 3 ] : 111 Simultaneously, the fantifa of the 1990s could not continue in its same form very far into the 2000s due to the changing nature of feminism. The influence of Judith Butler disrupted the radical feminist politics of German feminism.

[ 3 ] : 112–3 When fantifa was revived, feminism was transitioning from its third wave to its fourth and fantifa incorporated queer feminist ideology as part of this shift.

[ 11 ] In 2016, fantifa participated in a Goethe University Frankfurt student effort to aggregate reports of abuse committed by pickup artists .

[ 12 ] By 2017, fantifa was celebrated among common German feminist protest chants with the English/German chant, "High kick, low kick, Fantifa ; Feminismus schalala !" ("feminism sha la la").

[ 13 ] After the 2018 Brazilian election of Jair Bolsonaro , the fantifa flag was flown as part of the Ele Não movement .

[ 14 ] In 2020, fantifa activists performed various destructive but nonviolent acts of vandalism such as throwing a stink bomb into a neo-Nazi tattoo parlor.

[ 15 ] As the German far-right saw increased popularity with the founding of Alternative for Germany , there was a corresponding increase in anti-feminist sentiment. Fantifa became more relevant, encouraging fantifa protest activity in response to high-profile homophobic and transphobic violence that feminists associate with misogyny.

[ 16 ] Theory and ideology [ edit ] Treatment of fascism [ edit ] Fantifa addresses fascism in its aspect as an antifeminist movement. Fascism is analyzed as a phenomenon encompassing male and female gender roles and fantifa theory discusses the roles of fascist women (as well as gender relations in the anti-fascist movement). Though some feminists are so biased by antagonism to men that they may characterize fascism as equivalent to the way all men are perceived to demonstrate domineering and aggressive traits, fantifa theorists believe the only effective way to address fascism as an antifeminist movement requires a complete dissolution of gendered conflict and oppose this perspective. Fantifa rejects the view that women are too peaceful by nature to take part in aggressive movements, both antifa itself and fascism, and it pushes for a more inclusive understanding of both to recognize the role of women within them.

[ 3 ] : 6–7 A 1989 fantifa brochure describes fascism as an institution based on patriarchal aggression. It suggests that fascism could not exist without society already embracing patriarchy and encourages antifa members to embrace the feminist movement to target a root cause of fascism.

[ 17 ] Members of Bonn -based fantifa group Fantifa Bonn identified anti-abortion activist Dr. Ferdinand Oeter as a former Nazi seemingly attempting to bolster the reproduction of white German citizens as an exercise in eugenics and to seed the culture with values that would support a return to fascism, having previously made a 1937 statement indicating the importance of keeping women in traditional gender roles as mothers and homemakers to rescue a perceived dying essential whiteness and bolster cultural Nazism.

[ 3 ] : 32 Oeter was a member of the Deutsche Liga für das Kind (German League for Children), an antifeminist group part of a movement fighting for a state subsidy for women to become stay-at-home mothers.

[ 18 ] The campaign was explicitly derived from Nazi policies, brought into the modern day by former Nazi eugenicist Friedrich Burgdörfer, and Oeter contributed the narrative that West Germany taking this route would lead to economic growth.

[ 19 ] This effort escaped notice of men's antifa movements as what they would consider an issue of concern before fantifa called attention to it.

[ 3 ] : 31 Another aspect of antifascist action central to the lives of women that fantifa engages in is the identification of fascist women to expose them to the judgment of the public.

[ 20 ] Relation to other ideologies [ edit ] Though rooted in radical feminist theory, fantifa's focus on the opposition of fascism generally keeps it from embracing conservative variants of feminism . Particularly, the persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany and neo-Nazi targeting of transgender and intersex people influences fantifa to reject gender-critical feminism . An early focus of fantifa was the movement for lesbian rights, calling attention to Nazi persecution of lesbians as relevant to antifa, and it maintains a strong element of LGBT advocacy.

[ 3 ] : 7 [ 21 ] Fantifa members may specifically use the acronym FLTI ( Frauen , meaning Women ; Lesbians, Transgender people, and Intersex people) as a single group they seek to uplift. Fantifa embraces intersectional feminism and opposes forms of feminism that reproduce oppression against marginalized groups.

[ 2 ] The fantifa movement has internal tensions. Early fantifa was marked by strains of lesbian separatism critical of involvement with men's antifa groups but this eventually gave way to cooperation between genders, if not always allowing cisgender men into individual fantifa groups.

[ 3 ] As is shared by the greater antifa movement in Germany, there is controversy over handling of the Israeli–Palestinian conflict , with some fantifa groups such as the Antifaschistischer Frauenblock Leipzig viewing support of Israel as anti-fascist while others view Israel as a fascist state whose opposition is a part of the anti-fascist cause.

[ 22 ] Though the vast majority of fantifa members are white able-bodied cis women of middle-class academic backgrounds, they try to encourage diversity in their movement.

[ 23 ] Relation to men's antifa groups [ edit ] Fantifa brings a critical look at gender relations within antifa movements. Though antifa men may intellectually oppose sexism, they may also display unconscious sexist behavior. Women can often feel marginalized and not taken seriously in male-centric antifa groups and seek relief in women's groups.

[ 2 ] Women may also be unable to receive proper education on antifa culture and practices that antifa men learn as youths in antifa groups for young people and are not forthright with knowledge themselves.

[ 24 ] Another focus of fantifa's criticism is how male antifa can harbor sexual predators as an aspect of rape culture , as was shown in a 2000 rape scandal.

[ 10 ] A provocative early 1990s demonstration asserted that antifa men who refuse to be critical of patriarchy actually support fascism by implicitly embracing male dominance and antifa women would be unable to trust them. One meaningful change fantifa brought to antifa was pushing for the widespread availability of daycare at antifa meetings, without which women with children were often unable to participate.

[ 3 ] : 22 In contrast to men's antifa movements favoring violent direct action techniques of punching neo-Nazis in direct confrontations, fantifa activists often believe this is contemptible toxic masculinity , inefficient for fixing the larger societal problem of Nazism as a phenomenon, and should not be undertaken in cases where violence can be avoided. To prepare for cases where violence is unavoidable, fantifa promotes women learning self-defense skills such as Wen-Do but emphasizes not delivering the first blow. Activists trained in Wen-Do or similar martial arts provide a line of defense to protect untrained demonstrators from neo-Nazi aggression and take part in urban patrols to protect women on the streets who may otherwise suffer sexual assault or other violence at the hands of men. Fantifa is critical of antifa men employing first strike violence on neo-Nazi women, often viewing it as a form of violence against women when not undertaken solely as self-defense.

[ 3 ] : 26 However, fantifa will engage in property destruction under the perception that it does not count as violent action if no one is harmed.

See also [ edit ] Antifa (Germany) Feminism in Germany Take Back the Night References [ edit ] ^ "10.02. Alles F_Antifa? Zur feministischen Perspektive von Antifa" .

Antifa Café Dortmund (in German). 2022-02-10 . Retrieved 2023-01-15 .

^ a b c d "Ein Plädoyer für die F*antifa" .

Antifaschistisches Info Blatt (in German). 2017-02-01 . Retrieved 2023-01-15 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r Fantifa: Feministische Perspektiven Antifascisischer Politik (in German). Münster, North Rhine-Westphalia: Edition Assemblage. 2013.

ISBN 978-3-942885-30-0 .

^ Paterson, Tony (2007-04-17).

"Germany's 'Red Zora' terrorist spared jail" .

The Independent . Archived from the original on 2007-05-15.

^ a b c d Struchtemeier, Thea A. (1990-01-28).

"Feminismus und Faschismus - verenbar oder nicht?" .

Schwarzer Faden (in German) . Retrieved 2023-01-13 .

^ Bray, Mark (2017).

Antifa: The Antifascist Handbook . Melville House Publishing. p. 57.

ISBN 9781612197043 .

^ Bogumil (2020-02-14).

"A National Socialist Feminist Writes to Hitler" .

ARPLAN . Retrieved 2023-01-13 .

^ "Faschismus" (PDF) .

K-Butt (in German). No. 17. 1998 . Retrieved 2023-01-14 .

^ "Achtung Vergewaltiger" .

Nadir.org (in German). 2000-03-01 . Retrieved 2023-01-14 .

^ a b "Tag X-Demo Leipzig Aufruf Teil II" .

Antifa Frankfurt (in German). 2022-12-17 . Retrieved 2023-01-15 .

^ "Antifa heißt (auch) Feminismus!" .

Antifaschistisches Info Blatt (in German). 2012-04-01 . Retrieved 2023-01-15 .

^ Fittkau, Ludger (2016-01-21).

"Streit um Pickup Artists" .

Deutschlandfunk (in German) . Retrieved 2023-01-19 .

^ "Schrei, Wenn Du Des Teufels Bist!" .

Internet Archive . 2017-10-07 . Retrieved 2023-01-13 .

^ Wayland, Alis (2018-10-20).

"marcha 20/10, florianópolis, #elenão" .

flickr . Retrieved 2023-01-15 .

^ "Wildcat Zirkular 1994-2002, mit Lücken" .

Internet Archive (in German). 2022-07-14 . Retrieved 2024-03-24 .

^ "„Die widerliche Vereinigung!" - Vorabenddemo" .

Indymedia (in German). 2023-10-28 . Retrieved 2023-12-04 .

^ "Fantifa – Gegen den Neonaziaufmarsch am 18. März in Leipzig" .

Indymedia (in German). 2017-03-11 . Retrieved 2023-01-14 .

^ Torstendahl, Rolfe (1999).

State Policy and Gender System in the Two German States and Sweden 1945-1989 . pp.

146– 148.

ISBN 978-9150613476 .

^ Moeller, Robert G. (1993-01-11).

Protecting Motherhood: Women and the Family in the Politics of Postwar West Germany . University of California Press. pp. 112, 122– 124.

ISBN 978-0520079038 . Retrieved 2023-01-15 .

^ "Princess Lillifee"; "Hannah Montana" (27 July 2023).

"„Wir wollten doch mal Männlichkeit abschaffen..." " .

Antifa Infoblatt (in German) . Retrieved 23 January 2025 .

^ "[Berlin] trans*geniale f_antifa goes Mad Pride" .

Indymedia (in German). 2013-07-14 . Retrieved 2023-01-14 .

^ Uni, Assaf (2006-12-27).

"The Good Men of Leipzig" .

Haaretz . Archived from the original on 2023-01-14 . Retrieved 2023-01-13 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ "Feministischer-antifaschistischer Arbeitskreis Berlin" (16 October 2017).

"Ein Plädoyer für die F*antifa" .

Antifaschistisches Infoblatt (in German) . Retrieved 24 January 2025 .

^ "Handlungsfähigkeit und Frauen*quote" .

Antifaschistiches Info Blatt (in German). 2017-02-01 . Retrieved 2023-01-15 .

v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fantifa&oldid=1303162177 " Categories : Anti-fascism in Germany Far-left politics in Germany Feminist movements and ideologies Feminism in Germany Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 11:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fantifa 2 languages Add topic

