Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nomenclature Toggle Nomenclature subsection 1.1 United Kingdom 1.2 United States 2 Types Toggle Types subsection 2.1 Liquid 2.2 Gas 3 Physics 4 Mechanisms Toggle Mechanisms subsection 4.1 Backflow prevention 5 ASME A112 Standards on Plumbing Materials and Equipment 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Tap (valve) 64 languages Ænglisc العربية अवधी বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Bikol Central Български Boarisch Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ کٲشُر Kiswahili Latina Lëtzebuergesch Magyar Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Seeltersk Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Valve controlling the release of a liquid or gas For other uses, see Tap (disambiguation) , Faucet (disambiguation) , and Spigot (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Tap" valve – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Interior water taps with aerators are commonly found in the bathroom and kitchen Exterior spigot (also known as a "shut-off valve", "hose hydrant", "hose bib", or "silcock").

Two way water tap used in restroom.

A tap (also spigot or faucet : see usage variations ) is a valve controlling the release of a fluid .

Nomenclature [ edit ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Tap is used in the United Kingdom and most of the Commonwealth for any everyday type of valve, particularly the fittings that control water supply to bathtubs and sinks .

United States [ edit ] Faucet is the most common term in the US, similar in use to "tap" in British English, e.g. "water faucet" (although the term "tap" is also used in the US).

Spigot is used by professionals in the trade (such as plumbers), and typically refers to an outdoor fixture.

[ 1 ] Silcock (and sillcock ), same as "spigot", referring to a "cock" (as in stopcock and petcock ) that penetrates a foundation sill .

Bib , bibcock , or hose bib , usually a freeze-resistant version of a "spigot".

Wall hydrant , same as "hose bib".

Tap generally refers to a keg or barrel tap , though also commonly refers to a faucet that supplies either hot or cold water and not both.

[ citation needed ] It also appears as a descriptor in " tap water " (i.e. water purified for domestic use). A single temperature tap is commonly found in a commercial or public restroom where the temperature of the water will be controlled by a separate temperature regulating valve that mixes hot and cold water. The regulating valve may be under the handwashing sink or in a separate mechanical room or service closet. These single taps are less prone to breakage from heavy use or vandalism.

[ citation needed ] Types [ edit ] Liquid [ edit ] Plastic taps are widely used in India due to low costs.

Water for baths, sinks and basins can be provided by separate hot and cold taps; this arrangement is common in older installations, particularly in public washrooms/lavatories and utility rooms/laundries. In kitchens and bathrooms, mixer taps are commonly used. In this case, hot and cold water from the two valves is mixed before reaching the outlet, allowing the water to emerge at any temperature between that of the hot and cold water supplies. Mixer taps were invented by Thomas Campbell of Saint John, New Brunswick , and patented in 1880.

[ 2 ] A North American style mixing valve uses a center handle to control both water flow and temperature (increased by clockwise rotation).  Below it is a lever controlling a diverter, sending flow to the tap when positioned to the left, the shower to the right.

For baths and showers, mixer taps frequently incorporate some sort of pressure balancing feature so that the hot/cold mixture ratio will not be affected by transient changes in the pressure of one or other of the supplies. This helps avoid scalding or uncomfortable chilling as other water loads occur (such as the flushing of a toilet).

Rather than two separate valves, mixer taps frequently use a single, more complex, valve controlled by a single handle ( single handle mixer ). The handle moves up and down to control the amount of water flow and from side to side to control the temperature of the water. Especially for baths and showers, the latest designs are thermostatic mixing valves that do this using a built-in thermostat , and can be mechanical or electronic. There are also taps with color LEDs to show the temperature of the water.

When two pipes are installed, the hot tap generally has a red indicator while the cold tap generally has a blue or green indicator. In the United States, the taps are frequently also labeled with an "H" or "C". In countries with Romance languages , the letters "C" for hot and "F" for cold are used (from French "chaud"/Italian "caldo"/Spanish "caliente" (hot) and French "froid"/Italian "freddo"/Spanish "frio" (cold)). Portuguese would use Q (for "quente", hot) and F. This can create confusion for English-speaking visitors. Mixer taps may have a red-blue stripe or arrows indicating which side will give hot and which cold.

In most countries, there is a standard arrangement of hot/cold taps. For example, in the United States and many other countries, the hot tap is on the left by building code requirements. Many installations exist where this standard has been ignored (called "crossed connections" by plumbers). Mis-assembly of some single-valve mixer taps will exchange hot and cold even if the fixture has been plumbed correctly.

In the United States, the Americans with Disabilities Act provide requirements for faucets, such as requiring less than five pounds of force to operate, and requiring that the user does not have to twist their wrist.

[ 3 ] Old metal taps were often used as decoration, as is this one at Fužine Castle, Slovenia .

Most handles in homes are fastened to the valve shafts with screws, but on many commercial and industrial applications they are fitted with a removable key called a "loose key", "water key", or " sillcock key ", which has a square peg and a square-ended key to turn off and on the water; the "loose key" can be removed to prevent vandals from turning on the water.

[ citation needed ] Before the "loose key" was invented it was common for some landlords or caretakers to take off the handle of a tap, which had teeth that would meet up with the gears on the valve shaft. This tooth and cog system is still used on most modern taps. "Loose keys" may also be found outside homes to prevent passers-by from using them.

[ citation needed ] Taps are normally connected to the water supply by means of a "swivel tap connector", which is attached to the end of the water pipe using a soldered or compression fitting, and has a large nut to screw onto the threaded "tail" of the tap, which hangs down underneath the bath, basin or sink.  A fibre washer (which expands when wet, aiding the seal) is used between the connector and the tap tail.  Tap tails are normally 1 ⁄ 2 " or 12 mm in diameter for sinks and 3 ⁄ 4 " or 19 mm for baths, although continental Europe sometimes uses a 3 ⁄ 8 " (still imperial) size.  The same connection method is used for a ballcock .

The term tap is widely used to describe the valve used to dispense draft beer from a keg , whether gravity feed or pressurized.

Gas [ edit ] Gas taps A gas tap is a specific form of ball valve used in residential, commercial, and laboratory applications for coarse control of the release of fuel gases (such as natural gas , coal gas , and syngas ). Like all ball valves its handle will parallel the gas line when open and be perpendicular when closed, making for easy visual identification of its status.

Physics [ edit ] Water and gas taps have adjustable flow: gate valves are more progressive; ball valves more coarse, typically used in on-off applications. Turning a valve knob or lever adjusts flow by varying the aperture of the control device in the valve assembly.  The result when opened in any degree is a choked flow .  Its rate is independent of the viscosity or temperature of the fluid or gas in the pipe, and depends only weakly on the supply pressure , so that flow rate is stable at a given setting.  At intermediate flow settings the pressure at the valve restriction drops nearly to zero from the Venturi effect ; in water taps, this causes the water to boil momentarily at room temperature as it passes through the restriction.  Bubbles of cool water vapor form and collapse at the restriction, causing the familiar hissing sound.  At very low flow settings, the viscosity of the water becomes important and the pressure drop (and hissing noise) vanish; at full flow settings, parasitic drag in the pipes becomes important and the water again becomes silent.

Mechanisms [ edit ] Tap mechanism The first screw-down tap mechanism was patented and manufactured by the Rotherham brass founders Guest and Chrimes in 1845.  Most older taps use a soft rubber or neoprene washer which is screwed down onto a valve seat in order to stop the flow. This is called a " globe valve " in engineering and, while it gives a leak-proof seal and good fine adjustment of flow, both the rubber washer and the valve seat are subject to wear (and for the seat, also corrosion ) over time, so that eventually no tight seal is formed in the closed position, resulting in a leaking tap. The washer can be replaced and the valve seat resurfaced (at least a few times), but globe valves are never maintenance-free.

Also, the tortuous S-shaped path the water is forced to follow offers a significant obstruction to the flow. For high pressure domestic water systems this does not matter, but for low pressure systems where flow rate is important, such as a shower fed by a storage tank, a "stop tap" or, in engineering terms, a " gate valve " is preferred.

Gate valves use a metal wedge with a circular face, usually the same diameter as the pipe, which is screwed into place perpendicularly to the flow, cutting it off.  There is little resistance to flow when the tap is fully open, but this type of tap rarely gives a perfect seal when closed.  In the UK this type of tap normally has a wheel-shaped handle rather than a crutch or capstan handle.

Cone valves or ball valves are another alternative. These are commonly found as the service shut-off valves in more-expensive water systems and usually found in gas taps (and, incidentally, the cask beer taps referred to above). They can be identified by their range of motion—only 90°—between fully open and closed. Usually, when the handle is in line with the pipe the valve is open, and when the handle is across the pipe it is closed. But it could move in either direction CW or CCW perpendicular to the pipe. S=shut and O=open. A cone valve consists of a shallowly tapering cone in a tight-fitting socket placed across the flow of the fluid. In UK English this is usually known as a taper-plug cock . A ball valve uses a spherical ball instead. In either case, a hole through the cone or ball allows the fluid to pass if it is lined up with the openings in the socket through which the fluid enters and leaves; turning the cone using the handle rotates the passage away, presenting the fluid with the unbroken surface of the cone through which it cannot pass. Valves of this type using a cylinder rather than a cone are sometimes encountered, but using a cone allows a tight fit to be made even with moderate manufacturing tolerances. The ball in ball valves rotates within plastic (usually PTFE ) seats.

Hands free infrared proximity sensors are replacing the standard valve. Thermostatically controlled electronic dual-purpose mixing or diverting valves are used within industrial applications to automatically provide liquids as required.

Foot controlled valves are installed within laboratory and healthcare/hospitals, as well as in industrial settings where extremely dirty hands operating taps might leave residues on them.

Modern taps often have aerators at the tip to limit water flow and introduce air in the form of bubbles to reduce splashing.  Without an aerator, water usually flows out of the tap in one big stream.  An aerator spreads the water flow into many small droplets. In sanitary settings such as hospitals or laboratories "laminar flow devices" are used in place of aerators. Laminar flow devices restrict flow and direct the water into a smooth stream without introducing the surrounding air which could contain hazardous bacteria or particles.

Cross section of a shower tap Modern bathroom and kitchen taps often use ceramic or plastic surfaces sliding against other spring -loaded ceramic surfaces or plastic washers. These taps exploit the uniquely low value of the coefficient of friction of 2 ceramic surfaces in contact, especially in the presence of water as a lubricant. These taps tend to require far less maintenance than traditional globe valves, and when maintenance is required the entire interior of the valve is usually replaced, often as a single pre-assembled cartridge .

Of three manufacturers in North America, Moen and American Standard use cartridges (Moen's being O-ring based, American Standard's being ceramic), while Delta uses rubber seats facing the cartridges. Each design has its advantages: Moen cartridges tend to be easiest to find, American Standard cartridges have nearly infinite lifespan in sediment-free municipal water, and Delta's rubber seats tend to be most forgiving of sediment in well water.

Backflow prevention [ edit ] Most US jurisdictions require hose spigots, hose bibs, and wall hydrants to have a vacuum breaker or backflow preventer , so that water cannot return through the spigot from the hose . This prevents contamination of the building or public water system should there be a pressure drop. In the UK, water regulations require a double check valve ; this is often incorporated within the body of the tap itself.

ASME A112 Standards on Plumbing Materials and Equipment [ edit ] The American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME) publishes several Standards on plumbing. Some are: ASME A112.6.3 – Floor and Trench Drains ASME A112.6.4 – Roof, Deck, and Balcony Drains ASME A112.18.1/CSA B125.1 – Plumbing Supply Fittings ASME A112.19.1/CSA B45.2 – Enameled Cast Iron and Enameled Steel Plumbing Fixtures ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1 – Ceramic Plumbing Fixtures See also [ edit ] Automatic faucet – Sensor-operated water outlet Drip irrigation – Irrigation system Irrigation – Agricultural artificial application of water to land Shower head – Place in which a person bathes under a spray of water Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets References [ edit ] ^ "Spigot - Definition of spigot by Merriam-Webster" .

merriam-webster.com .

^ Mario Theriault, Great Maritime Inventions 1833–1950 , Goose Lane, 2001, p. 33.

^ "Chapter 6: Lavatories and Sinks" . 2023-05-16. Archived from the original on 2023-05-16 . Retrieved 2023-11-30 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) External links [ edit ] Media related to Tap at Wikimedia Commons The dictionary definition of faucet at Wiktionary Exploded-view diagrams with nomenclature for 3 styles of faucet.

[1] v t e Plumbing Fundamental concepts Air gap (plumbing) Backflow Compatibility (chemical) Corrosion Drain (plumbing) Drinking water Fuel gas Friction loss Grade (slope) Greywater Heat trap Hydrostatic loop Leak Neutral axis Onsite sewage facility Pressure Sanitary sewer Sewer gas Sewage Sewerage Siphon Storm sewer Stormwater Surface tension Tap water Thermal expansion Thermal insulation Thermosiphon Trap (plumbing) Venturi effect Wastewater Water hammer Water supply network Water table Well Technology Brazing British Standard Pipe (BSP) Cast iron pipe Chemical drain cleaners Compression fitting Copper tubing Crimp (joining) Drain-waste-vent system Ductile iron pipe Flare fitting Garden Hose Thread (GHT) Gasket Hydronics Leak detection National pipe thread (NPT) Nominal Pipe Size (NPS) O-ring Oakum Pipe (fluid conveyance) Pipe dope Pipe support Plastic pipework Push-to-pull compression fittings Putty Sealant Sewage pumping Soldering Solvent welding Swaging Thread seal tape Threaded pipe Tube bending Water heat recycling Components Atmospheric vacuum breaker Automatic bleeding valve Automatic faucet Backflow prevention device Ball valve Bleed screw Booster pump Butterfly valve Check valve Chemigation valve Chopper pump Circulator pump Cistern Closet flange Concentric reducer Condensate pump Coupling (piping) Diaphragm valve Dielectric union Double check valve Eccentric reducer Expansion tank Faucet aerator Float switch Float valve Floor drain Flow limiter Flushing trough Flushometer Gate valve Globe valve Grease trap Grinder pump Hose coupling Manifold Needle valve Nipple (plumbing) Pinch valve Piping and plumbing fitting Plug (sanitation) Pressure regulator Pressure vacuum breaker Pressure-balanced valve Pump Radiator (heating) Reduced pressure zone device Reducer Relief valve Riser clamp Rooftop water tower Safety valve sewage pumping Street elbow Submersible pump Tap (valve) Thermostatic mixing valve Trench drain Vacuum breaker Vacuum ejector Valve Water tank Zone valve Plumbing fixtures Accessible bathtub Bathtub Bidet Dehumidifier Dishwasher Drinking fountain Electric water boiler Evaporative cooler Flush toilet Garbage disposal unit Hot water storage tank Humidifier Icemaker Instant hot water dispenser Laundry tub Shower water recycling shower Sink Storage water heater Sump pump Tankless water heating Urinal Washing machine Washlet Water dispenser Water filter Water heating Water softening Specialized tools Basin wrench Blowtorch Borescope Core drill Drain cleaner Driving cap Flare-nut wrench Pipecutter Pipe wrench Plumber's snake Plumber wrench Plunger Strap wrench Tap and die Measurement and control Control valve Flow sensor Pressure sensor Water detector Water metering Professions, trades, and services Hydronic balancing Hydrostatic testing Leak detection Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing Pipe marking Pipefitter Pipelayer Plumber Industry organizations and standards International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO) NSF International Plumbing & Drainage Institute (PDI) Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) World Plumbing Council (WPC) Health and safety Plumbing code Scalding Waterborne disease See also Fire sprinkler system Piping Template:HVAC Template:Public health Template:Sewerage Template:Human waste elimination Template:Wastewater Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tap_(valve)&oldid=1290034173 " Categories : Plumbing Valves Irrigation Gardening aids Gardening tools Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2010 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2012 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 11:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tap (valve) 64 languages Add topic

