Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Operation 3 History 4 Modern sleds Toggle Modern sleds subsection 4.1 Transport 4.2 Recreation 4.3 Competition 4.4 Other 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Sled 71 languages Адыгэбзэ Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Banjar Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kiswahili Ladin Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Мокшень Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Land vehicle used for sliding across snow or ice This article is about the vehicle. For other uses, see SLED (disambiguation) .

"Sledge" and "Sleigh" redirect here. For other uses, see Sledge (disambiguation) and Sleigh (disambiguation) .

Two people in a horse-drawn cutter-style sleigh A loaded dogsled Children with their sled, 1903 Boy lying on a Flexible Flyer A sled , skid , sledge , or sleigh is a land vehicle that slides across a surface, usually of ice or snow . It is built with either a smooth underside or a separate body supported by two or more smooth, relatively narrow, longitudinal runners similar in principle to skis . This reduces the amount of friction , which helps to carry heavy loads.

Some designs are used to transport passengers or cargo across relatively level ground. Others are designed to go downhill for recreation, particularly by children, or competition (compare cross-country skiing with its downhill cousin ). Shades of meaning differentiating the three terms often reflect regional variations depending on historical uses and prevailing climate.

In British English , sledge is the general term, and more common than sled .

[ 1 ] Toboggan is sometimes used synonymously with sledge but more often to refer to a particular type of sledge without runners.

[ 2 ] Sleigh refers to a moderate to large-sized, usually open-topped vehicle to carry passengers or goods, and typically drawn by horses, dogs, or reindeer.

[ 3 ] In American usage sled remains the general term [ citation needed ] but often implies a smaller device, often for recreational use.

Sledge implies a heavier sled used for moving freight or massive objects.

Sleigh refers more specifically than in Britain to a vehicle which is essentially a cold-season alternative to a carriage or wagon and has seating for passengers; what can be called a dog-sleigh in Britain is known only as a dog-sled in North America.

In Australia , where there is limited snow, sleigh and sledge are given equal preference in local parlance.

[ 4 ] Etymology [ edit ] The word sled comes from Middle English sledde , which itself has the origins in Middle Dutch word slēde , meaning 'sliding' or 'slider'. The same word shares common ancestry with both sleigh and sledge .

[ 5 ] The word sleigh , on the other hand, is an anglicized form of the modern Dutch word slee and was introduced to the English language by Dutch immigrants to North America.

[ 6 ] Operation [ edit ] Sleds are especially useful in winter but can also be drawn over wet fields, muddy roads, and even hard ground if one helps them along by greasing the blades ("grease the skids") with oil or alternatively wetting them with water. For an explanation of why sleds and other objects glide with various degrees of friction ranging from very little to fairly little friction on ice, icy snow, wet snow, and dry snow, see the relevant sections in the articles on ice and ice skating . The traditional explanation of the pressure of sleds on the snow or ice producing a thin film of water and this enabling sleds to move on ice with little friction is insufficient.

[ 7 ] Various types of sleds are pulled by animals such as reindeer , horses, mules , oxen , or dogs.

History [ edit ] Transporting statue of Djehutihotep Traveling by sleigh, Muscovy , mid-16th century, according to Sigismund von Herberstein A carabao sled ( kangga ) in the Philippines (c. 1899) Evidence of the use of sledges or skids for transport has been dated to before 10,000 BCE in North America, [ 8 ] by 3,200 BCE in Sumer , [ 9 ] and in Ancient Egypt .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Sleds and sledges were found in the Oseberg "Viking" ship excavation.  The sledge was also highly prized, because – unlike wheeled vehicles – it was exempt from tolls.

Until the late 19th century, a closed winter sled, or vozok , provided a high-speed means of transport through the snow-covered plains of European Russia and Siberia. It was a means of transport preferred by royals, bishops, and boyars of Muscovy . Several royal vozoks of historical importance have been preserved in the Kremlin Armoury .

Man-hauled sledges were the traditional means of transport on British exploring expeditions to the Arctic and Antarctic regions in the 19th and early 20th centuries, championed for example by Captain Scott .

Dog sleds were used by most others, such as Roald Amundsen .

In the Philippines , a traditional carabao -drawn sled is known as the kangga . It is still used in place of wheeled carts over rough or muddy terrain, while also having the advantage of traveling over rice paddy dikes without destroying them.

[ 12 ] Modern sleds [ edit ] Transport [ edit ] An enormous cargo sledge being maneuvered by a 10K-AT "All Terrain" forklift at McMurdo Station in Antarctica Some of these originally used draft animals but are now more likely to be pulled by an engine (snowmobile or tractor). Some use human power.

The word "motor sled" [ 13 ] is colloquial term for a snowmobile The Inuit qamutiik is uniquely adapted for travel on the sea ice .

[ 14 ] The pulk (or ahkio ) is a traditional sled of the Lapland region, used for expeditions, mountain rescue , and cold weather military units to haul equipment, supplies, and passengers.

Rescue toboggan , developed from the pulk Stone boat , a farm vehicle used for moving heavy objects such as stones or haybales; can be towed by a tractor.

Today some people use kites to tow exploration sleds.

Recreation [ edit ] Adult and child walk uphill, each pulling a small plastic toboggan Sled at Botswana National Museum There are several types of recreational sleds designed for sliding down snowy hills ( sledding ): [ 15 ] Toboggan , an elongated sled without runners, usually made from wood or plastic, but sometimes made from sheet metal .

[ 16 ] Saucer, a round sled curved like a saucer (see also flying saucer ), also without runners and usually made out of plastic or metal Flexible Flyer , a steerable wooden sled with thin metal runners [ 17 ] Kicksled or spark, a human-powered sled Inflatable sled or tube , a plastic membrane filled with air to make a very lightweight sled, like an inner tube Foam slider, a flat piece of durable foam with handles and a smooth underside Backcountry sled, a deep, steerable plastic sled to kneel on with pads and a seat belt Airboard , a snow bodyboard , i.e. an inflatable single-person sled [ 18 ] Competition [ edit ] A few types of sleds are used only for a specific sport: Bobsled (British: bobsleigh), an aerodynamic composite-bodied vehicle on lightweight runners Luge and the skeleton , tiny one or two-person sleds with runners [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Other [ edit ] Horses pulling a "stone boat" in a horse pulling competition A cutter is an open, lightweight, horse-drawn sleigh that usually holds no more than two people. It was developed in the United States around 1800. Historic styles were often quite decorative.

[ 21 ] About 1920, cutter racing began in the American Rocky Mountain west, first using a simple homemade chariot on skis, later replaced by a bicycle-wheeled chariot that was also pulled over snow.

[ 22 ] Troika , a traditional Russian vehicle drawn by three horses, usually a sled, but it may also be a wheeled carriage.

A sled or "stone boat", seen in truck and tractor pulling and horse pulling . A flat sled able to carry increasing amounts of weight to determine the maximum load the animal or machine can pull.

[ 23 ] See also [ edit ] Snowboard Luge Travois , a frame used to drag loads over land, i.e. another horse-drawn transport method without wheels References [ edit ] ^ "Collins 2012 digital edition" .

^ "Collins 2012 digital edition" .

^ "Collins 2012 digital edition" .

^ The Macquarie Dictionary , 2nd ed . North Ryde: Macquarie Library. 1991.

^ "thefreedictionary entry on "sled" " . Farlex.

^ "thefreedictionary entry on "sleigh" " .

^ "The surprising science of why ice is so slippery" ^ Gramly, Richard Michael (2024) Sled Guide to Palaeolithic Artifacts and Features of the Americas Rowman & Littlefield ISBN 9781538186961 p95,19 ^ Scarre, Chris (1993) Smithsonian Timelines of the Ancient World Dorling Kindersley p99 ^ McCoy, Terrence (2 May 2014).

"The Surprisingly Simple Way Egyptians Moved Massive Pyramid Stones Without Modern Technology" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 1 February 2019 .

^ Sledge from mortuary complex of Senwosret I Metropolitan Museum of Art ^ Zabilka, Gladys (1963).

Customs and Culture of the Philippines . C. E. Tuttle Company. p. 37.

OL 33515960M .

^ sledspace.com (2008).

"Sledspace.com – Snowmobile Community" . Retrieved 18 April 2011 .

^ "Snowracer" (in German). schlitten-bob.de . Retrieved 19 May 2013 .

^ Parigon Sleds ^ "Hörnerschlitten" (in German). schlitten-bob.de . Retrieved 19 May 2013 .

^ "Snow Racer von Stiga finden Sie in der Rubrik Stiga Schlitten!" (in German). schlitten-bob.de . Retrieved 19 May 2013 .

^ "Airboards - from ski slopes to backcountry!" . Retrieved 17 February 2018 .

^ "Herzlich Willkommen !" (in German). schlittendiscount.de . Retrieved 19 May 2013 .

^ "Hörnerschlitten" (in German). hoernerrodel.de . Retrieved 19 May 2013 .

^ "Cutter sleigh" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 20 August 2019 .

^ "Starting traditions: Cutter racing beings in Thayne" .

Wyoming Livestock Roundup . Retrieved 20 August 2019 .

^ "The Sled" . Lake Country Antique Tractor Association. Archived from the original on 28 March 2012 . Retrieved 27 July 2011 .

External links [ edit ] Sled at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons v t e Human-powered transport Land Pedal power 29er Bicycle ( outline ) Bicycle trailer BMX bike Boneshaker Cargo bike City bicycle Cold-weather biking Cruiser bicycle Cycle rickshaw Cyclo-cross bicycle Downhill bike Enduro Fatbike Flat bar road bike Folding bicycle Go-kart Glossary of cycling Hybrid bicycle Motorized bicycle Mountain bike Mountain biking 27.5 Downhill Singletrack Party bike Penny-farthing Porteur bicycle Prone bicycle Quadracycle Recumbent bicycle Road bicycle Roadster Safety bicycle Sociable Small-wheel bicycle Tandem bicycle Touring bicycle Track bicycle Trailer bike Tricycle Unicycle Utility bicycle Velocar Velocipede Velomobile Wheelie bike Cold-weather biking ( ice cycle ) Electric motor assist Electric bicycle Pedelec Motorized bicycle Motorized scooter Treadle power Treadle bicycle Other foot power Balance bike Dandy horse Kick scooter Kickbike Kicksled Brakeboard Freeboard Freeskates Longboard Skateboard Hand power Handcar Handcycle Hobcart Invalid carriage Wheelchair Row action Rowing cycle Pushed/pulled Baby transport Baggage cart Bath chair Cart Flatbed trolley Hand truck Pulled rickshaw Shopping cart Shopping caddy Stairclimber Stretcher Toy wagon Wheelbarrow Sled Carried Litter/sedan chair Scoop stretcher Weight shifting Trikke Pogo stick Caster board Snakeboard Gravity Gravity racer Billy cart Street luge Snowboard Toboggan Summer toboggan Gravity biking Water Hand power Canoe Kayak Paddleboarding Rowing (fixed seat) Punt Hand and foot power Rowing (sliding seat) Rowing (sliding rigger) Foot power Hydrocycle Hydrofoil Pedalo Amphibious Amphibious cycle Air Aircraft list Helicopter Ornithopter Non-vehicular transport Foot power Inline skating skates Roller skating skates Running Stair climbing Walking Stair climbing Snow and ice Crampons Ice skates Ski Alpine touring skis Cross-country skis Telemark skis Snowshoes Related topics Animal-powered transport Cycling ( outline ) Bicycle- and human-powered vehicle museums Human power Zero-emissions vehicle v t e Horse-drawn vehicles and carriages Four-wheeled carriages and coaches Araba Barouche Berlin Brake Britzka Brougham Buckboard Buggy Calash Cariole Carryall Charabanc ‡ Clarence Coach ‡ Concord coach ‡ Coupé Diligence ‡ Drag Droshky Fiacre ‡ Fly Four-in-hand Hackney coach ‡ Hearse Herdic Horsebus/Omnibus ‡ Horsecar ‡ Jingle Karozzin Kibitka Landau Long car Mail coach ‡ Marathon carriage Mylord Park Drag Phaeton Post chaise Road Coach Rockaway Runabout (carriage) Sociable Spider phaeton Stagecoach ‡ Stage wagon ‡ State coach Gilded Surrey Tarantass Triga Victoria Vis-à-vis Wagonette Two-wheeled carriages and carts Bandy Cabriolet ‡ Cape cart Cart Chaise Chariot Biga Triga Quadriga Chasse-marée Cidomo Croydon Curricle Dogcart Dokar Ekka Float Gari Gharry ‡ Gig Governess cart Hansom cab ‡ Jaunting car Kalesa Limbers and caissons Ralli car Red River cart Shay Sicilian cart Sjees Sprung cart Stanhope Sulky Tanga Tilbury Trap Tumbrel Two-wheeled calash Un-sprung cart Volante Whiskey Non-wheeled Sled/sleigh Travois Troika Vozok Wagons & freight Chuckwagon Conestoga wagon Covered wagon Float Lorry Telega Trolley Trolley and lift van Vardo Wagon Vehicle construction Coachbuilder Front axle assembly Hammercloth Shaft bow Swingletree/singletree Undercarriage Wainwright Wheelwright Whippletree/double tree Harness Bearing rein Blinders Breast collar Breeching Bridle Collar Crupper Horse brass Lines Saddle Terret Trace Related Coachman Footman Postilion Livery Driving Draft horse Driving club Tandem Museums and collections Equestrian use of roadways Categories Carriages Carts Coachbuilders Carriage museums Horse driving Images ‡ indicates vehicles that were used historically in public transport services Authority control databases International FAST 2 National Germany United States 2 Japan Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sled&oldid=1305209995 " Categories : Animal-powered vehicles Human-powered vehicles Racing vehicles Sledding Sliding vehicles Snow Sports equipment Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 Articles containing Middle English (1100-1500)-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing Filipino-language text Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 18:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sled 71 languages Add topic

