Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Background 1.2 Life 1.3 Traditional hagiography 1.4 Other Nāgārjunas 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Mūlamadhyamakakārikā 2.2 Major attributed works 2.3 Other attributed works 2.4 Attributions which are likely to be false 3 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 3.1 Sunyata 3.2 Two truths 3.3 Causality 3.4 Relativity 4 Comparative philosophy Toggle Comparative philosophy subsection 4.1 Hinduism 4.2 Mahāyāna Buddhism 4.3 Pyrrhonism and its influence 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Citations 6.2 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Nagarjuna 104 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Gaeilge Galego 贛語 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kriyòl gwiyannen Ladin Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs La .lojban.

Lombard Magyar Madhurâ Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Tyap Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 3rd-century Indian Buddhist philosopher For other uses, see Nagarjuna (disambiguation) .

Nāgārjuna नागार्जुन Painting of Nāgārjuna (18th century) Born c. 150 CE South India [ 1 ] Died c. 250 CE India Occupation(s) Buddhist teacher, monk and philosopher Philosophical work Era Ancient philosophy Region Eastern philosophy Indian philosophy School Mahāyāna Buddhism Madhyamaka Pure Land Buddhism Tiantai Buddhism Notable works Mūlamadhyamakakārikā Notable ideas Madhyamaka Śūnyatā Two truths doctrine Nāgārjuna ( Sanskrit : नागार्जुन, Nāgārjuna ; c.

150 – c.

250 CE ) was an Indian monk and Mahāyāna Buddhist philosopher of the Madhyamaka (Centrism, Middle Way) school.

[ 2 ] He is widely considered one of the most important Buddhist philosophers.

[ 3 ] Nāgārjuna is widely considered to be the founder of the Madhyamaka school of Buddhist philosophy and a defender of the Mahāyāna movement.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] His Mūlamadhyamakakārikā ( Root Verses on Madhyamaka , MMK) is the most important text on the Madhyamaka philosophy of emptiness . The MMK inspired a large number of commentaries in Sanskrit, Chinese, Tibetan, Korean and Japanese and continues to be studied today.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] A map of the Satavahana Kingdom, showing the location of Amaravathi (where Nāgārjuna may have lived and worked according to Walser) and Vidarbha (the birthplace of Nāgārjuna according to Kumārajīva) Background [ edit ] India in the first and second centuries CE was politically divided into various states, including the Kushan Empire and the Satavahana Kingdom . At this point in Buddhist history , the Buddhist community was already divided into various Buddhist schools and had spread throughout India.

At this time, there was already a small and nascent Mahāyāna movement. Mahāyāna ideas were held by a minority of Buddhists in India at the time. As Joseph Walser writes, "Mahāyāna before the fifth century was largely invisible and probably existed only as a minority and largely unrecognized movement within the fold of nikāya Buddhism." [ 6 ] By the second century, early Mahāyāna Sūtras such as the Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā were already circulating among certain Mahāyāna circles.

[ 7 ] Life [ edit ] Very little is reliably known of the life of Nāgārjuna and modern historians do not agree on a specific date (1st to 3rd century CE) or place (multiple places in India suggested) for him.

[ 8 ] The earliest surviving accounts were written in Chinese and Tibetan centuries after his death and are mostly hagiographical accounts that are historically unverifiable.

[ 8 ] Some scholars such as Joseph Walser argue that Nāgārjuna was an advisor to a king of the Sātavāhana dynasty which ruled the Deccan Plateau in the second century.

[ 9 ] [ 1 ] This is supported by most of the traditional hagiographical sources as well.

[ 10 ] Archaeological evidence at Amarāvatī indicates that if this is true, the king may have been Yajña Śrī Śātakarṇi (c. second half of the 2nd century). On the basis of this association, Nāgārjuna is conventionally placed at around 150–250 CE.

[ 9 ] [ 1 ] A model of the Amaravati Stupa Walser thinks that it is most likely that when Nāgārjuna wrote the Ratnavali , he lived in a mixed monastery (with Mahāyānists and non-Mahāyānists) in which Mahāyānists were the minority. The most likely sectarian affiliation of the monastery according to Walser was Purvasailya, Aparasailya, or Caityaka (which were Mahāsāṃghika sub-schools).

[ 11 ] He also argues that "it is plausible that he wrote the Ratnavali within a thirty-year period at the end of the second century in the Andhra region around Dhanyakataka (modern-day Amaravati )." [ 9 ] Traditional hagiography [ edit ] According to Walser, "the earliest extant legends about Nāgārjuna are compiled into Kumārajīva ’s biography of Nāgārjuna, which he translated into Chinese in about 405 CE." [ 10 ] According to this biography, Nāgārjuna was born into a Brahmin family [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] and later became a Buddhist. The traditional religious hagiographies place Nāgārjuna in various regions of India (Kumārajīva and Candrakirti place him in Vidarbha region of South India, [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Xuanzang in south Kosala ) [ 10 ] Traditional religious hagiographies credit Nāgārjuna with being associated with the teaching of the Prajñāpāramitā sūtras as well as with having revealed these scriptures to the world after they had remained hidden for some time. The sources differ on where this happened and how Nāgārjuna retrieved the sutras. Some sources say he retrieved the sutras from the land of the nāgas .

[ 18 ] A Tibetan depiction of Nagarjuna; the snakes are depicted as protectors around Nagarjuna's head and the nagas rising out of the water are offering Buddhist sutras.

Nicholas Roerich "Nagarjuna Conqueror of the Serpent" (1925) Nāgārjuna himself is often depicted in composite form comprising human and nāga characteristics. Nāgas are snake-like supernatural beings of great magical power that feature in Hindu , Buddhist and Jain mythology .

[ 19 ] Nāgas are found throughout Indian religious culture, and typically signify intelligent serpents or dragons that are responsible for rain, lakes, and other bodies of water. In Buddhism, a naga can be a symbol of a realised arhat or wise person.

[ 20 ] Traditional sources also claim that Nāgārjuna practised ayurvedic alchemy ( rasayāna ). Kumārajīva's biography for example, has Nāgārjuna making an elixir of invisibility, and Buton Rinchen Drub , Taranatha and Xuanzang all state that he could turn rocks into gold.

[ 21 ] Tibetan hagiographies also state that Nāgārjuna studied at Nālanda University. However, according to Walser, this university was not a strong monastic center until about 425. Also, as Walser notes, "Xuanzang and Yijing both spent considerable time at Nālanda and studied Nāgārjuna’s texts there. It is strange that they would have spent so much time there and yet chose not to report any local tales of a man whose works played such an important part in the curriculum." [ 22 ] Some sources ( Buton Rinchen Drub and the other Tibetan historians) claim that in his later years, Nāgārjuna lived on the mountain of Śrīparvata near the city that would later be called Nāgārjunakoṇḍa ("Hill of Nāgārjuna").

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] The ruins of Nāgārjunakoṇḍa are located in Guntur district , Andhra Pradesh . The Caitika and Bahuśrutīya nikāyas are known to have had monasteries in Nāgārjunakoṇḍa.

[ 23 ] The archaeological finds at Nāgārjunakoṇḍa have not resulted in any evidence that the site was associated with Nagarjuna. The name "Nāgārjunakoṇḍa" dates from the medieval period, and the 3rd-4th century inscriptions found at the site make it clear that it was known as "Vijayapuri" in the ancient period.

[ 25 ] Other Nāgārjunas [ edit ] There are a multitude of texts attributed to "Nāgārjuna", many of these texts date from much later periods. This has caused much confusion for the traditional Buddhist biographers and doxographers . Modern scholars are divided on how to classify these later texts and how many later writers called "Nāgārjuna" existed (the name remains popular today in Andhra Pradesh).

[ 26 ] Some scholars have posited that there was a separate Aryuvedic writer called Nāgārjuna who wrote numerous treatises on Rasayana . Also, there is a later Tantric Buddhist author by the same name who may have been a scholar at Nālandā University and wrote on Buddhist tantra .

[ 27 ] [ 26 ] According to Donald S. Lopez Jr.

, he originally belonged to a Brahmin family from eastern India and later became Buddhist.

[ 28 ] There is also a Jain figure of the same name who was said to have travelled to the Himalayas. Walser thinks that it is possible that stories related to this figure influenced Buddhist legends as well.

[ 26 ] Works [ edit ] Part of a series on Buddhist philosophy Traditions Vibhajyavāda Theravāda Vaibhāṣika Sautrāntika Pudgalavada Prajñaptivāda Lokottaravāda Mahayana Madhyamaka Yogachara Pramāṇavāda Vajrayana Tiāntāi Huayan Zen/Chán Dzogchen Themes Buddhist logico-epistemology Buddhist ethics Buddhism and psychology Buddhist vegetarianism Abhidharma Ahimsa Not-self Interdependent origination Emptiness Karma Middle Way Two truths doctrine Dharma theory Svabhava Buddhist atomism Suffering Buddha-nature Nirvana Buddhist modernism Pre-modern philosophers Moggaliputta-Tissa Katyāyāniputra Nagasena Nagarjuna Aryadeva Harivarman Vasubandhu Saṃghabhadra Asanga Buddhaghosa Buddhadatta Dhammapāla Dignāga Dharmakirti Buddhapālita Bhāviveka Dharmapala of Nalanda Chandrakirti Shantideva Sengzhao Jizang Xuanzang Zhiyi Fazang Guifeng Zongmi Wonhyo Jinul Kūkai Dōgen Jñānagarbha Śāntarakṣita Haribhadra Atiśa Jñanasrimitra Ratnakīrti Ratnākaraśānti Abhayakaragupta Sakya Pandita Rongzom Acariya Anuruddha Dolpopa Je Tsongkhapa Longchenpa Gorampa Sakya Chokden Mikyö Dorje Modern philosophers Anagarika Dharmapala Ledi Sayadaw B. R. Ambedkar Taixu Yin Shun Kitaro Nishida Keiji Nishitani Hajime Tanabe Masao Abe D. T. Suzuki Mahasi Sayadaw K. N. Jayatilleke David Kalupahana Ñāṇananda Buddhadasa P. A. Payutto Thích Nhất Hạnh Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo Jamgon Kongtrul Ju Mipham Gendün Chöphel 14th Dalai Lama Religion portal Philosophy portal v t e There exist a number of influential texts attributed to Nāgārjuna; however, as there are many pseudepigrapha attributed to him, lively controversy exists over which are his authentic works.

Mūlamadhyamakakārikā [ edit ] Main article: Mūlamadhyamakakārikā The Mūlamadhyamakakārikā is Nāgārjuna's best-known work. It is "not only a grand commentary on the Buddha's discourse to Kaccayana , [ 29 ] the only discourse cited by name, but also a detailed and careful analysis of most of the important discourses included in the Nikayas and the Agamas , especially those of the Atthakavagga of the Sutta-nipata .

[ 30 ] Utilizing the Buddha's theory of "dependent arising" ( pratitya-samutpada ) , Nagarjuna demonstrated the futility of [...] metaphysical speculations. His method of dealing with such metaphysics is referred to as "middle way" ( madhyama pratipad ). It is the middle way that avoided the substantialism of the Sarvastivadins as well as the nominalism of the Sautrantikas .

[ 31 ] In the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā , "[A]ll experienced phenomena are empty ( sunya ) . This did not mean that they are not experienced and, therefore, non-existent; only that they are devoid of a permanent and eternal substance ( svabhava ) because, like a dream, they are mere projections of human consciousness. Since these imaginary fictions are experienced, they are not mere names ( prajnapti ) ." [ 31 ] Major attributed works [ edit ] According to David Seyfort Ruegg , the Madhyamakasastrastuti attributed to Candrakirti ( c.

600 – c. 650) refers to eight texts by Nagarjuna: the (Madhyamaka)karikas , the Yuktisastika , the Sunyatasaptati , the Vigrahavyavartani , the Vidala (i.e.

Vaidalyasutra/Vaidalyaprakarana ), the Ratnavali , the Sutrasamuccaya , and Samstutis (Hymns). This list covers not only much less than the grand total of works ascribed to Nagarjuna in the Chinese and Tibetan collections, but it does not even include all such works that Candrakirti has himself cited in his writings.

[ 32 ] According to one view, that of Christian Lindtner, the works definitely written by Nāgārjuna are: [ 33 ] Mūlamadhyamaka-kārikā (Fundamental Verses of the Middle Way, MMK), available in three Sanskrit manuscripts and numerous translations.

[ 34 ] Śūnyatāsaptati (Seventy Verses on Emptiness), accompanied by a prose commentary ascribed to Nagarjuna himself.

Vigrahavyāvartanī (The End of Disputes).

Vaidalyaprakaraṇa (Pulverizing the Categories), a prose work critiquing the categories used by Indian Nyaya philosophy .

Vyavahārasiddhi (Proof of Convention).

Yuktiṣāṣṭika (Sixty Verses on Reasoning).

Catuḥstava (Four Hymns): Lokātīta-stava (Hymn to transcendence), Niraupamya-stava (to the Peerless), Acintya-stava (to the Inconceivable), and Paramārtha-stava (to Ultimate Truth).

[ 35 ] Ratnāvalī (Precious Garland), subtitled ( rajaparikatha ), a discourse addressed to an Indian king (possibly a Satavahana monarch).

[ 36 ] Pratītyasamutpādahṝdayakārika (Verses on the heart of Dependent Arising ), along with a short commentary ( Vyākhyāna ).

Sūtrasamuccaya , an anthology of various sutra passages.

Bodhicittavivaraṇa (Exposition of the awakening mind ).

Suhṛllekha (Letter to a Good Friend).

Bodhisaṃbhāraśāstra (Requisites of awakening ), a work the path of the Bodhisattva and paramitas , it is quoted by Candrakirti in his commentary on Aryadeva 's four hundred. Now only extant in Chinese translation ( Taisho 1660).

[ 37 ] Other scholars have challenged and argued against some of the above works being Nagarjuna's. David F. Burton notes that Christian Lindtner is "rather liberal" with his list of works and that other scholars have called some of these into question. He notes how Paul Williams argued convincingly that the Bodhicittavivaraṇa must be a later text.

[ 38 ] In his study, Burton relies on the texts that he considers "least controversial": Mūlamadhyamaka-kārikā, Vigrahavyāvartanī, Śūnyatāsaptati, Yuktiṣāṣṭika , Catuḥstava , Vaidalyaprakaraṇa and Ratnāvalī .

[ 38 ] Similarly, Jan Westerhoff notes how there is uncertainty about the attribution of Nagarjuna's works (and about his life in general). He relies on six works: MMK, Vigrahavyāvartanī, Śūnyatāsaptati, Yuktiṣāṣṭika , Vaidalyaprakaraṇa and Ratnāvalī, all of which "expound a single, coherent philosophical system," and are attributed to Nagarjuna by a variety of Indian and Tibetan sources.

[ 39 ] The Tibetan historian Buston considers the first six to be the main treatises of Nāgārjuna (this is called the "yukti corpus", rigs chogs ), while according to Tāranātha only the first five are the works of Nāgārjuna. TRV Murti considers Ratnāvalī , Pratītyasamutpādahṝdaya and Sūtrasamuccaya to be works of Nāgārjuna as the first two are quoted profusely by Chandrakirti and the third by Shantideva .

[ 40 ] Other attributed works [ edit ] In addition to works mentioned above, numerous other works are attributed to Nāgārjuna, many of which are dubious attributions and later works. There is an ongoing, lively controversy over which of those works are authentic. Christian Lindtner divides the various attributed works as "1) correctly attributed, 2) wrongly attributed to him, and 3) those which may or may not be genuine." [ 41 ] Lindtner further divides the third category of dubious or questionable texts into those which are "perhaps authentic" and those who are unlikely to be authentic.

Those which he sees as perhaps being authentic include: [ 42 ] Mahāyānavimsika , it is cited as Nagarjuna's work in the Tattvasamgraha as well as by Atisha , Lindtner sees the style and content as compatible with the yukti corpus. Survives in Sanskrit.

Bodhicittotpādavidhi, a short text that describes the sevenfold write for a bodhisattva, Dvadasakāranayastotra, a madhyamaka text only extant in Tibetan, (Madhyamaka-)Bhavasamkrānti, a verse from this is attributed to Nagarjuna by Bhavaviveka .

Nirālamba-stava, Sālistambakārikā, only exists in Tibetan, it is a versification of the Śālistamba Sūtra Stutytitastava, only exists in Tibetan Danaparikatha, only exists in Tibetan, a praise of giving (dana) Cittavajrastava, Mulasarvāstivadisrāmanerakārikā, 50 karikas on the Vinaya of the Mulasarvastivadins Dasabhumikavibhāsā , only exists in Chinese, a commentary on the Dashabhumikasutra Lokapariksā, Yogasataka, a medical text Prajñadanda Rasavaisesikasutra, a rasayana (biochemical) text Bhāvanākrama, contains various verses similar to the Lankavatara , it is cited in the Tattvasamgraha as by Nagarjuna Rasratnakar deals with the formation of mercury compounds.

Ruegg notes various works of uncertain authorship which have been attributed to Nagarjuna, including the Dharmadhatustava (Hymn to the Dharmadhatu , which shows later influences), Mahayanavimsika, Salistambakarikas, the Bhavasamkranti, and the Dasabhumtkavibhāsā.

[ 43 ] Furthermore, Ruegg writes that "three collections of stanzas on the virtues of intelligence and moral conduct ascribed to Nagarjuna are extant in Tibetan translation": Prajñasatakaprakarana , Nitisastra-Jantuposanabindu and Niti-sastra-Prajñadanda.

[ 44 ] Attributions which are likely to be false [ edit ] Meanwhile, those texts that Lindtner considers as questionable and likely inauthentic are: Aksarasataka, Akutobhaya (Mulamadhyamakavrtti), Aryabhattaraka-Manjusriparamarthastuti, Kayatrayastotra, Narakoddharastava, Niruttarastava, Vandanastava, Dharmasamgraha, Dharmadhatugarbhavivarana, Ekaslokasastra, Isvarakartrtvanirakrtih (A refutation of God/Isvara), Sattvaradhanastava, Upayahrdaya, Astadasasunyatasastra, Dharmadhatustava, Yogaratnamala.

[ 45 ] Meanwhile, Lindtner's list of outright wrong attributions is: Mahāprajñāpāramitopadeśa (Dà zhìdù lùn), Abudhabodhakaprakarana , Guhyasamajatantratika , Dvadasadvaraka , Prajñaparamitastotra, and Svabhavatrayapravesasiddhi.

[ 46 ] Notably, the Dà zhìdù lùn ( Taisho 1509, "Commentary on the great prajñaparamita ") which has been influential in Chinese Buddhism, has been questioned as a genuine work of Nāgārjuna by various scholars including Lamotte . This work is also only attested in a Chinese translation by Kumārajīva and is unknown in the Tibetan and Indian traditions.

[ 47 ] Other works are extant only in Chinese, one of these is the Shih-erh-men-lun or 'Twelve-topic treatise' (* Dvadasanikaya or * Dvadasamukha-sastra ); one of the three basic treatises of the Sanlun school ( East Asian Madhyamaka ).

[ 48 ] Several works considered important in esoteric Buddhism are attributed to Nāgārjuna and his disciples by traditional historians like Tāranātha from 17th century Tibet. These historians try to account for chronological difficulties with various theories, such as seeing later writings as mystical revelations. For a useful summary of this tradition, see Wedemeyer 2007. Lindtner sees the author of some of these tantric works as being a tantric Nagarjuna who lives much later, sometimes called "Nagarjuna II".

[ 49 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Golden statue of Nāgārjuna at Kagyu Samye Ling Monastery , Scotland Sunyata [ edit ] Main article: Śūnyatā Nāgārjuna's major thematic focus is the concept of śūnyatā (translated into English as "emptiness") which brings together other key Buddhist doctrines, particularly anātman "not-self" and pratītyasamutpāda "dependent origination", to refute the metaphysics of some of his contemporaries. For Nāgārjuna, as for the Buddha in the early texts, it is not merely sentient beings that are "selfless" or non-substantial; all phenomena (dhammas) are without any svabhāva , literally "own-being", "self-nature", or "inherent existence" and thus without any underlying essence. They are empty of being independently existent; thus the heterodox theories of svabhāva circulating at the time were refuted on the basis of the doctrines of early Buddhism. This is so because all things arise always dependently: not by their own power, but by depending on conditions leading to their becoming —coming into existence —, as opposed to being .

Nāgārjuna means by real any entity which has a nature of its own (svabhāva), which is not produced by causes (akrtaka), which is not dependent on anything else (paratra nirapeksha).

[ 50 ] Chapter 24 verse 14 of the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā provides one of Nāgārjuna's most famous quotations on emptiness and co-arising: [ 51 ] sarvaṃ ca yujyate tasya śūnyatā yasya yujyate sarvaṃ na yujyate tasya śūnyaṃ yasya na yujyate All is possible when emptiness is possible.

Nothing is possible when emptiness is impossible.

As part of his analysis of the emptiness of phenomena in the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā , Nāgārjuna critiques svabhāva in several different concepts. He discusses the problems of positing any sort of inherent essence to causation, movement, change and personal identity. Nāgārjuna makes use of the Indian logical tool of the tetralemma to attack any essentialist conceptions. Nāgārjuna's logical analysis is based on four basic propositions: All things (dharma) exist: affirmation of being, negation of non-being All things (dharma) do not exist: affirmation of non-being, negation of being All things (dharma) both exist and do not exist: both affirmation and negation All things (dharma) neither exist nor do not exist: neither affirmation nor negation [ 52 ] To say that all things are 'empty' is to deny any kind of ontological foundation; therefore Nāgārjuna's view is often seen as a kind of ontological anti-foundationalism [ 53 ] or a metaphysical anti-realism .

[ 54 ] Understanding the nature of the emptiness of phenomena is simply a means to an end, which is nirvana . Thus Nāgārjuna's philosophical project is ultimately a soteriological one meant to correct our everyday cognitive processes which mistakenly posits svabhāva on the flow of experience.

Some scholars such as Fyodor Shcherbatskoy and T.R.V. Murti held that Nāgārjuna was the inventor of the Shunyata doctrine; however, more recent work by scholars such as Choong Mun-keat, Yin Shun and Dhammajothi Thero has argued that Nāgārjuna was not an innovator by putting forth this theory, [ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ 57 ] but that, in the words of Shi Huifeng, "the connection between emptiness and dependent origination is not an innovation or creation of Nāgārjuna".

[ 58 ] Two truths [ edit ] Main article: Two truths doctrine Nāgārjuna was also instrumental in the development of the two truths doctrine , which claims that there are two levels of truth in Buddhist teaching, the ultimate truth ( paramārtha satya ) and the conventional or superficial truth ( saṃvṛtisatya ). The ultimate truth to Nāgārjuna is the truth that everything is empty of essence, [ 59 ] this includes emptiness itself ('the emptiness of emptiness'). While some (Murti, 1955) have interpreted this by positing Nāgārjuna as a neo-Kantian and thus making ultimate truth a metaphysical noumenon or an "ineffable ultimate that transcends the capacities of discursive reason", [ 60 ] others such as Mark Siderits and Jay L. Garfield have argued that Nāgārjuna's view is that "the ultimate truth is that there is no ultimate truth" (Siderits) and that Nāgārjuna is a "semantic anti-dualist" who posits that there are only conventional truths.

[ 60 ] Hence according to Garfield: Suppose that we take a conventional entity, such as a table. We analyze it to demonstrate its emptiness, finding that there is no table apart from its parts [...]. So we conclude that it is empty. But now let us analyze that emptiness [...]. What do we find? Nothing at all but the table's lack of inherent existence. [...]. To see the table as empty [...] is to see the table as conventional, as dependent.

[ 61 ] In articulating this notion in the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā , Nāgārjuna drew on an early source in the Kaccānagotta Sutta , [ 62 ] which distinguishes definitive meaning ( nītārtha ) from interpretable meaning ( neyārtha ): By and large, Kaccayana, this world is supported by a polarity, that of existence and non-existence. But when one reads the origination of the world as it actually is with right discernment, "non-existence" with reference to the world does not occur to one. When one reads the cessation of the world as it actually is with right discernment, "existence" with reference to the world does not occur to one.

By and large, Kaccayana, this world is in bondage to attachments, clingings (sustenances), and biases. But one such as this does not get involved with or cling to these attachments, clingings, fixations of awareness, biases, or obsessions; nor is he resolved on "my self". He has no uncertainty or doubt that just stress, when arising, is arising; stress, when passing away, is passing away. In this, his knowledge is independent of others. It's to this extent, Kaccayana, that there is right view.

"Everything exists": That is one extreme. "Everything doesn't exist": That is a second extreme. Avoiding these two extremes, the Tathagata teaches the Dhamma via the middle...

[ 63 ] The version linked to is the one found in the nikayas, and is slightly different from the one found in the Samyuktagama . Both contain the concept of teaching via the middle between the extremes of existence and non-existence.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Nagarjuna does not make reference to "everything" when he quotes the agamic text in his Mūlamadhyamakakārikā .

[ 66 ] Causality [ edit ] See also: Causality Jay L. Garfield describes that Nāgārjuna approached causality from the Four Noble Truths and dependent origination . Nāgārjuna distinguished two dependent origination views in a causal process, that which causes effects and that which causes conditions. This is predicated in the two truth doctrine , as conventional truth and ultimate truth held together, in which both are empty in existence.  The distinction between effects and conditions is controversial. In Nāgārjuna's approach, cause means an event or state that has power to bring an effect. Conditions, refer to proliferating causes that bring a further event, state or process; without a metaphysical commitment to an occult connection between explaining and explanans. He argues nonexistent causes and various existing conditions. The argument draws from unreal causal power.  Things conventional exist and are ultimately nonexistent to rest in the Middle Way in both causal existence and nonexistence as casual emptiness within the Mūlamadhyamakakārikā doctrine. Although seeming strange to Westerners, this is seen as an attack on a reified view of causality.

[ 67 ] Relativity [ edit ] See also: Relativism Nāgārjuna also taught the idea of relativity; in the Ratnāvalī, he gives the example that shortness exists only in relation to the idea of length. The determination of a thing or object is only possible in relation to other things or objects, especially by way of contrast. He held that the relationship between the ideas of "short" and "long" is not due to intrinsic nature (svabhāva). This idea is also found in the Pali Nikāyas and Chinese Āgamas, in which the idea of relativity is expressed similarly: "That which is the element of light ... is seen to exist on account of [in relation to] darkness; that which is the element of good is seen to exist on account of bad; that which is the element of space is seen to exist on account of form." [ 68 ] Comparative philosophy [ edit ] Hinduism [ edit ] Nāgārjuna was fully acquainted with the classical Hindu philosophies of Samkhya and even the Vaiseshika .

[ 69 ] Nāgārjuna assumes a knowledge of the definitions of the sixteen categories as given in the Nyaya Sutras , the chief text of the Hindu Nyaya school, and wrote a treatise on the pramanas where he reduced the syllogism of five members into one of three. In the Vigrahavyavartani Karika, Nāgārjuna criticises the Nyaya theory of pramanas (means of knowledge).

[ 70 ] Mahāyāna Buddhism [ edit ] Nāgārjuna was conversant with many of the Śrāvaka philosophies and with the Mahāyāna tradition; however, determining Nāgārjuna's affiliation with a specific nikāya is difficult, considering much of this material has been lost. If the most commonly accepted attribution of texts (that of Christian Lindtner) holds, then he was clearly a Māhayānist, but his philosophy holds assiduously to the Śrāvaka Tripiṭaka , and while he does make explicit references to Mahāyāna texts, he is always careful to stay within the parameters set out by the Śrāvaka canon.

Nāgārjuna may have arrived at his positions from a desire to achieve a consistent exegesis of the Buddha's doctrine as recorded in the āgamas . In the eyes of Nāgārjuna, the Buddha was not merely a forerunner, but the very founder of the Madhyamaka system.

[ 71 ] David Kalupahana sees Nāgārjuna as a successor to Moggaliputta-Tissa in being a champion of the middle-way and a reviver of the original philosophical ideals of the Buddha.

[ 72 ] Pyrrhonism and its influence [ edit ] See also: Similarities between Pyrrhonism and Buddhism Because of the high degree of similarity between Nāgārjuna's philosophy and Pyrrhonism , particularly the surviving works of Sextus Empiricus , [ 73 ] According to Thomas McEvilley this is because Nagarjuna was likely influenced by Greek Pyrrhonist texts imported into India.

[ 74 ] Pyrrho of Elis (c. 360 – c. 270 BCE), the founder of this school of sceptical philosophy , was himself influenced by Indian philosophy. Pyrrho travelled to India with Alexander the Great 's army and studied with the gymnosophists . According to Christopher I. Beckwith , Pyrrho's teachings are based on Buddhism , because the Greek terms adiaphora , astathmēta and anepikrita in the Aristocles Passage resemble the Buddhist three marks of existence .

[ 75 ] According to him, the key innovative tenets of Pyrrho's scepticism were only found in Indian philosophy at the time and not in Greece.

[ 76 ] However, other scholars, such as Stephen Batchelor [ 77 ] and Charles Goodman [ 78 ] question Beckwith's conclusions about the degree of Buddhist influence on Pyrrho.

See also [ edit ] Acharya Nagarjuna University Aryadeva Buddhapālita Buddhism Kamalasila Middle Way Śāntarakṣita Sun Simiao Śūnyatā Yogachara-Madhyamaka References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c Kalupahana 1994 , p. 160.

^ Walser (2005) p. 1-3.

^ a b Garfield, Jay L. (1995), The Fundamental Wisdom of the Middle Way , Oxford: Oxford University Press.

^ Walser (2005) p. 3.

^ Garfield (1995), p. 87.

^ Walser (2005), p. 43.

^ Mäll, Linnart.

Studies in the Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā and other essays.

2005. p. 96 ^ a b Walser (2005), p. 60.

^ a b c Walser (2005), p. 61.

^ a b c Walser (2005), p. 66.

^ Walser (2005), p. 87.

^ "Notes on the Nagarjunikonda Inscriptions", Dutt, Nalinaksha.

The Indian Historical Quarterly 7:3 1931.09 pp. 633–53 "..Tibetan tradition which says that Nāgārjuna was born of a brahmin family of Amaravati ." ^ Geri Hockfield Malandra, Unfolding A Mandala: The Buddhist Cave Temples at Ellora , SUNY Press, 1993, p. 17 ^ Shōhei Ichimura, Buddhist Critical Spirituality: Prajñā and Śūnyatā , Motilal Banarsidass Publishers (2001), p. 67 ^ Bkra-śis-rnam-rgyal (Dwags-po Paṇ-chen), Takpo Tashi Namgyal, Mahamudra: The Quintessence of Mind and Meditation , Motilal Banarsidass Publishers (1993), p. 443 ^ Buddhist Text & Research Society (1895).

Journal . Vol.

3– 5. p. 16.

^ Transaction - Indian Institute of World Culture, Issue 73, Indian Institute of World Culture, 1987, p. 5 ^ Walser (2005), pp. 69, 74.

^ Walser (2005), p. 74.

^ Berger, Douglas.

"Nagarjuna (c. 150—c. 250)" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2 May 2017 .

^ Walser (2005), pp. 75-76.

^ Walser (2005), p. 78 ^ a b Hirakawa, Akira. Groner, Paul.

A History of Indian Buddhism: From Śākyamuni to Early Mahāyāna.

2007. p. 242 ^ Walser (2005), p. 72.

^ K. Krishna Murthy (1977).

Nāgārjunakoṇḍā: A Cultural Study . Concept Publishing Company. p. 1.

OCLC 4541213 .

^ a b c Walser (2005), p. 69.

^ Hsing Yun, Xingyun, Tom Manzo, Shujan Cheng Infinite Compassion, Endless Wisdom: The Practice of the Bodhisattva Path Buddha's Light Publishing Hacienda Heights California ^ Lopez, Donald S. Jr. (28 May 2019).

Seeing the Sacred in Samsara: An Illustrated Guide to the Eighty-Four Mahasiddhas . Shambhala Publications. p. 75.

ISBN 978-0-8348-4212-0 .

^ See SN 12.15 Kaccayanagotta Sutta: To Kaccayana Gotta (on Right View) Archived 29 March 2013 at the Wayback Machine ^ Kalupahana 1994 , p. 161.

^ a b Kalupahana 1992 , p. 120.

^ Ruegg, David Seyfort, ''The Literature of the Madhyamaka School of Philosophy in India,'' Otto Harrassowitz Verlag, 1981, p. 8.

^ Lindtner, C. (1982).

Nagarjuniana: studies in the writings and philosophy of Nāgārjuna , Copenhagen: Akademisk forlag, p. 11.

^ Ruegg, David Seyfort, ''The Literature of the Madhyamaka School of Philosophy in India,'' Otto Harrassowitz Verlag, 1981, p. 9.

^ Fernando Tola & Carmen Dragonetti, Nagarjuna's Catustava, Journal of Indian Philosophy 13 (1):1-54 (1985) ^ Ruegg, David Seyfort, ''The Literature of the Madhyamaka School of Philosophy in India,'' Otto Harrassowitz Verlag, 1981, p. 24.

^ Ruegg, David Seyfort, ''The Literature of the Madhyamaka School of Philosophy in India,'' Otto Harrassowitz Verlag, 1981, p. 29.

^ a b Burton, David F. (2015).

Emptiness Appraised: A Critical Study of Nagarjuna's Philosophy, pp. 13-14. Routledge.

^ Westerhoff (2009), pp. 5-6.

^ TRV Murti, Central philosophy of Buddhism , pp. 89–91 ^ Lindtner 1982, p. 10.

^ Lindtner 1982, pp. 12-14.

^ Ruegg, David Seyfort, ''The Literature of the Madhyamaka School of Philosophy in India,'' Otto Harrassowitz Verlag, 1981, pp. 28-46.

^ Ruegg, David Seyfort, ''The Literature of the Madhyamaka School of Philosophy in India,'' Otto Harrassowitz Verlag, 1981, p. 27.

^ Lindtner 1982, pp. 14-17.

^ Lindtner 1982, pp. 11-12.

^ Ruegg, David Seyfort, ''The Literature of the Madhyamaka School of Philosophy in India,'' Otto Harrassowitz Verlag, 1981, p. 32.

^ Ruegg, David Seyfort, ''The Literature of the Madhyamaka School of Philosophy in India,'' Otto Harrassowitz Verlag, 1981, p. 28.

^ Lindtner 1982, p. 11.

^ S.Radhakrishnan, Indian philosophy Volume 1, p. 607 ^ Siderits, Mark; Katsura, Shoryu (2013).

Nagarjuna's Middle Way: Mulamadhyamakakarika (Classics of Indian Buddhism) . Wisdom Publications. pp.

175– 76.

ISBN 978-1-61429-050-6 .

^ Dumoulin, Heinrich (1998) Zen Buddhism: a history, India and China, Macmillan Publishing, 43 ^ Westerhoff, Jan. Nagarjuna's Madhyamaka: A Philosophical Introduction.

^ Siderits, Mark. Nagarjuna as anti-realist, Journal of Indian Philosophy December 1988, Volume 16, Issue 4, pp 311-325.

^ Yìn Shùn, An Investigation into Emptiness (Kōng zhī Tànjìu 空之探究) (1985) ^ Choong, The Notion of Emptiness in Early Buddhism (1999) ^ Medawachchiye Dhammajothi Thero, The Concept of Emptiness in Pali Literature ^ Shi huifeng: “Dependent Origination = Emptiness”—Nāgārjuna’s Innovation?

^ Garfield, Jay. Empty Words: Buddhist Philosophy and Cross-cultural Interpretation, p. 91.

^ a b Siderits, Mark, On the Soteriological Significance of Emptiness, Contemporary Buddhism , Vol. 4, No. 1, 2003.

^ Garfield, J. L. (2002).

Empty words , pp. 38–39 ^ Kalupahana 1986 .

^ Thanissaro Bhikkhu (1997).

SN 12.15 Kaccayanagotta Sutta: To Kaccayana Gotta (on Right View) ^ A.K. Warder, A Course in Indian Philosophy.

Motilal Banarsidass Publ., 1998, pp. 55–56 ^ For the full text of both versions with analysis see pp. 192–95 of Choong Mun-keat, The Fundamental Teachings of Early Buddhism: A comparative study based on the Sutranga portion of the Pali Samyutta-Nikaya and the Chinese Samyuktagama ; Harrassowitz Verlag, Weisbaden, 2000.

^ Kalupahana 1986 , p. 232.

^ Garfield, Jay L (April 1994).

"Dependent Arising and the Emptiness of Emptiness: Why Did Nāgārjuna Start with Causation?" .

Philosophy East and West .

44 (2): 219– 50.

doi : 10.2307/1399593 .

JSTOR 1399593 .

S2CID 51932733 .

^ Kalupahana 1975 , 96-97: "In the Nikayas the quote is found at SN 2.150.".

^ TRV Murti, The central philosophy of Buddhism , p. 92 ^ S.Radhakrishnan, Indian Philosophy Volume 1, p. 644 ^ Christian Lindtner, Master of Wisdom.

Dharma Publishing 1997, p. 324.

^ David Kalupahana, Mulamadhyamakakarika of Nāgārjuna: The Philosophy of the Middle Way.

Motilal Banarsidass, 2005, pp. 2, 5.

^ Adrian Kuzminski, Pyrrhonism: How the Ancient Greeks Reinvented Buddhism 2008 ^ Thomas McEvilley, The Shape of Ancient Thought 2002 pp 499-505 ^ Beckwith 2015 , p. 28.

^ Beckwith 2015 , p. 221.

^ Stephen Batchelor "Greek Buddha: Pyrrho's encounter with early Buddhism in central Asia", Contemporary Buddhism , 2016, pp 195-215 ^ Charles Goodman, "Neither Scythian nor Greek: A Response to Beckwith's Greek Buddha and Kuzminski's "Early Buddhism Reconsidered"", Philosophy East and West , University of Hawai'i Press Volume 68, Number 3, July 2018 pp. 984-1006 Sources [ edit ] Beckwith, Christopher I. (2015).

Greek Buddha: Pyrrho's Encounter with Early Buddhism in Central Asia (PDF) .

Princeton University Press .

ISBN 9781400866328 .

Garfield, Jay L. (1995), The Fundamental Wisdom of the Middle Way . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Garfield, Jay L. and Graham Priest (2003), “Nāgārjuna and the Limits of Thought”, Philosophy East and West 53 (January 2003): 1-21.

Jones, Richard H. (2014), Nagarjuna: Buddhism's Most Important Philosopher , 2nd ed. New York: Jackson Square Books.

Kalupahana, David J. (1975), Causality: The Central Philosophy of Buddhism , The University Press of Hawaii, ISBN 9780824802981 Kalupahana, David J. (1986), The Philosophy of the Middle Way , Albany: SUNY Press, ISBN 9780887061486 Kalupahana, David J. (1992), The Principles of Buddhist Psychology , Delhi: Sri Satguru Publications Kalupahana, David J. (1994), A history of Buddhist philosophy , Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Private Limited, ISBN 9780824814021 Lamotte, E., Le Traite de la Grande Vertu de Sagesse , Vol I (1944), Vol II (1949), Vol III (1970), Vol IV (1976), Institut Orientaliste: Louvain-la-Neuve.

Lindtner, Christian (1982).

Nagarjuniana: Studies in the Writings and Philosophy of Nāgārjuna Akademisk forlag.

Mabbett, Ian, (1998), “The problem of the historical Nagarjuna revisited”, Journal of the American Oriental Society , 118(3): 332–46.

Murti, T. R. V. (1955), The Central Philosophy of Buddhism . George Allen and Unwin, London. 2nd edition: 1960.

Murty, K. Satchidananda (1971), Nagarjuna . National Book Trust, New Delhi. 2nd edition: 1978.

Ramanan, K. Venkata (1966), Nāgārjuna's Philosophy . Charles E. Tuttle, Vermont and Tokyo. Reprint: Motilal Banarsidass, Delhi. 1978.

Ruegg, D. Seyfort (1981), The literature of the Madhyamaka school of philosophy in India (A History of Indian literature) , Harrassowitz, ISBN 978-3-447-02204-0 .

Sastri, H. Chatterjee, ed. (1977), The Philosophy of Nāgārjuna as contained in the Ratnāvalī . Part I [ Containing the text and introduction only ]. Saraswat Library, Calcutta.

Streng, Frederick J.

(1967), Emptiness: A Study in Religious Meaning . Nashville: Abingdon Press.

Tuck, Andrew P. (1990), Comparative Philosophy and the Philosophy of Scholarship: on the Western Interpretation of Nāgārjuna , Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Walser, Joseph (2002), Nagarjuna And The Ratnavali: New Ways To Date An Old Philosopher , Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies 25 (1-2), 209-262 Walser, Joseph (2005), Nāgārjuna in Context: Mahāyāna Buddhism and Early Indian Culture . New York: Columbia University Press.

Westerhoff, Jan (2010), The Dispeller of Disputes: Nāgārjuna's Vigrahavyāvartanī . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Westerhoff, Jan (2009), Nāgārjuna's Madhyamaka. A Philosophical Introduction . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Wedemeyer, Christian K. (2007), Āryadeva's Lamp that Integrates the Practices: The Gradual Path of Vajrayāna Buddhism according to the Esoteric Community Noble Tradition . New York: AIBS/Columbia University Press.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nagarjuna .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Nagarjuna .

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Saṃyukta Āgama 301: Kātyāyana Gotra Sūtra Westerhoff, Jan Christoph.

"Nāgārjuna" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Rhys Davids, T. W.

(1911).

"Nāgārjuna" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 19 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 151.

"Nagarjuna" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Nāgārjuna – Sanskrit Buddhist texts: Acintyastava, Bodhicittavivaraṇa, Ratnāvalī, Mūlamadhyamakakārikās &c.

Overview of traditional biographical accounts Online version of the Ratnāvalī (Precious Garland) in English Translated by Prof. Vidyakaraprabha and Bel-dzek Online version of the Suhṛllekha (Letter to a Friend) in English Translated by Alexander Berzin Works by or about Nagarjuna at the Internet Archive Works by Nagarjuna at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Nārāgjuna vis-à-vis the Āgama-s and Nikāya-s Byoma Kusuma Nepalese Dharmasangha (archived) ZenEssays: Nagarjuna and the Madhyamika Mula madhyamaka karika online Tibetan and English version translated by Stephen Batchelor (archived) v t e Indian philosophy Topics Atheism Atomism Idealism Logic Monotheism Vedic philosophy Kama Artha Moksha Ancient Āstika Hindu : Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Shaiva Raseśvara Pashupata Shaivism Pāṇiniya Nāstika Ājīvika Ajñana Charvaka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist philosophy and Early Buddhist schools Śūnyatā Madhyamaka Yogachara Sautrāntika Svatantrika Medieval Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Sikh Philosophy Shaiva Pratyabhijna Pashupata Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Modern Integral yoga Gandhism Radical Humanism Progressive utilization theory Texts Abhinavabharati Arthashastra Bhagavad Gita Bhagavata Purana Brahma Sutra Buddhist texts Dharmashastra Hindu texts Jain Agamas Kamasutra Mimamsa Sutras All 108 texts Principal Nyāya Sūtras Nyayakusumanjali Panchadasi Samkhyapravachana Sutra Sangam texts Sarvadarsanasangraha Shiva Sutras Tarka-Sangraha Tattvacintāmaṇi Tirukkuṟaḷ Upanishads Minor Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Vedangas Vedas Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Yoga Vasistha More...

Philosophers Adi Shankara Abhinavagupta Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Maṇḍana Miśra Valluvar Avatsara Vāchaspati Misra Uddalaka Aruni Gautama Buddha Yājñavalkya Gārgī Vāchaknavī Buddhaghosa Patañjali Kanada Kapila Brihadratha Ikshvaku Jaimini Vyasa Chanakya Dharmakirti Akshapada Gotama Nagarjuna Padmasambhāva Vasubandhu Gaudapada Ramana Maharshi Vivekananda Dayananda Saraswati Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Raikva Sadananda Sakayanya Satyakama Jabala Madhvacharya Mahavira Guru Nanak More...

Concepts Abhava Abhasavada Abheda Adarsana Adrishta Advaita Aham Ahimsa Aishvarya Akrodha Aksara Anatta Ananta Anavastha Anupalabdhi Apauruṣheyā Artha Asiddhatva Asatkalpa Ātman Avyakta Bhrama Brahman Bhuman Bhumika Catuṣkoṭi Chaitanya Chidabhasa Cittabhumi Dāna Devatas Dharma Dhi Dravya Dhrti Ekagrata Guṇa Hitā Idam Ikshana Ishvaratva Jivatva Kama Karma Kasaya Kshetrajna Lakshana Matsya Nyaya Mithyatva Mokṣa Nididhyasana Nirvāṇa Nishkama Karma Niyama Padārtha Paramatman Paramananda Parameshashakti Parinama-vada Pradhana Prajna Prakṛti Pratibimbavada Pratītyasamutpāda Puruṣa Rājamaṇḍala Ṛta Sakshi Samadhi Saṃsāra Satya Satkaryavada Shabda Brahman Sphoṭa Sthiti Śūnyatā Sutram Svātantrya Iccha-mrityu Syādvāda Taijasa Tajjalan Tanmatra Tyāga Uparati Upekkhā Utsaha Vivartavada Viraj Yamas Yoga More...

v t e Bodhisattvas Major Avalokiteśvara ( Guanyin ) Mañjuśrī Samantabhadra Kṣitigarbha Maitreya Mahāsthāmaprāpta Ākāśagarbha Chinese Skanda Sangharāma (Guān Yǔ) Vajrayana Padmasambhava Mandāravā Tārā Vajrapāṇi Vajrasattva Sitātapatrā Cundī Other Bhaiṣajyarāja Candraprabha Niō Supratiṣṭhitacāritra Supuṣpacandra Sūryaprabha Vasudhārā Viśiṣṭacāritra Viśuddhacāritra Vimalakirti v t e Topics in Buddhism Outline Glossary Index Foundations Four Noble Truths Three Jewels Buddha Dharma Sangha Noble Eightfold Path Nirvana Middle Way The Buddha Tathāgata Birthday Four sights Eight Great Events Great Renunciation Physical characteristics Life of Buddha in art Footprint Relics Iconography in Laos and Thailand Films Miracles Family Suddhodāna (father) Māyā (mother) Mahapajapati Gotamī (aunt, adoptive mother) Yaśodharā (wife) Rāhula (son) Ānanda (cousin) Devadatta (cousin) Bodhi tree Places where the Buddha stayed Buddha in world religions Bodhisattvas Avalokiteśvara Guanyin Mañjuśrī Mahāsthāmaprāpta Ākāśagarbha Kṣitigarbha Samantabhadra Vajrapāṇi Skanda Tārā Metteyya/Maitreya Disciples Kaundinya Assaji Sāriputta Mahamoggallāna Ānanda Mahākassapa Aṅgulimāla Anuruddha Mahākaccana Nanda Subhūti Puṇṇa Mantānīputta Upāli Mahapajapati Gotamī Khema Uppalavanna Asita Channa Yasa Key concepts Avidyā (Ignorance) Bardo Bodhicitta Buddha-nature Dhamma theory Dharma Enlightenment Five hindrances Indriya Karma Kleshas Mental factors Mindstream Parinirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Rebirth Saṃsāra Saṅkhāra Skandha Śūnyatā Taṇhā (Craving) Tathātā Ten Fetters Three marks of existence Anicca Dukkha Anattā Two truths doctrine Cosmology Ten spiritual realms Six Paths Deva realm Human realm Asura realm Hungry Ghost realm Animal realm Naraka Three planes of existence Branches Mahayana Zen Chinese Chan Japanese Zen Korean Seon Vietnamese Thiền Pure Land Tiantai Huayan Risshū Nichiren Madhyamaka Yogachara Vajrayana Tibetan Buddhism Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Shingon Dzogchen Theravada Southern Esoteric Buddhism Navayana Early Buddhist schools Pre-sectarian Buddhism Basic points unifying Theravāda and Mahāyāna Southern, Eastern and Northern Buddhism Practices Bhavana Bodhipakkhiyādhammā Brahmavihara Mettā Karuṇā Mudita Upekkha Buddhābhiṣeka Dāna Devotion Deity yoga Dhyāna Faith Five Strengths Iddhipada Meditation Mantras Kammaṭṭhāna Recollection Smarana Anapanasati Samatha-vipassanā ( Vipassana movement ) Shikantaza Zazen Tukdam Koan Ganana Mandala Tonglen Tantra Tertön Terma Merit Mindfulness Mindful Yoga Satipatthana Nekkhamma Nianfo Pāramitā Paritta Puja Offerings Prostration Music Refuge Sādhu Satya Sacca Seven Factors of Enlightenment Sati Dhamma vicaya Pīti Passaddhi Śīla Five precepts Eight precepts Bodhisattva vow Pratimokṣa Threefold Training Śīla Samadhi Prajñā Vīrya Four Right Exertions Twenty-two vows of Ambedkar Yujia Yankou Shuilu Fahui Nirvana Bodhi Bodhisattva Buddhahood Pratyekabuddhayāna Four stages of awakening Sotāpanna Sakadagami Anāgāmi Arhat Monasticism Bhikkhu Bhikkhunī Śrāmaṇera Śrāmaṇerī Anagārika Ajahn Sayadaw Zen master Rōshi Lama Rinpoche Geshe Tulku Western tulku Kappiya Donchee Householder Upāsaka and Upāsikā Achar Śrāvaka Ten principal disciples Shaolin Monastery Major figures The Buddha Nagasena Aśvaghoṣa Nagarjuna Asanga Vasubandhu Kumārajīva Buddhaghosa Buddhapālita Dignāga Bodhidharma Zhiyi Emperor Wen of Sui Songtsen Gampo Xuanzang Shandao Padmasambhava Saraha Atiśa Naropa Karmapa Hōnen Shinran Dōgen Nichiren Shamarpa Dalai Lama Panchen Lama Ajahn Mun B. R. Ambedkar Ajahn Chah Thích Nhất Hạnh Texts Early Buddhist texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana sutras Pali Canon Chinese Buddhist canon Tibetan Buddhist canon Dhammapada Sutra Vinaya Madhyamakālaṃkāra Abhidharmadīpa Countries Afghanistan Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bhutan Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Cambodia Canada China Costa Rica Croatia Czech Republic Denmark England Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Korea Kyrgyzstan Laos Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Maldives Malaysia Mexico Middle East Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nepal Netherlands New Zealand North Korea Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Portugal Russia Buryatia Kalmykia Tuva Scotland Senegal Singapore Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Tibet Ukraine United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela Vietnam Wales Zimbabwe History Timeline Ashoka Kanishka Buddhist councils History of Buddhism in India Decline of Buddhism in India Huichang persecution of Buddhism Greco-Buddhism Gandharan Buddhism Texts Menander I Buddhism and the Roman world Buddhism in the West Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Persecution of Buddhists In Afghanistan In Vietnam Rimé movement Banishment of Buddhist monks from Nepal Dalit Buddhist movement Chinese invasion of Tibet 1959 Tibetan uprising Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist modernism Vipassana movement 969 Movement Engaged Buddhism Women in Buddhism Philosophy Abhidharma Atomism Buddhology Creator Buddhism and democracy Economics Eight Consciousnesses Engaged Buddhism Eschatology Ethics Evolution Humanism Logic Reality Secular Buddhism Socialism The unanswerable questions Culture Architecture Temple Vihāra Kyaung Wat Ordination hall Stupa Pagoda Burmese pagoda Candi Dzong architecture List of Buddhist architecture in China Japanese Buddhist architecture Buddhist temples in Korea Thai temple art and architecture Tibetan Buddhist architecture Art Greco-Buddhist Budai Buddha in art Calendar Cuisine Funeral Holidays Vesak Uposatha Māgha Pūjā Asalha Puja Vassa Jaya Sri Maha Bodhi Kasaya Mahabodhi Temple Mantra Om mani padme hum Mudra Music Pilgrimage Lumbini Maya Devi Temple Bodh Gaya Sarnath Kushinagar Poetry Prayer beads Hama yumi Prayer wheel Symbolism Dharmachakra Flag Bhavacakra Swastika Thangka Temple of the Tooth Vegetarianism Miscellaneous Abhijñā Amitābha Brahmā Dharma talk Hinayana Iddhi Kalpa Koliya Lineage Māra Siddhi Sacred languages Pāḷi Sanskrit Comparison Baháʼí Faith Christianity Influences Comparison East Asian religions Gnosticism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Psychology Science Theosophy Violence Western philosophy Lists Bodhisattvas Buddhas Buddhists American Korean Indian Suttas Sutras Temples Festivals Category Buddhism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Korea Poland Israel Belgium People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐6qjf2
Cached time: 20250817043648
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, vary‐revision, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.011 seconds
Real time usage: 1.235 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6506/1000000
Revision size: 46881/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 186060/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9037/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 126685/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.559/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18061422/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  965.489      1 -total
 17.79%  171.804      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 17.34%  167.383      1 Template:Reflist
 10.95%  105.685      5 Template:Cite_book
  9.65%   93.147      3 Template:Sister_project
  9.59%   92.615     14 Template:IAST
  9.51%   91.836      3 Template:Side_box
  9.38%   90.583     14 Template:Transliteration
  7.33%   70.727      1 Template:Short_description
  6.77%   65.388      1 Template:Wikisource Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:22149:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043648 and revision id 1302979265. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nagarjuna&oldid=1302979265 " Categories : 150 births 250 deaths Mahayana Buddhism writers 2nd-century Buddhist monks 3rd-century Buddhist monks 3rd-century Indian philosophers Indian scholars of Buddhism People from Guntur district Mahayana Buddhists 3rd-century Indian writers Madhyamaka scholars Mahasiddhas Ontologists Tibetan Buddhist spiritual teachers Buddhist yogis Converts to Buddhism from Hinduism Bodhisattvas Rangtong Monks of Nalanda Scholars from Maharashtra 2nd-century Indian philosophers Scholars from Andhra Pradesh 2nd-century Indian writers Indian male writers Indian Buddhist monks Founders of Buddhist sects Sanron-shū Jōdo Shin patriarchs 3rd-century Indian monks Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from January 2024 Use dmy dates from January 2024 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikisource templates with missing id Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 12:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nagarjuna 104 languages Add topic

