Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geographical hemispheres Toggle Geographical hemispheres subsection 1.1 North-South 1.2 East-West 2 Alternative hemispheres Toggle Alternative hemispheres subsection 2.1 Cultural and religious hemispheres 2.2 Geographical feature-based hemispheres 2.3 Land-water hemispheres 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Hemispheres of Earth 63 languages Afrikaans العربية Arpetan Asturianu বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Furlan Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Lombard Македонски Malagasy ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Oromoo Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Sunda Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Walon Wolof ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Hemispheres of the Earth ) Division of the globe into equal halves The division of Earth by the Equator and the prime meridian 19th-century map depicting the Western and Eastern hemispheres , slightly adjusted to keep Europe and Africa whole 19th-century map depicting the Northern and Southern hemispheres In geography and cartography , hemispheres of Earth are any division of the globe into two equal halves (hemispheres), typically divided into northern and southern halves by the Equator and into western and eastern halves by the Prime meridian . Hemispheres can be divided geographically or culturally, or based on religion or prominent geographic features. Use of these divisions is applied when studying Earth's geographic distribution, cultural differences, and other geographic, demographic and socioeconomic features.

[ 1 ] Geographical hemispheres [ edit ] Geographical hemispheres are primarily split by latitudinal (north-south) and longitudinal (east-west) markers: [ 2 ] [ 3 ] North-South [ edit ] Northern Hemisphere : The half that lies north of the Equator . This hemisphere contains approximately 68% of Earth's landmass and is home to about 90% of the global population.

[ 4 ] It includes North America, Europe, Asia, and most of Africa.

Southern Hemisphere : The half that lies south of the Equator. It contains approximately 32% of Earth's landmass and is home to about 10% of the global population. It includes South America, Australia, Antarctica, and the southern parts of Africa.

East-West [ edit ] A spheroidal projection, showing the Earth's Western and Eastern hemispheres as seen from a vantage directly above the equator at 90°W and 90°E respectively Eastern Hemisphere : Notionally, the half that lies east of the prime meridian and west of the 180th meridian . This hemisphere includes most of Africa, Europe, Asia, and Australia, as well as the Indian and Western Pacific Oceans. In practice, maps typically move the division line westward to keep Europe and Africa together.

Western Hemisphere : Notionally, the half that lies west of the prime meridian and east of the 180th meridian. This hemisphere includes North and South America, the eastern Pacific Ocean, the Caribbean Sea, and the majority of the Atlantic Ocean.

Alternative hemispheres [ edit ] Alternative Earth hemispheres can divide the globe along cultural or religious lines, or be used to maximize the prominence of geographic features.

[ 5 ] For example: Cultural and religious hemispheres [ edit ] Eastern Hemisphere: Historically reckoned in Western culture as the more staid or conservative Old World .

Western Hemisphere: In such accounts, taken as the more liberal New World .

Geographical feature-based hemispheres [ edit ] The Earth as seen from the vantage point of the Sun on two consecutive days. The terrestrial terminator is located at the circumference of each circle.

Terrestrial terminator-based hemispheres: Earth may be split into hemispheres of day and night by the terrestrial terminator, which is the boundary between the illuminated and dark sides of the planet. This division changes continuously as Earth rotates.

20° West and 160° East-based hemispheres: This alternative division prevents the splitting of Africa and Europe.

Land-water hemispheres [ edit ] Main article: Land and water hemispheres Alternative hemisphere schemes can divide the planet in a way that maximizes the prominence of one geographic feature or another in each division, such as the land-water division: Land Hemisphere : Centered near 47°N, 1°E, near the city of Nantes, France, this hemisphere contains the largest possible area of land, including most of the world's continents and major landmasses.

Water Hemisphere : Centered near 47°S, 179°W, in the South Pacific Ocean, this hemisphere contains the largest possible area of water, including most of the Indian, Pacific, and Southern Oceans.

The Land Hemisphere The Water Hemisphere The Land Hemisphere is at the top, and the Water Hemisphere is at the bottom.

After rotation, the Land Hemisphere is still at the top and the Water Hemisphere is still at the bottom See also [ edit ] Earth's geographical centre Global North and Global South Land and water hemispheres East–West dichotomy References [ edit ] ^ "hemisphere | Etymology, origin and meaning of hemisphere by etymonline" .

www.etymonline.com . Retrieved 2022-12-03 .

^ "Hemisphere" .

www.nationalgeographic.org . 2011-03-22.

^ "hemisphere | National Geographic Society" .

education.nationalgeographic.org . Retrieved 2022-08-27 .

^ "90% Of People Live In The Northern Hemisphere – Business Insider" .

Business Insider . 4 May 2012.

Archived from the original on 19 January 2018 . Retrieved 10 November 2015 .

^ Boggs, S. W. (1945).

"This Hemisphere" .

Journal of Geography .

44 (9): 345– 355.

doi : 10.1080/00221344508986498 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Earth's hemispheres at Wikimedia Commons v t e Hemispheres of Earth Northern Southern Eastern Western Land and water hemispheres Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hemispheres_of_Earth&oldid=1300291302 " Category : Hemispheres of Earth Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 12:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hemispheres of Earth 63 languages Add topic

