Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Importance 1.1.1 Significance and management of coastal zones 1.1.2 Goals 1.2 Five-step process 1.3 Dimensions of coastal zone management 1.3.1 Defining coastal zones 1.3.2 Finding sustainable solutions 1.4 Constraints 1.4.1 Top-down and bottom-up approach 1.4.2 Human factors 2 Adoption Toggle Adoption subsection 2.1 European Union 2.2 Iran 2.3 Mediterranean 2.4 New Zealand 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Integrated coastal zone management 11 languages Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français हिन्दी Italiano Nederlands 日本語 ไทย Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Environmental management system This article appears to contain a large number of buzzwords .

Please help improve it by replacing such wording with clear, neutral , encyclopedic terms.

( April 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article contains wording that promotes the subject in a subjective manner without imparting real information .

Please remove or replace such wording and instead of making proclamations about a subject's importance, use facts and attribution to demonstrate that importance.

( October 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM ), also known as Integrated Coastal Management (ICM) or Integrated Coastal Planning , is a coastal management decision-making process that manages all aspects of the coastal zone, including geographical and political boundaries, in an attempt to achieve sustainability . This notion was conceptualized in 1992 during the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro . The specifics regarding ICZM are outlined in the proceedings of the summit within Agenda 21 , Chapter 17 .

[ 1 ] Overview [ edit ] Framework Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) is a decision-making framework designed to address the diverse and site-specific environmental needs of national, regional, and local coastlines while considering the interactions among natural, social, and economic systems within the coastal zone. ICZM is typically applied within a clearly defined geographic area, often characterized by overlapping jurisdictions and environmental pressures, and requires a high degree of integration across sectors, stakeholders, and governance levels to ensure sustainable coastal development.

[ 2 ] Importance [ edit ] Significance and management of coastal zones [ edit ] Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM) is suitable for sustainable development of coastal zones; however, it may not be adapted to all cases.

[ 3 ] For example, the Sumatra earthquake and the Indian Ocean tsunami had significant impacts on the coastal environment itself and has altered perceptions of coastal hazard mitigation.

[ 4 ] Coastal zones are often characterized by diverse and productive ecosystems of great importance to human populations.

[ 5 ] Coastal margins equate to only 8% of the world's surface area but provide 25% of global productivity. Approximately 70% of the world's population lives within a day's walk of the coast, [ 6 ] and two-thirds of the world's cities are coastal.

[ 7 ] Resources such as fish and minerals are in high demand among coastal dwellers for subsistence, recreation, and economic development.

[ 8 ] As these resources are considered common property, they have been subjected to intensive and specific exploitation. For example, 90% of the world's fish harvest comes from within national exclusive economic zones , most of which are within sight of the shore.

[ 6 ] Substantial, potentially unsustainable, quantities of resources are often extracted, and the impacts of extractive activity are compounded by pollution, contributing to the cumulative degradation of these ecosystems.

[ citation needed ] Goals [ edit ] For ICZM to be successful, it must adhere to sustainability principles and act upon them in an integrated fashion. A balance between environmental protection and economic/social development is paramount.

[ 9 ] ICZM considers the spatial, functional, legal, policy, knowledge, and participation components of coastal management, among other items.

[ 10 ] The four identified goals of ICZM are: Maintaining the functional integrity of coastal resource systems.

Reducing resource-use conflicts.

Maintaining environmental health.

Facilitating economic development.

[ 2 ] Five-step process [ edit ] Problem and needs assessment: Issues need to be identified and quantified. This first step will require co-operation among government, local and regional non-governmental entities, and local residents.

Plan: After the issues and problems have been identified and weighted, an effective management plan that can act as a guide for future development is developed. The plan will be specific to the area in question.

Institutionalization of plan: Plan adoption by relevant agencies is carried out, either in the form of legally binding statutory plans, strategies, or objectives, or as non-statutory agency guidance or policy.

[ 11 ] Implementation: The plan is put into effect through law enforcement, education, development, etc. The implementation activities are unique to their environments and can take many forms.

Evaluation: The last phase is evaluation of the plan's implementation. The principles of sustainability mean that there is no ‘end state.’ ICZM is an ongoing process constantly readjusting the equilibrium between economic development and environmental protection. Feedback is a crucial part of the process, enabling continued effectiveness even if the situation changes.

Public participation and stakeholder involvement are essential in ICZM processes, not only from a democratic perspective but also from a technical and instrumental standpoint, to reduce decision-making conflicts.

Dimensions of coastal zone management [ edit ] Defining coastal zones [ edit ] Defining the coastal zone is of particular importance to the idea of ICZM. Ketchum (1972) [ 12 ] defined the area as: The band of dry land and adjacent ocean space (water and submerged land) in which terrestrial processes and land uses directly affect oceanic processes and uses, and vice versa.

The diverse features of coastal regions and the varying spatial scales of interacting systems present significant challenges for management. Coasts, being dynamic and influenced by a variety of factors globally, are shaped by processes such as river systems, which can extend far inland and increase the complexity of the coastal zone. These complexities make it difficult to clearly define hinterlands and establish effective management strategies.

In addition to their physical characteristics, coastal zones encompass ecosystems, resources, and human activities, the latter being a primary driver of disruption to natural coastal systems. Management is further complicated by the use of administrative boundaries, which often rely on arbitrary lines that fragment the zone. This fragmented approach can result in management strategies that focus on individual sectors, such as land use or fisheries , potentially causing negative impacts in other sectors.

Finding sustainable solutions [ edit ] The concept behind ICZM is sustainability . For ICZM to succeed, it must be sustainable. Sustainability entails a continuous decision-making process, so there is never an end-state, just a readjustment of the equilibrium between development and environmental protection.

[ 13 ] The concept of sustainability or sustainable development came to fruition in the 1987 World Commission on Environment and Development's report, Our Common Future . It stated sustainable development is “to meet the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.” [ 14 ] Three main points: Economic development to improve the quality of life of people Environmentally appropriate development Equitable development [ 13 ] To simplify these points, sustainability should acknowledge the right of humans to live a life that is healthy and productive. It should allow for equal distribution of benefits to all people and in doing so protect the environment through appropriate use.

[ 13 ] Sustainability is by no means a set of prescriptive actions, more accurately it is a way of thinking. Adapting this way of thinking paves the way for a longer-term view with a more holistic approach, something successful ICZM can achieve.

[ 11 ] Finding integration and synergies The term ‘integration’ can be adopted for many different purposes, it is therefore quite important to define the term in the context of the management of the coastal zone to appreciate the intentions of ICZM. Integration within ICZM occurs in and between many different levels. 5 types of integration occur within ICZM; [ 13 ] Integration among sectors : There are many sectors that operate within the coastal environment. These human activities are largely economic activities such as tourism, fisheries, and port companies. A sense of co-operation between sectors is the main requirement for sector integration within ICZM. This comes from the realization of a common goal focused around sustainability and the appreciation of one another within the area.

Integration between land and water elements of the coastal zone : This is the realization of the physical environment being a whole. The coastal environment is a dynamic relationship between many processes, all of which are interdependent. The link must be made between imposing a change on one system or feature and its inevitable ‘flow on’ effects.

Integration among levels of government : Between levels of governance, consistency and co-operation is needed throughout planning and policy making. ICZM is most effective where initiatives have common purpose at local, regional, and national levels. Common goals and actions increase efficiency and mitigate confusion.

Integration between nations: This sees ICZM as an important tool on a global scale. If goals and beliefs are common on a supranational scale, large scale problems could be mitigated or avoided.

Integration among disciplines: Throughout ICZM, knowledge should be accepted from all disciplines. All means of scientific, cultural, traditional, political, and local expertise need to be accounted for. By including all these elements, a truly holistic approach towards management can be achieved.

The term integration in a coastal management context has many horizontal and vertical aspects, which reflects the complexity of the task and proves a challenge to implement.

Constraints [ edit ] Successful implementation is still a major challenge to the idea of ICZM.

Top-down and bottom-up approach [ edit ] Major constraints of ICZM are mostly institutional, rather than technological.

[ 10 ] The top-down approach in administrative decision-making considers problematization as a tool promoting ICZM through the idea of sustainability.

[ 10 ] Community-based ‘bottom-up’ approaches can perceive problems and issues that are specific to a local area. The benefit of this is that existing problems are acknowledged, rather than being utilized to fit an imposed strategy or policy. Public consultation and involvement are necessary for current ‘top-down’ approaches, as they can incorporate this ‘bottom-up’ idea into the policies made. Prescriptive ‘top-down’ methods have not been able to effectively address problems of resource utilization in poor coastal communities, as perceptions of the coastal zone differ within developed and developing countries.

[ 10 ] This results in another constraint to ICZM, the idea of common property.

Human factors [ edit ] The coastal environment has historical and cultural connections with human activity. Its wealth of resources have provided for millennia. With regard to ICZM, legally binding management becomes difficult when coastal areas are perceived as common areas available to all.

[ 6 ] Enforcing restrictions or change to activities within the coastal zone can be difficult as these resources are often very important to people's livelihoods. The idea of the coast being common property fouls ‘top-down’ approaches. The idea of common property itself is not all that clean, and this perception can lead to cumulative exploitation of resources – the very problem this management seeks to extinguish.

Adoption [ edit ] European Union [ edit ] The European Parliament and the European Council "adopted in 2002 a recommendation on Integrated Coastal Zone Management which defines the principles sound coastal planning and management. These include the need to base planning on sound and shared knowledge, the need to take a long-term and cross-sector perspective, to pro-actively involve stakeholders and the need to take into account both the terrestrial and the marine components of the coastal zone".

[ 15 ] Iran [ edit ] Preparation of comprehensive management plans for optimum utilization of existent sources and potentials in all developed and developing countries is one of the appropriate approaches for constant and permanent utilization of natural, human, and financial sources. The versatility of natural sources in coastal areas has lead to private and governmental users and investors participating in this sector to gain the utmost profits. Therefore, the necessity of preparation and implementation of management plans for perpetual utilization of existent sources in coastal areas has become inevitable.

Iran, possessing some 6000km of coastline in the north and south, owns abundant economic capacities in coastal zones, and regarding the versatility of nature and coast operators and management of coastal activities and operations, necessity of attention to Integrated Coastal Zone Management becomes more significant. Such necessity has gained its legal support through ratification of arrangements no. 40 from transportation chapter of third and article no. 63 of fourth economic, social, and cultural economic schedule and its executive regulations.

The General Director of coasts and ports engineering of Ports and Maritime Organization was detailed to take the studies of ICZM into consideration. The first phase of these studies began in spring 2003 and was fulfilled in autumn 2006. The outcome of this phase was the compilation of the following reports accomplished by several skilled national and international consultants: 1- Project Methodology 2- Scrutinized scope of services related to studies 3- Investigation of studies' needs and project preparation and performance 4- Study, definition and determination of Iranian coastal zone boundaries 6- Investigation of International concepts, methods and experiences about Integrated Coastal Zone Management 7- Study and investigation of different features of Integrated Coastal Zone Management in Iran 8- Preparation and designation of geographic database 9- Purchasing and preparing basic data The second phase of studies started in autumn of 2005 and since then, this phase has been fully accomplished and presented, in which six Iranian consultants with some cooperation of international consultants were responsible for preparing the eleven results of the second part of the studies.

[ 16 ] Mediterranean [ edit ] At the Conference of the Plenipotentiaries on the ICZM Protocol that took place on 20–21 January 2008 in Madrid, the ICZM Protocol was signed. Under the presidency of the Minister of Environment of Spain, H.E. Ms. Cristina Narbona Ruiz, fourteen Contracting Parties of the Barcelona Convention signed the Protocol. These are the following: Algeria, Croatia, France, Greece, Israel, Italy, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco, Slovenia, Spain, Syria, and Tunisia. All other Parties announced to do so in the very near future. This is the 7th Protocol in the framework of the Barcelona Convention, and the decision to approve the draft text and recommendation to the Conference of the Plenipotentiaries to sign it was taken at the 15th Ordinary Meeting of the Contracting Parties during their meeting in Almeria, on 15–18 January 2008. All the parties are convinced that this Protocol is a crucial milestone in the history of the Mediterranean Action Plan of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP/MAP), the first-ever Regional Seas Programme under UNEP's umbrella. It will allow the countries to better manage their coastal zones, as well as to deal with the emerging coastal environmental challenges, such as climate change.

The ICZM Protocol is a unique legal instrument in the entire international community and the Mediterranean countries are proud of this fact. They are willing to share these experiences with other coastal countries of the world. The signing of the Protocol came after six years of dedicated work from all the Parties. Syria became the sixth, and "enter-into-force", country for the ICZM Protocol. Namely, the President of the Syrian Arab Republic issued a Legislative Decree No. 85 dated 31 September 2010 for the ratification of the ICZM Protocol. With this 6th ratification, the ICZM Protocol entered into force one month later, provided that Syria deposits the instrument of ratification to the depositary country, i.e. Spain.
In September 2012, Croatia and Morocco ratified the Protocol, which brought the number of ratifications to 9 (Slovenia, Montenegro, Albania, Spain, France, the European Union, Syria, Croatia, and Morocco).

The Action Plan for the implementation of the ICZM Protocol 2012-2019 was adopted on the occasion of the CoP 17, held in Paris from 8 to 10 February 2012. The core purposes and objectives of this Action Plan are to implement the Protocol based on country-based planning and regional co-ordination, namely: Support the effective implementation of the ICZM Protocol at regional, national, and local levels, including through a Common Regional Framework for ICZM; Strengthen the capacities of Contracting Parties to implement the Protocol and use in an effective manner ICZM policies, instruments, tools, and processes; and Promote the ICZM Protocol and its implementation within the region and globally by developing synergies with relevant Conventions and Agreements.

A roadmap for the implementation of the ICZM Process, prepared by Priority Actions Programme Regional Activity Centre (PAP/RAC) , is available on the Coastal Wiki platform of the PEGASO and ENCORA projects: ICZM Process .

On May 8, 2014, the Israeli Government ratified the ICZM Protocol. This Resolution (#1588) was made in accordance with Article 19(b) of the Government Rules of Procedure. The ICZM Protocol ratification by Israel brought the number of ratifications to 10.

New Zealand [ edit ] New Zealand is unique as it uses sustainable management within legislation, with a high level of importance placed on the coastal environment.

[ 5 ] The Resource Management Act (RMA) (1991) promoted sustainable development and mandated the preparation of a New Zealand Coastal Policy Statement (NZCPS), a national framework for coastal planning. It is the only national policy statement that was mandatory.

[ 17 ] All subsequent planning must not be inconsistent with the NZCPS, making it a very important document.

[ 5 ] Regional authorities are required to produce regional coastal policy plans under the RMA (1991) but they only need to include the marine environment seaward of the mean high-water mark. However, many regional councils have chosen to integrate the ‘dry’ landward area within their plans, breaking down the artificial barriers.

[ 5 ] This attempt at ICZM is still in its early days, running into many legislative hurdles, and is yet to achieve a fully ecosystems-based approach. But as part of ICZM, evaluation and adoption of changes is important and ongoing changes to the NZCPS in the form of reviews is currently happening.

[ 17 ] This will provide a stepping stone for future initiatives and the development of a fully integrated form of coastal management.

See also [ edit ] Environment portal Geography portal Oceans portal Beach erosion and accretion Beach evolution Beach nourishment Modern recession of beaches Raised beach Coastal management , to prevent coastal erosion and creation of beach Coastal and oceanic landforms Coastal development hazards Coastal erosion Coastal geography Coastal engineering Hard engineering Soft engineering Coastal morphodynamics Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation (CERF) Human impacts on coasts Sea level rise Natural hazard Erosion Bioerosion Blowhole Natural arch Wave-cut platform Longshore drift Deposition (sediment) Coastal sediment supply Sand dune stabilization Submersion References [ edit ] ^ "Agenda 21" (PDF) .

^ a b THIA-ENG, C. 1993. Essential Elements of Integrated Coastal Zone Management. Ocean and Coastal Management, 21, 81-108.

^ Billé, Raphaël (2008-11-27).

"Integrated Coastal Zone Management: four entrenched illusions" .

S.A.P.I.EN.S.

(1.2).

ISSN 1993-3800 .

^ Kurt Fedra. 2008. Integrated Coastal Zone Management (ICZM). Singapore: Research Publishing Services.

^ a b c d KAY, R. & ALDER, J. 1999. Coastal Planning and Management, London, E & FN Spon.

^ a b c BROWN, K., TOMPKINS, E. L. & ADGER, N. 2002. Making Waves: Integrating coastal conservation and development, London, Earthscan Publications Limited.

^ CROOKS, S. & TURNER, R. K. 1999. Integrated coastal management: sustaining estuarine natural resources. Advances in Ecological Research, 29, 241-289.

^ BERKES, F. 1989. Common property resources: Ecology and community-based sustainable development, London.

^ CICIN-SAIN, B. & KNECHT, R. 1998. Integrated coastal and ocean management: concepts and practices. Washington D.C.: Island Press.

^ a b c d IDRUS, M. R. 2009. Hard Habits to Break: Investigating Coastal Resource Utilisations and Management Systems in Sulawesi, Indonesia  Doctor of Philosophy in Environmental Science, University of Canterbury.

^ a b MASSELINK, G. & HUGHES, M. 2003. Introduction to Coastal Processes and Geomorphology, London, Hodder Arnold.

^ KETCHUM, B. H. 1972. The water's edge: critical problems of the coastal zone. In:  Coastal Zone Workshop, 22 May-3 June 1972 Woods Hole, Massachusetts. Cambridge: MIT Press.

^ a b c d CICIN-SAIN, B. 1993. Sustainable Development and Integrated Coastal Management. Ocean and Coastal Management, 21, 11-43.

^ WORLD, COMMISSION, ON, ENVIRONMENT, AND & DEVELOPMENT 1987. Towards Sustainable future, "Our common future". New York: Oxford University Press.

^ "Integrated Coastal Management - Environment - European Commission" .

^ Portal of the Iran ICZM ^ a b PEART, R. 2007. Beyond the Tide: Integrating the management of New Zealand's coasts, Auckland, Environmental Defence Society External links [ edit ] European Commission Coastal Zone Policy ENCORA Coastal WIKI -EU Coordination Action on ICZM Overview ICZM courses in Europe Examining Best Practices in Coastal Zone Planning Lessons and Applications for British Columbia's Central Coast Coastal Zone Management Policy and Politics Class Archived 2009-03-24 at the Wayback Machine Safecoast Knowledge exchange on coastal flooding and climate change in the North Sea region ICZM principles Archived 2007-07-17 at the Wayback Machine ZonaCostera | KüstenZone | CoastalZone Archived 2007-09-27 at the Wayback Machine | FrangeCôtière | KustStrook: Wiki in development with relevant and on-time information, useful for the integrated management of the coastal zones of our world.

Integrated development is everybody's business!

EUCC Marine Team: ICZM in Europe Coastal Zone Management Unit in Barbados Integrated Coastal Zone Management in Iran Integrated coastal zone management (ICZM) is a dynamic Videos Free Educational Videos about Coastal Policy and Zone Management The Future of Coastal Policy textbook overview v t e Coastal management Management Accretion Coastal engineering Coastal management Integrated coastal zone management Managed retreat Submersion Hard engineering A-Jacks Accropode Akmon Artificial reef Breachway Breakwater Cliff stabilization Dolos Flood wall Floodgate Gabion Groyne Jetty Levee Hard engineering Honeycomb sea wall Hudson's equation KOLOS Mole Pier Revetment Riprap Seawall Tetrapod Training wall Van der Meer formula Wharf Xbloc Soft engineering Beach nourishment Beach drainage Dynamic revetment Living shorelines Sand dune stabilization Soft engineering Related topics Beach evolution Coastal erosion Geotechnical engineering Land reclamation Longshore transport Modern recession of beaches Stream restoration v t e Coastal geography Landforms Anchialine pool Archipelago Atoll Avulsion Ayre Barrier island Bay Bight Bodden Brackish marsh Cape Channel Cliff Coast Coastal plain Coastal waterfall Continental margin Continental shelf Coral reef Cove Dune cliff-top Estuary Firth Fjard Fjord Freshwater marsh Fundus Gat Geo Gulf Gut Hapua Headland Inlet Intertidal wetland Island Islet Isthmus Liman Lagoon Machair Mudflat Natural arch Peninsula Reef Ria Salt marsh Shoal Skerry Sound Spit Stack Strait Strand plain Submarine canyon Tidal island Tidal marsh Tide pool Tied island Tombolo Waituna Windwatt Beaches Beach cusps Beach evolution Beach ridge Beach wrack Beaches in estuaries and bays Beachrock Coastal morphodynamics Pocket beach Raised beach Recession Shell beach Shingle beach Storm beach Wash margin River mouths Debouch Mouth bar River delta mega regressive Processes Blowhole Cliffed coast Coastal biogeomorphology Coastal erosion Concordant coastline Current Cuspate foreland Discordant coastline Emergent coastline Feeder bluff Flat coast Graded shoreline Ingression coast Large-scale coastal behaviour Longshore drift Marine regression Marine transgression Raised shoreline Rip current Rocky shore Sea cave Sea foam Shoal peresyp Steep coast Submergent coastline Surf break Surf zone Surge channel Swash Undertow Volcanic arc Wave-cut platform Wave shoaling Wind fetch Wind wave Management Accretion Coastal management Integrated coastal zone management Submersion Related Bulkhead line Coastal engineering Grain size boulder clay cobble granule gravel pebble sand shingle silt Intertidal zone Littoral zone Physical oceanography Region of freshwater influence River plume Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Integrated_coastal_zone_management&oldid=1305703697 " Category : Coastal geography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles containing buzzwords from April 2015 Articles with peacock terms from October 2021 All articles with peacock terms All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 16:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Integrated coastal zone management 11 languages Add topic

