Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Use in mathematical logic Toggle Use in mathematical logic subsection 2.1 Logical systems 2.1.1 Weak soundness 2.1.2 Strong soundness 2.1.3 Arithmetic soundness 2.2 Relation to completeness 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Soundness 19 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Português کوردی Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Term in logic and deductive reasoning In logic and deductive reasoning , an argument is sound if it is both valid in form and has no false premises .

[ 1 ] Soundness has a related meaning in mathematical logic , wherein a formal system of logic is sound if and only if every well-formed formula that can be proven in the system is logically valid with respect to the logical semantics of the system.

Definition [ edit ] In deductive reasoning , a sound argument is an argument that is valid and all of its premises are true (and as a consequence its conclusion is true as well). An argument is valid if, assuming its premises are true, the conclusion must be true. An example of a sound argument is the following well-known syllogism : (premises) All men are mortal.

Socrates is a man.

(conclusion) Therefore, Socrates is mortal.

Because of the logical necessity of the conclusion, this argument is valid; and because the argument is valid and its premises are true, the argument is sound.

However, an argument can be valid without being sound. For example: All birds can fly.

Penguins are birds.

Therefore, penguins can fly.

This argument is valid as the conclusion must be true assuming the premises are true. However, the first premise is false. Not all birds can fly (for example, ostriches). For an argument to be sound, the argument must be valid and its premises must be true.

[ 2 ] Some authors, such as Lemmon , have used the term "soundness" as synonymous with what is now meant by "validity", [ 3 ] which left them with no particular word for what is now called "soundness". But nowadays, this division of the terms is very widespread.

Use in mathematical logic [ edit ] Logical systems [ edit ] In mathematical logic , a logical system has the soundness property if every formula that can be proved in the system is logically valid with respect to the semantics of the system.
In most cases, this comes down to its rules having the property of preserving truth .

[ 4 ] The converse of soundness is known as completeness .

A logical system with syntactic entailment ⊢ ⊢ {\displaystyle \vdash } and semantic entailment ⊨ ⊨ {\displaystyle \models } is sound if for any sequence A 1 , A 2 , .

.

.

, A n {\displaystyle A_{1},A_{2},...,A_{n}} of sentences in its language, if A 1 , A 2 , .

.

.

, A n ⊢ ⊢ C {\displaystyle A_{1},A_{2},...,A_{n}\vdash C} , then A 1 , A 2 , .

.

.

, A n ⊨ ⊨ C {\displaystyle A_{1},A_{2},...,A_{n}\models C} . In other words, a system is sound when all of its theorems are validities .

Soundness is among the most fundamental properties of mathematical logic. The soundness property provides the initial reason for counting a logical system as desirable. The completeness property means that every validity (truth) is provable. Together they imply that all and only validities are provable.

Most proofs of soundness are trivial.

[ citation needed ] For example, in an axiomatic system , proof of soundness amounts to verifying the validity of the axioms and that the rules of inference preserve validity (or the weaker property, truth). If the system allows Hilbert-style deduction , it requires only verifying the validity of the axioms and one rule of inference, namely modus ponens (and sometimes substitution).

Soundness properties come in two main varieties: weak and strong soundness, of which the former is a restricted form of the latter.

Weak soundness [ edit ] Weak soundness of a deductive system is the property that any sentence that is provable in that deductive system is also true on all interpretations or structures of the semantic theory for the language upon which that theory is based. In symbols, where S is the deductive system, L the language together with its semantic theory, and P a sentence of L : if ⊢ S P , then also ⊨ L P .

Strong soundness [ edit ] Strong soundness of a deductive system is the property that any sentence P of the language upon which the deductive system is based that is derivable from a set Γ of sentences of that language is also a logical consequence of that set, in the sense that any model that makes all members of Γ true will also make P true. In symbols, where Γ is a set of sentences of L : if Γ ⊢ S P , then also Γ ⊨ L P . Notice that in the statement of strong soundness, when Γ is empty, we have the statement of weak soundness.

Arithmetic soundness [ edit ] If T is a theory whose objects of discourse can be interpreted as natural numbers , we say T is arithmetically sound if all theorems of T are actually true about the standard mathematical integers.  For further information, see ω-consistent theory .

Relation to completeness [ edit ] The converse of the soundness property is the semantic completeness property. A deductive system with a semantic theory is strongly complete if every sentence P that is a semantic consequence of a set of sentences Γ can be derived in the deduction system from that set. In symbols: whenever Γ ⊨ P , then also Γ ⊢ P . Completeness of first-order logic was first explicitly established by Gödel , though some of the main results were contained in earlier work of Skolem .

Informally, a soundness theorem for a deductive system expresses that all provable sentences are true. Completeness states that all true sentences are provable.

Gödel's first incompleteness theorem shows that for languages sufficient for doing a certain amount of arithmetic, there can be no consistent and effective deductive system that is complete with respect to the intended interpretation of the symbolism of that language. Thus, not all sound deductive systems are complete in this special sense of completeness, in which the class of models (up to isomorphism ) is restricted to the intended one. The original completeness proof applies to all classical models, not some special proper subclass of intended ones.

See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Soundness (interactive proof) Type soundness References [ edit ] ^ Smith, Peter (2010).

"Types of proof system" (PDF) . p. 5.

^ Gensler, Harry J., 1945- (January 6, 2017).

Introduction to logic (Third ed.). New York.

ISBN 978-1-138-91058-4 .

OCLC 957680480 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Lemmon, Edward John (1998).

Beginning logic . Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall/CRC.

ISBN 978-0-412-38090-7 .

^ Mindus, Patricia (2009-09-18).

A Real Mind: The Life and Work of Axel Hägerström . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 978-90-481-2895-2 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Hinman, P. (2005).

Fundamentals of Mathematical Logic . A K Peters.

ISBN 1-56881-262-0 .

Copi, Irving (1979), Symbolic Logic (5th ed.), Macmillan Publishing Co., ISBN 0-02-324880-7 Boolos, Burgess, Jeffrey.

Computability and Logic , 4th Ed, Cambridge, 2002.

External links [ edit ] Wiktionary has definitions related to Soundness .

Validity and Soundness in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Metalogic and metamathematics Cantor's theorem Entscheidungsproblem Church–Turing thesis Consistency Effective method Foundations of mathematics of geometry Gödel's completeness theorem Gödel's incompleteness theorems Soundness Completeness Decidability Interpretation Löwenheim–Skolem theorem Metatheorem Satisfiability Independence Type–token distinction Use–mention distinction v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Soundness&oldid=1290401242 " Categories : Arguments Concepts in logic Deductive reasoning Model theory Proof theory Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2008 This page was last edited on 14 May 2025, at 15:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Soundness 19 languages Add topic

