Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Affair with Luise Rinser 2 Work Toggle Work subsection 2.1 Foundations of Christian Faith 2.2 Economic and immanent Trinity 2.3 God's self-communication 2.4 Transfinalization 2.5 Awareness of God 2.5.1 God as Absolute Mystery 2.6 Homanisation and Incarnation 2.6.1 Multiple Incarnations 2.7 Incarnation-grace 2.8 Mode of grace 2.9 Language about God: univocity and equivocation 2.10 Criticism of Jesusism 2.11 Christology 2.11.1 Christian faith and God's self-communication 2.11.2 Transcendental Christology and mediation 2.11.3 Saviour and hypostatic union 2.11.4 God-Man in history 2.11.5 Death and resurrection 2.12 Anonymous Christianity 2.13 Non-Christian religions 3 Selected bibliography 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Works cited 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Karl Rahner 30 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili Latina Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German Catholic theologian The Reverend Karl Rahner SJ Portrait of Rahner by L. M. Cremer Born ( 1904-03-05 ) 5 March 1904 Freiburg im Breisgau , Grand Duchy of Baden , German Empire Died 30 March 1984 (1984-03-30) (aged 80) Innsbruck , Tyrol , Austria Education Alma mater University of Freiburg University of Innsbruck Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Transcendental Thomism Main interests Christology Trinity faith Notable ideas Anonymous Christian , Economic Trinity and Immanent Trinity, Supernatural Existential,
 Everyday Mysticism, God's Self-Communication Karl Rahner SJ ( German: [ˈʁaːnɐ] ; 5 March 1904 – 30 March 1984) was a German Jesuit priest and theologian who, alongside Henri de Lubac , Hans Urs von Balthasar , and Yves Congar , is considered to be one of the most influential Catholic theologians of the 20th-century. He was the brother of Hugo Rahner , also a Jesuit scholar.

Before the Second Vatican Council , Rahner worked alongside Yves Congar , Henri de Lubac , and Marie-Dominique Chenu , theologians associated with the emerging school of theological thought known as Nouvelle théologie . The Council was influenced by Rahner's theology and his understanding of Catholic faith.

[ 2 ] Biography [ edit ] Karl Rahner's parents, Karl and Luise (née Trescher) Rahner, had seven children, of whom Karl was the fourth. His father was a professor in a local college and his mother had a profound religious personality, which influenced his home atmosphere. Karl attended primary and secondary school in Freiburg, entering the Society of Jesus upon graduation. He began his Jesuit formation in the North German Province of the Jesuits in 1922, four years after his older brother Hugo entered the same order. Deeply affected by the spirituality of Ignatius of Loyola during the initial phase of his formation (1922–24), he concentrated the next phase of his formation (1924–7) on Catholic scholastic philosophy and the modern German philosophers: he seems to have been particularly interested in Immanuel Kant and two contemporary Thomists , the Belgian Jesuit Joseph Maréchal and the French Jesuit Pierre Rousselot , who were to influence Rahner's understanding of Thomas Aquinas in his later writings.

[ a ] As a part of his Jesuit training, Rahner taught Latin to novices at Feldkirch (1927–29), then began his theological studies at the Jesuit theologate in Valkenburg aan de Geul in 1929. This allowed him to develop a thorough understanding of patristic theology , also developing interests in spiritual theology, mysticism , and the history of piety. Rahner was ordained a priest on 26 July 1932, and then made his final year of tertianship , the study and taking of Ignatius' Spiritual Exercises , at St. Andrä in Austria's Lavanttal Valley .

[ 4 ] Because Rahner's superiors wished him to teach philosophy at Pullach , he returned home to Freiburg in 1934 to study for a doctorate in philosophy , delving more deeply into the philosophy of Kant and Maréchal, and attended seminars by Martin Heidegger .

[ 5 ] His philosophy dissertation Geist in Welt , an interpretation of Aquinas's epistemology influenced by the transcendental Thomism of Maréchal and the existentialism of Heidegger, [ b ] was ultimately rejected by his mentor Martin Honecker , allegedly for its bias toward Heidegger's philosophy and not sufficiently expressing the Catholic neo-scholastic tradition .

[ c ] In 1936 Rahner was sent to Innsbruck to continue his theological studies and there he completed his habilitation .

[ d ] Soon after he was appointed a Privatdozent (lecturer) in the faculty of theology of the University of Innsbruck, in July 1937. In 1939 the Nazis took over the university and Rahner, while staying in Austria, was invited to Vienna to work in the Pastoral Institute, where he both taught and became active in pastoral work until 1949. He then returned to the theology faculty at Innsbruck and taught on a variety of topics which later became the essays published in Schriften zur Theologie ( [ 7 ] ) : the collection is not a systematic presentation of Rahner's views, but, rather a diverse series of essays on theological matters characterised by his probing, questioning search for truth.

[ 8 ] The Karl Rahner centre in Freiburg In early 1962, with no prior warning, Rahner's superiors in the Society of Jesus told him that he was under Rome's pre-censorship, which meant that he could not publish or lecture without advance permission. The objections of the Roman authorities focused mainly on Rahner's views on the Eucharist and Mariology ; [ citation needed ] however, the practical import of the pre-censorship decision was voided in November 1962 when, without any objection, John XXIII appointed Rahner a peritus (expert advisor) to the Second Vatican Council : Rahner had complete access to the council and numerous opportunities to share his thoughts with the participants. Rahner's influence at Vatican II was thus widespread, and he was subsequently chosen as one of seven theologians who would develop Lumen gentium , the dogmatic explication of the doctrine of the Church.

[ e ] [ 10 ] The council's receptiveness towards other religious traditions may be linked to Rahner's notions of the renovation of the church, God's universal salvific revelation, and his desire to support and encourage the ecumenical movement .

[ f ] During the council, Rahner accepted the chair for Christianity and the Philosophy of Religion at the University of Munich and taught there from 1964 to 1967. Subsequently, he was appointed to a chair in dogmatic theology at the Catholic theological faculty of the University of Münster , where he stayed until his retirement in 1971.

[ 12 ] Rahner then moved to Munich and in 1981 to Innsbruck , where he remained for the next 3 years as an active writer and lecturer, also continuing his active pastoral ministry. He published several volumes (23 total in English ) of collected essays for the Schriften zur Theologie (Theological Investigations) , expanded the Kleines theologisches Wörterbuch (Theological Dictionary) , co-authored other texts such as Unity of the Churches: An Actual Possibility with Heinrich Fries, and in 1976 he completed the long-promised systematic work, Foundations of Christian Faith .

[ 13 ] [ g ] Rahner's burial niche. Jesuit Church, Innsbruck , Austria.

Rahner fell ill from exhaustion and died on 30 March 1984 at the age of 80, after a birthday celebration that also honoured his scholarship. He was buried at the Jesuit Church [ de ] in Innsbruck.

[ 14 ] During his years of philosophical and theological study and teaching, Rahner produced some 4,000 written works.

[ 15 ] Affair with Luise Rinser [ edit ] From 1962 to his death in 1984, Rahner engaged in a 22-year long romantic affair with German author Luise Rinser . During this period, the couple sent roughly 4,000 letters to each other, detailing their romantic feelings. The couple's letters were originally published in the 1990's in German under the title Gratwanderung , drawing embarrassment and public ridicule for Rinser.

[ 16 ] Work [ edit ] Rahner interviewed in 1974 Rahner's output is extraordinarily voluminous. In addition to the above-mentioned writings, his other major works include: the ten-volume encyclopaedia, Lexicon für Theologie und Kirche ; a six-volume theological encyclopaedia, Sacramentum Mundi , and many other books, essays, and articles.

[ h ] In addition to his own work, the reference texts that Rahner edited also added significantly to the general impact of his own theological views.

The basis for Rahner's theology is that all human beings have a latent ("unthematic") experience of God in any perception of meaning or "transcendental experience". It is only because of this proto-revelation that recognising a distinctively special revelation (such as the Christian Gospel ) is possible.

[ 17 ] His theology influenced the Second Vatican Council and was ground-breaking for the development of what is generally seen as the modern understanding of Catholicism . Until the early 2000s his thought also shaped Catholic theology in the United States.

[ 18 ] A popular anecdote, that resonates with those who find some of Karl Rahner's works difficult reading, comes from his brother Hugo who quipped that in his retirement he'd try to "translate his brother's works ... into German!" [ 19 ] Foundations of Christian Faith [ edit ] Written near the end of his life, Rahner's Foundations of Christian Faith ( Grundkurs des Glaubens ) is the most developed and systematic of his works, most of which were published in the form of essays.

Economic and immanent Trinity [ edit ] Among the most important of his essays was The Trinity , in which he argues that "the economic Trinity is the immanent Trinity, and the immanent Trinity is the economic Trinity" (sometimes called 'Rahner's rule'). That is to say, God communicates Himself to humanity ("economic" Trinity) as He really is in the divine Life ("immanent" Trinity).

Rahner was emphatic that the identity between "economic" Trinity and "immanent" Trinity does not lead to Modalism , because God could not communicate Himself to humanity as threefold ( dreifaltig ) unless He were threefold in reality. Nonetheless, some theologians and Christian philosophers (e.g., Jürgen Moltmann ) have found his teaching to tend strongly in a Modalist direction.

[ 20 ] God's self-communication [ edit ] Rahner maintained that the fulfillment of human existence consists in receiving God's self-communication, and that the human being is actually constituted by this divine self-communication. He identifies grace with the self-communication of God. In this vein, he writes: God wishes to communicate himself, to pour forth the love which he himself is. That is the first and the last of his real plans and hence of his real world too. Everything else exists so that this one thing might be: the eternal miracle of infinite Love. And so God makes a creature whom he can love: he creates man. He creates him in such a way that he can receive this Love which is God himself, and that he can and must at the same time accept it for what it is: the ever astounding wonder, the unexpected, unexacted gift [...] Thus in this second respect God must so create man that love does not only pour forth free and unexacted, but also so that man as real partner, as one who can accept or reject it, can experience and accept it as the unexacted event and wonder not owed to him, the real man.

[ 21 ] Transfinalization [ edit ] See also: Teleology , Extrinsic finality , and Intrinsic finality Rahner was a critic of substance theory and was concerned about the finality of liturgy. He proposed instead to rename transubstantiation into transfinalization .

[ citation needed ] John Hardon defined "transfinalization" as: The view of Christ's presence in the Eucharist that the purpose or finality of the bread and wine is changed by the words of consecration. They are said to serve a new function, as sacred elements that arouse the faith of the people in the mystery of Christ's redemptive love.

[ 22 ] Pope Paul VI in the encyclical Mysterium fidei , mentioning the term 'transfinalization' one time, without citing Rahner's name, stated: [...]it is not permissible to[...] discuss the mystery of transubstantiation without mentioning what the Council of Trent had to say about the marvelous conversion of the whole substance [...] as if they involve nothing more than " transignification ," or "transfinalization" as they call it...

[ 23 ] Haldon states that in Mysterium fidei Pope Paul VI "condemned" the notion of "transfinalization", which was one of the "principal errors about the Real Presence that were already current in his day".

[ 22 ] Awareness of God [ edit ] The basis for Rahner's theology is that all human beings have a latent ("unthematic") awareness of God in any experiences of limitation in knowledge or freedom as finite subjects. Because such experience is the "condition of possibility" for knowledge and freedom as such, Rahner borrows the language of Kant to describe this experience as "transcendental".

[ 4 ] [ 8 ] This transcendental experiential factor reveals his closeness to Maréchal's transcendental Thomism.

[ 24 ] Such is the extent of Rahner's idea of the "natural knowledge of God"—what can be known by reason prior to the advent of "special" revelation—that God is only approached asymptotically, in the mode of what Rahner calls "absolute mystery". While one may try to furnish proofs for God's existence, these explicit proofs ultimately refer to the inescapable orientation towards mystery which constitute—by transcendental necessity—the very nature of the human being.

God as Absolute Mystery [ edit ] Rahner often prefers the term "mystery" to that of "God".

[ 25 ] He identifies the God of Absolute Being as Absolute Mystery.

[ 26 ] At best, philosophy approaches God only asymptotically , evoking the question whether attempts to know God are in vain. Can the line between the human asymptote and the Mystery asymptote connect?

[ 27 ] [ clarification needed ] In Rahner's theology, the Absolute Mystery reveals himself in self-communication.

[ 28 ] Revelation, however, does not resolve the Mystery; it increases cognizance of God's incomprehensibility.

[ 29 ] Experiences of the mystery of themselves point people to the Absolute Mystery, "an always-ever-greater Mystery." [ 30 ] Even in heaven, God will still be an incomprehensible mystery.

[ 29 ] Homanisation and Incarnation [ edit ] Rahner examines evolution in his work Homanisation (1958, rev. 1965). The title represents a term he coined, deriving it from "hominization", the theory of man's evolutionary origins. The book's preface describes the limits of Catholic theology with respect to evolution, further on giving a summary of official church teaching on the theory. He then continues in the next sections to propound "fundamental theology" in order to elucidate the background or foundation of church teaching. In the third section he raises some philosophical and theological questions relating to the concept of becoming, the concept of cause, the distinction between spirit and matter, the unity of spirit and matter, the concept of operation, and the creation of the spiritual soul.

[ 24 ] In his writing, Rahner does not simply deal with the origin of man but with his existence and his future, issues that can be of some concern to evolutionary theory. Central for Rahner is the theological doctrine of grace , which for Rahner is a constituent element of man's existence, so that grace is a permanent modification of human nature in a supernatural "existential", to use a Heidegger term. Accordingly, Rahner doubts the real possibility of a state of pure nature ( natura pura ), which is human existence without being involved with grace. In treating the present existence of man and his future as human, Rahner affirms that "the fulfillment of human existence occurs in receiving God's gift of Himself, not only in the beatific vision at the end of time, but present now as seed in grace." [ 31 ] Multiple Incarnations [ edit ] See also: Exotheology#Christianity Rahner has been open to the prospect of extraterrestrial intelligence , the idea that cosmic evolution has yielded sentient life forms in other galaxies . Logically, this raises for Rahner some important questions of philosophical , ethical , and theological significance: he argues against any theological prohibition of the notion of extraterrestrial life, while separating the existential significance of such life forms from that of angels . Moreover, Rahner advances the possibility of multiple Incarnations, but does not delve into it: given the strong Christological orientation of his theology, it does not appear likely he would have propended for repetitions of the Incarnation of Christ .

[ 31 ] Incarnation-grace [ edit ] For Rahner, at the heart of Christian doctrine is the co-reality of incarnation-grace. Incarnation and grace appear as technical terms to describe the central message of the Gospel: God has communicated Himself. The self-communication of God is crucial in  view: grace is not something other than God, not some celestial 'substance,' but God Himself. The event of Jesus Christ is, according to Rahner, the centre-point of the self-communication of God. God, insists Rahner, does not only communicate Himself from without ; rather, grace is the constitutive element both of the objective reality of revelation (the incarnate Word) and the subjective principle of our hearing (the internal Word and the Holy Spirit). To capture the relation between these aspects of grace, Rahner appropriates the Heideggerian terminology of "thematization:" the objective mediation is the explicit "thematization" of what is always already subjectively proffered – the history of grace's categorical expression without, culminating in the event of Jesus Christ, is the manifestation of what is always already on offer through the supernatural existential, which enters amid a transcendental horizon within .

[ 32 ] Mode of grace [ edit ] Rahner's particular interpretation of the mode in which grace makes itself present is that grace is a permanent modification of human nature in a supernatural existential (a phrase borrowed from Heidegger ). Grace is perceived in light of Christianity as a constitutive element of human existence. For this reason, Rahner denies the possibility of a state of pure nature ( natura pura , human existence without being-involved with grace), which according to him is a counterfactual.

Language about God: univocity and equivocation [ edit ] Like others of his generation, Rahner was much concerned with refuting the propositional approach to theology typical of the Counter-Reformation . The alternative he proposes is one where statements about God are always referring back to the original experience of God in mystery. In this sense, language regarding being is analogically predicated of the mystery, inasmuch as the mystery is always present but not in the same way as any determinate possible object of consciousness.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Rahner would claim Thomas Aquinas as the most important influence on his thought, but also spoke highly of Heidegger as "my teacher", and in his elder years Heidegger used to visit Rahner regularly in Freiburg.

[ 35 ] Some have noted that the analogy of being is greatly diminished in Rahner's thought. Instead, they claim, equivocal predication dominates much of Rahner's language about God. In this respect, similarity between him and other Thomist-inspired theologians is seen as problematic. Others, however, identify Rahner's primary influence not in Heidegger but in the Neo-Thomists of the early 20th century, especially the writings of Joseph Maréchal .

[ 17 ] Criticism of Jesusism [ edit ] Rahner criticised Jesusism , despite his stated respect for the position. Jesusism tends to focus narrowly on Jesus' life for imitation, apart from the Christian God or Church .

[ 36 ] Christology [ edit ] If the task of Christology is to make intelligible the Christian faith that Jesus of Nazareth , a historical person, is Christ as the centre of all human history and the final and full revelation of God to humanity—then Rahner feels that within "the contemporary mentality which sees the world from an evolutionary point of view" [ 37 ] the person of Christ should not be emphasised in his unique individuality whilst ignoring any possibility of combining the event of Christ with the process of human history as a whole. In fact, it appears there are some limitations of classic Christological formula suggested by the Council of Chalcedon (AD 451) which affirms "one identical Son, our Lord Jesus Christ ... perfect both in his divinity and in his humanity ... [with] two natures without any commingling or change or division or separation ... united in one person." [ 38 ] Moreover, the Chalcedon formula adopts philosophical concepts such as nature and hypostatic union which are no longer used to explain and interpret religious experiences.

[ 39 ] Christology flowchart explaining the various Christological positions and their names Thus, Rahner introduces transcendental Christology , which interprets the event and person of Christ in relation to the essential structure of the human person, reflecting on the essential conditions of all human experiences, conditions which transcend any one particular kind of experience.

[ 40 ] One should however first look into Rahner's basic insights on Christology within an evolutionary view of the world, which claims that Christian faith sees all things in the world come from the one same origin, God. This means that in spite of their differences, there is "an inner similarity and commonality" among things, which forms a single world. This commonality is most clearly disclosed in a human being as a form of the unity of spirit and matter: it is only in a human person that spirit and matter can be experienced in their real essence and in their unity. Rahner states that spirit represents the unique mode of existence of a single person when that person becomes self-conscious and is always oriented towards the incomprehensible Mystery called God. However, it is only in the free acceptance by the subject of this mystery and in its unpredictable disposal of the subject that the person can genuinely undertake this process of returning to the self. Conversely, matter is the condition which makes human beings estranged from themselves towards other objects in the world and makes possible an immediate intercommunication with other spiritual creatures in time and space. Even if there is an essential difference between spirit and matter, that is not understood as an essential opposition: the relationship between the two can be said as "the intrinsic nature of matter to develop towards spirit".

[ 41 ] This kind of becoming from matter to spirit can be called self-transcendence which "can be only understood as taking place by the power of the absolute fullness of being": [ 42 ] the evolutionary view of the world allows us to consider that humanity is nothing but the latest stage of the self-transcendence of matter.

[ 43 ] Christian faith and God's self-communication [ edit ] According to Rahner, Christian faith affirms that the cosmos reaches its final fulfillment when it receives the immediate self-communication of its own ground in the spiritual creatures which are its goal and its high point.

[ 44 ] Rahner further states that God's self-communication to the world is the final goal of the world and that the process of self-transcendence makes the world already directed towards this self-communication and its acceptance by the world.

[ 45 ] As a consequence, and explaining the place of Christ in this whole process of self-transcendence of the world, Rahner says that it has to do with the process of the intercommunication of spiritual subjects, because otherwise there is no way to retain the unity of the very process. God's self-communication is given to cosmic subjects who have freedom to accept or reject it and who have intercommunication with other existents. It takes place only if the subjects freely accept it, and only then forms a common history in a sense that "it is addressed to all men in their intercommunication" then "addressed to others as a call to their freedom".

[ 46 ] In this sense, Rahner claims that "God's self-communication must have a permanent beginning and in this beginning a guarantee that it has taken place, a guarantee by which it can rightly demand a free decision to accept this divine self-communication." [ 46 ] Within this scheme, the saviour refers to a historical person "who signifies the beginning of the absolute self-communication of God which is moving towards its goal, that beginning which indicates that this self-communication for everyone has taken place irrevocably and has been victoriously inaugurated." [ 46 ] Hypostatic union , therefore, happens in an intrinsic moment when God's self-communication and its acceptance by that person are met, and this union is open to all spiritual creatures with the bestowal of grace . In order to be fulfilled, this event should have "a concrete tangibility in history".

[ 47 ] Transcendental Christology and mediation [ edit ] If one then examines Rahner's transcendental Christology , it may be seen that it "presupposes an understanding of the relationship of mutual conditioning and mediation in human existence between what is transcendentally necessary and what is concretely and contingently historical." [ 48 ] It is a sort of relationship between the two elements in such a way that "the transcendental element is always an intrinsic condition of the historical element in the historical self" while "in spite of its being freely posited, the historical element co-determines existence in an absolute sense." [ 48 ] Transcendental Christology is "the experiences which man always and inescapably has." [ 48 ] Human beings were created to freely transcend themselves and the objects in the world, towards the incomprehensible Mystery called God; the limitations of human situation make a human being hope that the full meaning of humanity and the unity of everything in the world will be fulfilled by God's self-giving. Furthermore, God's self-communication and human hope for it should be "mediated historically" because of "the unity of transcendentality and historicity in human existence": human hope looks in history for its salvation from God that "becomes final and irreversible, and is the end in an 'eschatological' sense." [ 49 ] At this point Rahner proposes two possibilities of human salvation, i.e. either as "fulfillment in an absolute sense" which means the establishment of the Kingdom of God on earth, or as "a historical event within history".

[ 50 ] The event of human salvation by God's self-giving love should be the event of a human person, because God's salvific love can only be effective in history when a person freely accepts his love, surrenders everything to God in death, and in death is accepted by God.

[ 50 ] Rahner significantly affirms that the character of the saviour is exemplary and absolute: given the unity of the world and of history from the view point of both God and the world, such an "individual" destiny has "exemplary" significance for the world as a whole. Such a man with this destiny is what is meant by an "absolute saviour".

[ 50 ] Saviour and hypostatic union [ edit ] Rahner believes that the saviour described by his transcendental Christology is not diverse from the one presented by the classic Christological formulations of Chalcedon , which used a concept of hypostatic union to claim Jesus as the Christ. Accordingly, he then proceeds to articulate the meaning of the hypostatic union .

[ 51 ] The issue is how to understand the meaning of "human being": Rahner understands the phrase "became man" as assuming an individual human nature as God's own, and emphasises "the self-emptying of God, his becoming, the kenosis and genesis of God himself." [ 52 ] God "assumes by creating" and also "creates by assuming", that is, he creates by emptying himself, and therefore, of course, he himself is in the emptying. He creates the human reality by the very fact that he assumes it as his own.

[ 52 ] God's creating-by-emptying act belongs to God's power and freedom as the absolute one and to God's self-giving love expressed in Scripture .

[ 52 ] Therefore, it is legitimate for Rahner to assert that God "who is not subject to change in himself can himself be subject to change in something else." This is what the doctrine of the Incarnation teaches us: "in and in spite of his immutability he can truly become something: he himself, he in time." [ 53 ] According to Rahner, human beings are created to be oriented towards the incomprehensible Mystery called God. However, this human orientation towards the Mystery can be fully grasped only if we as humans freely choose to be grasped by the incomprehensible one: if God assumes human nature as God's own reality with God's irrevocable offer of God's self-communication, and a person freely accepts it, the person is united with God, reaching the very point towards which humanity is always moving by virtue of its essence, a God-Man which is fully fulfilled in the person of Jesus of Nazareth claimed by Christian faith. In this sense, Rahner sees the incarnation of God as "the unique and highest instance of the actualization of the essence of human reality".

[ 54 ] God-Man in history [ edit ] To answer the question of how we find a God-Man in history, Rahner employs a historical approach to Christology by examining the history of the life and death of Jesus of Nazareth and proposes two theses beforehand: 1) Christian faith requires a historical basis; and 2) considering a possibility of significant difference between who the person is and the extent to which that person verbalises or expresses identity, it is possible both to say that "the self-understanding of the pre-resurrection Jesus may not contradict in an historical sense the Christian understanding of his person and his salvific significance", and to state that his self-understanding may not coincide with the content of Christological faith.

[ 55 ] To establish the grounds of Christian faith, Rahner asserts that two points should be proven as historically credible—first, that Jesus saw himself "as the eschatological prophet, as the absolute and definitive saviour", and second, that the resurrection of Jesus is the absolute self-communication of God.

[ 56 ] There are several historical elements concerning Jesus' identity as a Jew and "radical reformer": his drastic behaviour in solidarity with social and religious outcasts based on his belief in God, his essential preaching "as a call to conversion", his gathering disciples, his hope for conversions of others, his acceptance of death on the cross "as the inevitable consequence of fidelity to his mission".

[ 57 ] Death and resurrection [ edit ] Rahner states that the death and the resurrection of Jesus are two aspects of a single event not to be separated, [ 58 ] even though the resurrection is not a historical event in time and place like the death of Jesus. What the Scripture offers are powerful encounters in which the disciples come to experience the spirit of the risen Lord Jesus among them, provoking a resurrection faith of the disciples as "a unique fact".

[ 59 ] The resurrection is not a return to life in the temporal sphere, but the seal of God the Father upon all that Jesus stood for and preached in his pre-Easter life. "By the resurrection... Jesus is vindicated as the absolute saviour" by God: [ 60 ] it means "this death as entered into in free obedience and as surrendering life completely to God, reaches fulfillment and becomes historically tangible for us only in the resurrection." [ 61 ] Thus, in the resurrection, the life and death of Jesus are understood as "the cause of God's salvific will" and open the door to our salvation : "we are saved because this man who is one of us has been saved by God, and God has thereby made his salvific will present in the world historically, really and irrevocably." [ 61 ] In this sense, Jesus of Nazareth becomes a God-Man, the absolute saviour.

Anonymous Christianity [ edit ] Anonymous Christianity is the theological concept that declares that people who have never heard the Christian Gospel might be saved through Christ .

Inspiration for this idea sometimes comes from the Second Vatican Council's Lumen gentium , which teaches that those "who through no fault of their own do not know the Gospel of Christ or His Church, but who nevertheless seek God with a sincere heart, and moved by grace, try in their actions to do His will as they know it through the dictates of their conscience—those too may achieve eternal salvation." [ 62 ] Rahner's development of the idea preceded the council, and became more insistent after it received its conciliar formulation. Non-Christians could have "in [their] basic orientation and fundamental decision", Rahner wrote, "accepted the salvific grace of God, through Christ, although [they] may never have heard of the Christian revelation." [ 63 ] His writings on the subject were somewhat related to his views about the mode of grace.

[ 64 ] Non-Christian religions [ edit ] Rahner's transcendental Christology opens another horizon which comprises non-Christian religions, as God's universal saving will in Christ extends to non-Christians: since Christ is the saviour of all people, salvation for non-Christians comes only through Christ ( anonymous Christians ). Just as importantly, it is possible to say that Christians can learn from other religions or atheistic humanism because God's grace is and can be operative in them.

[ 65 ] The presence of Christ in other religions operates in and through his Spirit [ 66 ] and non-Christians respond to the grace of God through "the unreflexive and 'searching Christology ' " (searching "memory" of the absolute saviour) present in the hearts of all persons.

[ 67 ] Three specific attitudes become involved: 1) an absolute love towards one's neighbours; 2) an attitude of readiness for death; and 3) an attitude of hope for the future.

[ 68 ] In practising these, the person is acting from and responding to the grace of God that was fully manifest in the life of Jesus.

[ 4 ] Selected bibliography [ edit ] A complete bibliography is available at [2] .

1954–1984.

Schriften zur Theologie . 16 volumes. Einsiedeln: Benziger Verlag.

1965.

Homanisation . Translated by W. J. O’Hara. West Germany: Herder K.G.

1968.

Spirit in the World . Revised edition by J. B. Metz. Translated by William V. Dych. (Translation of Geist in Welt: Zur Metaphysik der endlichen Erkenntnis bei Thomas von Aquin . Innsbruck: Verlag Felizian Rauch, 1939; 2nd ed. Revised by J. B. Metz. München: Kösel-Verlag, 1957) New York: Herder and Herder.

1969.

Hearers of the Word . Revised edition by J. B. Metz. Translated by Michael Richards. (Translation of Hörer des Wortes: Zur Grundlegung einer Religionsphilosophie . München: Verlag Kösel-Pustet, 1941) New York: Herder and Herder.

1970.

The Trinity . Translated by Joseph Donceel . New York: Herder and Herder.

1978, 1987.

Foundations of Christian Faith: An Introduction to the Idea of Christianity . Translated by William V. Dych. (Translation of Grundkurs des Glaubens: Einführung in den Begriff des Christentums . Freiburg: Verlag Herder, 1976) New York: The Seabury Press; New York: Crossroad.

1985.

I Remember . New York: Crossroad.

1990.

Faith in a Wintry Season: Conversations and Interviews With Karl Rahner in the Last Years of His Life , with Paul Imhof & Hubert Biallowons, eds. New York: Crossroad.

1993.

Content of Faith: The Best of Karl Rahner's Theological Writings . New York: Crossroad.

See also [ edit ] Catholicism portal Luise Rinser Notes [ edit ] ^ As well as offering Rahner a way to deal with Kant 's transcendental method in relation to Thomistic epistemology , Maréchal and Rousselot, as Rahner himself later mentioned, deeply influenced his own philosophical and theological work. Maréchal was famous for his study on Kant and Thomism, especially for applying Kant's transcendental method to Thomistic epistemology.

[ 3 ] ^ That is, the relation between Aquinas's notion of dynamic mind and Heidegger's analysis of Dasein , or "being-in-the-world".

^ According to Herbert Vorgrimler , Honecker's rejection of Rahner's dissertation reflected the former's dislike of Heidegger's philosophy. Thirty four years later the Philosophical Faculty of the University of Innsbruck gave Rahner an honorary doctorate for his philosophical works, especially for his failed dissertation, published in 1939 as Geist in Welt ( Spirit in World ). At any rate, it was in the early 1930s that Rahner elucidated his conviction that the human search for meaning was rooted in the unlimited horizon of God's own being experienced within the world.

[ 6 ] ^ A second dissertation qualifying one to teach at university level. The English title of this dissertation was From the Side of Christ: The Origin of the Church as Second Eve from the Side of Christ the Second Adam. An Examination of the Typological Meaning of John 19:34 .

^ Rahner had input to many of the other conciliar presentations as well.

[ 9 ] ^ According to Herbert Vorgrimler , it is not hard to trace Rahner's influence on the work of the council (apart from four texts: the Decree on the Means of Social Communication , the Decree on the Catholic Eastern Churches , the Declaration on Christian education , and the Declaration on Religious Liberty ).

[ 11 ] ^ For specific biographical information, see Michaud n.d.

^ For a complete bibliography, see list at [1] .

References [ edit ] ^ Carbine & Koster 2015 , p. xxix.

^ Marmion, Declan (March 2017). "Karl Rahner, Vatican II, and the Shape of the Church".

Theological Studies .

78 (1): 25– 48.

doi : 10.1177/0040563916681992 .

^ Vorgrimler 1986 , p. 51.

^ a b c Michaud n.d .

^ Woodson 2018 , pp. 123–141.

^ Vorgrimler 1986 , p. 62.

^ Theological Investigations ^ a b Masson, Robert (5 January 2013).

"Karl Rahner: A Brief Biography" . Karl Rahner Society . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ Vorgrimler 1986 , pp. 100–102.

^ Second Vatican Council 1964 .

^ Vorgrimler 1986 , p. 100.

^ "Chronology" . Karl Rahner Society. 5 January 2013 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ Rahner, Karl (July 1979). "Foundations of Christian Faith: An Introduction to the Idea of Christianity".

Religious Studies Review .

5 (3): 190– 199.

doi : 10.1111/j.1748-0922.1979.tb00215.x .

^ Byers & Bourgoin 2004 .

^ Kennedy 2010 , p. 134.

^ Schaeffer, Pamela (19 December 1997).

"Karl Rahner's secret 22-year romance" .

National Catholic Reporter .

^ a b "Karl Rahner (Boston Collaborative Encyclopedia of Western Theology)" .

people.bu.edu . Retrieved 16 December 2017 .

^ Dahlke, Benjamin (22 January 2024).

Katholische Theologie in den USA (in German). Verlag Herder GmbH. pp.

69– 83.

ISBN 978-3-451-83776-0 .

^ Marika (19 March 2010).

"Theologies: Karl Rahner on Theology and Anthropology" .

Theologies . Retrieved 16 December 2017 .

[ self-published source?

] ^ Moltmann 1993 , p. 144.

^ Theological investigations, vol. 1, pp. 310-311, Karl Rahner, trans. Fergus Kerr, 1950.

^ a b Hardon, John A.

(1998).

"Defending the Faith" . Lombard, Illinois: Real Presence Eucharistic Education and Adoration Association . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ Paul VI 1965 .

^ a b Mulvihill 2009 .

^ Mawhinney 1968 .

^ Ryan 2010 , p. 44.

^ Duffy 2005 , p. 44.

^ Duffy 2005 , pp. 44–45.

^ a b Dulles 2013 .

^ Petty 1996 , p. 88; Steinmetz 2012 , pp. 1, 3.

^ a b Mulvihill 2009 ; Rahner 1965 .

^ Cf. Karl Rahner, Foundations of Christian Faith , (New York: Crossroad, 1978) pp. 24-175.

^ Maher, Anthony M. (1 December 2017).

The Forgotten Jesuit of Catholic Modernism: George Tyrrell's Prophetic Theology, Chapter 9, Section 1 . Fortress Press.

ISBN 978-1-5064-3851-1 .

^ Speidell, Todd (8 November 2016).

Fully Human in Christ: The Incarnation as the End of Christian Ethics . Wipf and Stock Publishers. p. 88.

ISBN 978-1-4982-9637-3 .

^ Sheehan, Thomas (4 February 1982).

"The Dream of Karl Rahner" .

The New York Review .

^ Linnane 2005 , p. 166.

^ Rahner 1978 , p. 206.

^ Hentz 1991 , p. 110; see also O'Collins 2009 , pp. 238–248.

^ For the whole Christology section, refer to Michaud n.d.

^ Rahner 1978 , pp. 206–212.

^ Rahner 1978 , p. 184.

^ Rahner 1978 , p. 185.

^ Hentz 1991 ; Michaud n.d.

^ Rahner 1978 , p. 190.

^ Rahner 1978 , p. 192.

^ a b c Rahner 1978 , p. 193.

^ Rahner 1978 , p. 201.

^ a b c Rahner 1978 , p. 208.

^ Rahner 1978 , pp. 210–211.

^ a b c Rahner 1978 , p. 211.

^ O'Collins 2009 , pp. 217, 243.

^ a b c Rahner 1978 , p. 222.

^ Rahner 1978 , pp. 220–223.

^ Rahner 1978 , p. 218.

^ Rahner 1978 , p. 236.

^ Rahner 1978 , pp. 245–246.

^ Rahner 1978 , pp. 247–264.

^ Rahner 1978 , p. 266.

^ Rahner 1978 , p. 274.

^ Rahner 1978 , p. 279.

^ a b Rahner 1978 , p. 284.

^ "Lumen gentium, 16" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 16 December 2017 .

^ D'Costa 1985 , p. 132.

^ Clinton 1998 .

^ Schineller 1991 , p. 102.

^ Rahner 1978 , p. 316.

^ Rahner 1978 , pp. 295, 318.

^ Rahner 1978 , pp. 295–298.

Works cited [ edit ] Byers, Paula K.; Bourgoin, Suzanne M., eds. (2004).

"Karl Rahner" .

Encyclopedia of World Biography . Vol. 13 (2nd ed.). Detroit, Michigan: Gale. pp.

4– 5.

ISBN 978-0-7876-2553-5 .

Carbine, Rosemary P.; Koster, Hilda P. (2015).

"Introduction: The Gift of Kathryn Tanner's Theological Imagination" . In Carbine, Rosemary P.; Koster, Hilda P. (eds.).

The Gift of Theology: The Contribution of Kathryn Tanner . 1517 Media. pp.

xxv– xl.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctt155j3hm.6 .

ISBN 978-1-4514-8206-5 .

JSTOR j.ctt155j3hm.6 .

Project MUSE chapter 1655072 .

Clinton, Stephen M. (1998).

Peter, Paul, and the Anonymous Christian: A Response to The Mission Theology of Rahner and Vatican II (PDF) . Orlando, Florida: The Orlando Institute . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

D'Costa, Gavin (1985). "Karl Rahner's Anonymous Christian: A Reappraisal".

Modern Theology .

1 (2): 131– 148.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0025.1985.tb00013.x .

Duffy, Stephen J. (2005). "Experience of Grace". In Marmion, Declan; Hines, Mary E. (eds.).

The Cambridge Companion to Karl Rahner . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

Dulles, Avery (2013).

"Revelation" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 23 October 2017 .

Hentz, Otto H. (1991). "Anticipating Jesus Christ: An Account of Our Hope". In O'Donovan, Leo J.

(ed.).

A World of Grace: An Introduction to the Themes and Foundations of Karl Rahner's Theology . New York: Crossroad.

Kennedy, Philip (2010).

Twentieth-Century Theologians: A New Introduction to Modern Christian Thought . I. B. Tauris.

Linnane, Brian (2005). "Ethics". In Marmion, Declan; Hines, Mary E. (eds.).

The Cambridge Companion to Karl Rahner . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. pp.

158 –173.

doi : 10.1017/CCOL0521832888.011 .

ISBN 978-0-521-54045-2 .

Mawhinney, John J. (1968). "The Concept of Mystery in Karl Rahner's Philosophical Theology".

Union Seminary Quarterly Review .

24 (1): 17– 30.

ISSN 0362-1545 .

Michaud, Derek (n.d.).

"Karl Rahner (1904–1984)" . In Wildman, Wesley (ed.).

Boston Collaborative Encyclopedia of Western Theology . Boston: Boston University . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

{{ cite encyclopedia }} :  CS1 maint: year ( link ) Moltmann, Jürgen (1993) [1980].

The Trinity and the Kingdom: the Doctrine of God . Translated by Kohl, Margaret. Minneapolis, Minnesota: Fortress Press.

ISBN 978-0-8006-2825-3 .

Mulvihill, John Edward (2009).

"Neo-Scholastics in Germany" .

Philosophy of Evolution: Survey of Literature . Franklin Park, Illinois . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

[ self-published source?

] O'Collins, Gerald (2009).

Christology: A Biblical, Historical, and Systematic Study of Jesus . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Paul VI (1965).

Mysterium fidei (encyclical letter). Vatican City: Libreria Editrice Vaticana . Retrieved 23 October 2017 .

Petty, Michael W. (1996).

A Faith that Loves the Earth: The Ecological Theology of Karl Rahner . Lanham, Maryland: University Press of America.

Rahner, Karl (1965).

Homanisation . Translated by O'Hara, W. J. West Germany: Herder K.G. Archived from the original on 21 June 2017 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 – via Religion Online.

——— (1978).

Foundations of Christian Faith: An Introduction to the Idea of Christianity . Translated by Dych, William V. New York: Seabury Press.

Ryan, Fáinche (2010).

"Rahner and Aquinas: The Incomprehensibility of God" . In Conway, Pádraic; Ryan, Fáinche (eds.).

Karl Rahner: Theologian for the Twenty-first Century . Studies in Theology, Society, and Culture. Vol. 3. Bern: Peter Lang. pp.

41– 60.

ISBN 978-3-03-430127-5 .

Schineller, J. Peter (1991). "Discovering Jesus Christ: A History We Share". In O'Donovan, Leo J.

(ed.).

A World of Grace: An Introduction to the Themes and Foundations of Karl Rahner's Theology . New York: Crossroad.

Second Vatican Council (1964).

Lumen gentium . Vatican City: Libreria Editrice Vaticana . Retrieved 23 October 2017 .

Steinmetz, Mary (25 July 2012).

"Thoughts on the Experience of God in the Theology of Karl Rahner: Gifts and Implications" .

Lumen et Vita .

2 (1).

doi : 10.6017/lv.v2i1.1900 .

Vorgrimler, Herbert (1986).

Understanding Karl Rahner: An Introduction to His Life and Thought . New York: Crossroad.

Woodson, Hue (2018).

Heideggerian Theologies: The Pathmarks of John Macquarrie, Rudolf Bultmann, Paul Tillich, and Karl Rahner . Eugene: Wipf and Stock.

Further reading [ edit ] Burke, Patrick (2002).

Reinterpreting Rahner: A Critical Study of His Major Themes . Fordham University Press.

Carr, Anne (1977).

The Theological Method of Karl Rahner . Scholars Press.

Conway, Pádraic; Ryan, Fainche, eds. (2010).

Karl Rahner: Theologian for the Twenty-first Century . Peter Lang.

ISBN 978-3034301275 .

Egan, Harvey J. (1998).

Karl Rahner: Mystic of Everyday Life . Crossroad.

Endean, Philip (2001).

Karl Rahner and Ignatian Spirituality . Oxford.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Fischer, Mark F. (2005).

The Foundations of Karl Rahner . Crossroad.

Hussey, M. Edmund (2012).

The Idea of Christianity: A Brief Introduction to the Theology of Karl Rahner .

ASIN B00A3DMVYM .

Kelly, Geffrey B., ed. (1992).

Karl Rahner: Theologian of the Graced Search for Meaning . Fortress Press.

Kilby, Karen (2007).

A Brief Introduction to Karl Rahner . Crossroad.

Kress, Robert (1982).

A Rahner Handbook . John Knox Press.

ISBN 9780804206525 .

Sheehan, Thomas (1987).

Karl Rahner: The Philosophical Foundations . Athens, Ohio: Ohio University Press.

Tillich, Paul (1950).

Systematic Theology. Volume I: Reason and Revelation—Being and God . University of Chicago Press.

Woodward, Guy (n.d.).

"Karl Rahner (1904–1984)" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

ISSN 2161-0002 . Retrieved 23 October 2017 .

{{ cite encyclopedia }} :  CS1 maint: year ( link ) External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Karl Rahner .

Karl Rahner Society Archived 30 August 2009 at the Wayback Machine with biography and bibliography Karl Rahner Archive in Munich Bibliographical aids v t e Jesuits History Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Spiritual Exercises of Ignatius of Loyola Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Magis Regimini militantis Ecclesiae Exposcit debitum Ratio Studiorum Suppression of the Society of Jesus List of Jesuits Saints José de Anchieta Modeste Andlauer Edmund Arrowsmith Inácio de Azevedo Robert Bellarmine John Berchmans Jacques Berthieu Andrew Bobola Francis Borgia Jean de Brébeuf Alexander Briant John de Britto Edmund Campion Peter Canisius Juan del Castillo Noël Chabanel Peter Claver Claude de la Colombière Antoine Daniel Paul Denn Philip Evans Peter Faber Thomas Garnet Charles Garnier Aloysius Gonzaga Roque González de Santa Cruz John Soan de Goto René Goupil Melchior Grodziecki Alberto Hurtado Rémy Isoré Ignatius of Loyola Francis de Geronimo Isaac Jogues James Kisai Stanislaus Kostka Jean de Lalande Gabriel Lalemant David Lewis Lèon-Ignance Mangin Paul Miki Henry Morse John Ogilvie Nicholas Owen Joseph Pignatelli Stephen Pongracz Bernardino Realino John Francis Regis Alphonsus Rodriguez José María Rubio Robert Southwell André de Soveral Henry Walpole Francis Xavier Alfonso Rodríguez Olmedo Popes Francis Theology Diego Laynez Luis de Molina Francisco Suárez Jean Daniélou Karl Rahner Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Henri de Lubac John Courtney Murray Joseph Fitzmyer Alonso Rodriguez List of Jesuit theologians General Bollandist La Civiltà Cattolica General Congregation Superior General of the Society of Jesus Pontifical Gregorian University Pontifical Biblical Institute Pontifical Oriental Institute Jesuit China missions Jesuit missions in North America List of Jesuit educational institutions International Association of Jesuit Universities Ignatian Pedagogical Paradigm Related Church of the Gesù Madonna Della Strada Saint-Pierre de Montmartre Claudio Acquaviva Category Catholicism portal v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐vrqct
Cached time: 20250817044413
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.301 seconds
Real time usage: 1.565 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11676/1000000
Revision size: 56742/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 259867/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 20333/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 214366/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.826/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25260707/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1283.194      1 -total
 22.02%  282.559      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 13.99%  179.506     32 Template:Cite_book
 13.59%  174.417      2 Template:Reflist
 12.50%  160.449     60 Template:Sfn
  8.12%  104.250      1 Template:IPA
  6.40%   82.139      5 Template:Cite_journal
  6.25%   80.191      4 Template:Navbox
  5.59%   71.700      1 Template:Birth_date
  5.20%   66.741      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:370442:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044413 and revision id 1304895797. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Karl_Rahner&oldid=1304895797 " Categories : 1904 births 1984 deaths 20th-century German Catholic theologians 20th-century German Jesuits 20th-century German male writers 20th-century German non-fiction writers Academic staff of the Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich Academic staff of the University of Münster Christologists Clergy from Freiburg im Breisgau Corresponding fellows of the British Academy German male non-fiction writers German religious writers German Roman Catholic writers Jesuit theologians Knights Commander of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany Modernism in the Catholic Church Participants in the Second Vatican Council Recipients of the Order of Merit of Baden-Württemberg Recipients of the Pour le Mérite (civil class) Systematic theologians Thomists Writers from Freiburg im Breisgau Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from January 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from November 2012 Use dmy dates from July 2021 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking Pages with German IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2018 Articles containing German-language text Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2023 CS1 maint: year CS1 maint: location missing publisher Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 20:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Karl Rahner 30 languages Add topic

