Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education 2 Revolutionary activities 3 Orphanotropheio of Theophilos Kairis 4 The Kairis Library 5 References Toggle the table of contents Theophilos Kairis 8 languages العربية Български Deutsch Ελληνικά Français Latina Русский Winaray Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greek priest, philosopher and revolutionary This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( April 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Theophilos Kairis" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French .

(April 2015) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the French article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at [[:fr:Theóphilos Kaíris]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|fr|Theóphilos Kaíris}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Theophilos Kairis Theophilos Kairis Born ( 1784-10-19 ) 19 October 1784 Andros , Ottoman Empire Died 13 January 1853 (1853-01-13) (aged 68) Syros , Kingdom of Greece Philosophical work Era Age of Enlightenment Region Western philosophy School Modern Greek Enlightenment , Liberalism Main interests Natural philosophy , philosophy of religion , deism ( Theosebism ), separation of church and state , liberal democracy Theophilos Kairis ( Greek : Θεόφιλος Καΐρης; baptismal name Θωμᾶς Thomas ; 19 October 1784 – 13 January 1853) was a Greek priest, philosopher and revolutionary. He was born in Andros , Cyclades , Ottoman Greece , as a son of a distinguished family.

Education [ edit ] Kairis studied in the theological school of Smyrna and was ordained a Greek Orthodox priest. He spoke many languages ranging from Ancient Greek , Latin , Italian , French , German , and English , that would allow him to participate in organizing the Greek War of Independence and to one day build the "Orphanotropheio" (Ὀρφανοτροφεῖο; Greek for " Orphanage "), a progressive school that embraced the modern university system. Kairis studied with Benjamin of Lesbos at the school of Kydonies , Asia Minor , and was introduced to contemporary science and Greek interpretations of natural science .

Kairis studied in Pisa and Paris , and shared to the ideas of the Age of Enlightenment . He studied mathematics , natural sciences and philosophy . Kairis also had an interest in archaeology , making some major findings upon his native island of Andros . He also had an interest in botany and cataloged many of the plants of his local area, as well as documenting pharmacologic properties of various plants.

Revolutionary activities [ edit ] Starting from 1811 he led Greek language high schools in Asia Minor. Eventually, he took an active part (1819–1826) in the Greek War of Independence and is now considered as an important figure in the history of Modern Greece .

On 10 May 1821 Theophilos Kairis, one of the leading intellectuals of the Greek Revolution, declared the War of Independence by raising the Greek flag at the picturesque cliffside church of St George on the island of Andros : at this time, a  famous heartfelt speech, or "Rhetoras", inspired shipowners and merchants to contribute funds and contribute ships to build a Greek Navy to combat the Ottoman Empire .

There are many factors that influence the beginning of the Greek War of Independence. Furthermore, philosophy and science from Western Europe began to penetrate the culture of Greece at the same time of the establishment of the Philiki Etairia , which was composed of intellectuals and merchants.

The views of the Age of Enlightenment in European countries are in general well researched, while the attempts to introduce the Enlightenment to countries in the periphery of Europe, such as Greece, is not documented to the same degree. Many unanswered questions remain from this historical period, and surround the philosophic work of Theophilos Kairis. How did the scientific revolution migrate to the Greek-speaking regions occupied by the Ottoman Empire ? How did the Greeks accept the truly revolutionary ideas of the French Revolution and liberalism? What were the reactions of the conservative Greek Orthodox Church and who sacrificed their lives in the cause of their ideas?

Many of the orphans from the Greek War of Independence, especially from the massacre from the island of Psara would form the body of the Orphanotropheio, in which Kairis taught many of the ideas learned from Philhellenes from all over Europe . Hence, this was the first true European university of Greece.

Though he was an ordained priest, Kairis fought in the War of Independence and was severely wounded in one battle. Towards the end of the war, he was selected to draft the verbiage for Greece's Constitution. But when the European Great powers of the time installed Otto von Wittelsbach as a kind of Viceroy of the Powers he was not ready to integrate himself into the new system. King Otto offered him the position of Director of the University of Athens and awarded him the Gold Cross (equivalent to the Medal of Honor) for his contribution to the war, but Kairis turned both of these down. Instead, he continued to teach radical ideas of the Enlightenment which brought him into conflict with the King and with the Eastern Orthodox Church. Kairis became a victim of the Eastern Orthodox Church's equivalent of the Holy Inquisition . Kairis suffered a tragic end reserved by fate for those who, being pioneers, tried to introduce to Greece the liberal ideas of Western Europe and the Enlightenment.  The philosopher priest, Theophilos Kairis, following his conviction by the Holy Synod in 1839, was confined to the monastery in political exile on the island of Skiathos .  He had been located to Syros for trial but died in 1853, 10 days before his judicial hearing, of natural causes.

Orphanotropheio of Theophilos Kairis [ edit ] Kairis, along with a few disciples, founded a pietistic revivalist movement known as Theosebism , inspired by the French revolutionary cults, radical Protestantism and deism.  This movement was anathematised by the Synod of the Patriarchate of Constantinople .

Beginning with 1826,  Kairis dedicated himself to an institute for orphans of the Greek revolution on Andros.  The "Orphantropheio", or orphan school, presented Kairis with the opportunity to introduce to the Greek education system a wide range of subjects ranging from comparative religion , astronomy , ship navigation , agriculture , applied mathematics , accounting , natural science , advanced mathematics, and Theosebism.

Members of the Orphanotripheio represented children from all sides of the Balkan conflict, with individuals from Bulgaria , Muslim Turks displaced by the Revolution, and Catholics who had inhabited the Greek island since the Middle Ages .

In fact, Kairis had a very different vision for an independent Greece, one that was based upon the concept of separation of church and state as proposed by Thomas Jefferson .  Kairis advocated for a pan- Balkan state similar to the United States , that preserved the cosmopolitan nature of the post- Byzantine Empire era, where all creeds were equally free of tyranny from the oppressive Ottomans.

This was the prelude of the so-called Eastern Question , the gradual dismemberment of the decaying Ottoman Empire by the Great powers.

The Kairis Library [ edit ] The library is housed in a wonderful neoclassical building, in Hora (or Andros Town) and contains about 3,000 tomes from the collection of Theophilos Kairis.  In the library are also exposed a large number of rare publications, manuscripts, historical records, works of art and a small archaeological collection. Within the records, extensive letters demonstrating a network of intellectuals would update Kairis about the trends in European science and philosophy.

Bust in Andros Also the mathematical treatises of Kairis are present, representing a very active and original intellect, who had written on complex themes, including on mathematical extensions of Pierre-Simon Laplace 's Celestial Mechanics.  Artifacts that demonstrate Kairis philosophic approach to understanding the energies (energiki ousia phiseos) of nature remain in the library, and highlight Kairis knowledge of Joseph Fourier 's work on energy .  Through various letters and correspondence, Kairis's approach to communicating with the various philhellenes demonstrates a network of intellectuals that were involved with the French Revolution .  Kairis has been referred to as the "new Socrates" and was very active in didactic education.  The island of Andros has a series of water fountains, and horizontal windmills constructed at the time the students from the orphanotropio were active on the Island, and represent applications from the Kairiki lessons.

One can find books by Professor Mavromatis in the library, who edited Kairis's mathematical work, focusing on how Kairis use the Newtonian binomial to find the roots of cardinal numbers .

[ dubious – discuss ] Kairis was in constant communication with western intellectuals from Andros, and had communicated with Auguste Comte , and wrote on his treatises on sociology , then a newly emerging subject. Kairis has also incorporated these ideas into the curriculum of the orphanotropheio. Comte's ideas were tremendously influential on Kairis in the later years of the orphanotropheio, especially the idea that social ills can be solved as advocated by Jeremy Bentham .

Kairis spoke many languages and was interested in teaching philosophy from the ancient Greeks, translating the great poetry and theatre from antiquity, as well as the philosophic treatises of Aristotle and Plato. Furthermore, lessons on the progressive subject of comparative religion was to be invaluable for the would-be ship captains and merchants embarked on international trade. Kairis would teach theosphitism, but in the context of world religions, ranging from Buddhism, many describing the philosophical thought of Kairis similar in vein as with the Transcendentalism of Henry David Thoreau and Ralph Waldo Emerson .

Kiaris emphasised poetry as part of the curriculum and taught Lord Byron 's work, Robert Browning as well as poetry from the French and German speaking west. This was to create a naturalist and metaphysical aptitude balanced with the natural sciences and mathematics .

Unfortunately, the school was disbanded after Kairis was declared a heretic, but many of the orphanotropio would go on into the shipping professions, and were also versed in accounting and probability. Of notable family names who can trace back ancestors who were schooled by Kairis were the Goulandris and Emberikos families. Other students hid in the surrounding mountains, taking with them the banned books from the school, and continued to live with the inhabitants of the island working and building some of the most interesting windmills in Greece.

Indeed, Kairis had also taught his students the early field of Archeology, and conducted field trips on the island to the place he had discovered the ruins of a temple dedicated to Aphrodite prior to the Greek revolution.

To this day, every summer, art exhibitions are organized in the new exhibition area of the library.

References [ edit ] Georgios Makris (1992). "Kairis, Theophilos (Taufname Thomas)". In Bautz, Friedrich Wilhelm (ed.).

Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon (BBKL) (in German). Vol. 3. Herzberg: Bautz. cols. 951–952.

ISBN 3-88309-035-2 .

Peter Z. Mantarakis, Tears of the People: The Tragic Life of a Great Revolutionary ,  Diavlos Publications, 2009.

Theophilos Kairis, Gnostike, Stoicheia Philosophias , ed. with intr. and appendices by Niketas Siniossoglou, Andros and Athens, Kairis Library, 2008.

George Gannaris, Theophilos Kairis: The Tragic Fate of an Intellectual .

E. Theodossiou, Th. Grammenos, V.N. Manimanis, Theophilos Kairis: the creator and initiator of Theosebism in Greece .

Demetrios Paschales, Theophilos Kairis , Athens 1928.

Dimitri Polemis, Biography of Theophilos Kairis .

Maximine Portaz, Essai critique sur Théophile Kaïris , Thése de Doctorat ès Lettres, Lyon, 1935.

Theophilos Kairis , (symposium documents), Athens, 1988.

The astronomy of the K., Thessaloniki 1989 Kosta Mauvromati, edited by, The Finite Algebra of Theophilos Kairis (written prior 1818),  volumes one and two.

Kosta Mauvromati, edited by, The astronomical treatise of Theophilos Kairis .

Kairis Library Website: http://www.kaireios.gr https://web.archive.org/web/20070928044124/http://www.eie.gr/institutes/ine/programmes/programme06/publications/programme06-pub-en.pdf v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category v t e Modern Greek Enlightenment Main ideas Greek Independence Nationalism Liberalism Constitutionalism Education Westernization Hellenization Freedom of religion Greek language Publications Asma Polemistirion Salpisma Polemistirion Adelphiki Didaskalia Geographia Neoteriki Hellenic Nomarchy Hellenic Library Ephimeris Calliope Rossaglogallos Hermes o Logios Politika Parallela Thourios or Patriotic hymn Pamphlet of Rigas Feraios Map of Greece New Map of Wallachia and part of Transylvania Real Bliss General Map of Moldavia Gnostike, Stoicheia Philosophias Academies Ottoman Empire : Athonite Academy Evangelical School Kaplaneios Maroutsaia New Academy Phanar Greek Orthodox College Phrontisterion of Trapezous Diaspora : Flanginian School Princely Academy of Bucharest Princely Academy of Iași Representatives Methodios Anthrakites Kosmas Balanos Athanasios Christopoulos Neophytos Doukas Vikentios Damodos Theoklitos Farmakidis Rigas Feraios Anthimos Gazis Georgios Gennadios Theophilos Kairis Theodore Kavalliotis Grigorios Konstantas Adamantios Korais Konstantinos Koumas Stefanos Kanellos Sevastos Leontiadis Benjamin of Lesbos Iosipos Moisiodax Minas Minoidis Konstantinos Michail Konstantinos Nikolopoulos Michail Papageorgiou Christodoulos Pablekis Daniel Philippidis Athanasios Psalidas Theoklitos Polyeidis Athanasios Stageiritis Konstantinos Tzechanis Neophytos Vamvas Ioannis Vilaras Eugenios Voulgaris Related Philomuse Society Filiki Eteria Ionian Academy Orphanage of Kairis Moscopole printing house v t e Greek War of Independence (1821–1829) Background Ottoman Greece People Armatoles Proestoi Klephts Dionysius the Philosopher Daskalogiannis Panagiotis Benakis Nikolaos Galatis Konstantinos Kolokotronis Lambros Katsonis Cosmas of Aetolia Ali Pasha Maniots Phanariots Rum Millet Souliotes Gregory V of Constantinople Events Orlov Revolt Souliote War (1789–1793) Souliote War (1803) Greek Enlightenment People John Caradja Athanasios Christopoulos Theoklitos Farmakidis Rigas Feraios Anthimos Gazis Theophilos Kairis Adamantios Korais Eugenios Voulgaris Organizations Ellinoglosso Xenodocheio Filiki Eteria Nikolaos Skoufas Athanasios Tsakalov Emmanuil Xanthos Panagiotis Anagnostopoulos Philomuse Society Society of the Phoenix Publications Adelphiki Didaskalia Asma Polemistirion Hellenic Nomarchy Pamphlet of Rigas Feraios Salpisma Polemistirion Thourios or Patriotic hymn European intervention and Greek involvement in the Napoleonic Wars Russo-Turkish war (1768–1774) Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca Greek Plan of Catherine the Great Russo-Turkish War (1787–1792) French Revolution and Napoleonic Wars Fall of the Republic of Venice Republican French rule in the Ionian Islands Septinsular Republic Greek Legion Imperial French rule in the Ionian Islands Albanian Regiment Adriatic campaign of 1807–1814 1st Regiment Greek Light Infantry United States of the Ionian Islands Ideas Greek nationalism Eastern Orthodox Christianity Liberalism Constitutionalism Monarchism Events Sieges Patras Salona Navarino Livadeia 1st Acropolis Tripolitsa Arta Acrocorinth Nauplia 1st Messolonghi 2nd Messolonghi 3rd Messolonghi 2nd Acropolis Battles Kalamata Wallachian uprising Alamana Gravia Valtetsi Doliana Lalas Vasilika Drăgășani Sculeni Vasilika Trench Peta Dervenakia Karpenisi Greek civil wars Sphacteria Maniaki Morea Lerna Mills Mani Distomo Arachova Kamatero Phaleron Chios expedition Martino Koronisia Petra Massacres Constantinople Thessaloniki Navarino Tripolitsa Naousa Samothrace Chios Psara Kasos Cyprus Naval conflicts Eresos Chios Nauplia Samos Andros Sphacteria Gerontas Souda Alexandria Volos Itea Navarino Ships Agamemnon Aris Hellas Karteria Greek regional councils and statutes Messenian Senate Directorate of Achaea Peloponnesian Senate Senate of Western Continental Greece Areopagus of Eastern Continental Greece Provisional Regime of Crete Military-Political System of Samos Greek national assemblies First (Epidaurus) ( Executive of 1822 ) Second (Astros) Third (Troezen) Fourth (Argos) Fifth (Nafplion) International Conferences, treaties and protocols Congress of Laibach Congress of Verona Protocol of St. Petersburg (1826) Treaty of London Conference of Poros London Protocol of 1828 London Protocol of 1829 Treaty of Adrianople London Protocol of 1830 London Conference Treaty of Constantinople Proposals for the monarch of Greece Related Greek expedition to Syria (1825) Russo-Turkish War (1828–29) Personalities Greece Chian Committee Odysseas Androutsos Fotos Bomporis Kostas Botsaris Markos Botsaris Notis Botsaris Tousias Botsaris Laskarina Bouboulina Constantin Denis Bourbaki Stefanos Chalis Sotiris Charalampis Giannis Chondrogiannis Dimitrios Christidis Panagiotis Danglis Hatzimichalis Dalianis Dimitrios Deligeorgis Dimitrakis Deligiannis Kanellos Deligiannis Athanasios Diakos Dionysis Diakos Konstantinos Dimidis Ioannis Dimoulitsas Adam Doukas Georgios Drakos Yiannis Dyovouniotis Georgios Filippopoulos Asimakis Fotilas Panagiotakis Fotilas Angelis Gatsos Antonios Georgantas Germanos III of Old Patras Georgios Gevidis Konstantinos Gofas Vasileios Goudas Ioannis Gouras Dimitrios Gouvelis Konstantinos Gouvelis Angelis Govios Dimitrios Indares Isaiah of Salona Antonios Kalamogdartis George Kalaras Dimitrios Kallergis Athanasios Kampetis Athanasios Kanakaris Konstantinos Kanaris Stefanos Kanellos Ioannis Kapodistrias Viaros Kapodistrias Stamatios Kapsas Georgakis Kapsokalyvas Anastasios Karatasos Panagiotis Karatzas Georgios Karaiskakis Aristeidis Karnalis Nikolaos Kasomoulis Ioannis Kolettis Apostolis Kolokotronis Ioannis Kolokotronis Panos Kolokotronis Theodoros Kolokotronis Michail Komninos Afentoulief Alexandros Kontostavlos Panos Koronaios Georgios Kountouriotis Lazaros Kountouriotis Michalis Kourmoulis Ioannis Krestenitis Lykourgos Krestenitis Stamatis Krestenitis Antonios Kriezis Nikolaos Kriezotis Kyprianos of Cyprus Konstantinos Lagoumitzis Georgios Lassanis Georgios Lechouritis Leonardos Leonardopoulos Georgios Liologlou Lykourgos Logothetis Andreas Londos Yiannis Makriyiannis Ioannis Mamouris Anastasios Manakis Manto Mavrogenous Alexandros Mavrokordatos Antonios Mavromichalis Demetrios Mavromichalis Georgios Mavromichalis Konstantinos Mavromichalis Kyriakoulis Mavromichalis Petrobey Mavromichalis Dimitrios Meletopoulos Andreas Metaxas Konstantinos Metaxas Hatzigiannis Mexis Andreas Miaoulis Antonios Miaoulis Panagiotis Michanidis Spyros Milios Nikolaos Mykonios Zachos Milios Alexander Negris Konstantinos Negris Theodoros Negris Diamantis Nikolaou Konstantinos Nikolopoulos Ioannis Notaras Antonis Oikonomou Ioannis Orlandos Andronikos Paikos Georgios Panou Dimitrios Panourgias Nakos Panourgias Grigorios Papaflessas Anagnostis Papageorgiou Dimitrios Papanikolis Emmanouel Pappas Christoforos Perraivos Nikolaos Petimezas Vasileios Petimezas Dionysios Petrakis Andreas Pipinos Kyriakos Pittakis Anastasios Polyzoidis Konstantinos Rados Ioannis Rangos Panagiotis Rodios Dionysios Romas Georgios Sachtouris Georgios Sekeris Theofanis Siatisteus Georgios Sisinis Ioannis Skandalidis Zisis Sotiriou Nikitas Stamatelopoulos Georgios Stavros Joseph Stephanini Ioannis Stratos Sotirios Theocharopoulos Zafeirakis Theodosiou Emmanouil Tombazis Iakovos Tombazis Ioannis Trikoupis Anastasios Tsamados Melchisedek Tsouderos Kitsos Tzavellas Theodoros Tzinis Loukas Vagias Thanasoulas Valtinos Dimitrios Varis Meletis Vasileiou Domna Visvizi Alexakis Vlachopoulos Konstantinos Vlachopoulos Pieros Voidis Liolios Xirolivaditis Demetrios Ypsilantis Christoforos Zachariadis Andreas Zaimis Germanos Zapheiropoulos Evangelos Zappas Marigo Zarafopoula Nikolaos Zervas Philhellenes António Figueira d'Almeida Joseph Balestra Samuel Barff Paul Marie Bonaparte Karl Rudolf Brommy Lord Byron François-René de Chateaubriand Richard Church Giuseppe Chiappe Lord Cochrane Giacinto Collegno Charles Fabvier Adam Friedel Vincenzo Gallina Thomas Gordon Constantin Guys Emmanuel Han Frank Abney Hastings Carl von Heideck Samuel Gridley Howe George Jarvis Karl Krazeisen Henrik Nikolai Krøyer Ludwig I of Bavaria Ernst Michael Mangel Sophie de Marbois-Lebrun, Duchess of Plaisance Vasos Mavrovouniotis Johann Jakob Meyer Ellinika Chronika Jonathan Miller Julius Michael Millingen August Myhrberg Karl von Normann-Ehrenfels Hadži-Prodan Maurice Persat Theobald Piscatory Maxime Raybaud Auguste Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély Giuseppe Rosaroll Annibale Santorre di Rossi de Pomarolo, Count of Santarosa Friedrich Thiersch Auguste Hilarion Touret Edward John Trelawny German Legion [ el ] Serbs David Urquhart Olivier Voutier James Jakob Williams Moldavia and Wallachia ( Danubian Principalities ) Sacred Band Athanasios Agrafiotis Anastasios Christopoulos Diamandi Djuvara Stefanos Kanellos Alexandros Kantakouzinos Georgios Kantakouzinos Rallou Karatza Stamatios Kleanthis Georgios Lassanis Constantine Levidis Dimitrie Macedonski Anastasios Manakis Giorgakis Olympios Yiannis Pharmakis Michael Soutzos Roxani Soutzos Athanasios Tsakalov Tudor Vladimirescu Konstantinos Xenokratis Alexander Ypsilantis Demetrios Ypsilantis Nikolaos Ypsilantis Christoforos Zachariadis Ottoman Empire , Algeria , and Egypt Sultan Mahmud II Hurshid Pasha Nasuhzade Ali Pasha Ismael Gibraltar Omer Vrioni Kara Mehmet Mahmud Dramali Pasha Koca Hüsrev Mehmed Pasha Reşid Mehmed Pasha Yussuf Pasha Ibrahim Pasha Soliman Pasha al-Faransawi Britain , France and Russia George Canning Stratford Canning Edward Codrington Henri de Rigny Lodewijk van Heiden Alexander I of Russia Nicholas I of Russia Financial aid London Philhellenic Committee Ludwig I of Bavaria Jean-Gabriel Eynard Lazaros Kountouriotis Ioannis Papafis Georgios Stavros Ioannis Varvakis Rothschild & Co Morea expedition Military Nicolas Joseph Maison Antoine Simon Durrieu Antoine Virgile Schneider Auguste Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély Camille Alphonse Trézel Scientific Jean Baptiste Bory de Saint-Vincent Léon-Jean-Joseph Dubois Pierre Peytier Stamatis Voulgaris Guillaume-Abel Blouet Gabriel Bibron Prosper Baccuet Eugène Emmanuel Amaury Duval Pierre-Narcisse Guérin Charles Lenormant Edgar Quinet Historians/Memoirists Dimitrios Ainian Fotis Chrysanthopoulos Ioannis Filimon George Finlay Ambrosios Frantzis Lambros Koutsonikas Konstantinos Metaxas Panoutsos Notaras Panagiotis Papatsonis Anastasios Polyzoidis Georgios Tertsetis Spyridon Trikoupis Art Eugène Delacroix Louis Dupré Peter von Hess Victor Hugo François Pouqueville Alexander Pushkin Karl Krazeisen Andreas Kalvos Dionysios Solomos Theodoros Vryzakis Hellas The Reception of Lord Byron at Missolonghi Greece on the Ruins of Missolonghi Le siège de Corinthe The Massacre at Chios The Free Besieged Hymn to Liberty The Archipelago on Fire Loukis Laras The Apotheosis of Athanasios Diakos Remembrance 25 March (Independence Day) Hymn to Liberty Eleftheria i thanatos Pedion tou Areos Propylaea (Munich) Garden of Heroes (Missolonghi) Royal Phalanx Evzones ( Presidential Guard ) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Spain Netherlands Greece People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theophilos_Kairis&oldid=1294143601 " Categories : 1784 births 1853 deaths People from Andros Greek Eastern Orthodox priests 19th-century Eastern Orthodox priests Greek revolutionaries 19th-century Greek philosophers Greek people of the Greek War of Independence Eastern Orthodox Christians from Greece People excommunicated by Eastern Orthodox Church bodies People of the Modern Greek Enlightenment Greek scholars Deist philosophers Members of the Filiki Eteria Greek deists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from April 2009 All articles with style issues Articles needing additional references from March 2009 All articles needing additional references Featured articles needing translation from French Wikipedia Biography articles needing translation from French Wikipedia Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with hCards All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from October 2012 CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 21:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Theophilos Kairis 8 languages Add topic

