Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Species groups Toggle Species groups subsection 2.1 Aquatic plants 2.1.1 Seaweed farming 2.2 Fish 2.3 Crustaceans 2.4 Molluscs 2.5 Other groups 3 Global fish production Toggle Global fish production subsection 3.1 Over-reporting by China 4 Aquacultural methods Toggle Aquacultural methods subsection 4.1 Mariculture 4.2 Integrated 4.3 Urban aquaculture 5 Netting materials 6 Technology 7 Issues Toggle Issues subsection 7.1 Impacts on wild fish 7.2 Animal welfare 7.2.1 Common welfare concerns 7.2.2 Improving welfare 7.3 Coastal ecosystems 7.3.1 Pollution from sea cage aquaculture 7.4 Freshwater ecosystems 7.5 Genetic modification 7.6 Fish diseases, parasites and vaccines 7.6.1 Needs of the aquaculture sector in vaccines 7.6.2 Development of new vaccines 7.6.3 Recent vaccines development in aquaculture 7.6.4 Economic gains 7.7 Salinization/acidification of soils 7.8 Plastic pollution 8 Ecological benefits 9 Prospects Toggle Prospects subsection 9.1 Global goals 10 National laws, regulations, and management 11 By country 12 History 13 See also 14 Sources 15 References Toggle References subsection 15.1 Sources 15.2 Free content work 16 Further reading 17 External links Toggle the table of contents Aquaculture 60 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Farming of aquatic organisms For the journal, see Aquaculture (journal) .

Aquaculture fish farming in the fjords south of Castro, Chile Agriculture History West Asia Ancient Egypt Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Austronesia Agricultural science Agricultural History Review Arab Agricultural Revolution Argentina Canada China Chile Columbian exchange Green Revolution Indian subcontinent Mesoamerica Middle Ages Neolithic Revolution Organic farming Palestine Peru United Kingdom British Agricultural Revolution Cheshire Scotland United States African-American California On land Agrivoltaic Animal husbandry cattle pigs poultry sheep Dairy Dryland Extensive Fertilizer Free-range Grazing Convertible husbandry Rotational grazing Hobby Intensive animals pigs crops Natural Monoculture Orchard Organic Paddy field Ranching Sharecropping Sowing Colonia Slash-and-burn Smallholding Terrace Steam sterilization Hydroculture Aquaculture Aquaponics Hydroponics Aeroponics Related Agribusiness Agricultural cooperative Agricultural supplies Agricultural science Agricultural engineering Agricultural technology Precision Biotechnology Agroforestry Agronomy Animal husbandry Animal-free agriculture Cash crop Cellular agriculture Cultural methods Contract farming Extensive farming Farm Farmhouse Feed ratio Free range Horticulture Intensive farming animals pigs crops Mechanised agriculture Organic farming Paludiculture Permaculture Plantation Polyculture Rice-duck farming Rice-fish system Sustainable agriculture Sustainable food system Universities and colleges Urban agriculture Lists Agriculturist profession Agricultural machinery Food origins Government ministries Universities and colleges Categories Agricultural machinery Agriculture by country Agriculture companies Biotechnology Cannabis cultivation History of agriculture Livestock Meat industry Poultry farming Agriculture and the environment Agriculture portal v t e Aquaculture (less commonly spelled aquiculture ), [ 1 ] also known as aquafarming , is the controlled cultivation ("farming") of aquatic organisms such as fish , crustaceans , mollusks , algae and other organisms of value such as aquatic plants (e.g.

lotus ). Aquaculture involves cultivating freshwater , brackish water , and saltwater populations under controlled or semi-natural conditions and can be contrasted with commercial fishing , which is the harvesting of wild fish .

[ 2 ] Aquaculture is also a practice used for restoring and rehabilitating marine and freshwater ecosystems.

[ 3 ] Mariculture , commonly known as marine farming, is aquaculture in seawater habitats and lagoons, as opposed to freshwater aquaculture.

Pisciculture is a type of aquaculture that consists of fish farming to obtain fish products as food .

Aquaculture can also be defined as the breeding, growing, and harvesting of fish and other aquatic plants, also known as farming in water. It is an environmental source of food and commercial products that help to improve healthier habitats and are used to reconstruct the population of endangered aquatic species. Technology has increased the growth of fish in coastal marine waters and open oceans due to the increased demand for seafood.

[ 4 ] Aquaculture can be conducted in completely artificial facilities built on land (onshore aquaculture), as in the case of fish tank , ponds , aquaponics or raceways , where the living conditions rely on human control such as water quality (oxygen), feed or temperature. Alternatively, they can be conducted on well-sheltered shallow waters nearshore of a body of water (inshore aquaculture), where the cultivated species are subjected to relatively more naturalistic environments; or on fenced/enclosed sections of open water away from the shore (offshore aquaculture), where the species are either cultured in cages, racks or bags and are exposed to more diverse natural conditions such as water currents (such as ocean currents ), diel vertical migration and nutrient cycles .

According to the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), aquaculture "is understood to mean the farming of aquatic organisms including fish, molluscs, crustaceans and aquatic plants. Farming implies some form of intervention in the rearing process to enhance production, such as regular stocking , feeding , protection from predators, etc. Farming also implies individual or corporate ownership of the stock being cultivated." [ 5 ] The reported output from global aquaculture operations in 2019 was over 120 million tonnes valued at US$274 billion, by 2022, it had risen to 130.9 million tonnes, valued at USD 312.8 billion.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] However, there are issues with the reliability of the reported figures.

[ 8 ] Further, in current aquaculture practice, products from several kilograms of wild fish are used to produce one kilogram of a piscivorous fish like salmon .

[ 9 ] Plant and insect-based feeds are also being developed to help reduce wild fish being used for aquaculture feed.

Particular kinds of aquaculture include fish farming , shrimp farming , oyster farming , mariculture, pisciculture , algaculture (such as seaweed farming ), and the cultivation of ornamental fish . Particular methods include aquaponics and integrated multi-trophic aquaculture , both of which integrate fish farming and aquatic plant farming. The FAO describes aquaculture as one of the industries most directly affected by climate change and its impacts.

[ 10 ] Some forms of aquaculture have negative impacts on the environment, such as through nutrient pollution or disease transfer to wild populations.

Overview [ edit ] Global capture fisheries and aquaculture production reported by FAO, 1990–2030 World aquaculture production of food fish and aquatic plants, 1990–2016 Harvest stagnation in wild fisheries and overexploitation of popular marine species, combined with a growing demand for high-quality protein, encouraged aquaculturists to domesticate other marine species.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] At the outset of modern aquaculture, many were optimistic that a " Blue Revolution " could take place in aquaculture, just as the Green Revolution of the 20th century had revolutionized agriculture.

[ 13 ] Although land animals had long been domesticated, most seafood species were still caught from the wild. Concerned about the impact of growing demand for seafood on the world's oceans, prominent ocean explorer Jacques Cousteau wrote in 1973: "With earth's burgeoning human populations to feed, we must turn to the sea with new understanding and new technology." [ 14 ] About 430 (97%) of the species cultured as of 2007 [update] were domesticated during the 20th and 21st centuries, of which an estimated 106 came in the decade to 2007. Given the long-term importance of agriculture,  to date, only 0.08% of known land plant species and 0.0002% of known land animal species have been domesticated, compared with 0.17% of known marine plant species and 0.13% of known marine animal species. Domestication typically involves about a decade of scientific research.

[ 15 ] Domesticating aquatic species involves fewer risks to humans than do land animals, which took a large toll in human lives. Most major human diseases originated in domesticated animals, [ 16 ] including diseases such as smallpox and diphtheria , that like most infectious diseases, move to humans from animals. No human pathogens of comparable virulence have yet emerged from marine species.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Biological control methods to manage parasites are already being used, such as cleaner fish (e.g. lumpsuckers and wrasse) to control sea lice populations in salmon farming.

[ 19 ] Models are being used to help with spatial planning and siting of fish farms in order to minimize impact.

[ 20 ] Aquaculture production (2019) [ 21 ] The decline in wild fish stocks has increased the demand for farmed fish.

[ 22 ] However, finding alternative sources of protein and oil for fish feed is necessary so the aquaculture industry can grow sustainably; otherwise, it represents a great risk for the over-exploitation of forage fish.

[ 23 ] Aquaculture production now exceeds capture fishery production [ 24 ] and together the relative GDP contribution has ranged from 0.01 to 10%.

[ 25 ] Singling out aquaculture's relative contribution to GDP, however, is not easily derived due to lack of data.

[ 26 ] Another recent issue following the banning in 2008 of organotins by the International Maritime Organization is the need to find environmentally friendly, but still effective, compounds with antifouling effects.

Many new natural compounds are discovered every year, but producing them on a large enough scale for commercial purposes is almost impossible.

It is highly probable that future developments in this field will rely on microorganisms, but greater funding and further research is needed to overcome the lack of knowledge in this field.

[ 27 ] Species groups [ edit ] Global aquaculture production in million tonnes, 1950–2010, as reported by the FAO [ 28 ] Main species groups Minor species groups World capture fisheries and aquaculture production by main producers (2018), from FAO 's Statistical Yearbook 2020 [ 29 ] Aquatic plants [ edit ] Cultivating emergent aquatic plants in floating containers See also: Algaculture and Seaweed farming Microalgae , also referred to as phytoplankton , microphytes , or planktonic algae , constitute the majority of cultivated algae . Macroalgae commonly known as seaweed also have many commercial and industrial uses, but due to their size and specific requirements, they are not easily cultivated on a large scale and are most often taken in the wild.

In 2016, aquaculture was the source of 96.5 percent by volume of the total 31.2 million tonnes of wild-collected and cultivated aquatic plants combined. Global production of farmed aquatic plants, overwhelmingly dominated by seaweeds, grew in output volume from 13.5 million tonnes in 1995 to just over 30 million tonnes in 2016.

[ 24 ] Seaweed farming [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Seaweed farming .

[ edit ] Underwater Eucheuma farming in the Philippines A seaweed farmer in Nusa Lembongan (Indonesia) gathers edible seaweed that has grown on a rope.

Seaweed farming or kelp farming is the practice of cultivating and harvesting seaweed . In its simplest form farmers gather from natural beds, while at the other extreme farmers fully control the crop's life cycle .

The seven most cultivated taxa are Eucheuma spp., Kappaphycus alvarezii , Gracilaria spp., Saccharina japonica , Undaria pinnatifida , Pyropia spp., and Sargassum fusiforme .

Eucheuma and K. alvarezii are attractive for carrageenan (a gelling agent ); Gracilaria is farmed for agar ; the rest are eaten after limited processing.

[ 30 ] Seaweeds are different from mangroves and seagrasses , as they are photosynthetic algal organisms [ 31 ] and are non-flowering.

[ 30 ] The largest seaweed-producing countries as of 2022 are China (58.62%) and Indonesia (28.6%); followed by South Korea (5.09%) and the Philippines (4.19%). Other notable producers include North Korea (1.6%), Japan (1.15%), Malaysia (0.53%), Zanzibar ( Tanzania , 0.5%), and Chile (0.3%).

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Seaweed farming has frequently been developed to improve economic conditions and to reduce fishing pressure.

[ 34 ] The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) reported that world production in 2019 was over 35 million tonnes. North America produced some 23,000 tonnes of wet seaweed. Alaska, Maine, France, and Norway each more than doubled their seaweed production since 2018 .

As of 2019, seaweed represented 30% of marine aquaculture.

[ 35 ] In 2023, the global seaweed extract market was valued at $16.5 billion, with strong projected growth.

[ 36 ] Seaweed farming is a carbon negative crop, with a high potential for climate change mitigation .

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] The IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate recommends "further research attention" as a mitigation tactic.

[ 39 ] World Wildlife Fund , Oceans 2050, and The Nature Conservancy publicly support expanded seaweed cultivation.

[ 35 ] Fish [ edit ] Main article: Fish farming The farming of fish is the most common form of aquaculture. It involves raising fish commercially in tanks, fish ponds , or ocean enclosures, usually for food. A facility that releases juvenile fish into the wild for recreational fishing or to supplement a species' natural numbers is generally referred to as a fish hatchery . Worldwide, the most important fish species used in fish farming are, in order, carp , salmon , tilapia , and catfish .

[ 28 ] In the Mediterranean, young bluefin tuna are netted at sea and towed slowly towards the shore. They are then interned in offshore pens (sometimes made from floating HDPE pipe) [ 40 ] where they are further grown for the market.

[ 41 ] In 2009, researchers in Australia managed for the first time to coax southern bluefin tuna to breed in landlocked tanks. Southern bluefin tuna are also caught in the wild and fattened in grow-out sea cages in southern Spencer Gulf , South Australia .

A similar process is used in the salmon-farming section of this industry; juveniles are taken from hatcheries and a variety of methods are used to aid them in their maturation. For example, as stated above, some of the most important fish species in the industry, salmon, can be grown using a cage system. This is done by having netted cages, preferably in open water that has a strong flow, and feeding the salmon a special food mixture that aids their growth. This process allows for year-round growth of the fish, thus a higher harvest during the correct seasons.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] An additional method, known sometimes as sea ranching, has also been used within the industry. Sea ranching involves raising fish in a hatchery for a brief time and then releasing them into marine waters for further development, whereupon the fish are recaptured when they have matured.

[ 44 ] Crustaceans [ edit ] See also: Shrimp farming and Freshwater prawn farming Commercial shrimp farming began in the 1970s, and production grew steeply thereafter. Global production reached more than 1.6 million tonnes in 2003, worth about US$9 billion. About 75% of farmed shrimp is produced in Asia, in particular in China and Thailand. The other 25% is produced mainly in Latin America, where Brazil is the largest producer. Thailand is the largest exporter.

Shrimp farming has changed from its traditional, small-scale form in Southeast Asia into a global industry. Technological advances have led to ever higher densities per unit area, and broodstock is shipped worldwide. Virtually all farmed shrimp are penaeids (i.e., shrimp of the family Penaeidae ), and just two species of shrimp, the Pacific white shrimp and the giant tiger prawn , account for about 80% of all farmed shrimp. These industrial monocultures are very susceptible to disease, which has decimated shrimp populations across entire regions. Increasing ecological problems, repeated disease outbreaks, and pressure and criticism from both nongovernmental organizations and consumer countries led to changes in the industry in the late 1990s and generally stronger regulations. In 1999, governments, industry representatives, and environmental organizations initiated a program aimed at developing and promoting more sustainable farming practices through the Seafood Watch program.

[ 45 ] Freshwater prawn farming shares many characteristics with, including many problems with, marine shrimp farming. Unique problems are introduced by the developmental lifecycle of the main species, the giant river prawn .

[ 46 ] The global annual production of freshwater prawns (excluding crayfish and crabs ) in 2007 was about 460,000 tonnes , exceeding 1.86 billion dollars.

[ 47 ] Additionally, China produced about 370,000 tonnes of Chinese river crab .

[ 48 ] In addition astaciculture is the freshwater farming of crayfish (mostly in the US, Australia, and Europe).

[ 49 ] Molluscs [ edit ] Abalone farm Sturgeon farm See also: Oyster farming and Geoduck aquaculture Aquacultured shellfish include various oyster , mussel , and clam species. These bivalves are filter and/or deposit feeders, which rely on ambient primary production rather than inputs of fish or other feed. As such, shellfish aquaculture is generally perceived as benign or even beneficial.

[ 50 ] Depending on the species and local conditions, bivalve molluscs are either grown on the beach, on longlines, or suspended from rafts and harvested by hand or by dredging. In May 2017 a Belgian consortium installed the first of two trial mussel farms on a wind farm in the North Sea .

[ 51 ] Abalone farming began in the late 1950s and early 1960s in Japan and China.

[ 52 ] Since the mid-1990s, this industry has become increasingly successful.

[ 53 ] Overfishing and poaching have reduced wild populations to the extent that farmed abalone now supplies most abalone meat. Sustainably farmed molluscs can be certified by Seafood Watch and other organizations, including the World Wildlife Fund (WWF). WWF initiated the "Aquaculture Dialogues" in 2004 to develop measurable and performance-based standards for responsibly farmed seafood. In 2009, WWF co-founded the Aquaculture Stewardship Council with the Dutch Sustainable Trade Initiative to manage the global standards and certification programs.

[ 54 ] After trials in 2012, [ 55 ] a commercial "sea ranch" was set up in Flinders Bay , Western Australia, to raise abalone. The ranch is based on an artificial reef made up of 5000 (As of April 2016 [update] ) separate concrete units called abitats (abalone habitats). The 900 kg abitats can host 400 abalone each. The reef is seeded with young abalone from an onshore hatchery. The abalone feed on seaweed that has grown naturally on the habitats, with the ecosystem enrichment of the bay also resulting in growing numbers of dhufish, pink snapper, wrasse, and Samson fish, among other species.

Brad Adams, from the company, has emphasised the similarity to wild abalone and the difference from shore-based aquaculture. "We're not aquaculture, we're ranching, because once they're in the water they look after themselves." [ 56 ] [ 57 ] Other groups [ edit ] Other groups include aquatic reptiles, amphibians, and miscellaneous invertebrates, such as echinoderms and jellyfish . They are separately graphed at the top right of this section, since they do not contribute enough volume to show clearly on the main graph.

[ 58 ] Commercially harvested echinoderms include sea cucumbers and sea urchins . In China, sea cucumbers are farmed in artificial ponds as large as 400 hectares (1,000 acres).

[ 59 ] Global fish production [ edit ] World capture fisheries and aquaculture production [ 60 ] By species group By main producers (2019) Global fish production peaked at about 171 million tonnes in 2016, with aquaculture representing 47 percent of the total and 53 percent if non-food uses (including reduction to fishmeal and fish oil) are excluded. With capture fishery production relatively static since the late 1980s, aquaculture has been responsible for the continuing growth in the supply of fish for human consumption.

[ 24 ] Global aquaculture production (including aquatic plants) in 2016 was 110.2 million tonnes, with the first-sale value estimated at US$244 billion. Three years later, in 2019 the reported output from global aquaculture operations was over 120 million tonnes valued at US$274 billion and by 2022 it had reached 130.9 million tonnes, valued at USD 312.8 billion.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] For the first time, aquaculture surpassed capture fisheries in aquatic animal production with 94.4 million tonnes, representing 51 percent of the world total and a record 57 percent of the production destined for human consumption.

[ 7 ] In 2022 most aquaculture workers were in Asia (95%), followed by Africa (3%) and Latin America and the Caribbean (2%).

[ 7 ] The contribution of aquaculture to the global production of capture fisheries and aquaculture combined has risen continuously, reaching 46.8 percent in 2016, up from 25.7 percent in 2000. With 5.8 percent annual growth rate during the period 2001–2016, aquaculture continues to grow faster than other major food production sectors, but it no longer has the high annual growth rates experienced in the 1980s and 1990s.

[ 24 ] In 2012, the total world production of fisheries was 158 million tonnes , of which aquaculture contributed 66.6 million tonnes, about 42%.

[ 61 ] The growth rate of worldwide aquaculture has been sustained and rapid, averaging about 8% per year for over 30 years, while the take from wild fisheries has been essentially flat for the last decade. The aquaculture market reached $86 billion [ 62 ] in 2009.

[ 63 ] Aquaculture is an especially important economic activity in China. Between 1980 and 1997, the Chinese Bureau of Fisheries reports, aquaculture harvests grew at an annual rate of 16.7%, jumping from 1.9 million tonnes to nearly 23 million tonnes. In 2005, China accounted for 70% of world production.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Aquaculture is also currently one of the fastest-growing areas of food production in the U.S.

[ 66 ] About 90% of all U.S. shrimp consumption is farmed and imported.

[ 67 ] In recent years, salmon aquaculture has become a major export in southern Chile, especially in Puerto Montt , Chile's fastest-growing city.

A United Nations report titled The State of the World Fisheries and Aquaculture released in May 2014 maintained fisheries and aquaculture support the livelihoods of some 60 million people in Asia and Africa.

[ 68 ] FAO estimates that in 2016, overall, women accounted for nearly 14 percent of all people directly engaged in the fisheries and aquaculture primary sector.

[ 24 ] In 2021, global fish production reached 182 million tonnes, with approximately equal amounts coming from capture (91.2 million tonnes) and aquaculture (90.9 million tonnes). Aquaculture has experienced rapid growth in recent decades, increasing almost sevenfold from 1990 to 2021.

[ 69 ] Category 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 Production Capture Inland 10.7 11.2 11.2 11.3 11.4 11.6 Marine 81.5 78.4 79.4 79.9 81.2 79.3 Total capture 92.2 89.5 90.6 91.2 92.7 90.9 Aquaculture Inland 38.6 42 44.8 46.9 48.6 51.4 Marine 23.2 24.4 25.4 26.8 27.5 28.7 Total aquaculture 61.8 66.4 70.2 73.7 76.1 80 Total world fisheries and aquaculture 154 156 160.7 164.9 168.7 170.9 Utilization Human consumption 130 136.4 140.1 144.8 148.4 151.2 Non-food uses 24 19.6 20.6 20 20.3 19.7 Population (billions) 7 7.1 7.2 7.3 7.3 7.4 Per capita apparent consumption (kg) 18.5 19.2 19.5 19.9 20.2 20.3 [ 24 ] Aquaculture production by region Over-reporting by China [ edit ] China overwhelmingly dominates the world in reported aquaculture output, [ 70 ] reporting a total output which is double that of the rest of the world put together. However, there are some historical issues with the accuracy of China's returns.

In 2001, scientists Reg Watson and Daniel Pauly expressed concerns that China was over reporting its catch from wild fisheries in the 1990s.

[ 8 ] [ 71 ] They said that made it appear that the global catch since 1988 was increasing annually by 300,000 tonnes, whereas it was really shrinking annually by 350,000 tonnes. Watson and Pauly suggested this may have been related to Chinese policies where state entities that monitored the economy were also tasked with increasing output. Also, until more recently, the promotion of Chinese officials was based on production increases from their own areas.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] China disputed this claim. The official Xinhua News Agency quoted Yang Jian, director general of the Agriculture Ministry's Bureau of Fisheries, as saying that China's figures were "basically correct".

[ 74 ] However, the FAO accepted there were issues with the reliability of China's statistical returns, and for a period treated data from China, including the aquaculture data, apart from the rest of the world.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Aquacultural methods [ edit ] Mariculture [ edit ] Finfish mariculture off High Island , Hong Kong Carp are one of the dominant fishes in freshwater aquaculture.

[ 77 ] The adaptable tilapia is another commonly farmed freshwater fish Main article: Mariculture Mariculture is the cultivation of marine organisms in seawater , variously in sheltered coastal waters ("inshore"), open ocean ("offshore"), and on land ("onshore").  Farmed species include algae (from microalgae (such as phytoplankton ) to macroalgae (such as seaweed ); shellfish (such as shrimp ), lobster , oysters ), and clams , and marine finfish .  Channel catfish ( Ictalurus punctatus ), hard clams ( Mercenaria mercenaria ) and Atlantic salmon ( Salmo salar ) are prominent in the U.S. mariculture.

[ 78 ] Mariculture may consist of raising the organisms on or in artificial enclosures such as in floating netted enclosures for salmon, and on racks or in floating cages for oysters. In the case of enclosed salmon, they are fed by the operators; oysters on racks filter feed on naturally available food. Abalone have been farmed on an artificial reef consuming seaweed which grows naturally on the reef units.

[ 57 ] Integrated [ edit ] Main article: Integrated multi-trophic aquaculture Integrated multi-trophic aquaculture (IMTA) is a practice in which the byproducts (wastes) from one species are recycled to become inputs ( fertilizers , food ) for another. Fed aquaculture (for example, fish , shrimp ) is combined with inorganic extractive and organic extractive (for example, shellfish ) aquaculture to create balanced systems for environmental sustainability (biomitigation), economic stability (product diversification and risk reduction) and social acceptability (better management practices).

[ 79 ] "Multi-trophic" refers to the incorporation of species from different trophic or nutritional levels in the same system.

[ 80 ] This is one potential distinction from the age-old practice of aquatic polyculture , which could simply be the co-culture of different fish species from the same trophic level. In this case, these organisms may all share the same biological and chemical processes, with few synergistic benefits, which could potentially lead to significant shifts in the ecosystem . Some traditional polyculture systems may, in fact, incorporate a greater diversity of species, occupying several niches , as extensive cultures (low intensity, low management) within the same pond. A working IMTA system can result in greater total production based on mutual benefits to the co-cultured species and improved ecosystem health , even if the production of individual species is lower than in a monoculture over a short-term period.

[ 81 ] Sometimes the term "integrated aquaculture" is used to describe the integration of monocultures through water transfer.

[ 81 ] For all intents and purposes, however, the terms "IMTA" and "integrated aquaculture" differ only in their degree of descriptiveness.

Aquaponics , fractionated aquaculture, integrated agriculture-aquaculture systems, integrated peri-urban-aquaculture systems, and integrated fisheries-aquaculture systems are other variations of the IMTA concept.

Urban aquaculture [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Urban aquaculture .

[ edit ] Urban aquaculture is aquaculture of fish, shellfish , and marine plants in rivers, ponds, lakes, canals located within an urban environment .

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] Urban aquaculture systems can be associated with a multitude of different production locations, species used, environment , and production intensity. The use of urban aquaculture has increased over the last several years as societies continue to urbanise and demand for food in urban environments increases.

[ 84 ] Methods of production include recirculating systems; land-based culture systems; multifunctional wetlands; ponds, borrow pits and lakes; cages and culture-based fisheries.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] Most production in urban environments will include either extensive (productivity is based solely on natural runoff) or intensive (tanks and cages of monoculture production), compared to aquaculture in general which is normally semi-intensive.

[ clarify ] [ 84 ] Netting materials [ edit ] Various materials, including nylon , polyester , polypropylene , polyethylene , plastic-coated welded wire , rubber , patented rope products (Spectra, Thorn-D, Dyneema), galvanized steel and copper are used for netting in aquaculture fish enclosures around the world.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 88 ] [ 89 ] [ 90 ] All of these materials are selected for a variety of reasons, including design feasibility, material strength , cost, and corrosion resistance .

Main article: Copper alloys in aquaculture Recently, copper alloys have become important netting materials in aquaculture because they are antimicrobial (i.e., they destroy bacteria , viruses , fungi , algae , and other microbes ) and they therefore prevent biofouling (i.e., the undesirable accumulation, adhesion, and growth of microorganisms, plants, algae, tubeworms, barnacles, mollusks, and other organisms). By inhibiting microbial growth, copper alloy aquaculture cages avoid costly net changes that are necessary with other materials. The resistance of organism growth on copper alloy nets also provides a cleaner and healthier environment for farmed fish to grow and thrive.

Technology [ edit ] Uncrewed vessels, like ROVs and AUVs ,  are now being used in aquaculture in various ways, such as site planning, cage or net inspection, environmental monitoring, disaster assessment, and risk reduction. The use of uncrewed vessels aims to increase safety, efficiency, and accuracy of aquaculture operations.

[ 91 ] Aquaculture is a multi-million-dollar business that relies on net and cage maintenance. Inspections used to be conducted by divers manually inspecting the nets, but uncrewed vessels are now being used to conduct faster and more efficient inspections.

[ 92 ] Biofloc technology is also used to simultaneously improve water quality and generate bacterial biomass as food for the cultured animals.

[ 93 ] Issues [ edit ] See also: Issues with salmon aquaculture If performed without consideration for potential local environmental impacts, aquaculture in inland waters can result in more environmental damage than wild fisheries , though with less waste produced per kg on a global scale.

[ 94 ] Local concerns with aquaculture in inland waters may include waste handling, side-effects of antibiotics , competition between farmed and wild animals, and the potential introduction of invasive plant and animal species , or foreign pathogens, particularly if unprocessed fish are used to feed more marketable carnivorous fish. If non-local live feeds are used, aquaculture may introduce exotic plants or animals with disastrous effects. Improvements in methods resulting from advances in research and the availability of commercial feeds has reduced some of these concerns since their greater prevalence in the 1990s and 2000s .

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] Fish waste is organic and composed of nutrients necessary in all components of aquatic food webs. In-ocean aquaculture often produces much higher than normal fish waste concentrations. The waste collects on the ocean bottom, damaging or eliminating bottom-dwelling life.

[ 97 ] Waste can also decrease dissolved oxygen levels in the water column , putting further pressure on wild animals.

[ 98 ] An alternative model to food being added to the ecosystem, is the installation of artificial reef structures to increase the habitat niches available, without the need to add any more than ambient feed and nutrient. This has been used in the "ranching" of abalone in Western Australia.

[ 57 ] Impacts on wild fish [ edit ] Some carnivorous and omnivorous farmed fish species are fed wild forage fish . Although carnivorous farmed fish represented only 13 percent of aquaculture production by weight in 2000, they represented 34 percent of aquaculture production by value.

[ 99 ] Farming of carnivorous species like salmon and shrimp leads to a high demand for forage fish to match the nutrition they get in the wild. Fish do not actually produce omega-3 fatty acids , but instead accumulate them from either consuming microalgae that produce these fatty acids, as is the case with forage fish like herring and sardines , or, as is the case with fatty predatory fish , like salmon, by eating prey fish that have accumulated omega-3 fatty acids from microalgae. To satisfy this requirement, more than 50 percent of the world fish oil production is fed to farmed salmon.

[ 100 ] Farmed salmon consume more wild fish than they generate as a final product, although the efficiency of production is improving. To produce one kilograms of farmed salmon, products from several kilograms of wild fish are fed to them – this can be described as the "fish-in-fish-out" (FIFO) ratio. In 1995, salmon had a FIFO ratio of 7.5 (meaning 7.5 kilograms of wild fish feed were required to produce one kilogram of salmon); by 2006 the ratio had fallen to 4.9.

[ 101 ] Additionally, a growing share of fish oil and fishmeal come from residues (byproducts of fish processing), rather than dedicated whole fish.

[ 102 ] In 2012, 34 percent of fish oil and 28 percent of fishmeal came from residues.

[ 103 ] However, fishmeal and oil from residues instead of whole fish have a different composition with more ash and less protein, which may limit its potential use for aquaculture.

As the salmon farming industry expands, it requires more wild forage fish for feed, at a time when seventy-five percent of the world's monitored fisheries are already near to or have exceeded their maximum sustainable yield .

[ 9 ] The industrial-scale extraction of wild forage fish for salmon farming then impacts the survivability of the wild predator fish who rely on them for food. An important step in reducing the impact of aquaculture on wild fish is shifting carnivorous species to plant-based feeds. Salmon feeds, for example, have gone from containing only fishmeal and oil to containing 40 percent plant protein.

[ 104 ] The USDA has also experimented with using grain-based feeds for farmed trout .

[ 105 ] When properly formulated (and often mixed with fishmeal or oil), plant-based feeds can provide proper nutrition and similar growth rates in carnivorous farmed fish.

[ 106 ] Another impact aquaculture production can have on wild fish is the risk of fish escaping from coastal pens, where they can interbreed with their wild counterparts, diluting wild genetic stocks.

[ 107 ] Escaped fish can become invasive , out-competing native species.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] [ 110 ] Animal welfare [ edit ] See also: Pain in fish and Pain in invertebrates As with the farming of terrestrial animals, social attitudes influence the need for humane practices and regulations in farmed marine animals. Under the guidelines advised by the Farm Animal Welfare Council good animal welfare means both fitness and a sense of well-being in the animal's physical and mental state. This can be defined by the Five Freedoms : Freedom from hunger and thirst Freedom from discomfort Freedom from pain, disease, or injury Freedom to express normal behaviour Freedom from fear and distress However, the controversial issue in aquaculture is whether fish and farmed marine invertebrates are actually sentient , or have the perception and awareness to experience suffering. Although no evidence of this has been found in marine invertebrates, [ 111 ] recent studies conclude that fish do have the necessary receptors ( nociceptors ) to sense noxious stimuli and so are likely to experience states of pain, fear and stress.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] Consequently, welfare in aquaculture is directed at vertebrates, finfish in particular.

[ 113 ] Common welfare concerns [ edit ] Welfare in aquaculture can be impacted by a number of issues such as stocking densities, behavioural interactions, disease and parasitism . A major problem in determining the cause of impaired welfare is that these issues are often all interrelated and influence each other at different times.

[ 114 ] Optimal stocking density is often defined by the carrying capacity of the stocked environment and the amount of individual space needed by the fish, which is very species specific. Although behavioural interactions such as shoaling may mean that high stocking densities are beneficial to some species, [ 111 ] [ 115 ] in many cultured species high stocking densities may be of concern. Crowding can constrain normal swimming behaviour, as well as increase aggressive and competitive behaviours such as cannibalism, [ 116 ] feed competition, [ 117 ] territoriality and dominance/subordination hierarchies.

[ 118 ] This potentially increases the risk of tissue damage due to abrasion from fish-to-fish contact or fish-to-cage contact.

[ 111 ] Fish can suffer reductions in food intake and food conversion efficiency .

[ 118 ] In addition, high stocking densities can result in water flow being insufficient, creating inadequate oxygen supply and waste product removal.

[ 115 ] Dissolved oxygen is essential for fish respiration and concentrations below critical levels can induce stress and even lead to asphyxiation .

[ 118 ] Ammonia, a nitrogen excretion product, is highly toxic to fish at accumulated levels, particularly when oxygen concentrations are low.

[ 119 ] Many of these interactions and effects cause stress in the fish, which can be a major factor in facilitating fish disease.

[ 113 ] For many parasites, infestation depends on the host's degree of mobility, the density of the host population and vulnerability of the host's defence system.

[ 120 ] Sea lice are the primary parasitic problem for finfish in aquaculture, high numbers causing widespread skin erosion and haemorrhaging, gill congestion, and increased mucus production.

[ 121 ] There are also a number of prominent viral and bacterial pathogens that can have severe effects on internal organs and nervous systems.

[ 122 ] Improving welfare [ edit ] The key to improving welfare of marine cultured organisms is to reduce stress to a minimum, as prolonged or repeated stress can cause a range of adverse effects. Attempts to minimise stress can occur throughout the culture process. Understanding and providing required environmental enrichment can be vital for reducing stress and benefit aquaculture objects such as improved growth body condition and reduced damage from aggression.

[ 123 ] During grow-out it is important to keep stocking densities at appropriate levels specific to each species, as well as separating size classes and grading to reduce aggressive behavioural interactions. Keeping nets and cages clean can assist positive water flow to reduce the risk of water degradation.

Not surprisingly disease and parasitism can have a major effect on fish welfare and it is important for farmers not only to manage infected stock but also to apply disease prevention measures. However, prevention methods, such as vaccination, can also induce stress because of the extra handling and injection.

[ 115 ] Other methods include adding antibiotics to feed, adding chemicals into water for treatment baths and biological control, such as using cleaner wrasse to remove lice from farmed salmon.

[ 115 ] Many steps are involved in transport, including capture, food deprivation to reduce faecal contamination of transport water, transfer to transport vehicle via nets or pumps, plus transport and transfer to the delivery location. During transport water needs to be maintained to a high quality, with regulated temperature, sufficient oxygen and minimal waste products.

[ 113 ] [ 115 ] In some cases anaesthetics may be used in small doses to calm fish before transport.

[ 115 ] Aquaculture is sometimes part of an environmental rehabilitation program or as an aid in conserving endangered species.

[ 124 ] Coastal ecosystems [ edit ] Aquaculture is becoming a significant threat to coastal ecosystems . About 20 percent of mangrove forests have been destroyed since 1980, partly due to shrimp farming .

[ 125 ] An extended cost –benefit analysis of the total economic value of shrimp aquaculture built on mangrove ecosystems found that the external costs were much higher than the external benefits.

[ 126 ] Over four decades, 269,000 hectares (660,000 acres) of Indonesian mangroves have been converted to shrimp farms. Most of these farms are abandoned within a decade because of the toxin build-up and nutrient loss.

[ 127 ] [ 128 ] Pollution from sea cage aquaculture [ edit ] Salmon aquaculture, Norway Salmon farms are typically sited in pristine coastal ecosystems which they then pollute. A farm with 200,000 salmon discharges more fecal waste than a city of 60,000 people. This waste is discharged directly into the surrounding aquatic environment, untreated, often containing antibiotics and pesticides ." [ 9 ] There is also an accumulation of heavy metals on the benthos (seafloor) near the salmon farms, particularly copper and zinc .

[ 129 ] In 2016, mass fish kill events impacted salmon farmers along Chile's coast and the wider ecology.

[ 130 ] Increases in aquaculture production and its associated effluent were considered to be possible contributing factors to fish and molluscan mortality.

[ 131 ] Sea cage aquaculture is responsible for nutrient enrichment of the waters in which they are established. This results from fish wastes and uneaten feed inputs. Elements of most concern are nitrogen and phosphorus which can promote algal growth, including harmful algal blooms which can be toxic to fish. Flushing times, current speeds, distance from the shore and water depth are important considerations when locating sea cages in order to minimize the impacts of nutrient enrichment on coastal ecosystems.

The extent of the effects of pollution from sea-cage aquaculture varies depending on where the cages are located, which species are kept, how densely cages are stocked and what the fish are fed. Important species-specific variables include the species' food conversion ratio (FCR) and nitrogen retention.

Freshwater ecosystems [ edit ] Whole-lake experiments carried out at the Experimental Lakes Area in Ontario, Canada, have displayed the potential for cage aquaculture to source numerous changes in freshwater ecosystems. Following the initiation of an experimental rainbow trout cage farm in a small boreal lake, dramatic reductions in mysis concentrations associated with a decrease in dissolved oxygen were observed.

[ 132 ] Significant increases in ammonium and total phosphorus, a driver for eutrophication in freshwater systems, [ 133 ] were measured in the hypolimnion of the lake. Annual phosphorus inputs from aquaculture waste exceeded that of natural inputs from atmospheric deposition and inflows, [ 134 ] and phytoplankton biomass has had a fourfold annual increase following the initiation of the experimental farm.

[ 135 ] Genetic modification [ edit ] A type of salmon called the AquAdvantage salmon has been genetically modified for faster growth, although it has not been approved for commercial use, due to controversy.

[ 136 ] The altered salmon incorporates a growth hormone from a Chinook salmon that allows it to reach full size in 16–28 months, instead of the normal 36 months for Atlantic salmon, and while consuming 25 percent less feed.

[ 137 ] The U.S. Food and Drug Administration reviewed the AquAdvantage salmon in a draft environmental assessment and determined that it "would not have a significant impact (FONSI) on the U.S. environment." [ 138 ] [ 139 ] Fish diseases, parasites and vaccines [ edit ] A major difficulty for aquaculture is the tendency towards monoculture and the associated risk of widespread disease . Aquaculture is also associated with environmental risks; for instance, shrimp farming has caused the destruction of important mangrove forests throughout southeast Asia .

[ 140 ] In the 1990s, disease wiped out China's farmed Farrer's scallop and white shrimp and required their replacement by other species.

[ 141 ] Needs of the aquaculture sector in vaccines [ edit ] Aquaculture has an average annual growth rate of 9.2%, however, the success and continued expansion of the fish farming sector is highly dependent on the control of fish pathogens including a wide range of viruses, bacteria, fungi, and parasites. In 2014, it was estimated that these parasites cost the global salmon farming industry up to 400 million Euros. This represents 6–10% of the production value of the affected countries, but it can go up to 20% (Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 2014). Since pathogens quickly spread within a population of cultured fish, their control is vital for the sector.
Historically, the use of antibiotics was against bacterial epizootics but the production of animal proteins has to be sustainable, which means that preventive measures that are acceptable from a biological and environmental point of view should be used to keep disease problems in aquaculture at an acceptable level. So, this added to the efficiency of vaccines resulted in an immediate and permanent reduction in the use of antibiotics in the 90s. In the beginning, there were fish immersion vaccines efficient against the vibriosis but proved ineffective against the furunculosis, hence the arrival of injectable vaccines: first water-based and after oil-based, much more efficient (Sommerset, 2005).

Development of new vaccines [ edit ] It is the important mortality in cages among farmed fish, the debates around DNA injection vaccines, although effective, their safety and their side effects but also societal expectations for cleaner fish and security, lead research on new vaccine vectors. Several initiatives are financed by the European Union to develop a rapid and cost-effective approach to using bacteria in feed to make vaccines, in particular thanks to lactic bacteria whose DNA is modified (Boudinot, 2006). In fact, vaccinating farmed fish by injection is time-consuming and costly, so vaccines can be administered orally or by immersion by being added to feed or directly into water. This allows vaccinating many individuals at the same time while limiting the associated handling and stress.
Indeed, many tests are necessary because the antigens of the vaccines must be adapted to each species or not present a certain level of variability or they will not have any effect. For example, tests have been done with two species: Lepeophtheirus salmonis (from which the antigens were collected) and Caligus rogercresseyi (which was vaccinated with the antigens), although the homology between the two species is important, the level of variability made the protection ineffective (Fisheries and Oceans Canada, 2014).

Recent vaccines development in aquaculture [ edit ] There are 24 vaccines available and one for lobsters. The first vaccine was used in the USA against enteric red mouth in 1976. However, there are 19 companies and some small stakeholders are producing vaccines for aquaculture nowadays. The novel approaches are a way forward to prevent the loss of 10% of aquaculture through disease. Genetically modified vaccines are not being used in the EU due to societal concerns and regulations. Meanwhile, DNA vaccines are now authorised in the EU.
There are challenges in fish vaccine development, immune response due to lack of potent adjuvants. Scientists are considering microdose application in future. But there are also opportunities in aquaculture vaccinology due to the low cost of technology, regulations change and novel antigen expression and delivery systems.

[ 142 ] In Norway subunit vaccine (VP2 peptide) against infectious pancreatic necrosis is being used. In Canada, a licensed DNA vaccine against Infectious hematopoietic necrosis has been launched for industry use.
Fish have large mucosal surfaces, so the preferred route is immersion, intraperitoneal and oral respectively.

Nanoparticles are in progress for delivery purposes. The common antibodies produced are IgM and IgT. Normally booster is not required in fish because more memory cells are produced in response to the booster rather than an increased level of antibodies.
mRNA vaccines are alternative to DNA vaccines because they are more safe, stable, easily producible at a large scale and mass immunization potential. Recently these are used in cancer prevention and therapeutics. Studies in rabies has shown that efficacy depends on dose and route of administration. These are still in infancy.

[ 142 ] Economic gains [ edit ] In 2014, the aquaculture produced fish overtook wild caught fish, in supply for human food. This means there is a huge demand for vaccines, in prevention of diseases. The reported annual loss fish, calculates to >10 billion USD. This is from approximately 10% of all fishes dying from infectious diseases.

[ 142 ] The high annual losses increases the demand for vaccines. Even though there are about 24 traditionally used vaccines, there is still demand for more vaccines. The breakthrough of DNA-vaccines has sunk the cost of vaccines.

[ 142 ] The alternative to vaccines would be antibiotics and chemotherapy, which are more expensive and with bigger drawbacks. DNA-vaccines have become the most cost-efficient method of preventing infectious diseases. This bodes well for DNA-vaccines becoming the new standard both in fish vaccines, and in general vaccines.

[ 143 ] Salinization/acidification of soils [ edit ] Sediment from abandoned aquaculture farms can remain hypersaline, acidic and eroded. This material can remain unusable for aquaculture purposes for long periods thereafter. Various chemical treatments, such as adding lime , can aggravate the problem by modify the physicochemical characteristics of the sediment.

[ 144 ] Plastic pollution [ edit ] Aquaculture produces a range of marine debris, depending on the product and location. The most frequently documented type of plastic is expanded polystyrene (EPS), used extensively in floats and sea cage collars (MEPC 2020). Other common waste items include cage nets and plastic harvest bins. A review of aquaculture as a source of marine litter in the North, Baltic and Mediterranean Seas identified 64 different items, 19 of which were unique to aquaculture . Estimates of the amount of aquaculture waste entering the oceans vary widely, depending on the methodologies used. For example, in the European Economic Area loss estimates have varied from a low of 3,000 tonnes to 41,000 tonnes per year.

[ 145 ] Ecological benefits [ edit ] See also: Nitrate vulnerable zone While some forms of aquaculture can be devastating to ecosystems, such as shrimp farming in mangroves , other forms can be beneficial. Shellfish aquaculture adds substantial filter feeding capacity to an environment which can significantly improve water quality . A single oyster can filter 15 gallons of water a day, removing microscopic algal cells. By removing these cells, shellfish are removing nitrogen and other nutrients from the system and either retaining it or releasing it as waste which sinks to the bottom. By harvesting these shellfish, the nitrogen they retained is completely removed from the system.

[ 146 ] Raising and harvesting kelp and other macroalgae directly remove nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus. Repackaging these nutrients can relieve eutrophic , or nutrient-rich, conditions known for their low dissolved oxygen which can decimate species diversity and abundance of marine life. Removing algal cells from the water also increases light penetration, allowing plants such as eelgrass to reestablish themselves and further increase oxygen levels.

[ citation needed ] [ 147 ] Aquaculture in an area can provide for crucial ecological functions for the inhabitants. Shellfish beds or cages can provide habitat structure. This structure can be used as shelter by invertebrates, small fish or crustaceans to potentially increase their abundance and maintain biodiversity. Increased shelter raises stocks of prey fish and small crustaceans by increasing recruitment opportunities in turn providing more prey for higher trophic levels. One study estimated that 10 square meters of oyster reef could enhance an ecosystem's biomass by 2.57 kg [ 148 ] Herbivore shellfish will also be preyed on. This moves energy directly from primary producers to higher trophic levels potentially skipping out on multiple energetically costly trophic jumps which would increase biomass in the ecosystem.

[ citation needed ] Seaweed farming is a carbon negative crop, with a high potential for climate change mitigation .

[ 149 ] The IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate recommends "further research attention" as a mitigation tactic.

[ 150 ] Regenerative ocean farming is a polyculture farming system that grows a mix of seaweeds and shellfish while sequestering carbon, decreasing nitrogen in the water and increasing oxygen, helping to regenerate and restore local habitat like reef ecosystems.

[ 151 ] Prospects [ edit ] Global wild fisheries are in decline, with valuable habitat such as estuaries in critical condition.

[ 152 ] The aquaculture or farming of piscivorous fish, like salmon , does not help the problem because they need to eat products from other fish, such as fish meal and fish oil . Studies have shown that salmon farming has major negative impacts on wild salmon, as well as the forage fish that need to be caught to feed them.

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] Fish that are higher on the food chain are less efficient sources of food energy.

[ citation needed ] Apart from fish and shrimp, some aquaculture undertakings, such as seaweed and filter-feeding bivalve mollusks like oysters , clams , mussels and scallops , are relatively benign and even environmentally restorative.

[ 12 ] Filter-feeders filter pollutants as well as nutrients from the water, improving water quality.

[ 155 ] Seaweeds extract nutrients such as inorganic nitrogen and phosphorus directly from the water, [ 79 ] and filter-feeding mollusks can extract nutrients as they feed on particulates, such as phytoplankton and detritus .

[ 156 ] Some profitable aquaculture cooperatives promote sustainable practices.

[ 157 ] New methods lessen the risk of biological and chemical pollution through minimizing fish stress, fallowing netpens, and applying integrated pest management .

Vaccines are being used more and more to reduce antibiotic use for disease control.

[ 158 ] Onshore recirculating aquaculture systems, facilities using polyculture techniques, and properly sited facilities (for example, offshore areas with strong currents) are examples of ways to manage negative environmental effects.

[ citation needed ] Recirculating aquaculture systems (RAS) recycle water by circulating it through filters to remove fish waste and food and then recirculating it back into the tanks. This saves water and the waste gathered can be used in compost or, in some cases, could even be treated and used on land. While RAS was developed with freshwater fish in mind, scientists associated with the Agricultural Research Service have found a way to rear saltwater fish using RAS in low-salinity waters.

[ 159 ] Although saltwater fish are raised in off-shore cages or caught with nets in water that typically has a salinity of 35 parts per thousand (ppt), scientists were able to produce healthy pompano, a saltwater fish, in tanks with a salinity of only 5 ppt. Commercializing low-salinity RAS are predicted to have positive environmental and economical effects. Unwanted nutrients from the fish food would not be added to the ocean and the risk of transmitting diseases between wild and farm-raised fish would greatly be reduced. The price of expensive saltwater fish, such as the pompano and cobia used in the experiments, would be reduced. However, before any of this can be done researchers must study every aspect of the fish's lifecycle, including the amount of ammonia and nitrate the fish will tolerate in the water, what to feed the fish during each stage of its lifecycle, the stocking rate that will produce the healthiest fish, etc.

[ 159 ] Some 16 countries now use geothermal energy for aquaculture, including China, Israel , and the United States.

[ 160 ] In California, for example, 15 fish farms produce tilapia, bass, and catfish with warm water from underground. This warmer water enables fish to grow all year round and mature more quickly. Collectively these California farms produce 4.5 million kilograms of fish each year.

[ 160 ] Global goals [ edit ] The UN Sustainable Development Goal 14 ("life below water"), Target 14.7 includes aquaculture: "By 2030, increase the economic benefits to small island developing states and least developed countries from the sustainable use of marine resources, including through sustainable management of fisheries, aquaculture and tourism ".

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] Aquaculture's contribution to GDP is not included in SDG Target 14.7 but methods for quantifying this have been explored by FAO.

[ 25 ] National laws, regulations, and management [ edit ] Laws governing aquaculture practices vary greatly by country [ 163 ] and are often not closely regulated or easily traceable.

In the United States, land-based and nearshore aquaculture is regulated at the federal and state levels; [ 164 ] however, no national laws govern offshore aquaculture in U.S.

exclusive economic zone waters. In June 2011, the Department of Commerce and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration released national aquaculture policies [ 165 ] to address this issue and "to meet the growing demand for healthy seafood, to create jobs in coastal communities, and restore vital ecosystems." Large aquaculture facilities (i.e. those producing 20,000 pounds (9,100 kg) per year) which discharge wastewater are required to obtain permits pursuant to the Clean Water Act .

[ 166 ] Facilities that produce at least 100,000 pounds (45,000 kg) of fish, molluscs or crustaceans a year are subject to specific national discharge standards.

[ 167 ] Other permitted facilities are subject to effluent limitations that are developed on a case-by-case basis.

[ 166 ] By country [ edit ] Aquaculture by Country: v t e Aquaculture by country Albania Australia Canada Chile China Federated States of Micronesia Fiji India Indonesia Israel Kiribati Laos Madagascar Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Pakistan Palau Papua New Guinea Philippines Russia Samoa Singapore Solomon Islands South Africa South Korea Taiwan Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Uganda United Kingdom United States Vanuatu History [ edit ] Workers harvest catfish from the Delta Pride Catfish farms in Mississippi The Gunditjmara , a local Aboriginal Australian people in south-western Victoria , Australia, may have raised short-finned eels as early as about 4,580 BCE .

[ 168 ] Evidence indicates they developed about 100 km 2 (39 sq mi) of volcanic floodplains in the vicinity of Lake Condah into a complex of channels and dams, and used woven traps to capture eels , and to preserve them to eat all year round.

[ 169 ] [ 170 ] The local Budj Bim Cultural Landscape , a World Heritage Site , is one of the oldest known aquaculture sites in the world.

[ 171 ] [ 172 ] Oral tradition in China tells of the culture of the common carp, Cyprinus carpio , as long ago as 2000–2100 BCE (around 4,000 years BP ), but the earliest significant evidence lies in the literature, in the earliest monograph on fish culture called The Classic of Fish Culture , by Fan Li , written around 475 BCE ( c.

2475 BP).

[ 173 ] Another ancient Chinese guide to aquaculture , wriiten by Yang Yu Jing around 460 BCE, shows that carp farming was becoming more sophisticated. The Jiahu site in China has circumstantial archeological evidence as possibly the oldest aquaculture locations, dating from 6200BCE (about 8,200 years BP), but this is speculative.

[ 174 ] When the waters subsided after river floods, some fish, mainly carp , were trapped in lakes. Early aquaculturists fed their brood using nymphs and silkworm faeces, and ate them.

[ 175 ] Ancient Egyptians might have farmed fish (especially gilt-head bream ) from Lake Bardawil about 1,500 BCE (about 3,500 BP), and they traded them with Canaan .

[ 175 ] Gim cultivation is the oldest aquaculture in Korea .

[ 176 ] Early cultivation methods used bamboo or oak sticks; [ 176 ] newer methods utilizing nets replaced them in the 19th century.

[ 176 ] [ 177 ] Floating rafts have been used for mass production since the 1920s.

[ 176 ] Japanese people cultivated seaweed by providing bamboo poles and, later, nets and oyster shells to serve as anchoring-surfaces for spores .

[ 178 ] Romans bred fish in ponds and farmed oysters in coastal lagoons before 100 CE .

[ 179 ] Fish pond of the La Cambre Abbey in Brussels , Belgium In medieval Europe , early Christian monasteries adopted Roman aquacultural practices.

[ 180 ] Aquaculture spread because people away from coasts and big rivers were otherwise dependant on fish which required salting in order to be preserved.

[ 181 ] Fish was an important food source in medieval Europe, when in average 150 days per year were days of fasting and abstinence , and meat was prohibited.

[ 182 ] Improvements in transportation during the 19th century made fresh fish easily available and inexpensive, even in inland areas, rendering aquaculture less popular. The 15th-century fishponds of the Trebon Basin in the present-day Czech Republic are maintained as a tentative UNESCO World Heritage Site .

[ 183 ] Samoans practised "a traditional form of giant clam ranching".

[ 184 ] Hawaiians constructed oceanic fish ponds . A remarkable example is the "Menehune" fishpond dating from at least 1,000 years ago, at Alekoko. Legend records its construction by the mythical Menehune dwarf-people.

[ 185 ] In the first half of the 18th century, German Stephan Ludwig Jacobi experimented with external fertilization of brown trout and salmon . He wrote an article " Von der künstlichen Erzeugung der Forellen und Lachse " ( On the Artificial Production of Trout and Salmon ) summarizing his findings, and earning him a reputation as the founder of artificial fish-rearing.

[ 186 ] By the latter decades of the 18th century, oyster-farming had begun in estuaries along the Atlantic Coast of North America.

[ 187 ] The word "aquaculture" appeared in an 1855 newspaper article in reference to the harvesting of ice.

[ 188 ] It also appeared in descriptions of the terrestrial agricultural practise of sub-irrigation in the late-19th century [ 189 ] before becoming associated primarily with the cultivation of aquatic plant- and animal-species. (The Oxford English Dictionary records the common modern usage of "aquaculture" from 1887; [ 190 ] and that of "aquiculture" from 1867.

[ 191 ] ) In 1859, Stephen Ainsworth of West Bloomfield, New York , began experiments with brook trout . By 1864, Seth Green had established a commercial fish-hatching operation at Caledonia Springs, near Rochester, New York . By 1866, with the involvement of W. W. Fletcher of Concord, Massachusetts , artificial fish-hatcheries operated both in both Canada and in the United States.

[ 192 ] When the Dildo Island fish hatchery opened in Newfoundland in 1889, it was the largest and most advanced in the world. The word "aquaculture" was used in descriptions of the hatcheries experiments with cod and lobster in 1890.

[ 193 ] By the 1920s, the American Fish Culture Company of Carolina, Rhode Island , founded in the 1870s, was one of the leading producers of trout.  During the 1940s, they perfected the method of manipulating the day- and night-cycle of fish so that they could be artificially spawned year-round.

[ 194 ] Californians harvested wild kelp and attempted to manage supply around 1900, later labeling it a wartime resource.

[ 195 ] See also [ edit ] Water portal Marine life portal Agroecology Alligator farm Certification for Aquaculture Professionals Fisheries science Fishery Industrial aquaculture List of commercially important fish species Maggots used as food for fish Oyster farming Recirculating aquaculture system Resource decoupling Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY 4.0 . Text taken from The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2024​ , p.10, FAO.

References [ edit ] ^ Garner, Bryan A.

(2016), Garner's Modern English Usage (4th ed.), Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0190491482 ^ "aquaculture" .

Answers.com . Archived from the original on 2006-07-19.

^ "Study: Aquaculture can be 'part of the solution' to marine ecosystem restoration - Responsible Seafood Advocate" .

Global Seafood Alliance . 2023-02-22 . Retrieved 2024-02-17 .

^ "What is aquaculture?" .

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, US Department of Commerce . Retrieved 2022-12-07 .

^ Global Aquaculture Production Fishery Statistical Collections, FAO, Rome. Retrieved 2 October 2011.

^ a b FAO FIGIS Database (2022) Global Aquaculture Production 1950–2019 Archived 2022-01-19 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 2 February 2022 ^ a b c d The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2024 . FAO. 2024-06-07.

doi : 10.4060/cd0683en .

ISBN 978-92-5-138763-4 .

^ a b Watson, Reg; Pauly, Daniel (2001).

"Systematic distortions in world Fisheries catch trends" .

Nature .

414 (6863): 534– 6.

Bibcode : 2001Natur.414..534W .

doi : 10.1038/35107050 .

PMID 11734851 .

S2CID 205023890 . Archived from the original on 2010-05-31.

^ a b c Seafood Choices Alliance (2005) It's all about salmon [ usurped ] ^ FAO's work on climate change Fisheries & aquaculture 2019 (PDF) .

Food and Agriculture Organization . 2019.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-10-09.

^ "'FAO: 'Fish farming is the way forward.'(Big Picture)(Food and Agriculture Administration's 'State of Fisheries and Aquaculture' report)." The Ecologist 39.4 (2009): 8–9. Gale Expanded Academic ASAP. Web. 1 October 2009. < http://find.galegroup.com/gtx/start.do?prodId=EAIM .>.

^ a b " The Case for Fish and Oyster Farming Archived 2009-05-12 at the Wayback Machine ," Carl Marziali, University of Southern California Trojan Family Magazine, May 17, 2009.

^ "The Economist: 'The promise of a blue revolution', Aug. 7, 2003. < https://www.economist.com/special-report/2003/08/07/the-promise-of-a-blue-revolution > ^ "Jacques Cousteau, The Ocean World of Jacques Cousteau: The Act of life , World Pub: 1973." ^ Duarte, C. M; Marba, N; Holmer, M (2007). "Rapid Domestication of Marine Species".

Science .

316 (5823): 382– 383.

doi : 10.1126/science.1138042 .

hdl : 10261/89727 .

PMID 17446380 .

S2CID 84063035 .

^ Guns, Germs, and Steel . New York, New York: W.W. Norton & Company, Inc.

2005.

ISBN 978-0-393-06131-4 .

^ Lasa, Aide; Auguste, Manon; Lema, Alberto; Oliveri, Caterina; Borello, Alessio; Taviani, Elisa; Bonello, Guido; Doni, Lapo; Millard, Andrew D.; Bruto, Maxime; Romalde, Jesus L.; Yakimov, Michail; Balbi, Teresa; Pruzzo, Carla; Canesi, Laura (September 2021).

"A deep-sea bacterium related to coastal marine pathogens" .

Environmental Microbiology .

23 (9): 5349– 5363.

Bibcode : 2021EnvMi..23.5349L .

doi : 10.1111/1462-2920.15629 .

ISSN 1462-2912 .

PMC 8519021 .

PMID 34097814 .

^ "Aquatic animal disease and human health" .

Department of Primary Industries . 2016-04-26. Archived from the original on 2019-11-13 . Retrieved October 15, 2019 .

^ Imsland, Albert K.; Reynolds, Patrick; Eliassen, Gerhard; Hangstad, Thor Arne; Foss, Atle; Vikingstad, Erik; Elvegård, Tor Anders (2014-03-20). "The use of lumpfish (Cyclopterus lumpus L.) to control sea lice (Lepeophtheirus salmonis Krøyer) infestations in intensively farmed Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.)".

Aquaculture .

424– 425: 18– 23.

Bibcode : 2014Aquac.424...18I .

doi : 10.1016/j.aquaculture.2013.12.033 .

^ "DEPOMOD and AutoDEPOMOD — Ecasa Toolbox" .

www.ecasatoolbox.org.uk . Archived from the original on 2015-09-25 . Retrieved 2015-09-24 .

^ World Food and Agriculture – Statistical Yearbook 2021 . 2021.

doi : 10.4060/cb4477en .

ISBN 978-92-5-134332-6 .

S2CID 240163091 . Retrieved 2021-12-13 – via fao.org.

^ Naylor, Rosamond L.; Goldburg, Rebecca J.; Primavera, Jurgenne H.; Kautsky, Nils; Beveridge, Malcolm C. M.; Clay, Jason; Folke, Carl; Lubchenco, Jane; Mooney, Harold (2000-06-29). "Effect of aquaculture on world fish supplies".

Nature .

405 (6790): 1017– 1024.

Bibcode : 2000Natur.405.1017N .

doi : 10.1038/35016500 .

hdl : 10862/1737 .

ISSN 0028-0836 .

PMID 10890435 .

S2CID 4411053 .

^ "Turning the tide" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-02-22 . Retrieved 2015-09-24 .

^ a b c d e f In brief, The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture, 2018 (PDF) . FAO. 2018.

^ a b Cai, Junning (2019).

Understanding and measuring the contribution of aquaculture and fisheries to gross domestic product (GDP) . Hui Huang, PingSun Leung. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

ISBN 978-92-5-131280-3 .

OCLC 1104067293 .

^ Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (2020).

The state of world fisheries and aquaculture 2020 : sustainability in action . Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

ISBN 978-92-5-132692-3 .

OCLC 1159532489 .

^ Qian, Pei-Yuan; Xu, Ying; Fusetani, Nobushino (2009).

"Qian, P. Y., Xu, Y. & Fusetani, N. Natural products as antifouling compounds: recent progress and future perspectives" .

Biofouling .

26 (2): 223– 234.

doi : 10.1080/08927010903470815 .

PMID 19960389 .

S2CID 35932563 . Retrieved 2015-09-24 .

^ a b Based on data sourced from the FishStat database Archived November 7, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ World Food and Agriculture – Statistical Yearbook 2020 . Rome: FAO. 2020.

doi : 10.4060/cb1329en .

ISBN 978-92-5-133394-5 .

S2CID 242794287 .

^ a b Reynolds, Daman; Caminiti, Jeff; Edmundson, Scott; Gao, Song; Wick, Macdonald; Huesemann, Michael (2022-07-12).

"Seaweed proteins are nutritionally valuable components in the human diet" .

The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition .

116 (4): 855– 861.

doi : 10.1093/ajcn/nqac190 .

ISSN 0002-9165 .

PMID 35820048 .

^ "Seaweeds: Plants or Algae?" .

Point Reyes National Seashore Association . Retrieved 1 December 2018 .

^ Zhang, Lizhu; Liao, Wei; Huang, Yajun; Wen, Yuxi; Chu, Yaoyao; Zhao, Chao (13 October 2022).

"Global seaweed farming and processing in the past 20 years" .

Food Production, Processing and Nutrition .

4 (1).

doi : 10.1186/s43014-022-00103-2 .

^ Buschmann, Alejandro H.; Camus, Carolina; Infante, Javier; Neori, Amir; Israel, Álvaro; Hernández-González, María C.; Pereda, Sandra V.; Gomez-Pinchetti, Juan Luis; Golberg, Alexander; Tadmor-Shalev, Niva; Critchley, Alan T. (2 October 2017). "Seaweed production: overview of the global state of exploitation, farming and emerging research activity".

European Journal of Phycology .

52 (4): 391– 406.

Bibcode : 2017EJPhy..52..391B .

doi : 10.1080/09670262.2017.1365175 .

ISSN 0967-0262 .

S2CID 53640917 .

^ Ask, E.I (1990).

Cottonii and Spinosum Cultivation Handbook . Philippines: FMC BioPolymer Corporation. p. 52.

^ a b Jones, Nicola (March 15, 2023).

"Banking on the Seaweed Rush" .

Hakai Magazine . Retrieved 2023-03-19 .

^ "Global Seaweed Extract Market Report 2024 - Seaweed Extract Market was Valued at $16.5 Billion in 2023 and is Projected to Grow to $20.9 Billion by 2029" (Press release). Research and Markets. 2024-09-24 . Retrieved 2025-01-26 – via GlobeNewswire News Room.

^ Wang, Taiping; Yang, Zhaoqing; Davis, Jonathan; Edmundson, Scott J. (2022-05-01).

Quantifying Nitrogen Bioextraction by Seaweed Farms – A Real-time Modeling-Monitoring Case Study in Hood Canal, WA (Technical report).

Office of Scientific and Technical Information .

doi : 10.2172/1874372 .

^ Duarte, Carlos M.; Wu, Jiaping; Xiao, Xi; Bruhn, Annette; Krause-Jensen, Dorte (2017).

"Can Seaweed Farming Play a Role in Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation?" .

Frontiers in Marine Science .

4 : 100.

Bibcode : 2017FrMaS...4..100D .

doi : 10.3389/fmars.2017.00100 .

hdl : 10754/623247 .

ISSN 2296-7745 .

^ Bindoff, N. L.; Cheung, W. W. L.; Kairo, J. G.; Arístegui, J.; et al. (2019).

"Chapter 5: Changing Ocean, Marine Ecosystems, and Dependent Communities" (PDF) .

IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate . pp.

447– 587.

^ "HDPE Pipe used for Aquaculture pens" . Archived from the original on 2019-01-09.

^ Volpe, J. (2005).

"Dollars without sense: The bait for big-money tuna ranching around the world" .

BioScience .

55 (4): 301– 302.

doi : 10.1641/0006-3568(2005)055[0301:DWSTBF]2.0.CO;2 .

ISSN 0006-3568 .

^ Asche, Frank (2008). "Farming the Sea".

Marine Resource Economics .

23 (4): 527– 547.

doi : 10.1086/mre.23.4.42629678 .

JSTOR 42629678 .

S2CID 129264961 .

^ Goldburg, Rebecca; Naylor, Rosamond (February 2005).

"Future Seascapes, Fishing, and Fish Farming" .

Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment .

3 (1): 21– 28.

doi : 10.2307/3868441 .

JSTOR 3868441 .

^ Brown, E. Evan (1983).

World Fish Farming: Cultivation and Economics (Second ed.). Westport, Connecticut: AVI Publishing. p. 2.

ISBN 978-0-87055-427-8 .

^ "About Seafood Watch" . Monterey Bay Aquarium. Archived from the original on 2013-05-11 . Retrieved 2013-05-30 .

^ New, M. B.: Farming Freshwater Prawns ; FAO Fisheries Technical Paper 428, 2002.

ISSN 0429-9345 .

^ "Freshwater Prawn Book" . Wiley Blackwell. 2010. Archived from the original on December 1, 2018 . Retrieved November 25, 2018 .

^ Data extracted from the FAO Fisheries Global Aquaculture Production Database Archived 2005-09-27 at the Wayback Machine for freshwater crustaceans. The most recent data are from 2003 and sometimes contain estimates. Retrieved June 28, 2005.

^ Holdich, David M. (1993).

"A review of astaciculture: freshwater crayfish farming" .

Aquatic Living Resources .

6 (4): 307– 317.

Bibcode : 1993AqLR....6..307H .

doi : 10.1051/alr:1993032 .

^ Burkholder, Joann M.; Shumway, Sandra E. (2011). "Bivalve Shellfish Aquaculture and Eutrophication".

Shellfish Aquaculture and the Environment . pp.

155– 215.

doi : 10.1002/9780470960967.ch7 .

ISBN 9780470960967 .

^ "Belgians Start Growing Mussels on Offshore Wind Farms" .

offshoreWIND.biz . Navingo BV. June 2, 2017 . Retrieved 3 June 2017 .

^ "Abalone Farming Information" .

Archived from the original on 13 November 2007 . Retrieved 2007-11-08 .

^ "Abalone Farming on a Boat" .

Wired . 25 January 2002.

Archived from the original on 4 January 2007 . Retrieved 2007-01-27 .

^ World Wildlife Fund.

"Sustainable Seafood, Farmed Seafood" . Retrieved May 30, 2013 .

^ "Information Memorandum, 2013 Ranching of Greenlip Abalone, Flinders Bay – Western Australia" (PDF) .

Ocean Grown Abalone . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 October 2016 . Retrieved 23 April 2016 .

^ Fitzgerald, Bridget (28 August 2014).

"First wild abalone farm in Australia built on artificial reef" .

ABC News . Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 23 April 2016 .

It's the same as the wild core product except we've got the aquaculture advantage which is consistency of supply.

^ a b c Murphy, Sean (23 April 2016).

"Abalone grown in world-first sea ranch in WA 'as good as wild catch' " .

ABC News . Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 23 April 2016 .

So to drive future growth I really believe sea ranching is a great opportunity going forward for some of these coastal communities.

^ "Chapter 7: Correlation and Simple Linear Regression | Natural Resources Biometrics" .

courses.lumenlearning.com . Retrieved 2023-10-19 .

^ Ess, Charlie.

"Wild product's versatility could push price beyond $2 for Alaska dive fleet" . National Fisherman. Archived from the original on 2009-01-22 . Retrieved 2008-08-01 .

^ World Food and Agriculture – Statistical Yearbook 2021 . Rome: FAO. 2021.

doi : 10.4060/cb4477en .

ISBN 978-92-5-134332-6 .

S2CID 240163091 .

^ FAO (2014) The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture 2014 (SOFIA) ^ $86 thousand million ^ Blumenthal, Les (August 2, 2010).

"Company says FDA is nearing decision on genetically engineered Atlantic salmon" .

Washington Post . Retrieved 26 November 2017 .

^ "Wired 12.05: The Bluewater Revolution" .

wired.com . May 2004.

^ Eilperin, Juliet (2005-01-24).

"Fish Farming's Bounty Isn't Without Barbs" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 2018-11-28 . Retrieved 2017-08-24 .

^ "Environmental Impact of Aquaculture" . August 20, 2004. Archived from the original on 2004-08-20.

^ "The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture" .

fao.org .

^ "Fisheries and aquaculture have good future" . Herald Globe. Archived from the original on 2014-05-28 . Retrieved 27 May 2014 .

^ "Life below water | SDG 14: Life below water" .

Atlas of Sustainable Development Goals 2023 . Retrieved 2024-06-08 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Output of Aquatic Products" .

China Statistics . Retrieved 2011-04-23 .

^ Pearson, Helen (2001).

"China caught out as model shows net fall in fish" .

Nature .

414 (6863): 477.

Bibcode : 2001Natur.414..477P .

doi : 10.1038/35107216 .

PMID 11734811 .

^ Heilprin, John (29 November 2001).

"Chinese Misreporting Masks Dramatic Decline In Ocean Fish Catches" (PDF) . Associated Press.

^ Reville, William (14 Mar 2002).

"Something fishy about the figures" (PDF) . The Irish Times.

^ China disputes claim it over reports fish catch Associated Press , 17 December 2002.

^ FAO (2006).

"The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture (SOPHIA)" (PDF) .

FTP server ( FTP ). p. 5 . Retrieved 2013-05-18 .

[ dead ftp link ] (To view documents see Help:FTP ) ^ "FAO Fisheries Department – FISHERY STATISTICS: RELIABILITY AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS" .

www.fao.org .

^ "FAO summary" (PDF) . April 2018. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-05-18 . Retrieved 2017-10-18 .

^ "Marine Aquaculture in the United States: Environmental Impacts and Policy Options" .

www.iatp.org . Retrieved 2019-07-15 .

^ a b Chopin, T; Buschmann, AH; Halling, C; Troell, M; Kautsky, N; Neori, A; Kraemer, GP; Zertuche-Gonzalez, JA; Yarish, C; Neefus, C (2001). "Integrating seaweeds into marine aquaculture systems: a key toward sustainability".

Journal of Phycology .

37 (6): 975– 986.

Bibcode : 2001JPcgy..37..975C .

doi : 10.1046/j.1529-8817.2001.01137.x .

S2CID 85161308 .

^ Chopin T. 2006. Integrated multi-trophic aquaculture. What it is, and why you should care ... and don't confuse it with polyculture. Northern Aquaculture, Vol. 12, No. 4, July/August 2006, pg. 4.

^ a b Neori, A; Chopin, T; Troell, M; Buschmann, AH; Kraemer, GP; Halling, C; Shpigel, M; Yarish, C (2004). "Integrated aquaculture: rationale, evolution and state of the art emphasizing seaweed biofiltration in modern mariculture".

Aquaculture .

231 ( 1– 4): 361– 391.

Bibcode : 2004Aquac.231..361N .

doi : 10.1016/j.aquaculture.2003.11.015 .

^ "Urban Aquaculture" .

The RUAF Foundation . 2013-11-26 . Retrieved 2019-05-08 .

^ Bunting, Stuart; Little, David C (2007). "Urban Aquaculture".

Annotated bibliography on urban agriculture .

hdl : 10625/32959 .

OCLC 757376506 .

^ a b c Bunting, Stuart W.; Little, David C. (2015).

"Urban aquaculture for resilient food systems" . In de Zeeuw, Henk; Drechsel, Pay (eds.).

Cities and Agriculture: Developing Resilient Urban Food Systems . Routledge. pp.

312– 335.

ISBN 978-1-317-50662-1 .

^ White, Kathryn; O'Neill, Brendan; Tzankova, Zdravka (2004).

At a Crossroads: Will Aquaculture Fulfill the Promise of the Blue Revolution?

(PDF) .

^ Offshore Aquaculture in the United States: Economic considerations, implications, and opportunities, U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration, July 2008, p. 53 ^ Braithwaite, RA; McEvoy, LA (2005).

Marine biofouling on fish farms and its remediation . Advances in Marine Biology. Vol. 47. pp.

215– 52.

doi : 10.1016/S0065-2881(04)47003-5 .

ISBN 9780120261482 .

PMID 15596168 .

^ "Commercial and research fish farming and aquaculture netting and supplies" . Sterlingnets.com.

Archived from the original on 26 July 2010 . Retrieved 2010-06-16 .

^ "Aquaculture Netting by Industrial Netting" . Industrialnetting.com. Archived from the original on 2010-05-29 . Retrieved 2010-06-16 .

^ Southern Regional Aquaculture Center at "Caged Culture" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-11-19 . Retrieved 2011-08-15 .

^ "The Use of Uncrewed Vehicles in Coastal Aquaculture" .

NC State Extension Publications . Retrieved 2024-01-11 .

^ "Contributing to Faster, More Efficient Aquaculture Cage Net Inspection with Autonomous ROV Navigation" .

ECO . 2021-06-01 . Retrieved 2024-01-11 .

^ Bentzon-Tilia, Mikkel; Sonnenschein, Eva C.; Gram, Lone (September 2016).

"Monitoring and managing microbes in aquaculture – Towards a sustainable industry" .

Microbial Biotechnology .

9 (5): 576– 584.

doi : 10.1111/1751-7915.12392 .

ISSN 1751-7915 .

PMC 4993175 .

PMID 27452663 .

^ Diamond, Jared, Collapse: How societies choose to fail or succeed, Viking Press, 2005, pp. 479–485 ^ Costa-Pierce, B.A., 2002, Ecological Aquaculture, Blackwell Science, Oxford, UK.

^ le Page, Michael (2016-11-10).

"Food made from natural gas will soon feed farm animals – and us" .

New Scientist . Retrieved 2016-12-12 .

^ "Making Fish Farming More Sustainable – State of the Planet" .

State of the Planet . 2016-04-13 . Retrieved 2017-12-04 .

^ Thacker, Paul D. (2006).

"Fish farms harm local food supply" .

Environmental Science & Technology .

40 (11): 3445– 6.

Bibcode : 2006EnST...40.3444T .

doi : 10.1021/es0626988 .

PMID 16786674 .

^ FAO (2000).

"Aquaculture Production Trends Analysis" (PDF) .

^ FAO (August 2018).

"World Review of Fisheries and Aquaculture Highlights of Special Studies" (PDF) .

FTP server ( FTP ).

[ dead ftp link ] (To view documents see Help:FTP ) ^ Tacon; Metian (2008).

"Global overview on the use of fish meal and fish oil in industrially compounded aquafeeds: Trends and future prospects" (PDF) .

Aquaculture .

285 ( 1– 4): 146– 158.

Bibcode : 2008Aquac.285..146T .

doi : 10.1016/j.aquaculture.2008.08.015 .

^ Urbina, Ian (19 June 2020).

"The Bane of Unsustainable Fishing" .

The Safina Center .

^ "OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook" . OECD. 2014. Archived from the original on 2015-09-25 . Retrieved 2015-09-24 .

^ Torrissen; et al. (2011). "Atlantic Salmon (Salmo salar): The "Super-Chicken" of the Sea?".

Reviews in Fisheries Science .

19 (3): 3.

Bibcode : 2011RvFS...19..257T .

doi : 10.1080/10641262.2011.597890 .

S2CID 58944349 .

^ "USDA Grains Project" . USDA ARS.

^ NOAA/USDA: The Future of Aquafeeds (2011) ^ "Oceans" .

davidsuzuki.org . Archived from the original on 2016-05-15.

^ " Aquaculture's growth continuing: improved management techniques can reduce environmental effects of the practice. (UPDATE).

" Resource: Engineering & Technology for a Sustainable World 16.5 (2009): 20–22. Gale Expanded Academic ASAP. Web. 1 October 2009.

^ Azevedo-Santos, V. M. D.; Rigolin-Sá, O.; Pelicice, F. M. (2011).

"Growing, losing or introducing? Cage aquaculture as a vector for the introduction of non-native fish in Furnas Reservoir, Minas Gerais, Brazil" .

Neotropical Ichthyology .

9 (4): 915.

doi : 10.1590/S1679-62252011000400024 .

^ Azevedo-Santos, Valter M.; Pelicice, Fernando Mayer; Lima-Junior, Dilermando Pereira; Magalhães, André Lincoln Barroso; Orsi, Mario Luis; Vitule, Jean Ricardo Simões; Agostinho, Angelo Antonio (2015).

"How to avoid fish introductions in Brazil: education and information as alternatives" .

Natureza & Conservação .

13 (2): 123– 132.

doi : 10.1016/j.ncon.2015.06.002 .

^ a b c d Håstein, T.; Scarfe, A. D.; Lund, V. L. (2005).

"Science-based assessment of welfare: Aquatic animals" .

Revue Scientifique et Technique (International Office of Epizootics) .

24 (2): 529– 47.

doi : 10.20506/rst.24.2.1590 .

PMID 16358506 .

^ Chandroo, K.P; Duncan, I.J.H; Moccia, R.D (2004). "Can fish suffer?: Perspectives on sentience, pain, fear and stress".

Applied Animal Behaviour Science .

86 ( 3– 4): 225– 250.

doi : 10.1016/j.applanim.2004.02.004 .

^ a b c Conte, F.S. (2004). "Stress and the welfare of cultured fish".

Applied Animal Behaviour Science .

86 ( 3– 4): 205– 223.

doi : 10.1016/j.applanim.2004.02.003 .

^ Huntingford, F. A.; Adams, C.; Braithwaite, V. A.; Kadri, S.; Pottinger, T. G.; Sandoe, P.; Turnbull, J. F. (2006).

"Current issues in fish welfare" (PDF) .

Journal of Fish Biology .

68 (2): 332– 372.

Bibcode : 2006JFBio..68..332H .

doi : 10.1111/j.0022-1112.2006.001046.x .

S2CID 84511123 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-04-26 . Retrieved 2011-12-12 .

^ a b c d e f Ashley, Paul J. (2007). "Fish welfare: Current issues in aquaculture".

Applied Animal Behaviour Science .

104 ( 3– 4): 199– 235.

doi : 10.1016/j.applanim.2006.09.001 .

^ Baras E, Jobling M (2002).

"Dynamics of intracohort cannibalism in cultured fish" .

Aquaculture Research .

33 (7): 461– 479.

doi : 10.1046/j.1365-2109.2002.00732.x .

^ Greaves K.; Tuene S. (2001). "The form and context of aggressive behaviour in farmed Atlantic halibut (Hippoglossus hippoglossus L.)".

Aquaculture .

193 ( 1– 2): 139– 147.

Bibcode : 2001Aquac.193..139G .

doi : 10.1016/S0044-8486(00)00476-2 .

^ a b c Ellis T.; North B.; Scott A.P.; Bromage N.R.; Porter M.; Gadd D. (2002). "The relationships between stocking density and welfare in farmed rainbow trout".

Journal of Fish Biology .

61 (3): 493– 531.

Bibcode : 2002JFBio..61..493E .

doi : 10.1111/j.1095-8649.2002.tb00893.x .

^ Remen M.; Imsland A.K.; Steffansson S.O.; Jonassen T.M.; Foss A. (2008). "Interactive effects of ammonia and oxygen on growth and physiological status of juvenile Atlantic cod ( Gadus morhua )".

Aquaculture .

274 ( 2– 4): 292– 299.

Bibcode : 2008Aquac.274..292R .

doi : 10.1016/j.aquaculture.2007.11.032 .

^ Paperna I (1991). "Diseases caused by parasites in the aquaculture of warm water fish".

Annual Review of Fish Diseases .

1 : 155– 194.

doi : 10.1016/0959-8030(91)90028-I .

^ Johnson S.C.; Treasurer J.W.; Bravo S.; Nagasawa K.; Kabata Z. (2004). "A review of the impact of parasitic copepods on marine aquaculture".

Zoological Studies .

43 (2): 229– 243.

^ Johansen L.H.; Jensen I.; Mikkelsen H.; Bjorn P.A.; Jansen P.A.; Bergh O. (2011).

"Disease interaction and pathogens exchange between wild and farmed fish populations with special reference to Norway" (PDF) .

Aquaculture .

315 ( 3– 4): 167– 186.

Bibcode : 2011Aquac.315..167J .

doi : 10.1016/j.aquaculture.2011.02.014 .

hdl : 11250/117164 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-10-09.

^ Jones, N.A.R.; Webster, M.; Salvanes, A.G.V. (2021).

"Physical enrichment research for captive fish: Time to focus on the DETAILS" .

Journal of Fish Biology .

99 (3): 704– 725.

Bibcode : 2021JFBio..99..704J .

doi : 10.1111/jfb.14773 .

hdl : 10023/23362 .

PMID 33942889 .

S2CID 233719781 .

^ Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (1997).

Aquaculture Development . Food & Agriculture Org.

ISBN 9789251039717 – via google.be.

^ Nickerson, DJ (1999). "Trade-offs of mangrove area development in the Philippines".

Ecol. Econ .

28 (2): 279– 298.

doi : 10.1016/S0921-8009(98)00044-5 .

^ Gunawardena, M; Rowan, JS (2005). "Economic Valuation of a Mangrove Ecosystem Threatened by Shrimp Aquaculture in Sri Lanka".

Journal of Environmental Management .

36 (4): 535– 550.

Bibcode : 2005EnMan..36..535G .

doi : 10.1007/s00267-003-0286-9 .

PMID 16151655 .

S2CID 27718582 .

^ Hinrichsen, Don (1 February 1999).

Coastal Waters of the World: Trends, Threats, and Strategies . Island Press.

ISBN 978-1-55963-383-3 .

^ Meat and Fish Archived 2011-06-24 at the Wayback Machine American Association for the Advancement of Science Atlas of Population and Environment. Retrieved 4 January 2010.

^ FAO.

"Cultured Aquatic Species Information Programme Oncorhynchus kisutch (Walbaum, 1792)" . Retrieved 8 May 2009 .

^ "Chile's salmon farms lose $800m as algal bloom kills millions of fish" .

The Guardian . Reuters. 2016-03-10 . Retrieved 2016-05-07 .

^ "Wave of dead sea creatures hits Chile's beaches" .

ABC News . 2016-05-04 . Retrieved 2016-05-07 .

^ Paterson, Michael J.; Podemski, Cheryl L.; Findlay, Wilhelmina J.; Findlay, David L.; Salki, Alex G. (2010-11-03). Sprules, Gary (ed.). "The response of zooplankton in a whole-lake experiment on the effects of a cage aquaculture operation for rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss)".

Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences .

67 (11): 1852– 1861.

Bibcode : 2010CJFAS..67.1852P .

doi : 10.1139/F10-106 .

ISSN 0706-652X .

^ Schindler, D. W. (1974-05-24). "Eutrophication and Recovery in Experimental Lakes: Implications for Lake Management".

Science .

184 (4139): 897– 899.

Bibcode : 1974Sci...184..897S .

doi : 10.1126/science.184.4139.897 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 17782381 .

S2CID 25620329 .

^ Bristow, Corben E.; Morin, Antoine; Hesslein, Ray H.; Podemski, Cheryl L. (2008-11-04). "Phosphorus budget and productivity of an experimental lake during the initial three years of cage aquaculture".

Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences .

65 (11): 2485– 2495.

Bibcode : 2008CJFAS..65.2485B .

doi : 10.1139/f08-155 .

ISSN 0706-652X .

^ Findlay, David L.; Podemski, Cheryl L.; Kasian, Susan E.M. (2009-10-21). Smith, Ralph (ed.). "Aquaculture impacts on the algal and bacterial communities in a small boreal forest lakeThis paper is part of the series "Forty Years of Aquatic Research at the Experimental Lakes Area" ".

Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences .

66 (11): 1936– 1948.

Bibcode : 2009CJFAS..66.1936F .

doi : 10.1139/F09-121 .

ISSN 0706-652X .

^ Mcleod C, J Grice, H Campbell and T Herleth (2006) Super Salmon: The Industrialisation of Fish Farming and the Drive Towards GM Technologies in Salmon Production Archived 2013-05-05 at the Wayback Machine CSaFe, Discussion paper 5, University of Otago .

^ Robynne Boyd, Would you eat AquAdvantage salmon if approved?

Scientific American online, 26 April 2013.

^ FDA: AquAdvantage Salmon ^ Black, K. D. (2001).

"Mariculture, Environmental, Economic and Social Impacts of" . In Steele, John H.; Thorpe, Steve A.; Turekian, Karl K. (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Ocean Sciences . Academic Press. pp.

1578–84 .

doi : 10.1006/rwos.2001.0487 .

ISBN 978-0-12-227430-5 .

^ Black, K. D. (2001).

"Mariculture, Environmental, Economic and Social Impacts of" . In Steele, John H.; Thorpe, Steve A.; Turekian, Karl K. (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Ocean Sciences . Academic Press. pp.

1578–84 .

doi : 10.1006/rwos.2001.0487 .

ISBN 978-0-12-227430-5 .

^ " An Overview of China's Aquaculture ", page 6. Netherlands Business Support Office (Dalian), 2010.

^ a b c d Adams, Alexandra (July 2019). "Progress, challenges and opportunities in fish vaccine development".

Fish & Shellfish Immunology .

90 : 210– 214.

Bibcode : 2019FSI....90..210A .

doi : 10.1016/j.fsi.2019.04.066 .

hdl : 1893/29828 .

PMID 31039441 .

S2CID 141624380 .

^ Thorarinsson, R; Wolf, JC; Inami, M; Phillips, L; Jones, G; Macdonald, AM; Rodriguez, JF; Sindre, H; Skjerve, E; Rimstad, E; Evensen, Ø (January 2021).

"Effect of a novel DNA vaccine against pancreas disease caused by salmonid alphavirus subtype 3 in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar)" .

Fish & Shellfish Immunology .

108 : 116– 126.

Bibcode : 2021FSI...108..116T .

doi : 10.1016/j.fsi.2020.12.002 .

hdl : 11250/2830510 .

PMID 33285168 .

S2CID 227949940 .

^ Martinez-Porchas, Marcel; Martinez-Cordova, Luis R. (2012-04-29).

"World Aquaculture: Environmental Impacts and Troubleshooting Alternatives" .

The Scientific World Journal .

2012 : 389623.

doi : 10.1100/2012/389623 .

ISSN 2356-6140 .

PMC 3353277 .

PMID 22649291 .

^ Environment, U. N. (2021-10-21).

"Drowning in Plastics – Marine Litter and Plastic Waste Vital Graphics" .

UNEP – UN Environment Programme . Retrieved 2022-03-23 .

^ Higgins, Colleen B.; Stephenson, Kurt; Brown, Bonnie L. (2011). "Nutrient Bioassimilation Capacity of Aquacultured Oysters: Quantification of an Ecosystem Service".

Journal of Environmental Quality .

40 (1): 271– 7.

Bibcode : 2011JEnvQ..40..271H .

doi : 10.2134/jeq2010.0203 .

PMID 21488516 .

^ Newell, Roger (2007).

"Top-down control of phytoplankton by oysters in Chesapeake Bay, USA" .

Marine Ecology Progress Series : 293– 298.

doi : 10.3354/meps341293 .

^ Peterson, CH; Grabowski, JH; Powers, SP (2003).

"Estimated enhancement of fish production resulting from restoring oyster reef habitat: quantitative valuation" .

Marine Ecology Progress Series .

264 : 249– 264.

Bibcode : 2003MEPS..264..249P .

doi : 10.3354/meps264249 .

^ Duarte, Carlos M.; Wu, Jiaping; Xiao, Xi; Bruhn, Annette; Krause-Jensen, Dorte (2017).

"Can Seaweed Farming Play a Role in Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation?" .

Frontiers in Marine Science .

4 : 100.

Bibcode : 2017FrMaS...4..100D .

doi : 10.3389/fmars.2017.00100 .

hdl : 10754/623247 .

ISSN 2296-7745 .

^ Bindoff, N. L.; Cheung, W. W. L.; Kairo, J. G.; Arístegui, J.; et al. (2019).

"Chapter 5: Changing Ocean, Marine Ecosystems, and Dependent Communities" (PDF) .

IPCC Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate . pp.

447– 587.

^ Carr, Gabriela (2021-03-15).

"Regenerative Ocean Farming: How Can Polycultures Help Our Coasts?" .

School of Marine and Environmental Affairs .

Archived from the original on 2021-03-16 . Retrieved 2021-10-29 .

^ Tietenberg, Tom (2006) Environmental and Natural Resource Economics: A Contemporary Approach . Page 28. Pearson/Addison Wesley.

ISBN 978-0-321-30504-6 ^ Knapp G, Roheim CA and Anderson JL (2007) The Great Salmon Run: Competition Between Wild And Farmed Salmon [ permanent dead link ] World Wildlife Fund .

ISBN 978-0-89164-175-9 ^ Eilperin, Juliet; Kaufman, Marc (2007-12-14).

"Salmon Farming May Doom Wild Populations, Study Says" .

The Washington Post .

^ OSTROUMOV S. A. (2005).

"Some aspects of water filtering activity of filter-feeders" .

Hydrobiologia .

542 (1): 400.

Bibcode : 2005HyBio.542..275O .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.457.7375 .

doi : 10.1007/s10750-004-1875-1 .

S2CID 25050083 . Retrieved September 26, 2009 .

^ Rice, M.A.

(2008).

"Environmental impacts of shellfish aquaculture" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-10-05 . Retrieved 2009-10-08 .

^ "Aquaculture: Issues and Opportunities for Sustainable Production and Trade" . ITCSD. July 2006. Archived from the original on 2008-11-20 . Retrieved 2008-09-01 .

^ Pew Oceans Commission (January 6, 2005).

"Marine Aquaculture in the United States" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2005-01-06.

^ a b "Growing Premium Seafood-Inland!" . USDA Agricultural Research Service. February 2009.

^ a b Brown, Lester Russell , ed. (2006).

"Stabilizing Climate" (PDF) .

Plan B 2.0: Rescuing a Planet Under Stress and a Civilization in Trouble . W. W. Norton & Company. p. 199.

ISBN 978-0-393-32831-8 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-09-26.

^ United Nations (2017) Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 6 July 2017, Work of the Statistical Commission pertaining to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development ( A/RES/71/313 ) ^ Ritchie, Roser, Mispy, Ortiz-Ospina. " SDG 14 – Measuring progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals ." SDG-Tracker.org, website (2018).

^ "Fisheries & Aquaculture Fact Sheets" .

National Aquaculture Legislation Overview . Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; Fisheries Division . Retrieved 2021-07-25 .

^ "U.S. Aquaculture Legislation Timeline" .

National Ocean Economics Program . Monterey, CA: Middlebury Institute of International Studies. 2007-08-01. Archived from the original on 2015-06-02 . Retrieved 2015-06-08 .

^ "Commerce and NOAA release national aquaculture policies to increase domestic seafood production, create sustainable jobs, and restore marine habitats" .

www.noaanews.noaa.gov . Retrieved 2015-06-08 .

^ a b "Aquaculture NPDES Permitting" .

National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). 2023-03-21.

^ "Concentrated Aquatic Animal Production Effluent Guidelines" . EPA. 2023-06-22.

^ "National Heritage Places – Budj Bim National Heritage Landscape" .

Australian Government. Dept of Agriculture, Water and the Environment . Retrieved 30 January 2020 .

See also attached documents: National Heritage List Location and Boundary Map , and Government Gazette , 20 July 2004.

^ Aborigines may have farmed eels, built huts ABC Science News, 13 March 2003.

^ Lake Condah Sustainability Project Archived 2013-01-03 at archive.today . Retrieved 18 February 2010.

^ Neal, Matt (6 July 2019).

"Ancient Indigenous aquaculture site Budj Bim added to UNESCO World Heritage list" .

ABC News . Retrieved 14 July 2019 .

Not only does Budj Bim bust the myth that all Indigenous people were nomadic and not agriculturally inclined, it is also considered one of the oldest aquaculture sites in the world.

^ "World heritage Places – Budj Bim Cultural Landscape" .

Australian Government. Dept of the Environment and Energy . 6 July 2019 . Retrieved 11 March 2020 .

^ "History of Aquaculture" . Food and Agriculture Organization, United Nations . Retrieved August 23, 2009 .

^ Smith, Kiona N. (17 September 2019).

"Aquaculture may be the future of seafood, but its past is ancient" .

Ars Technica . Archived from the original on 17 September 2019 . Retrieved 17 September 2019 .

^ a b Sisma-Ventura, Guy; Tütken, Thomas; Zohar, Irit; Pack, Andreas; Sivan, Dorit; Lernau, Omri; Gilboa, Ayelet; Bar-Oz, Guy (2018).

"Tooth oxygen isotopes reveal Late Bronze Age origin of Mediterranean fish aquaculture and trade" .

Scientific Reports .

8 (1): 14086.

Bibcode : 2018NatSR...814086G .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-018-32468-1 .

PMC 6148281 .

PMID 30237483 .

^ a b c d 강, 제원.

"gim" 김 .

Encyclopedia of Korean Culture (in Korean).

Academy of Korean Studies .

^ "gim" 김 .

Encyclopædia Britannica (in Korean). Archived from the original on February 24, 2021 . Retrieved 5 June 2017 .

^ Anitei, Stefan (30 January 2007).

"... Make Unusual Aquaculture" .

softpedia . Archived from the original on 2021-09-29 . Retrieved 2021-02-17 .

^ McCann, Anna Marguerite (1979). "The Harbor and Fishery Remains at Cosa, Italy, by Anna Marguerite McCann".

Journal of Field Archaeology .

6 (4): 391– 411.

doi : 10.1179/009346979791489014 .

JSTOR 529424 .

^ Jhingran, V.G., Introduction to aquaculture. 1987, United Nations Development Programme, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Nigerian Institute for Oceanography and Marine Research.

^ Kurlansky, Mark (2002).

Salt: A World History .

^ Wilmart, Mickaël (2001).

"Les étangs de Marcoussis. Un exemple d'exploitation piscicole dans la région parisienne à la fin du XVe siècle" .

Bulletin de la Société historique et archéologique de Corbeil, de l'Essonne et du Hurepoix (71): 7– 18 . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ "Fishpond Network in the Trebon Basin" .

UNESCO . Archived from the original on 3 October 2015 . Retrieved 1 Oct 2015 .

^ IBP Inc. (2015).

Samoa Fishing and Aquaculture Industry Handbook - Strategic Information and Regulations . Washington DC: International Business Publications, USA. p. 37.

ISBN 9781514519486 . Retrieved 21 April 2024 .

[...] in Samoa [...] a traditional form of giant clam ranching was practiced on village reefs or on lagoon [sic] where a community place giant clams in a fenced off area for special occasion or reserves for seafood supply in bad weather.

^ Costa-Pierce, B.A. (1987).

"Aquaculture in ancient Hawaii" (PDF) .

BioScience .

37 (5): 320– 331.

doi : 10.2307/1310688 .

JSTOR 1310688 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-10-09.

^ "Ein Lipper macht sich Gedanken ..." Lippisches Landesmuseum Detmold (in German). Archived from the original on 2019-12-09 . Retrieved 2019-09-18 .

Stephan Ludwig Jacobi, vor 300 Jahren in Kalletal-Hohenhausen geboren, veröffentlichte 1768 den Aufsatz „Von der künstlichen Erzeugung der Forellen und Lachse" in den „Lippischen Intelligenzblättern" – und gilt damit zu Recht als Begründer der künstlichen Fischaufzucht.

^ "A Brief History of Oystering in Narragansett Bay" . URI Alumni Magazine, University of Rhode Island. 22 May 2015 . Retrieved 1 October 2015 .

^ "The cultivation of ice (1855) - on Newspapers.com" .

The Baltimore Sun . Retrieved 2015-12-10 .

^ "Agricultural. New agricultural practises by A. N. Cole. Subirrigation, methods and results (1888) - on Newspapers.com" .

Oakland Tribune . Retrieved 2015-12-10 .

^ "aquaculture" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ "aquiculture" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ Milner, James W. (1874). "The Progress of Fish-culture in the United States". United States Commission of Fish and Fisheries Report of the Commissioner for 1872 and 1873. 535 – 544 < http://penbay.org/cof/cof_1872_1873.html > ^ "Food from the sea. Remarkable results of the experiments in cod and lobster,(aquaculture, 1890) - on Newspapers.com" .

Pittsburgh Dispatch . Retrieved 2015-12-10 .

^ Rice, M.A.

2010. "A brief history of the American Fish Culture Company 1877–1997".

Rhode Island History 68(1):20–35.

web version Archived 2013-12-03 at the Wayback Machine ^ Neushul, Peter (1989). "Seaweed for War: California's World War I Kelp Industry".

Technology and Culture .

30 (3): 561– 583.

doi : 10.2307/3105951 .

JSTOR 3105951 .

S2CID 111835074 .

Sources [ edit ] Corpron, K.E.; Armstrong, D.A. (1983). "Removal of nitrogen by an aquatic plant, Elodea densa , in recirculating Macrobrachium culture systems".

Aquaculture .

32 ( 3– 4): 347– 360.

Bibcode : 1983Aquac..32..347C .

doi : 10.1016/0044-8486(83)90232-6 .

Duarte, C. M.; Marba, N.; Holmer, M. (2007). "ECOLOGY: Rapid Domestication of Marine Species".

Science .

316 (5823): 382– 383.

doi : 10.1126/science.1138042 .

PMID 17446380 .

S2CID 84063035 .

podcast Ferreira, J. G.; Hawkins, A.J.S.; Bricker, S.B. (2007).

"Management of productivity, environmental effects and profitability of shellfish aquaculture – The Farm Aquaculture Resource Management (FARM) model" (PDF) .

Aquaculture .

264 ( 1– 4): 160– 174.

Bibcode : 2007Aquac.264..160F .

doi : 10.1016/j.aquaculture.2006.12.017 .

GESAMP (2008) Assessment and communication of environmental risks in coastal aquaculture FAO Reports and Studies No 76.

ISBN 978-92-5-105947-0 Hepburn, J. 2002.

Taking Aquaculture Seriously . Organic Farming, Winter 2002 © Soil Association.

Kinsey, D. S. (2006).

" 'Seeding the Water as the Earth': The Epicenter and Peripheries of a Western Aquacultural Revolution" .

Environmental History .

11 (3): 527– 566.

doi : 10.1093/envhis/11.3.527 . Archived from the original on 2019-07-29 . Retrieved 2019-07-29 .

Naylor, R.L.; Williams, S.L.; Strong, D.R. (2001). "Aquaculture – A Gateway For Exotic Species".

Science .

294 (5547): 1655– 6.

doi : 10.1126/science.1064875 .

PMID 11721035 .

S2CID 82810702 .

The Scottish Association for Marine Science and Napier University. 2002. Review and synthesis of the environmental impacts of aquaculture Higginbotham James Piscinae: Artificial Fishponds in Roman Italy University of North Carolina Press (June 1997) Wyban, Carol Araki (1992) Tide and Current: Fishponds of Hawai'I University of Hawaiʻi Press:: ISBN 978-0-8248-1396-3 Timmons, M.B., Ebeling, J.M., Wheaton, F.W., Summerfelt, S.T., Vinci, B.J., 2002. Recirculating Aquaculture Systems: 2nd edition. Cayuga Aqua Ventures.

Piedrahita, R.H. (2003). "Reducing the potential environmental impacts of tank aquaculture effluents through intensification and recirculation".

Aquaculture .

226 ( 1– 4): 35– 44.

Bibcode : 2003Aquac.226...35P .

doi : 10.1016/s0044-8486(03)00465-4 .

Klas, S.; Mozes, N.; Lahav, O. (2006). "Development of a single-sludge denitrification method for nitrate removal from RAS effluents: Lab-scale results vs. model prediction".

Aquaculture .

259 ( 1– 4): 342– 353.

Bibcode : 2006Aquac.259..342K .

doi : 10.1016/j.aquaculture.2006.05.049 .

Free content work [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 IGO ( license statement/permission ). Text taken from In brief, The State of World Fisheries and Aquaculture, 2018​ , FAO, FAO.

This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under Cc BY-SA 3.0 IGO ( license statement/permission ). Text taken from Drowning in Plastics – Marine Litter and Plastic Waste Vital Graphics​ , United Nations Environment Programme.

Further reading [ edit ] Holmer, Marianne.

Aquaculture in the Ecosystem . Dordrecht, Netherlands: Springer, 2008.

Molyneaux, Paul.

Swimming in Circles: Aquaculture and the End of Wild Oceans . New York: Thunder's Mouth Press, 2006.

Stickney, Robert R.

Aquaculture: An Introductory Text . Oxford, UK; Cambridge, MA: CABI Publishing, 2005.

World Bank.

Changing the Face of the Waters: The Promise and Challenge of Sustainable Aquaculture . Washington, DC: World Bank, 2007.

External links [ edit ] Look up aquaculture in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Aquaculture .

Aquaculture topic page from Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution "Aquaculture Factsheet" . Waitt Institute. Archived from the original on 2015-06-17 . Retrieved 2015-06-08 .

The Coastal Resources Center NOAA aquaculture The University of Hawaiʻi's AquacultureHub Library resources about Aquaculture Resources in your library v t e Fishing industry topics Wild fisheries Fishing industry Aquarium fishery Artisanal fishing Bycatch Commercial fishing Declawing of crabs Fish slaughter List of harvested aquatic animals by weight Trawling Overfishing Pair trawling Midwater trawling Bottom trawling Seining Gillnetting Longlining Lobster fishing Trolling Dredging Fishing vessels Fish trap Power block Shark finning Fisheries Agulhas Bank Crab fisheries Cod fisheries Fishing by country Fisheries management Illegal fishing in Africa Krill fishery Ocean fisheries World fish production North Sea Shrimp fishery Aquaculture and farmed fisheries Aquaculture Aquaculture engineering Aquaponics Best practices Copper alloys Geothermal energy and aquaculture Inland saline Integrated multi-trophic Mariculture Antimicrobials Offshore Organic Raceway Recirculating Fish farming Broodstock Catfish Cobia Fish diseases and parasites Fish farming Fish feed Fish hatchery Fish stocking Spawning bed Salmon Tilapia Tailwater US hatcheries Algaculture Giant kelp Microalgae Microalgal bacterial flocs Photobioreactor Raceway pond Seaweed Other species Brine shrimp Coral Freshwater prawns Geoduck Hirudiculture Marine shrimp Octopus Oysters Scallops Sea cucumber Sea sponges Turtles By country Australia Canada Chile China Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Madagascar Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Philippines Samoa Solomon Islands South Africa South Korea Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu United Kingdom United States Alaska Hawaii Maine Vanuatu Seafood processing and marketing Seafood processing Fish processing Fish factory Factory ship Fish preservation Slurry ice Dried fish Filleted fish Gibbing Salmon cannery Salted fish Smoked fish Kippers Seafood products Seafood Fish as food Cod liver oil Fish products Fish emulsion Fish meal Fish hydrolysate Fish oil Fish protein powder Fish sauce Gravlax Hákarl Lox Lutefisk Rakfisk Roe Bottarga Caviar Eoran Red caviar Pollock roe Tobiko Karasumi Shrimp paste Surimi Surströmming Seafood marketing Fish marketing Live fish trade Shrimp marketing Chasse-marée Fishmonger Fishwife Worshipful Company of Fishmongers Fish markets Billingsgate Busan English (Ireland) Fulton Garak Honolulu Huanan Jagiroad Jagalchi La Nueva Viga Maine Avenue Muara Angke Nouakchott Noryangjin Oluwo Pasil Peterhead Pike Place Sydney Scania Taipei Toyosu Tsukiji Ulsan Waterfront (Dubai) v t e Fisheries and fishing topic areas Fisheries Aquaculture Diversity of fish Fish diseases and parasites Fish farming Fisheries management Fisheries science Individual fishing quota Sustainable fishery Overfishing Wild fisheries Fishing Artisanal fishing Fisherman Fishing vessel History of fishing Industry List of harvested aquatic animals by weight By country Commercial fishing Marketing Markets Processing Products Seafood Recreation Angling Big-game fishing Catch and release Fishing tournaments Fly fishing Techniques Destructive fishing practices Fish trap Fishfinder Fishing net Gathering seafood by hand Handline fishing Spearfishing Trawling Trolling Tackle Artificial flies Bait Bite indicators Hook Line Lures Rod Sinker Locations Fish ponds Fishing banks Fishing villages Marine habitats Crime Bering Sea Anti-Poaching Operations Coral poaching Freshwater eel poaching and smuggling Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing Arctic Glossary Index Outline Category v t e Agriculture Outline History Index Occupations Agriculturist Agricultural Engineer Farmer Farm worker Herder General Agribusiness Agricultural cooperative Agricultural supplies Agricultural science Agricultural engineering Agricultural technology Precision Biotechnology Agroforestry Agronomy Animal husbandry Animal-free agriculture Cash crop Cellular agriculture Cultural methods Contract farming Extensive farming Farm Farmhouse Feed ratio Free range Horticulture Intensive farming animals pigs crops Mechanised agriculture Organic farming Paludiculture Permaculture Plantation Polyculture Rice-duck farming Rice-fish system Sustainable agriculture Sustainable food system Universities and colleges Urban agriculture History West Asia Ancient Egypt Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Austronesia Agricultural science Agricultural History Review Arab Agricultural Revolution Argentina Canada China Chile Columbian exchange Green Revolution Indian subcontinent Mesoamerica Middle Ages Neolithic Revolution Organic farming Palestine Peru United Kingdom British Agricultural Revolution Cheshire Scotland United States African-American California Farming Types Agrivoltaic Aquaculture Cattle Cannabis cultivation Dairy farming Desert farming Dryland farming Fur farming Goat farming Grazing Convertible husbandry Rotational grazing Transhumance Hydroponics Insect farming Livestock Pasture Mixed Monoculture Paddy field Pastoral Bocage Pig farming Poultry farming Ranch Rainfed agriculture Orchards Subsistence agriculture Sheep farming Terrace Wildlife farming Environmental impact Agricultural expansion Agricultural pollution Agricultural wastewater Overgrazing Environmental impact of irrigation Overdrafting Climate change and agriculture Multiple breadbasket failure Categories Agricultural machinery Agriculture by country Agriculture companies Biotechnology Cannabis cultivation History of agriculture Livestock Meat industry Poultry farming Agriculture and the environment Lists Agriculturist profession Agricultural machinery Food origins Government ministries Universities and colleges Category Portal Commons Wikiproject Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Artists KulturNav Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐qwrvm
Cached time: 20250814215150
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.514 seconds
Real time usage: 2.890 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14798/1000000
Revision size: 134883/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 564725/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 20602/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 232/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 744942/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.694/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24627305/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2489.345      1 -total
 51.37% 1278.839      1 Template:Reflist
 18.53%  461.328     62 Template:Cite_journal
 10.88%  270.879      6 Template:Excerpt
 10.32%  256.802     57 Template:Cite_web
  6.78%  168.875     25 Template:Cite_book
  6.60%  164.215      1 Template:Agriculture
  6.50%  161.896      1 Template:World_topic
  6.48%  161.220      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  4.01%   99.721     18 Template:Cite_news Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1634:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215150 and revision id 1303790032. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aquaculture&oldid=1303790032 " Categories : Aquaculture Domesticated animals Buildings and structures used to confine animals Sustainable food system Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead FTP links Articles with dead external links from April 2018 Webarchive template archiveis links CS1 uses Korean-language script (ko) CS1 Korean-language sources (ko) CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2007 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from April 2016 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Articles containing German-language text Free-content attribution Free content from FAO Free content from United Nations Environment Programme Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 02:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aquaculture 60 languages Add topic

