Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and career 2 Research and contributions 3 See also 4 Notes 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Leonard Jimmie Savage 14 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Euskara Français 한국어 Italiano Kreyòl ayisyen مصرى Norsk bokmål Português Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Leonard J. Savage ) American statistician Leonard Jimmie Savage Born ( 1917-11-20 ) 20 November 1917 Detroit , Michigan , US Died 1 November 1971 (1971-11-01) (aged 53) New Haven , Connecticut , US Alma mater University of Michigan (B.A., Ph.D.) Known for Savage loss Savage's axioms Friedman–Savage utility function Halmos–Savage factorization theorem Hewitt–Savage zero–one law Likehood principle Minmax regret criterion Subjective expected utility Sure-thing principle Scientific career Fields Mathematics , Statistics Institutions University of Chicago Princeton University Yale University Columbia University University of Michigan Doctoral advisor Sumner Myers Doctoral students Don Berry Morris H. DeGroot Roy Radner William S. Cleveland Leonard Jimmie Savage (born Leonard Ogashevitz ; 1917 – 1971) was an American mathematician and statistician . Economist Milton Friedman said Savage was "one of the few people I have met whom I would unhesitatingly call a genius." [ 1 ] Education and career [ edit ] Savage was born and grew up in Detroit. He studied at Wayne State University in Detroit before transferring to University of Michigan , where he first majored in chemical engineering, then switched to mathematics, graduating in 1938 with a bachelor's degree. He continued at the University of Michigan with a PhD on differential geometry in 1941 under the supervision of Sumner Byron Myers .

[ 2 ] Savage subsequently worked at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey , the University of Chicago , the University of Michigan, Yale University , and the Statistical Research Group at Columbia University .  Though his thesis advisor was Sumner Myers , he also credited Milton Friedman and W. Allen Wallis as statistical mentors.

During World War II, Savage served as chief "statistical" assistant to John von Neumann , the mathematician credited with describing the principles upon which electronic computers should be based.

[ 3 ] Later he was one of the participants in the Macy conferences on cybernetics .

[ 4 ] Research and contributions [ edit ] His most noted work was the 1954 book The Foundations of Statistics , in which he put forward a theory of subjective and personal probability and statistics which forms one of the strands underlying Bayesian statistics and has applications to game theory .

One of Savage's indirect contributions was his discovery of the work of Louis Bachelier on stochastic models for asset prices and the mathematical theory of option pricing. Savage brought the work of Bachelier to the attention of Paul Samuelson . It was from Samuelson's subsequent writing that " random walk " (and subsequently Brownian motion ) became fundamental to mathematical finance .

In 1951 he introduced the minimax regret criterion used in decision theory . The Hewitt–Savage zero–one law and Friedman–Savage utility function are (in part) named after him, as is the Savage Award given annually by the International Society for Bayesian Analysis for the best dissertations in Bayesian analysis.

See also [ edit ] Loss function Friedman–Savage utility function Notes [ edit ] ^ Friedman, Milton ; Friedman, Rose (1998).

Two Lucky People: Memoirs . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. pp.

146 .

ISBN 0-226-26414-9 .

^ O'Connor, J J; Robertson, E F (2010).

"Leonard Jimmie Savage (1917–1971)" .

Biographies .

^ Hacking, Ian (2001).

An Introduction to Probability and Inductive Logic . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 184.

ISBN 0-521-77287-7 .

^ Heims, Steve (1991).

The Cybernetics Group . Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. p. 348.

ISBN 978-0262082006 .

External links [ edit ] Leonard Jimmie Savage papers (MS 695). Manuscripts and Archives, Yale University Library.

[1] Wikiquote has quotations related to Leonard Jimmie Savage .

O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Leonard Jimmie Savage" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Leonard Jimmie Savage at the Mathematics Genealogy Project v t e Decision theory Core concepts Ambiguity aversion Bounded rationality Choice architecture Expected utility Expected value Hyperbolic discounting Leximin Loss aversion Multi-attribute utility Path dependence Principle of indifference Prospect theory Rational choice theory Risk aversion Risk-seeking Satisficing Strategic dominance Subjective expected utility Sure-thing Utility theorem Decision models Anscombe-Aumann framework Causal decision Decision field theory Emotional choice Evidential decision Fuzzy-trace theory Intertemporal choice Naturalistic decision Normative model Quantum cognition Recognition-primed decision Rubicon model Savage's subjective expected utility model Decision analysis tools Analytic hierarchy process Analytic network process Cost–benefit analysis Cost-effectiveness analysis Cost–utility analysis Decision conferencing Decision curve analysis Decision rule Decision support system Decision table Decision tree Decision matrix Decisional balance sheet Gittins index Influence diagram Minimax MCDA Scoring rule Value of information perfect sample uncertainty Paradoxes and biases Allais paradox Certainty effect Cognitive bias Decoy effect Disposition effect Ellsberg paradox Endowment effect Framing effect Heuristics Newcomb's paradox Pseudocertainty effect Reference dependence Regret St. Petersburg paradox Status quo bias Sunk cost Uncertainty and risk Deep uncertainty Exploration–exploitation Info-gap Pignistic probability Robust decision-making Related fields Behavioral economics Game theory Operations research Social choice theory Utility theory Key people David Blackwell Bruno de Finetti Morris H. DeGroot Peter C. Fishburn Gerd Gigerenzer Itzhak Gilboa Daniel Kahneman R. Duncan Luce Oskar Morgenstern Howard Raiffa Leonard J. Savage David Schmeidler Herbert Simon Amos Tversky John von Neumann Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Leonard_Jimmie_Savage&oldid=1294025298 " Categories : 1917 births 1971 deaths 20th-century American mathematicians Bayesian statisticians Philosophers of probability University of Michigan alumni Princeton University faculty University of Chicago faculty Columbia University faculty University of Michigan faculty Presidents of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics Bayesian econometricians 20th-century American economists American mathematical statisticians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 03:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Leonard Jimmie Savage 14 languages Add topic

