Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 International law 2 Religious Toggle Religious subsection 2.1 Atheists 2.2 Baháʼís 2.3 Buddhists 2.4 Christians 2.4.1 Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormonism) 2.4.2 Jehovah's Witnesses 2.5 Copts 2.6 Dogons 2.7 Druze 2.8 Falun Gong 2.9 Hindus 2.10 Jews 2.11 Muslims 2.12 Pagans 2.13 Philosophers 2.14 Serers 2.15 Sikhs 2.16 Yazidis 2.17 Zoroastrians 3 Ethnic Toggle Ethnic subsection 3.1 African Americans 3.2 Assyrians 3.3 Hazara people 3.4 Roma 3.5 Rohingyas 3.6 Sri Lankan Tamils 3.7 Uyghurs 4 Based on genetics Toggle Based on genetics subsection 4.1 People with albinism 5 People with autism 6 LGBT 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Sources 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Persecution 41 languages العربية ܐܪܡܝܐ Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Bosanski Català Čeština ChiShona Dansk Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kiswahili Kurdî Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Systematic mistreatment of an individual or group by another individual or group "Persecuted" redirects here. For the film, see Persecuted (film) .

Not to be confused with prosecution or Persécution .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Persecution" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Members of the right-wing Lapua Movement assault a former Red officer and the publisher of the communist newspaper at the Vaasa riot on June 4, 1930, in Vaasa , Finland .

Persecution is the systematic mistreatment of an individual or group by another individual or group. The most common forms are religious persecution , racism , and political persecution , though there is naturally some overlap between these terms.

[ citation needed ] The inflicting of suffering , harassment , imprisonment , internment , fear or pain are all factors that may establish persecution, but not all suffering will necessarily establish persecution. The threshold of severity has been a topic of much debate.

[ 1 ] International law [ edit ] As part of the Nuremberg Principles , crimes against humanity are part of international law. Principle VI of the Nuremberg Principles states that The crimes hereinafter set out are punishable as crimes under international law:...

(c) Crimes against humanity: Murder, extermination , enslavement , deportation , and other inhumane acts done against any civilian population, or persecutions on political, racial, or religious grounds, when such acts are done or such persecutions are carried on in execution of or in connection with any crime against peace or any war crime .

Telford Taylor , who was Counsel for the Prosecution at the Nuremberg Trials wrote "[at] the Nuremberg war crimes trials, the tribunals rebuffed several efforts by the prosecution to bring such 'domestic' atrocities within the scope of international law as 'crimes against humanity".

[ 2 ] Several subsequent international treaties incorporate this principle, but some have dropped the restriction "in connection with any crime against peace or any war crime" that is in Nuremberg Principles.

The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court , which is binding on 111 states, defines crimes against humanity in Article 7.1. The article criminalizes certain acts "committed as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of the attack". These include: (h) Persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender.

[ 3 ] ..or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in connection with any act referred to in this paragraph [e.g. murder, extermination, enslavement, deportation, imprisonment, torture, sexual violence, apartheid, and other inhumane acts] or any crime within the jurisdiction of the Court Religious [ edit ] Main article: Religious persecution Religious persecution is the systematic mistreatment of an individual or group due to their religious affiliation . Not only theorists of secularization (who presume a decline of religiosity in general) would willingly assume that religious persecution is a thing of the past [ citation needed ] . However, with the rise of fundamentalism and religiously related terrorism , this assumption has become even more controversial [ citation needed ] . Indeed, in many countries of the world today, religious persecution is a Human Rights problem.

Atheists [ edit ] Main article: Discrimination against atheists Atheists have experienced persecution throughout their history . Persecution may refer to unwarranted arrest, imprisonment, beating, torture, or execution. It also may refer to the confiscation or destruction of property.

Baháʼís [ edit ] Main article: Persecution of Baháʼís The persecution of Baháʼís refers to the religious persecution of Baháʼís in various countries, especially in Iran , [ 4 ] which has the seventh largest Baháʼí population in the world, with just over 251,100 as of 2010.

[ 5 ] The Baháʼí Faith originated in Iran, and it represents the largest religious minority in that country.

Buddhists [ edit ] Main articles: Persecution of Buddhists , Decline of Buddhism in India , Genocide of Indigenous peoples § Bangladesh , Chakma people , Jumma people , Four Buddhist Persecutions in China , Great Anti-Buddhist Persecution , Turkic settlement of the Tarim Basin , and Haibutsu kishaku See also the categories Persecution of Buddhists and Persecution by Buddhists The persecution of Buddhists has been a widespread phenomenon throughout the history of Buddhism , a phenomenon which is continuing today. As early as the 3rd century AD, Buddhists were persecuted by Kirder, the Zoroastrian high priest of the Sasanian Empire .

[ citation needed ] Anti-Buddhist sentiment in Imperial China between the 5th and 10th century led to the Four Buddhist Persecutions in China of which the Great Anti-Buddhist Persecution of 845 was probably the most severe. However, Buddhism managed to survive in China, but it was greatly weakened. During the Northern Expedition , in 1926 in Guangxi , the Kuomintang Muslim General Bai Chongxi led his troops on a campaign to destroy Buddhist temples and smash idols, they turned the temples into schools and Kuomintang party headquarters.

[ 6 ] During the Kuomintang Pacification of Qinghai , the Muslim General Ma Bufang and his army wiped out many Tibetan Buddhists in the northeast and eastern Qinghai, and destroyed Tibetan Buddhist temples.

[ 7 ] The Muslim invasion of the Indian subcontinent was the first great iconoclastic invasion of the Indian subcontinent .

[ 8 ] According to William Johnston, hundreds of Buddhist monasteries and shrines were destroyed, Buddhist texts were burnt by the Muslim armies, monks and nuns were killed on the Indo-Gangetic Plain during the 12th and 13th centuries.

[ 9 ] The Buddhist university of Nalanda was mistaken for a fort because of its walled campus. The Buddhist monks who had been slaughtered were mistaken for Brahmins according to Minhaj-i-Siraj .

[ 10 ] The walled town, the Odantapuri monastery, was also destroyed by his forces. Sumpa based his account on that of Śākyaśribhadra who was at Magadha in 1200, states that the Buddhist university complexes of Odantapuri and Vikramshila were also destroyed and the monks were massacred.

[ 11 ] Muslim forces attacked the north-western regions of the Indian subcontinent many times.

[ 12 ] Many places were destroyed and renamed. For example, Odantapuri's monasteries were destroyed in 1197 by Muhammad bin Bakhtiyar Khilji and the town was renamed.

[ 13 ] Likewise, Vikramashila was destroyed by the forces of Muhammad bin Bakhtiyar Khilji around 1200.

[ 14 ] The sacred Mahabodhi Temple was almost completely destroyed by the Muslim invaders.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Many Buddhist monks fled to Nepal , Tibet, and South India to avoid the consequences of war.

[ 17 ] Tibetan pilgrim Chöjepal (1179-1264), who arrived in India in 1234, [ 18 ] had to flee advancing Muslim troops multiple times, as they were sacking Buddhist sites.

[ 19 ] In Japan, the haibutsu kishaku during the Meiji Restoration (starting in 1868) was an event which was triggered by the official policy of separation of Shinto and Buddhism (or shinbutsu bunri ). This policy caused great destruction to Buddhism in Japan , the destruction of Buddhist temples, images and texts took place on a large scale all over the country and Buddhist monks were forced to return to secular life.

[ citation needed ] During the 2012 Ramu violence in Bangladesh, a 25,000-strong Muslim mob set fire to at least five Buddhist temples and dozens of homes throughout the town and throughout the surrounding villages after they saw a picture of an allegedly desecrated Quran , which they claimed had been posted on Facebook by Uttam Barua, a local Buddhist man.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Christians [ edit ] Main article: Persecution of Christians See also: Sectarian violence among Christians See also the categories Persecution of Christians and Persecution by Christians A Christian Dirce , by Henryk Siemiradzki . A Christian woman is martyred under Nero in this re-enactment of the myth of Dirce (painting by Henryk Siemiradzki , 1897, National Museum , Warsaw ).

The persecution of Christians is religious persecution that Christians may be subjected to as a consequence of professing their faith , both historically and in the modern era .

Early Christians were persecuted for their faith at the hands of both Jews from whose religion Christianity arose and the Roman Empire which controlled much of the land across which early Christianity was distributed .

Early in the fourth century , the religion was legalized by the Edict of Milan , and it eventually became the State church of the Roman Empire .

Christian missionaries , as well as the people that they converted to Christianity, have been the target of persecution, many times to the point of being martyred for their faith .

There is also a history of individual Christian denominations suffering persecution at the hands of other Christians under the charge of heresy , particularly during the 16th century Protestant Reformation as well as throughout the Middle Ages when various Christian groups deemed heretical were persecuted by the Papacy.

In the 20th century, Christians have been persecuted by various groups, and by atheistic states such as the USSR and North Korea . During the Second World War members of many Christian churches were persecuted in Germany for resisting the Nazi ideology.

In more recent times the Christian missionary organization Open Doors (UK) estimates 100 million Christians face persecution, particularly in Muslim-dominated countries such as Pakistan and Saudi Arabia .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] According to the International Society for Human Rights , up to 80% of all acts of persecution are directed against people of the Christian faith.

[ 24 ] Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (Mormonism) [ edit ] Main article: Anti-Mormonism This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( May 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Missouri extermination order forced Mormons to move to Illinois. This was after Sidney Rigdon gave his July 4th Oration which meant to state that Mormons would defend their lives and property. This speech was taken critically by the state government . Missouri state militia troops slaughtered Mormons in what is now known as the Haun's Mill massacre . Their forcible expulsion from the state caused the death of over a hundred due to exposure, starvation, and resulting illnesses. The founder of the church, Joseph Smith , was killed in Carthage, Illinois by a mob of about 200 men, almost all of whom were members of the Illinois state militia including some members of the militia who were assigned to guard him. The Mormons suffered through tarring and feathering , their lands and possessions being repeatedly taken from them, mob attacks, false imprisonments, and the US sending an army to Utah to deal with the "Mormon problem" in the Utah War which resulted in a group of Mormons led by John D. Lee massacring settlers at the Mountain Meadows Massacre .

Jehovah's Witnesses [ edit ] Main article: Persecution of Jehovah's Witnesses Throughout the history of Jehovah's Witnesses , their beliefs, doctrines and practices have engendered controversy and opposition from local governments, communities, and mainstream Christian groups.

Copts [ edit ] Main article: Persecution of Copts See also: Category:Persecution of Copts The persecution of Copts is a historical and ongoing issue in Egypt against Coptic Orthodox Christianity and its followers. It is also a prominent example of the poor status of Christians in the Middle East despite the religion being native to the region.

Copts are the Christ followers in Egypt, usually Oriental Orthodox , who currently make up around 10% of the population of Egypt — the largest religious minority of that country.

[ a ] Copts have cited instances of persecution throughout their history and Human Rights Watch has noted "growing religious intolerance" and sectarian violence against Coptic Christians in recent years, as well as a failure by the Egyptian government to effectively investigate properly and prosecute those responsible.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] The Muslim conquest of Egypt took place in AD 639, during the Byzantine Empire . Despite the political upheaval, Egypt remained a mainly Christian, but Copts lost their majority status after the 14th century, [ 31 ] as a result of the intermittent persecution and the destruction of the Christian churches there, [ 32 ] accompanied by heavy taxes for those who refused to convert.

[ 33 ] From the Muslim conquest of Egypt onwards, the Coptic Christians were persecuted by  different Muslims regimes, [ 34 ] such as the Umayyad Caliphate , [ 35 ] Abbasid Caliphate , [ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] Fatimid Caliphate , [ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] Mamluk Sultanate , [ 42 ] [ 43 ] and Ottoman Empire ; the persecution of Coptic Christians included closing and demolishing churches and forced conversion to Islam .

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Since 2011 hundreds of Egyptian Copts have been killed in sectarian clashes, and many homes, Churches and businesses have been destroyed. In just one province ( Minya ), 77 cases of sectarian attacks on Copts between 2011 and 2016 have been documented by the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights .

[ 47 ] The abduction and disappearance of Coptic Christian women and girls also remains a serious ongoing problem.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] Dogons [ edit ] Main articles: Dogon people and Dogon religion For almost 1000 years, [ 51 ] the Dogon people , an ancient tribe of Mali [ 52 ] had faced religious and ethnic persecution—through jihads by dominant Muslim communities.

[ 51 ] These jihadic expeditions were to forced the Dogon to abandon their traditional religious beliefs for Islam. Such jihads caused the Dogon to abandon their original villages and moved up to the cliffs of Bandiagara for better defense and to escape persecution—often building their dwellings in little nooks and crannies.

[ 51 ] [ 53 ] In the early era of French colonialism in Mali, the French authorities appointed Muslim relatives of El Hadj Umar Tall as chiefs of the Bandiagara —despite the fact that the area has been a Dogon area for centuries.

[ 54 ] In 1864, Tidiani Tall , nephew and successor of the 19th century Senegambian jihadist and Muslim leader—El Hadj Umar Tall, chose Bandiagara as the capital of the Toucouleur Empire thereby exacerbating the inter-religious and inter-ethnic conflict.  In recent years, the Dogon accused the Fulanis of supporting and sheltering Islamic terrorist groups like Al-Qaeda in Dogon country, leading to the creation of the Dogon militia Dan Na Ambassagou in 2016—whose aim is to defend the Dogon from systematic attacks.  That resulted in the Ogossagou massacre of Fulanis in March 2019, and a Fula retaliation with the Sobane Da massacre in June of that year. In the wake of the Ogossagou massacre, the President of Mali , Ibrahim Boubacar Keïta and his government ordered the dissolution of Dan Na Ambassagou—whom they hold partly responsible for the attacks. The Dogon militia group denied any involvement in the massacre and rejected calls to disband.

[ 55 ] Druze [ edit ] Qalb Loze : in June 2015, Druze were massacred there by the jihadist Nusra Front .

[ 56 ] Historically the relationship between the Druze and Muslims has been characterized by intense persecution.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] [ 59 ] The Druze faith is often classified as a branch of Isma'ili . Even though the faith originally developed out of Ismaili Islam , most Druze do not identify as Muslims , [ 60 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] and they do not accept the five pillars of Islam .

[ 63 ] The Druze have frequently experienced persecution by different Muslim regimes such as the Shia Fatimid Caliphate , [ 64 ] Mamluk , [ 65 ] Sunni Ottoman Empire , [ 66 ] and Egypt Eyalet .

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] The persecution of the Druze included massacres , demolishing Druze prayer houses and holy places and forced conversion to Islam.

[ 69 ] Those were no ordinary killings in the Druze's narrative, they were meant to eradicate the whole community according to the Druze narrative.

[ 70 ] Most recently, the Syrian Civil War , which began in 2011, saw persecution of the Druze at the hands of Islamic extremists .

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] Ibn Taymiyya a prominent Muslim scholar muhaddith , dismissed the Druze as non-Muslims, [ 73 ] and his fatwa cited that Druzes: "Are not at the level of ′Ahl al-Kitāb ( People of the Book ) nor mushrikin ( polytheists ). Rather, they are from the most deviant kuffār ( Infidel ) ... Their women can be taken as slaves and their property can be seized ... they are to be killed whenever they are found and cursed as they described ... It is obligatory to kill their scholars and religious figures so that they do not misguide others", [ 74 ] which in that setting would have legitimized violence against them as apostates .

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Ottomans have often relied on Ibn Taymiyya religious ruling to justify their persecution of Druze .

[ 77 ] Falun Gong [ edit ] Main article: Persecution of Falun Gong Falun Gong was introduced to the general public by Li Hongzhi in Changchun , China , in 1992. For the next few years, Falun Gong was the fastest growing qigong practice in Chinese history and, by 1999, there were millions of practitioners. Following the seven years of widespread popularity, on July 20, 1999, the government of the People's Republic of China began a nationwide persecution campaign against Falun Gong practitioners, except in the special administrative regions of Hong Kong and Macau .

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] In late 1999, legislation was created to outlaw "heterodox religions" and retroactively applied to Falun Gong.

[ 80 ] Amnesty International states that the persecution is "politically motivated" with "legislation being used retroactively to convict people on politically-driven charges, and new regulations introduced to further restrict fundamental freedoms".

[ 81 ] Hindus [ edit ] Main article: Persecution of Hindus See also the categories persecution of Hindus and persecution by Hindus Persecution of Hindus refers to the religious persecution inflicted upon Hindus that may undergo as a consequence of professing their faith, both historically and in the current era. Hindus have been brutally persecuted during the historical Islamic rule of the Indian subcontinent [ 82 ] [ better source needed ] and during Portuguese rule of Goa .

Even in modern times, Hindus in Pakistan and Bangladesh have suffered persecution. Most recently, thousands of Hindus from Sindh province in Pakistan have been fleeing to India voicing fear for their safety. After the Partition of India in 1947, there were 8.8 million Hindus in Pakistan (excluding Bangladesh) in 1951. In 1951, Hindus constituted 1.58% of the Pakistani population.

[ 83 ] Today, the Hindu minority amounts to 1.7 percent of Pakistan's population.

[ 84 ] The Bangladesh Liberation War (1971) resulted in one of the largest genocides of the 20th century. While estimates of the number of casualties was 3,000,000, it is reasonably certain that Hindus bore a disproportionate brunt of the Pakistan Army's onslaught against the Bengali population of what was East Pakistan. An article in Time magazine dated 2 August 1971, stated "The Hindus, who account for three-fourths of the refugees and a majority of the dead, have borne the brunt of the Muslim military hatred." [ 85 ] Senator Edward Kennedy wrote in a report that was part of United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations testimony dated 1 November 1971, "Hardest hit have been members of the Hindu community who have been robbed of their lands and shops, systematically slaughtered, mass rape and in some places, painted with yellow patches marked "H". All of this has been officially sanctioned, ordered and implemented under martial law from Islamabad ". In the same report, Senator Kennedy reported that 80% of the refugees in India were Hindus and according to numerous international relief agencies such as UNESCO and World Health Organization the number of East Pakistani refugees at their peak in India was close to 10 million. In a syndicated column "The Pakistani Slaughter That Nixon Ignored", Pulitzer Prize –winning journalist Sydney Schanberg wrote about his return to liberated Bangladesh in 1972. "Other reminders were the yellow "H"s the Pakistanis had painted on the homes of Hindus, particular targets of the Muslim army" (by "Muslim army", meaning the Pakistan Army , which had targeted Bengali Muslims as well), ( Newsday , 29 April 1994).

In Bangladesh, on 28 February 2013, the International Crimes Tribunal sentenced Delwar Hossain Sayeedi , the Vice President of the Jamaat-e-Islami to death for the war crimes committed during the 1971 Bangladesh Liberation War . Following the sentence, activists of Jamaat-e-Islami and its student wing Islami Chhatra Shibir attacked the Hindus in different parts of the country. Hindu properties were looted, Hindu houses were burnt into ashes and Hindu temples were desecrated and set on fire.

[ 86 ] [ additional citation(s) needed ] The violence included the looting of Hindu properties and businesses, the burning of Hindu homes, the rape of Hindu women, [ citation needed ] and the desecration and destruction of, according to community leaders, more than 50 Hindu temples ; 1,500 Hindu homes were destroyed in 20 districts.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] While the government has held the Jamaat-e-Islami responsible for the attacks on the minorities, the Jamaat-e-Islami leadership has denied any involvement. The minority leaders have protested the attacks and appealed for justice. The Supreme Court of Bangladesh has directed the law enforcement to start suo motu investigation into the attacks. US Ambassador to Bangladesh express concern about attack of Jamaat on Bengali Hindu community.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] Jews [ edit ] Main articles: Antisemitism , Persecution of Jews , and The Holocaust Kaunas pogrom in German-occupied Lithuania , June 1941 The persecution of Jews is a recurring phenomenon throughout Jewish history . It has occurred on numerous occasions in widely different geographic locations. It may include pogroms , looting and the demolition of private and public Jewish property (e.g., Kristallnacht ), unwarranted arrest, imprisonment, torture , killing, or even mass execution (in World War II alone, approximately six million people were deliberately killed because they were Jewish). They have been expelled from their hometowns/countries, hoping to find safe havens in other polities. In recent times anti-Semitism has often been manifested as Anti-Zionism , [ 91 ] [ 92 ] where Anti-Zionism is a prejudice against the Jewish movement for self-determination and the right of the Jewish people to a homeland in the State of Israel . Anti-Zionism can include threats to destroy the State of Israel (or otherwise eliminate its Jewish character), unfounded and inaccurate characterizations of Israel's power in the world, and language or actions that hold Israel to a different standard than other countries.

[ 93 ] Muslims [ edit ] Main article: Persecution of Muslims See also: Persecution by Muslims See also the categories Persecution of Muslims and Persecution by Muslims Mass grave where events of the Srebrenica massacre of Bosnian Muslims unfolded The persecution of Muslims has been a recurring phenomenon throughout the history of Islam . Persecution may refer to unwarranted arrest, imprisonment, beatings, torture, or execution. It may also refer to the confiscation or destruction of property, or incitement to hate Muslims.

Persecution can extend beyond those who perceive themselves to be Muslims and include those who are perceived by others as Muslims, or it can include Muslims who are considered non-Muslims by fellow Muslims. The Ahmadiyya regard themselves as Muslims, but are seen by many other Muslims as non-Muslims and "heretics". In 1984, the Government of Pakistan , under General Zia-ul-Haq , passed Ordinance XX , [ 94 ] which banned proselytizing by Ahmadis and also banned Ahmadis from referring to themselves as Muslims . According to this ordinance, any Ahmadi who refers to oneself as a Muslim by words, either spoken or written, or by visible representation, directly or indirectly, or makes the call for prayer as other Muslims do, is punishable by imprisonment of up to 3 years. Because of these difficulties, Mirza Tahir Ahmad migrated to London.

[ citation needed ] Pagans [ edit ] See also: Category:Persecution of Pagans Persecution of Pagans refers to the historical and ongoing acts of religious intolerance, violence, and oppression against followers of pagan or polytheistic religions. This persecution has been carried out by various religious and political groups, including Christians, Muslims, and governments throughout history. 
The rise of Christianity as a state religion in the Late Roman Empire led to the persecution of Pagans, who were seen as a threat to the new faith and persecution of pagans have continued in Post-Roman Europe , Arabia, and North Africa. The destruction and conversion of pagan temples into churches, mosques, or other structures were common practices during the Christianization of the Roman Empire and later the Spread of Islam in Middle East and North Africa . This was done to eradicate paganism and assert the dominance of Christianity and Islam. During the Age of Discovery , Many Europeans consider aspects of Native American , African Tribes , Polynesian, and Aboriginal Australian religion as pagans, which attributed to their genocide and forced conversions . Some notable examples are the Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire , Christianisation of the Germanic peoples , Islamization of the Sudan region , Persecution of pagans under Theodosius I , Persecution of pagans under Constantius II , Scramble for Africa , Colonization of Australia , and Colonization of the Americas . Modern Pagans, who practice various forms of paganism, are a religious minority in every country where they exist. They have been subject to religious discrimination and/or religious persecution. The largest modern Pagan communities are in North America and the United Kingdom, and the issue of discrimination receives most attention in those locations.  Although the persecution of Pagans has decreased in recent centuries, it still exists in some parts of the world. The community of Pagans and Wiccans continues to face Christian persecution, particularly in the United States, where they are frequently subjected to negative stereotypes and misconceptions, such as those perpetuated during the Satanic Panic .

Philosophers [ edit ] Main article: Persecution of philosophers See also: Category:Persecution of philosophers Philosophers throughout the history of philosophy have been held in courts and tribunals for various offenses, often as a result of their philosophical activity, and some have even been put to death.  The most famous example of a philosopher being put on trial is the case of Socrates , who was tried for, amongst other charges, corrupting the youth and impiety.

[ 95 ] Others include: Giordano Bruno - pantheist philosopher who was burned at the stake by the Roman Inquisition for his heretical religious views, his cosmological views, or both; [ 96 ] [ 97 ] Tommaso Campanella - confined to a convent for his heretical views, namely, an opposition to the authority of Aristotle , and later imprisoned in a castle for 27 years during which he wrote his most famous works, including The City of the Sun ; [ 98 ] Baruch Spinoza - Jewish philosopher who, at age 23, was put in cherem (similar to excommunication) by Jewish religious authorities for heresies such as his controversial ideas regarding the authenticity of the Hebrew Bible , which formed the foundations of modern biblical criticism , and the pantheistic nature of the Divine.

[ 99 ] [ 100 ] Prior to that, he had been attacked on the steps of the community synagogue by a knife-wielding assailant shouting "Heretic!", [ 101 ] and later his books were added to the Catholic Church's Index of Forbidden Books .

Serers [ edit ] Main articles: Serer religion and Serer history The persecution of the Serer people of Senegal , Gambia and Mauritania is multifaceted, and it includes both religious and ethnic elements. Religious and ethnic persecution of the Serer people dates back to the 11th century when King War Jabi usurped the throne of Tekrur (part of present-day Senegal) in 1030, and by 1035, introduced Sharia law and forced his subjects to submit to Islam .

[ 102 ] With the assistance of his son (Leb), their Almoravid allies and other African ethnic groups who have embraced Islam , the Muslim coalition army launched jihads against the Serer people of Tekrur who refused to abandon Serer religion in favour of Islam.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] [ 105 ] [ 106 ] The number of Serer deaths are unknown, but it triggered the exodus of the Serers of Tekrur to the south following their defeat, where they were granted asylum by the lamanes .

[ 106 ] Persecution of the Serer people continued from the medieval era to the 19th century, resulting in the Battle of Fandane-Thiouthioune . From the 20th to the 21st centuries, persecution of the Serers is less obvious, nevertheless, they are the object of scorn and prejudice.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] Sikhs [ edit ] Main articles: Chhota Ghallughara , Vadda Ghalughara , and 1984 anti-Sikh riots See also: Category:Persecution of Sikhs The 1984 anti-Sikh riots or the 1984 Sikh Massacre was a series of pogroms [ 109 ] [ 110 ] [ 111 ] [ 112 ] directed against Sikhs in India , by anti-Sikh mobs, in response to the assassination of Indira Gandhi , on 31 October 1984, by two of her Sikh bodyguards in response to her actions authorising the military operation Operation Blue Star . There were more than 8,000 [ 113 ] deaths, including 3,000 in Delhi.

[ 111 ] In June 1984, during Operation Blue Star , Indira Gandhi ordered the Indian Army to attack the Golden Temple and eliminate any insurgents, as it had been occupied by Sikh separatists who were stockpiling weapons.

Later operations by Indian paramilitary forces were initiated to clear the separatists from the countryside of Punjab state.

[ 114 ] The Indian government reported 2,700 deaths in the ensuing chaos. In the aftermath of the riots, the Indian government reported 20,000 had fled the city, however the People's Union for Civil Liberties reported "at least" 1,000 displaced persons .

[ 115 ] The most affected regions were the Sikh neighbourhoods in Delhi . The Central Bureau of Investigation , the main Indian investigating agency, is of the opinion that the acts of violence were organized with the support from the then Delhi police officials and the central government headed by Indira Gandhi 's son, Rajiv Gandhi .

[ 116 ] Rajiv Gandhi was sworn in as Prime Minister after his mother's death and, when asked about the riots, said  "when a big tree falls, the earth shakes" thus trying to justify the communal strife.

[ 117 ] There are allegations that the government destroyed evidence and shielded the guilty. The Asian Age front-page story called the government actions "the Mother of all Cover-ups" [ 118 ] [ 119 ] There are allegations that the violence was led and often perpetrated by Indian National Congress activists and sympathisers during the riots.

[ 120 ] The chief weapon used by the mobs, kerosene , was supplied by a group of Indian National Congress Party leaders who owned filling stations.

[ 121 ] Yazidis [ edit ] Main articles: Persecution of Yazidis and Persecution of Yazidis by Muslim Kurds See also: Category:Persecution of Yazidis The Persecution of Yazidis has been ongoing since at least the 10th century.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] The Yazidi religion is regarded as devil worship by Islamists .

[ 124 ] Yazidis have been persecuted by Muslim Kurdish tribes since the 10th century, [ 122 ] and by the Ottoman Empire from the 17th to the 20th centuries.

[ 125 ] After the 2014 Sinjar massacre of thousands of Yazidis by the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant , Yazidis still face violence from the Turkish Armed Forces and its ally the Syrian National Army , as well as discrimination from the Kurdistan Regional Government . According to Yazidi tradition (based on oral traditions and folk songs), estimated that 74 genocides against the Yazidis have been carried out in the past 800 years.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] [ 128 ] [ 129 ] Zoroastrians [ edit ] Main article: Persecution of Zoroastrians See also: Category:Anti-Zoroastrianism A Zoroastrian family in Qajar Iran about 1910.

Persecution of Zoroastrians is the religious persecution inflicted upon the followers of the Zoroastrian faith. The persecution of Zoroastrians occurred throughout the religion's history. The discrimination and harassment began in the form of sparse violence and forced conversions .

Muslims are recorded to have destroyed fire temples . Zoroastrians living under Muslim rule were required to pay a tax called jizya .

[ 130 ] Zoroastrian places of worship were desecrated, fire temples were destroyed and mosques were built in their place. Many libraries were burned and much of their cultural heritage was lost. Gradually an increasing number of laws were passed which regulated Zoroastrian behavior and limited their ability to participate in society. Over time, the persecution of Zoroastrians became more common and widespread, and the number of believers decreased by force significantly.

[ 130 ] Most were forced to convert due to the systematic abuse and discrimination inflicted upon them by followers of Islam . Once a Zoroastrian family was forced to convert to Islam , the children were sent to an Islamic school to learn Arabic and study the teachings of Islam , as a result some of these people lost their Zoroastrian faith. However, under the Samanids , who were Zoroastrian converts to Islam, the Persian language flourished. On occasion, the Zoroastrian clergy assisted Muslims in attacks against those whom they deemed Zoroastrian heretics.

[ 130 ] A Zoroastrian astrologer named Mulla Gushtasp predicted the fall of the Zand dynasty to the Qajar army in Kerman. Because of Gushtasp's forecast, the Zoroastrians of Kerman were spared by the conquering army of Agha Mohammad Khan Qajar . Despite the aforementioned favorable incident, the Zoroastrians during the Qajar dynasty remained in agony and their population continued to decline. Even during the rule of Agha Mohammad Khan, the founder of the dynasty, many Zoroastrians were killed and some were taken as captives to Azerbaijan .

[ 131 ] Zoroastrians regard the Qajar period as one of their worst.

[ 132 ] During the Qajar dynasty , religious persecution of the Zoroastrians was rampant. Due to the increasing contacts with influential Parsi philanthropists such as Maneckji Limji Hataria , many Zoroastrians left Iran for India . There, they formed the second major Indian Zoroastrian community known as the Iranis .

[ 133 ] Ethnic [ edit ] Main article: Racism This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( February 2024 ) Ethnic persecution refers to perceived persecution based on ethnicity . Its meaning is parallel to that of racism , (based on race ).  The Rwandan genocide remains an atrocity that the indigenous Hutu and Tutsi peoples still believe is unforgivable.  The Japanese occupation of China caused the death of millions of people, mostly peasants who were murdered after the Doolittle Raid in early-World War II.

[ citation needed ] African Americans [ edit ] Main article: Racism against African Americans African Americans have faced persecution in the forms of slavery , legal discrimination , and racial violence .

Assyrians [ edit ] Main article: Assyrian people See also: Category:Persecution of Assyrians Due to their Christian faith and ethnicity, the Assyrians have been persecuted since their adoption of Christianity. During the reign of Yazdegerd I , Christians in Persia were viewed with suspicion as potential Roman subversives, resulting in persecutions while at the same time, they promoted Nestorian Christianity as a buffer between the Churches of Rome and Persia . Persecutions and attempts to impose Zoroastrianism continued during the reign of Yazdegerd II .

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] During the eras of Mongol rule under Genghis Khan and Timur , there was indiscriminate slaughter of tens of thousands of Assyrians and destruction of the Assyrian population of northwestern Iran and central and northern Iran.

[ 136 ] More recent persecutions since the 19th century include the Massacres of Badr Khan , the Massacres of Diyarbakır (1895) , the Adana massacre , the Assyrian genocide , the Simele massacre , and the al-Anfal campaign .

Hazara people [ edit ] Main article: Persecution of Hazara people The Hazara people of central Afghanistan have been persecuted by Afghan rulers at various times in the history. Since the tragedy of 9/11, Sunni Muslim terrorists have been attacking the Hazara community in southwestern Pakistani town of Quetta , home to some 500,000 Hazara who fled persecution in neighbouring Afghanistan. Some 2,400 men, women and children have been killed or wounded with Lashkar-e-Jhangvi claiming responsibility for most of the attacks against the community. Consequently, many thousands have fled the country seeking asylum in Australia .

[ citation needed ] Roma [ edit ] Main articles: Antiziganism , Porajmos , and Romani genocide See also: Category:Antiziganism Antiziganism is hostility, prejudice , discrimination or racism directed against the Romani people as an ethnic group, or people who are perceived as being of Romani heritage.

The Porajmos was the planned and attempted effort, often described as a genocide , during World War II by the government of Nazi Germany and its allies to exterminate the Romani (Gypsy) people of Europe. Under the rule of Adolf Hitler , a supplementary decree to the Nuremberg Laws was issued on 26 November 1935, defining Gypsies as "enemies of the race-based state", the same category as Jews. Thus, the fate of Roma in Europe in some ways paralleled that of the Jews.

[ 137 ] Historians estimate that 220,000 to 500,000 Romani were killed by the Nazis and their collaborators, or more than 25% of the slightly less than 1 million Roma in Europe at the time.

[ 137 ] Ian Hancock puts the death toll as high as 1.5 million.

[ 138 ] Rohingyas [ edit ] Main article: Rohingya genocide See also: 2017 Rohingya persecution in Myanmar The UN human rights chief slammed Myanmar 's apparent "systematic attack" on the Rohingya minority, warning that "ethnic cleansing" seemed to be underway.
Ethnic Rohingya Muslims who fled from security forces in Myanmar's Rakhine State have described killings, shelling, and arson in their villages that have all the hallmarks of a campaign of “ethnic cleansing,” Human Rights Watch said.
“Rohingya refugees have harrowing accounts of fleeing Burmese army attacks and watching their villages be destroyed,” said Meenakshi Ganguly, South Asia director. “Lawful operations against armed groups do not involve burning the local population out of their homes.” [ 139 ] Sri Lankan Tamils [ edit ] See also: 1958 anti-Tamil pogrom and Black July Widespread attacks on Sri Lankan Tamils came in the form of island wide ethnic riots, including The 1958 anti-Tamil pogrom and the Black July riots. Further persecution through murders, targeted rape and kidnapping occurred. Whilst previously, the majority of Tamils demanded instead for a separate state, by 1983 armed struggles against Sinhalese extremists began to rise, culminating in the formation of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam .

[ citation needed ] Uyghurs [ edit ] Further information: Persecution of Uyghurs in China and Xinjiang conflict Uyghurs and other Turkic peoples in modern-day Xinjiang (called East Turkestan by independence activists ) declared two short-lived independent East Turkestan Republics in the 20th century.

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] In late 1949, the region and the rest of China came under the control of the People's Republic of China .

[ 140 ] Uyghur activist groups have said that anger towards the Chinese government has been fueled by years of state-sponsored oppression and discrimination.

[ 140 ] In 2017, the China began a large-scale crackdown on the Xinjiang region, which it justifies as a counterterrorism campaign following sporadic terrorist attacks in Xinjiang.

[ 140 ] Scholars estimate that the Chinese government detained over one million Uyghurs in internment camps (also called re-education camps) in order to indoctrinate them away from religion and Sinicize them (assimilate them into Chinese culture ).

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] Critics of the policy have described it as the Sinicization of Xinjiang and they have also called it an ethnocide or a cultural genocide , [ 142 ] [ 143 ] [ 144 ] while some governments, activists, independent NGOs , human rights organizations, academics, government officials, and the East Turkistan Government-in-Exile have called it a genocide .

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] Based on genetics [ edit ] People with albinism [ edit ] Main article: Persecution of people with albinism Persecution on the basis of albinism is frequently based on the belief that albinos are inferior to persons with higher concentration of melanin in their skin. As a result, albinos have been persecuted, killed and dismembered, and graves of albinistic people dug up and desecrated. Such people have also been ostracized and even killed because they are presumed to bring bad luck in some areas.  Haiti also has a long history of treating albinistic people as accursed, with the highest incidence under the influence of François "Papa Doc" Duvalier .

[ citation needed ] People with autism [ edit ] Main article: Persecution of people with autism People with autism spectrum disorders have commonly been victims of persecution, both throughout history and in the present era. In Cameroon children with autism are commonly accused of witchcraft and singled out for torture and even death.

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] Additionally, it is speculated that many of the disabled children murdered during Action T4 in Nazi Germany may have been autistic, [ 149 ] making autistic people among the first victims of The Holocaust .

LGBT [ edit ] The examples and perspective in this section may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate.

( July 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A number of countries, especially those countries in the Western world , have passed measures to alleviate discrimination against sexual minorities , including laws against anti-gay hate crimes and workplace discrimination . Some countries have also legalized same-sex marriages or civil unions in order to grant same-sex couples the same protections and benefits as those which are granted to opposite-sex couples. In 2011, the United Nations passed its first resolution which recognizes LGBT rights and, in 2015, same-sex marriages were legalized in all states of the United States .

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Persecution of Christians Christian martyrs Defamation Discrimination Latter-day Saint martyrs Lawfare Oppression Persecutory delusion Right to asylum Social defeat Social exclusion Notes [ edit ] ^ In 2017, the Wall Street Journal reported that "the vast majority of Egypt's estimated 9.5 million Christians, approximately 10% of the country's population, are Orthodox Copts." [ 25 ] In 2019, the Associated Press cited an estimate of 10 million Copts in Egypt.

[ 26 ] In 2015, the Wall Street Journal reported: "The Egyptian government estimates about 5 million Copts, but the Coptic Orthodox Church says 15-18 million. Reliable numbers are hard to find but estimates suggest they make up somewhere between 6% and 18% of the population." [ 27 ] The CIA World Factbook reported a 2015 estimate that 10% of the Egyptian population is Christian (including both Copts and non-Copts).

[ 28 ] References [ edit ] ^ Rempell, Scott (2011).

"Defining Persecution" .

Utah Law Review .

2013 (1). Social Science Research Network.

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.1941006 .

^ Telford Taylor "When people kill a people" , The New York Times , March 28, 1982.

^ Article 7.3 of the Rome Statute, which constitutes "compromise text" states that "For the purpose of this Statute, it is understood that the term 'gender' refers to the two sexes, male and female, within the context of society. The term 'gender' does not indicate any meaning different from the above." While under international criminal law persecution based on Gender Identity is also prohibited, during the Rome Diplomatic Conference that adopted the ICC Statute, it was decided to define gender narrowly in order to overcome opposition from the Holy See and other states that were concerned that the ICC could theoretically also look into discriminatory practices of religious institutions. This provision was balanced with that of Article 10, which states that "Nothing in this Part shall be interpreted as limiting or prejudicing in any way existing or developing rules of international law for purposes other than this Statute." ^ International Federation for Human Rights (2003-08-01).

"Discrimination against religious minorities in Iran" (PDF) . fdih.org . Retrieved 2006-10-20 .

^ "QuickLists: Most Baha'i Nations (2010)" .

Association of Religion Data Archives . 2010 . Retrieved 2020-10-14 .

^ Diana Lary (1974).

Region and nation: the Kwangsi clique in Chinese politics, 1925-1937 . Cambridge University Press. p. 98.

ISBN 978-0-521-20204-6 . Retrieved 2010-06-28 .

^ David S. G. Goodman (2004).

China's campaign to "Open up the West": national, provincial, and local perspectives . Cambridge University Press. p. 72.

ISBN 978-0-521-61349-1 . Retrieved 2010-06-28 .

^ Levy, Robert I. Mesocosm: Hinduism and the Organization of a Traditional Newar City in Nepal. Berkeley: University of California Press, c1990 1990.

^ William M. Johnston (2000).

Encyclopedia of Monasticism: A-L . Routledge. p. 335.

ISBN 978-1-57958-090-2 .

^ Eraly, Abraham (April 2015).

The Age of Wrath: A History of the Delhi Sultanate . Penguin UK.

ISBN 9789351186588 .

^ A Comprehensive History Of India, Vol. 4, Part 1, pp. 600 & 601.

^ Historia Religionum: Handbook for the History of Religions By C. J. Bleeker, G. Widengren p. 381.

^ S. Muthiah.

Where the Buddha Walked . p. 41.

^ Sanderson, Alexis. "The Śaiva Age: The Rise and Dominance of Śaivism during the Early Medieval Period." In: Genesis and Development of Tantrism, edited by Shingo Einoo. Tokyo: Institute of Oriental Culture, University of Tokyo, 2009. Institute of Oriental Culture Special Series, 23, pp. 89.

^ The Maha-Bodhi by Maha Bodhi Society, Calcutta (page 8) ^ The Maha-Bodhi by Maha Bodhi Society, Calcutta (page 205) ^ Islam at War: A History By Mark W. Walton, George F. Nafziger, Laurent W. Mbanda (p. 226) ^ The Holy Land Reborn: Pilgrimage and the Tibetan Reinvention of Buddhist India . University of Chicago Press. 15 September 2008.

ISBN 9780226356501 .

^ Roerich, G. 1959. Biography of Dharmasvamin (Chag lo tsa-ba Chos-rje-dpal): A Tibetan Monk Pilgrim. Patna: K. P. Jayaswal Research Institute. pp. 61–62, 64, 98.

^ "Protesters burn Bangladesh Buddhist temples" .

Al Jazeera . 30 September 2012.

^ "Religious attacks lead to 300 arrests in Bangladesh" .

ABC News . 2 October 2012.

^ Open Doors : The worst 50 countries for persecution of Christians Archived 2012-03-04 at the Wayback Machine ^ Open Doors: Weltverfolgungsindex 2012 Archived 2012-07-13 at the Wayback Machine , p. 2 ^ Philpott, Daniel, Pope Francis and Religious Freedom , Washington, DC: Berkley Center for Religion, Peace & World Affairs ^ Francis X. Rocca & Dahlia Kholaif, Pope Francis Calls on Egypt’s Catholics to Embrace Forgiveness , Wall Street Journal (April 29, 2017).

^ Noha Elhennawy, Egyptian woman fights unequal Islamic inheritance laws , Associated Press (November 15, 2019).

^ "Five Things to Know About Egypt's Coptic Christians" .

Wall Street Journal . February 16, 2015.

^ "Egypt" .

The World Factbook .

Central Intelligence Agency . 30 March 2023.

^ Egypt and Libya: A Year of Serious Abuses Archived 2011-07-04 at the Wayback Machine , hrw.org, January 24, 2010 ^ Zaki, Moheb (May 18, 2010).

"Egypt's Persecuted Christians" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on June 3, 2010 . Retrieved June 4, 2010 .

^ Shea, Nina (June 2017).

"Do Copts have a future in Egypt" .

Foreign Affairs .

Archived from the original on 2017-06-20.

^ Etheredge, Laura S. (2011).

Middle East, Region in Transition: Egypt . Britannica Educational Publishing. p. 161.

ISBN 9789774160936 .

^ Conversion, Exemption, and Manipulation: Social Benefits and Conversion to Islam in Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages: Forcing taxes on those who refuse to convert (PDF) , ʿUmar is depicted as having ordered that "the poll-tax should be taken from all men who would not become Muslims" ^ Refugees, United Nations High Commissioner for.

"Refworld | World Directory of Minorities and Indigenous Peoples – Egypt : Copts of Egypt" .

Refworld . Retrieved 2020-06-15 .

^ H. Patrick Glenn, Legal Traditions of the World. Oxford University Press, 2007, p. 219.

^ Goddard, Hugh (2000).

A History of Christian–Muslim Relations . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 71.

ISBN 1566633400 . Retrieved 20 January 2016 .

^ Feder, Frank (2017). "The Bashmurite Revolts in the Delta and the 'Bashmuric Dialect' ". In Gabra, Gawdat; Takla, Hany N. (eds.).

Christianity and Monasticism in Northern Egypt: Beni Suef, Giza, Cairo, and the Nile Delta . American University in Cairo Press. pp.

33– 35.

^ Lapidus, Ira M.

(1972). "The Conversion of Egypt to Islam".

Israel Oriental Studies .

2 : 257.

^ Robert Ousterhout, "Rebuilding the Temple: Constantine Monomachus and the Holy Sepulchre" in The Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians , Vol. 48, No. 1 (March, 1989), pp.66–78 ^ John Joseph Saunders (11 March 2002).

A History of Medieval Islam . Routledge. pp. 109–.

ISBN 978-1-134-93005-0 .

^ Marina Rustow (3 October 2014).

Heresy and the Politics of Community: The Jews of the Fatimid Caliphate . Cornell University Press. pp. 219–.

ISBN 978-0-8014-5529-2 .

^ Teule, Herman G. B. (2013).

"Introduction: Constantinople and Granada, Christian-Muslim Interaction 1350-1516" . In Thomas, David; Mallett, Alex (eds.).

Christian-Muslim Relations. A Bibliographical History, Volume 5 (1350-1500) . Brill. p. 10.

ISBN 9789004252783 .

^ Werthmuller, Kurt J. (2010).

Coptic Identity and Ayyubid Politics in Egypt, 1218-1250 . American Univ in Cairo Press. p. 76.

ISBN 9780805440737 .

^ Lyster, William (2013).

The Cave Church of Paul the Hermit at the Monastery of St. Pau . Yale University Press.

ISBN 9789774160936 .

Al Hakim Bi-Amr Allah (r. 996—1021), however, who became the greatest persecutor of Copts.... within the church that also appears to coincide with a period of forced rapid conversion to Islam ^ N. Swanson, Mark (2010).

The Coptic Papacy in Islamic Egypt (641-1517) . American Univ in Cairo Press. p. 54.

ISBN 9789774160936 .

By late 1012 the persecution had moved into high gear with demolitions of churches and the forced conversion of Christian ...

^ ha-Mizraḥit ha-Yiśreʼelit, Ḥevrah (1988). Asian and African Studies, Volume 22. Jerusalem Academic Press. Muslim historians note the destruction of dozens of churches and the forced conversion of dozens of people to Islam under al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah in Egypt ...These events also reflect the Muslim attitude toward forced conversion and toward converts.

^ Eltahawy, Mona (22 December 2016).

"Egypt's Cruelty to Christians" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 24 December 2016 . Retrieved 22 December 2016 .

^ United States. Congress. Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe (July 18, 2012).

Escalating Violence Against Coptic Women and Girls: Will the New Egypt be More Dangerous than the Old? : Hearing before the Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe, One Hundred Twelfth Congress, Second Session, July 18, 2012 . Washington, DC: Government Printing Office . Retrieved 8 March 2015 .

^ "Masress : Sectarian tensions rise in wake of crime boss death" .

Masress .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2016 . Retrieved 2 January 2016 .

^ Premier (2018-05-09).

"Newlywed becomes 8th Egyptian Christian woman to be kidnapped since April" .

Premier . Retrieved 2019-10-14 .

^ a b c Griaule, Marcel ; Dieterlen, Germaine ; (1965).

Le mythe cosmologique. Le renard pâle.

, 1. Paris: Institut d'Ethnologie Musée de l'homme, p. 17 ^ The Independent , Caught in the crossfire of Mali's war (25 January 2013) by Kim Sengupta [1] (retrieved March 14, 2020) ^ Africa Today , Volume 7, Afro Media (2001), p. 126 ^ Wise, Christopher , Sorcery, Totem, and Jihad in African Philosophy , Bloomsbury Publishing (2017), p. 68, ISBN 9781350013100 (retrieved March 14, 2020) [2] ^ World Politics Review , What Explains the Rise of Communal Violence in Mali, Nigeria and Ethiopia?

(Sept. 11, 2019) by Hilary Matfess.

[3] ^ Syria Druze back Sunnis' revolt with words but not arms .

Agence France-Presse . 2012-09-08.

^ Swayd, Samy (2015).

Historical Dictionary of the Druzes . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 132.

ISBN 9781442246171 .

Some Muslim rulers and jurists have advocated the persecution of members of the Druze Movement beginning with the seventh Fatimi Caliph Al-Zahir, in 1022. Recurring period of persecutions in subsequent centuries ... failure to elucidate their beliefs and practices, have contributed to the ambiguous relationship between Muslims and Druzes ^ K. Zartman, Jonathan (2020).

Conflict in the Modern Middle East: An Encyclopedia of Civil War, Revolutions, and Regime Change . ABC-CLIO. p. 199.

ISBN 9781440865039 .

Historically, Islam classified Christians, Jews, and Zoroastrians as protected "People of the Book," a secondary status subject to payment of a poll tax. Nevertheless, Zoroastrians suffered significant persecution. Other religions such as the Alawites, Alevis, and Druze often suffered more.

^ Layiš, Aharôn (1982).

Marriage, Divorce, and Succession in the Druze Family: A Study Based on Decisions of Druze Arbitrators and Religious Courts in Israel and the Golan Heights . BRILL. p. 1.

ISBN 9789004064126 .

the Druze religion, though originating from the Isma'lliyya, an extreme branch of the Shia, seceded completely from Islam and has, therefore, experienced periods of persecution by the latter.

^ "Are the Druze People Arabs or Muslims? Deciphering Who They Are" .

Arab America . 8 August 2018 . Retrieved 13 April 2020 .

^ J. Stewart, Dona (2008).

The Middle East Today: Political, Geographical and Cultural Perspectives . Routledge. p. 33.

ISBN 9781135980795 .

Most Druze do not consider themselves Muslim. Historically they faced much persecution and keep their religious beliefs secrets.

^ Yazbeck Haddad, Yvonne (2014).

The Oxford Handbook of American Islam . Oxford University Press. p. 142.

ISBN 9780199862634 .

While they appear parallel to those of normative Islam, in the Druze religion they are different in meaning and interpretation. The religion is considered distinct from the Ismaili as well as from other Muslims belief and practice... Most Druze consider themselves fully assimilated in American society and do not necessarily identify as Muslims..

^ De McLaurin, Ronald (1979).

The Political Role of Minority Groups in the Middle East . Michigan University Press. p. 114.

ISBN 9780030525964 .

Theologically, one would have to conclude that the Druze are not Muslims. They do not accept the five pillars of Islam. In place of these principles the Druze have instituted the seven precepts noted above..

^ Parsons, L. (2000).

The Druze between Palestine and Israel 1947–49 . Springer. p. 2.

ISBN 9780230595989 .

With the succession of al-Zahir to the Fatimid caliphate a mass persecution (known by the Druze as the period of the mihna ) of the Muwaḥḥidūn was instigated ...

^ Hitti 1924 .

^ C. Tucker, Spencer C. (2019).

Middle East Conflicts from Ancient Egypt to the 21st Century: An Encyclopedia and Document Collection [4 volumes] . ABC-CLIO. pp.

364– 366.

ISBN 9781440853531 .

^ Taraze Fawaz, Leila.

An occasion for war: civil conflict in Lebanon and Damascus in 1860 . p.63.

^ Goren, Haim.

Dead Sea Level: Science, Exploration and Imperial Interests in the Near East.

p.95-96.

^ C. Tucker, Spencer C. (2019).

Middle East Conflicts from Ancient Egypt to the 21st Century: An Encyclopedia and Document Collection [4 volumes] . ABC-CLIO. p. 364.

ISBN 9781440853531 .

^ Zabad, Ibrahim (2017).

Middle Eastern Minorities: The Impact of the Arab Spring . Routledge.

ISBN 9781317096726 .

^ "Syria conflict: Al-Nusra fighters kill Druze villagers" .

BBC News . 11 June 2015 . Retrieved 27 July 2015 .

^ "Nusra Front kills Syrian villagers from minority Druze sect" .

thestar.com . 11 June 2015 . Retrieved 27 July 2015 .

^ Roald, Anne Sofie (2011).

Religious Minorities in the Middle East: Domination, Self-Empowerment, Accommodation . BRILL. p. 255.

ISBN 9789004207424 .

Therefore, many of these scholars follow Ibn Taymiyya'sfatwa from the beginning of the fourteenth century that declared the Druzes and the Alawis as heretics outside Islam ...

^ Zabad, Ibrahim (2017).

Middle Eastern Minorities: The Impact of the Arab Spring . Taylor & Francis. p. 126.

ISBN 9781317096733 .

^ Knight, Michael (2009).

Journey to the End of Islam . Soft Skull Press. p. 129.

ISBN 9781593765521 .

^ S. Swayd, Samy (2009).

The A to Z of the Druzes . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 37.

ISBN 9780810868366 .

Subsequently, Muslim opponents of the Druzes have often relied on Ibn Taymiyya's religious ruling to justify their attitudes and actions against Druzes...

^ S. Swayd, Samy (2009).

The Druzes: An Annotated Bibliography . University of Michigan Press. p. 25.

ISBN 9780966293203 .

^ Faison, Seth (April 27, 1999) "In Beijing: A Roar of Silent Protesters" New York Times , retrieved June 10, 2006 ^ Kahn, Joseph (April 27, 1999) "Notoriety Now for Exiled Leader of Chinese Movement" New York Times , retrieved June 14, 2006 ^ Leung, Beatrice (2002) 'China and Falun Gong: Party and society relations in the modern era', Journal of Contemporary China, 11:33, 761 – 784 ^ The crackdown on Falun Gong and other so-called heretical organizations , The Amnesty International ^ Durant, Will.

The Story of Civilization: Our Oriental Heritage . p. 459.

The Mohammedan Conquest of India is probably the bloodiest story in history. It is a discouraging tale, for its evident moral is that civilization is a precarious thing, whose delicate complex of order and liberty, culture and peace may at any time be overthrown by barbarians invading from without or multiplying within. The Hindus had allowed their strength to be wasted in internal division and war; they had adopted religions like Buddhism and Jainism, which unnerved them for the tasks of life; they had failed to organize their forces for the protection of their frontiers and their capitals, their wealth and their freedom, from the hordes of Scythians, Huns, Afghans and Turks hovering about India's boundaries and waiting for national weakness to let them in. For four hundred years (600–1000 AD) India invited conquest; and at last it came.

^ "CENSUS OF PAKISTAN, 1951 POPULATION ACCORDING TO RELIGION TABLE 6" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 30 January 2023 .

^ Census of Pakistan Archived December 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine ^ "World: Pakistan: The Ravaging of Golden Bengal - Printout" . TIME. 2 August 1971. Archived from the original on March 11, 2007 . Retrieved 2013-10-25 .

^ "Bagerhat Hindu Temple Set on Fire" .

bdnews24.com . March 2, 2013. Archived from the original on April 7, 2013 . Retrieved March 20, 2013 .

^ "Bangladesh: Wave of violent attacks against Hindu minority" .

Press releases . Amnesty International. Archived from the original on 2013-03-09 . Retrieved 8 March 2013 .

^ Ethirajan, Anbarasan (9 March 2013).

"Bangladesh minorities 'terrorised' after mob violence" .

BBC News . London . Retrieved 17 March 2013 .

^ "US worried at violence" .

The Daily Star (Bangladesh) . March 12, 2013 . Retrieved 12 March 2013 .

^ "Mozena: Violence is not the way to resolution" .

The Daily Ittefaq . March 11, 2013. Archived from the original on 16 November 2014 . Retrieved 12 March 2013 .

^ New antisemitism ^ "Anti-zionism as an expression of anti-Semitism in recent years" .

huji.ac.il . Archived from the original on 12 May 2017 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ "What Is… Anti-Israel, Anti-Semitic, Anti-Zionist?" .

Anti-Defamation League .

^ "Government of Pakistan – Law for Ahmadis" .

www.thepersecution.org . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ "What Was the Charge Against Socrates?" Retrieved September 1, 2009 ^ Martínez, Alberto A. (2018).

Burned Alive: Giordano Bruno, Galileo and the Inquisition . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-1780238968 .

^ Michael J. Crowe, The Extraterrestrial Life Debate 1750–1900 , Cambridge University Press, 1986, p. 10, "[Bruno's] sources... seem to have been more numerous than his followers, at least until the eighteenth- and nineteenth-century revival of interest in Bruno as a supposed 'martyr for science.' It is true that he was burned at the stake in Rome in 1600, but the church authorities guilty of this action were almost certainly more distressed at his denial of Christ's divinity and alleged diabolism than at his cosmological doctrines." ^ "Tommaso Campanella" - first published Wed Aug 31, 2005" at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Retrieved September 1, 2009 ^ Scruton, Roger (2002).

Spinoza: A Very Short Introduction .

OUP Oxford . p. 144.

ISBN 978-0-19-280316-0 .

^ Nadler, Steven M. (2001).

Spinoza: A Life . Cambridge University Press. pp. 2, 7, 120.

ISBN 978-0-521-00293-6 .

^ Scruton, Roger (2002).

Spinoza: A Very Short Introduction .

OUP Oxford . p. 21.

ISBN 978-0-19-280316-0 .

^ Clark, Andrew F., & Phillips, Lucie Colvin, "Historical Dictionary of Senegal". ed: 2, Metuchen, New Jersey : Scrarecrow Press (1994) p 265 ^ Page, Willie F., "Encyclopedia of African history and culture: African kingdoms (500 to 1500)", pp 209, 676. Vol.2, Facts on File (2001), ISBN 0-8160-4472-4 ^ Streissguth, Thomas, "Senegal in Pictures, Visual Geography", Second Series, p 23, Twenty-First Century Books (2009), ISBN 1-57505-951-7 ^ Oliver, Roland Anthony, Fage, J. D., "Journal of African history", Volume 10, p 367. Cambridge University Press (1969) ^ a b Mwakikagile, Godfrey, "Ethnic Diversity and Integration in The Gambia: The Land, The People and The Culture," (2010), p 11, ISBN 9987-9322-2-3 ^ Abbey, M T Rosalie Akouele, "Customary Law and Slavery in West Africa", Trafford Publishing (2011), pp 481-482, ISBN 1-4269-7117-6 ^ Mwakikagile, Godfrey , "Ethnic Diversity and Integration in The Gambia: The Land, The People and The Culture," (2010), p 241, ISBN 9987-9322-2-3 ^ State pogroms glossed over .

The Times of India . 31 December 2005.

^ "Anti-Sikh riots a pogrom: Khushwant" .

Rediff.com . Retrieved 23 September 2009 .

^ a b Bedi, Rahul (1 November 2009).

"Indira Gandhi's death remembered" . BBC.

Archived from the original on 2 November 2009 . Retrieved 2 November 2009 .

The 25th anniversary of Indira Gandhi's assassination revives stark memories of some 3,000 Sikhs killed brutally in the orderly pogrom that followed her killing ^ Nugus, Phillip (Spring 2007).

"The Assassinations of Indira & Rajiv Gandhi" . BBC Active . Retrieved 23 July 2010 .

[ dead link ] ^ "Delhi court to give verdict on re-opening 1984 riots case against Congress leader Jagdish Tytler" .

ndtv.com . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ Charny, Israel W. (1999).

Encyclopaedia of genocide . ABC-CLIO. pp.

516– 517.

ISBN 978-0-87436-928-1 . Retrieved 21 February 2011 .

^ Mukhoty, Gobinda; Kothari, Rajni (1984), Who are the Guilty ?

, People's Union for Civil Liberties , retrieved 4 November 2010 ^ "1984 anti-Sikh riots backed by Govt, police: CBI" .

IBN Live . 23 April 2012. Archived from the original on 25 April 2012 . Retrieved 27 April 2012 .

^ "1984 anti-Sikh riots 'wrong', says Rahul Gandhi" .

Hindustan Times . 18 November 2008. Archived from the original on 12 October 2013 . Retrieved 5 May 2012 .

^ Mustafa, Seema (2005-08-09). "1984 Sikhs Massacres: Mother of All Cover-ups".

The Asian Age . p. 1.

^ Agal, Renu (2005-08-11). "Justice delayed, justice denied". BBC News.

^ "Leaders 'incited' anti-Sikh riots" . BBC News. August 8, 2005 . Retrieved November 23, 2012 .

^ Kaur, Jaskaran; Crossette, Barbara (2006).

Twenty years of impunity: the November 1984 pogroms of Sikhs in India (PDF) (2nd ed.). Portland, OR: Ensaaf. p. 29.

ISBN 978-0-9787073-0-9 . Retrieved 4 November 2010 .

^ a b Naby, Eden (2009). "Yazīdīs". In Esposito, John (ed.).

The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Islamic World .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780195305135 . Archived from the original on October 23, 2020.

^ Acikyildiz, Birgul (2014-08-20).

The Yezidis: The History of a Community, Culture and Religion . Bloomsbury Academic.

ISBN 978-1-78453-216-1 .

^ Jalabi, Raya (2014-08-11).

"Who are the Yazidis and why is Isis hunting them?" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2020-12-01 .

^ Evliya Çelebi, The Intimate Life of an Ottoman Statesman: Melek Ahmed Pasha (1588–1662), Translated by Robert Dankoff , 304 pp., SUNY Press, 1991; ISBN 0-7914-0640-7 , pp. 169–171 ^ Kizilhan, Jan Ilhan; Noll-Hussong, Michael (2017).

"Individual, collective, and transgenerational traumatization in the Yazidi" .

BMC Medicine .

15 (1): 198.

doi : 10.1186/s12916-017-0965-7 .

ISSN 1741-7015 .

PMC 5724300 .

PMID 29224572 .

^ Hosseini, S. Behnaz (2020).

Trauma and the Rehabilitation of Trafficked Women: The Experiences of Yazidi Survivors . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-000-07869-5 .

^ von Joeden-Forgey, Elisa; McGee, Thomas (1 November 2019).

"Editors' Introduction: Palimpsestic Genocide in Kurdistan" .

Genocide Studies International .

13 (1): 1– 9.

doi : 10.3138/gsi.13.1.01 .

ISSN 2291-1847 .

S2CID 208687918 .

^ Six-Hohenbalken, Maria (1 November 2019).

"The 72nd Firman of the Yezidis: A "Hidden Genocide" during World War I?" .

Genocide Studies International .

13 (1): 52– 76.

doi : 10.3138/gsi.13.1.04 .

S2CID 208688838 .

^ a b c Houtsma, Martijn Theodoor (1936).

First Encyclopaedia of Islam 1913-1936: E.J.Brill's . Vol. 2. BRILL. p. 100.

ISBN 90-04-09796-1 . 9789004097964.

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Shahmardan, Rashid, History of Zoroastrians past Sasanians , p. 125 ^ Price, Massoume (2005), Iran's diverse peoples: a reference sourcebook (Illustrated ed.), ABC-CLIO, p. 205, ISBN 9781576079935 ^ "ZOROASTRIANISM ii. Arab Conquest to Modern – Encyclopaedia Iranica" .

www.iranicaonline.org . Retrieved 2020-04-03 .

^ Bauer, Susan Wise (2010).

The History of the Medieval World: From the Conversion of Constantine to the First Crusade . W. W. Norton & Company. pp.

85– 87.

ISBN 978-0-393-07817-6 .

^ Mullin, Robert Bruce (2006).

A Short World History of Christianity . Westminster John Knox Press. pp.

82– 85.

ISBN 978-0-664-23664-9 .

^ "Nestorian (Christian sect)" .

Britannica.com . Retrieved 2013-09-18 .

^ a b "Holocaust Encyclopedia - Genocide of European Roma (Gypsies), 1939-1945" . United States Holocaust Memorial Museum (USHMM) . Retrieved 9 August 2011 .

^ Hancock, Ian (2005), "True Romanies and the Holocaust: A Re-evaluation and an overview" , The Historiography of the Holocaust , Palgrave Macmillan , pp.

383– 396, ISBN 1-4039-9927-9 [ permanent dead link ] ^ " 'Military atrocities on Rohingyas have hallmarks of ethnic cleansing' " .

The Daily Star . September 8, 2017.

^ a b c d e Dou, Eva (11 February 2021).

"Who are the Uighurs, and what's happening to them in China?" . Washington Post . Retrieved 16 March 2021 .

^ a b Simons, Marlise (6 July 2020).

"Uighur Exiles Push for Court Case Accusing China of Genocide" .

The New York Times . New York Times . Retrieved 16 March 2021 .

^ " 'Cultural genocide': China separating thousands of Muslim children from parents for 'thought education' " .

The Independent . 5 July 2019.

Archived from the original on 22 April 2020 . Retrieved 27 April 2020 .

^ " 'Cultural genocide' for repressed minority of Uighurs" .

The Times . 17 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 25 April 2020 . Retrieved 27 April 2020 .

^ "China's Oppression of the Uighurs 'The Equivalent of Cultural Genocide' " .

Der Spiegel . 28 November 2019.

Archived from the original on 21 January 2020 . Retrieved 27 April 2020 .

^ Alecci, Scilla (October 14, 2020).

"British lawmakers call for sanctions over Uighur human rights abuses" .

International Consortium of Investigative Journalists . Retrieved December 18, 2020 .

^ "Uighurs: 'Credible case' China carrying out genocide" .

BBC News . 2021-02-08 . Retrieved 2021-02-08 .

^ "The Thin Line Between Autism and Witchcraft in Cameroon" .

africaontheblog.com . 11 April 2014 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ "Autism Services - New York - ICare4Autism" .

Autism Services - New York - ICare4Autism . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

^ "NeuroTribes, Steve Silberman on a haunting history and new hope for autistic people - Your Say" .

Your Say . 2 November 2015 . Retrieved 22 October 2017 .

Sources [ edit ] Hitti, Philip Khūri (1924).

Origins of the Druze People and Religion . Forgotten Books.

ISBN 978-1-60506-068-2 . Retrieved 4 April 2012 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) External links [ edit ] Look up persecution in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Language alternatives to creating and being persecutors v t e Abuse Types Adverse childhood experiences Anti-social behaviour Bullying Child abuse neglect sexual military marriage Cruelty to animals Disability abuse military draft Domestic abuse Elder abuse Financial Marriage Gaslighting Harassment Humiliation Incivility Institutional abuse Intimidation Neglect Persecution Professional abuse Psychological abuse Physical abuse Police brutality Religious abuse Social abuse Sexual abuse Stalking Structural abuse Substance abuse Alcohol abuse Surveillance abuse Referee and umpire abuse Verbal abuse more...

Related topics Abusive supervision Abuse of power Controlling behavior Complex post-traumatic stress disorder Dehumanization Denial Destabilisation Discrimination Exaggeration Just-world fallacy Lying Manipulation Minimisation Narcissism Playing the victim Psychological projection Psychological trauma Psychopathy Rationalization Sexual grooming Traumatic bonding Victim blaming Victimisation Victimology v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other NARA İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Persecution&oldid=1306542713 " Categories : Persecution Abuse Crimes against humanity by type Majority–minority relations Racism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2020 CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with dead external links from March 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 Articles needing additional references from May 2021 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from December 2018 Articles needing additional references from June 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2018 Articles to be expanded from February 2024 All articles to be expanded Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 Articles with limited geographic scope from July 2017 This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 09:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Persecution 41 languages Add topic

