Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biodiversity Toggle Biodiversity subsection 1.1 Fungi 1.2 Flora 1.2.1 Fauna 1.3 Mammals 1.4 Birds 1.5 Reptiles 1.6 Amphibians 2 Gallery 3 References and notes Toggle the table of contents Biodiversity of Ghana 2 languages العربية فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Fauna of Ghana ) Red river hog The wildlife of Ghana is composed of its biodiversity of fungi , flora and fauna .

Biodiversity [ edit ] Fungi [ edit ] Ghana is home to a significant number of fungi species including: Aspergillus flavus ; Athelia rolfsii ; Auricularia auricula-judae ; Curvularia ; Fusarium oxysporum ; Fusarium solani f.sp.

pisi ; Gibberella intricans ; Gibberella stilboides ; and Macrophomina phaseolina .

[ 1 ] The true total number of fungal species occurring in Ghana is in the thousands and given the generally accepted estimate that only about 7 percent of all fungi worldwide have so far been discovered and that the amount of available information is still very small.

[ 1 ] Panorama and landscape view of Lake Volta in the Volta Basin ; the largest lake and reservoir by surface area in the world. Lake Volta contains an array of fungi species and flows into the Gulf of Guinea on the Atlantic Ocean .

Lake Volta has three main tributaries : the Black Volta ; the White Volta and the Red Volta .

Flora [ edit ] The flora of Ghana is diverse with both indigenous and introduced floral species considered in Ghana's floral diversity.

[ 2 ] A total of some 3,600 species of the major regional centres of endemism represent the three major taxonomic groups .

[ 2 ] Floral diversity is more pronounced among the angiosperms represented with well over 2,974 indigenous and 253 introduced species in Ghana.

[ 3 ] Among the various vegetation types of the tropical rain forest , it is the wet evergreen forest type in the southwestern Ashanti-Kwahu Plain that exhibits the highest level of endemism and species richness in Ghana.

[ 3 ] Flora species diversity and endemism in the savanna biomes in Ghana is very sparse and biological diversity of species in the Ghanaian savanna woodlands and gallery forests of the savannas show greater species richness than the dry savannas.

[ 3 ] Within Ghana, there are areas of high biological diversity, referred to as prime biological locations; such as the Ankasa and Nini-Suhien Conservation Area in the southwestern Ashanti-Kwahu  erea terrestrial plain of Ghana, in where the climatic diversity is greater.

[ 3 ] There are also Encephalartos barteri , and gymnosperm indigenous to Ghana; others growing in various Ghanaian ecological zones are introduced species for purposes including aesthetics and economic.

[ 3 ] The third taxonomic group ; pteridophytes , is well represented in Ghana with 124 known species.

[ 3 ] Flora of Ghana Mangifera Adonidia merrillii Opuntia cochenillifera Murraya paniculata Fauna [ edit ] Yellow-casqued wattled hornbill Kobus ellipsiprymnus Ghana has a vast array of fauna and they are of great significance, as some of Ghana's fauna have attained conservation status because of the current rate of decline in their number and distribution.

[ 4 ] The fauna of the Ghanaian terrestrial ecosystem , comprise a diverse array of species including several of conservation concern.

[ 4 ] Ghanaian records show that there is as many as 221 species of amphibians and reptiles , 724 species of birds, 225 mammalian species inhabiting Ghana;  with 93 recorded to be inhabiting the Ghanaian savanna ecological zone.

[ 4 ] As with floral diversity, prime locations for faunal diversity is located in the Ghanaian high forest uplands; accounting for 83% of the total number of butterfly species recorded in Ghana, where canopy stratification and micro-climatic differentiation have provided habitats and niches for specific faunal organisms.

[ 4 ] Endemism among Ghanaian terrestrial fauna has been observed in three species of frogs ; Hyperolius baumanni ; Hyperolius fusciventris ; and Hyperolius sylvaticus ; and the lizards ; and Agama sylvanus found in the Ghanaian Bia Forest Reserve and the Atwema Range Forest Reserve .

[ 4 ] Ghana has a high degree of butterfly endemism where more than 20 species are classified endemic or near-endemic.

[ 4 ] Ghana is home to 84 known amphibian species: 78 frogs, 5 toads and caecilians .

[ 4 ] Threatened species recorded in Ghana include four species of marine turtles and three species of crocodiles .

[ 4 ] Bird species of conservation concern include seven threatened species, including four species endemic to the Upper Guinea forest block and seven near-threatened species.

[ 4 ] Keystone species such as hornbills , parrots and birds of prey ( eagles ) are well represented in Ghana.

[ 4 ] Of the 728 birds species confirmed to be occurring in Ghana; 408 are non-passerines and 320 passerines , of which 498 are known or thought to be resident and 176 are regular seasonal bird migrants , including 100 from the Palearctic realm .

[ 4 ] Of the total number of species occurring; 180 restricted to the Guinea-Congo forests biome and 37 restricted to the Sudan-Guinea savanna biome have been recorded in Ghana.

[ 4 ] Eleven of the 15 endemic bird species within the Upper Guinea forest occur in Ghana.

[ 5 ] Six of the total species are considered threatened and 12 are near-threatened.

[ 5 ] Ghana is an important country for dozens of vulnerable , threatened , endangered , critically endangered or near-extinct mammalian species including the primates common chimpanzee ( Pan troglodytes ) and western red colobus ( Piliocolobus badius ), the big cats lion ( Panthera leo ) and leopard ( Panthera pardus ), African bush elephant ( Loxodonta africana ), and water-birds , being located on the boundary of the east Atlantic Ocean Flyway and Mediterranean Flyway. There are also several rare terrestrial birds, such as the white-necked rockfowl ( Picathartes gymnocephalus ).

[ 6 ] Fauna of Ghana Loxodonta africana Panthera leo Panthera pardus paridus Pan troglodytes Cercopithecus mona Mammals [ edit ] Main article: List of mammals of Ghana Guinea baboon Red river hog Birds [ edit ] Main article: List of birds of Ghana Blue-headed wood-dove Iris glossy-starling Reptiles [ edit ] Main article: List of reptiles of Ghana Bitis rhinoceros Amphibians [ edit ] Main article: List of amphibians of Ghana Gallery [ edit ] Wildlife of Ghana Whales in Ghana Gazelles in Ghana Black-winged kite in Ghana African elephants at Mole National Park References and notes [ edit ] ^ a b S.K. Ackuaku, P.K. Baidoo.

"Pathogenicity of Five Fungal Species Isolated From Eldana Saccharina (Walker) (Lepidoptera: Pyralidae)" .

ajol.info .

African Journal of Library, Archives and Information Science ( African Journals OnLine ) . Retrieved 15 June 2013 .

^ a b "Ghana overview – Convention on Biological Diversity" .

cbd.int .

Convention on Biological Diversity . Retrieved 15 June 2013 .

^ a b c d e f Guide to Standard Floras of the World: An Annotated, Geographically Arranged .

Cambridge University Press . 14 June 2001.

ISBN 9781139428651 . Retrieved 15 June 2013 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Ntiamoa-Baidu et al, 2001; Ntiamoa-Baidu et al, 2000 a & b. Retrieved 15 June 2013.

^ a b BirdLife International, 2000. Retrieved 15 June 2013.

^ Smit and Peirsma, 1989; Ntiamoa-Baidu et al, 2001. Retrieved 15 June 2013.

v t e Ghana articles History Historical timeline Early history Bono state Ashanti Empire Gold Coast First Republic (1960–1966) National Liberation Council Kofi Busia Ignatius Kutu Acheampong Armed Forces Revolutionary Council Hilla Limann Provisional National Defence Council Jerry Rawlings John Kufuor John Mills John Mahama Nana Akufo-Addo John Mahama By topic Economic Political Postal Geography Borders Cities Climate ( Climate change ) Forests Mountains National parks Protected areas Rivers Wildlife Politics Administrative divisions Constitution Cabinet Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights LGBT Judiciary Law enforcement Military Political parties Parliament President Prime Minister Economy Agriculture Cedi (currency) Central Bank Energy Fishing Labor Manufacturing Mining Oil Stock Exchange Telecommunications Tourism Transport Water and sanitation Society Abortion Crime Cybercrime Demographics Discrimination Domestic violence Education Ethnic groups Health Human trafficking Illegal immigration Languages Mob justice Polygamy Prostitution Religion Street children Squatting Women Culture Architecture Cultural heritage Flag Cuisine Festivals Media Music National anthem National pledge Public holidays Sports Social conduct Video games Witchcraft Outline Index Bibliography Category v t e Fauna of Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Western Sahara v t e Wildlife of Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Western Sahara v t e Biodiversity worldwide Biodiversity hotspot Biodiversity loss Global biodiversity Ecology Bioresilience Dark diversity Ecological effects of biodiversity Elevational diversity gradient Genetic diversity Insect biodiversity Soil biodiversity Species–area relationship Species richness Measurement All-taxa biodiversity inventory Alpha diversity Beta diversity Diversity index Environmental DNA Gamma diversity Range condition scoring Species diversity Phylogenetic diversity Zeta diversity Conservation Biodiversity action plan Convention on Biological Diversity 2010 Biodiversity Target Key Biodiversity Areas Kunming-Montreal Global Biodiversity Framework Economics Agricultural biodiversity Biodiversity in agriculture Biodiversity banking Biodiversity credit Crop diversity Biodiversity and drugs Food biodiversity Biodiversity offsetting Health Biodiversity hypothesis of health By region Africa Algeria Angola Botswana Benin Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Libya Madagascar Mali Morocco Mozambique Namibia Nigeria Rodrigues Rwanda Seychelles Somalia South Africa Cape Town Marine South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Tunisia Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Borneo Cambodia China Georgia India Assam Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Laos Malaysia Myanmar Nepal Pakistan Palestine Papua New Guinea Philippines Qatar Russia South Korea Sri Lanka Syria Thailand Turkey Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Italy Latvia Lithuania Kosovo Montenegro Norway Poland Portugal Republic of Ireland Romania Russia Serbia Slovenia Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Wales North America Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Jamaica Martinique Mexico Nicaragua Trinidad and Tobago Turks and Caicos Islands United States Oceania Australia New Caledonia New Zealand Papua New Guinea South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador French Guiana Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Antarctica Antarctica List of biodiversity databases Global 200 Megadiverse countries Millennium Ecosystem Assessment NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐m85mf
Cached time: 20250814232548
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.489 seconds
Real time usage: 0.661 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2934/1000000
Revision size: 11053/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 145785/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12660/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 28/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 63605/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.256/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5106601/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  479.640      1 -total
 31.07%  149.005      1 Template:Ghana_topics
 30.64%  146.973      1 Template:Country_topics
 20.63%   98.950      1 Template:Reflist
 16.32%   78.271      2 Template:Cite_web
 13.46%   64.570      1 Template:Short_description
 10.72%   51.429      1 Template:Gallery
  8.77%   42.060      6 Template:Navbox
  7.22%   34.638      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.79%   32.544      2 Template:Africa_topic Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:10948968:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814232548 and revision id 1250985970. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biodiversity_of_Ghana&oldid=1250985970 " Categories : Fauna of Ghana Biota of Ghana Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 October 2024, at 18:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biodiversity of Ghana 2 languages Add topic

