Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Selected works 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents A. Dale Kaiser 2 languages العربية Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American biologist (1927–2020) Armin Dale Kaiser (November 10, 1927 – June 5, 2020) [ 1 ] was an American biochemist, molecular geneticist, molecular biologist and developmental biologist.

[ 2 ] Biography [ edit ] Kaiser received in 1950 his bachelor's degree from Purdue University and in 1955 his PhD from Caltech in biology. At Caltech he was in Max Delbrück 's bacteriophage group and received his PhD in biology under Jean Weigle with thesis A genetic analysis of bacteriophage lambda . Kaiser was in 1956 a postdoc at the Pasteur Institute in Paris (where he worked in Francois Jacob 's group) and afterward became an instructor and then in 1958 an assistant professor in microbiology at Washington University in St. Louis . In 1959 he became an assistant professor at Stanford University , where in 1966 he became a professor for biochemistry at Stanford University School of Medicine . From 1989-2020 he was also a professor of developmental biology.

In the beginning of his career, Kaiser concentrated on the molecular genetics of bacteriophage lambda . He was especially concerned with the control mechanisms for lysogeny . He found one of the first examples of self-regulation of a gene ( cI , the repressor gene of lambda phage ) and later did pioneering work on molecular chaperones . Some of the methods developed by Kaiser's laboratory became important in genetic engineering.

In the 1970s he worked on the developmental biology of swarms of myxobacteria . In the 2000s his laboratory team did research on genetic and biochemical methods to control the swarm and propagation behavior of the bacterial species Myxococcus xanthus . When starved, the Myxococcus bacteria aggregate together to make fruiting bodies, each with approximately 10 5 {\displaystyle 10^{5}} spores; the form of the fruiting body is species-specific. Kaiser's laboratory succeeded in the identification and molecular elucidation of the roles of a series of molecular messengers in the swarm and propagation behavior of Myxococcus .

[ 3 ] Kaiser received in 1970 the U. S. Steel Foundation Award in Molecular Biology, in 1980 the Albert Lasker Award for Basic Medical Research , in 1981 the Waterford Biomedical Science Award, in 1997 the Abbott Lifetime Achievement Award of the American Society for Microbiology and in 1991 the Thomas Hunt Morgan Medal . In 1970 he was elected a member of the National Academy of Sciences and a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences . In 1993 Kaiser was the president of the Genetics Society of America .

Born in Piqua, Ohio , Kaiser died in Stanford, California .

Selected works [ edit ] Editor with Martin Dworkin Myxobacteria II , American Society of Microbiology 1993 Editor with Graham C. Walker Frontiers in Microbiology , American Society of Microbiology 1993 References [ edit ] ^ information from American Men and Women of Science , Thomson Gale 2004 ^ Kaiser, A.D. (July 1, 2013).

"Life in Science: Armin Dale Kaiser" .

Bacteriophage .

3 (3): e25589.

doi : 10.4161/bact.25589 .

PMC 3821691 .

PMID 24228225 .

^ A. Dale Kaiser, National Academy of Sciences External links [ edit ] Official bio at Stanford University Guide to the Armin Dale Kaiser Papers, Online Archive of California search on author Dale Kaiser from Google Scholar Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States Netherlands Norway Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=A._Dale_Kaiser&oldid=1259651394 " Categories : 1927 births 2020 deaths American biochemists American microbiologists American developmental biologists Purdue University alumni California Institute of Technology alumni Washington University in St. Louis faculty Stanford University faculty Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences Recipients of the Albert Lasker Award for Basic Medical Research People from Piqua, Ohio Scientists from Ohio Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2014 This page was last edited on 26 November 2024, at 09:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents A. Dale Kaiser 2 languages Add topic

