Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 History 3 Breakthroughs 4 Academic integrity issues 5 Patient care 6 Dana–Farber/Harvard Cancer Center 7 References Toggle the table of contents Dana–Farber Cancer Institute 7 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی עברית مصرى 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°20′15″N 71°06′30″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.337637°N 71.108195°W ﻿ / 42.337637; -71.108195 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cancer treatment and research institution in Boston, US Hospital in Massachusetts, United States Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Geography Location 450 Brookline Avenue, Boston , Massachusetts, United States Coordinates 42°20′15″N 71°06′30″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.337637°N 71.108195°W ﻿ / 42.337637; -71.108195 Organization Care system Private Funding Non-profit hospital Type Specialist Affiliated university Harvard University Services Standards NCI-designated Cancer Center Speciality Oncology , Teaching hospital Helipad Yes Public transit access MBTA Bus 8, 19, 47, 60, 65, CT2, CT3 Green Line D, E History Opened 1947 Links Website www .dana-farber .org Lists Hospitals in Massachusetts Dana–Farber Cancer Institute ( DFCI ) is a comprehensive cancer treatment and research center in Boston , Massachusetts . Dana-Farber is the founding member of the Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center, Harvard's Comprehensive Cancer Center designated by the National Cancer Institute , and one of the 15 clinical affiliates and research institutes of Harvard Medical School .

As of 2024, Dana-Farber is ranked the #6 cancer hospital in the US.

[ 1 ] Two Nobel laureates in Physiology or Medicine are among its past and present faculty.

[ citation needed ] In 2024, an investigation revealed evidence of research misconduct in dozens of studies authored by Dana-Farber researchers, including then President and CEO Laurie Glimcher , the Executive Vice President and COO , and the Research Integrity Officer .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] In response to these findings, Dana-Farber retracted 7 papers [ 5 ] and corrected 31 others.

[ 6 ] In October 2024, Laurie Glimcher stepped down as President and CEO.

[ 7 ] Overview [ edit ] Dana–Farber employs more than 4,855 full-time and part-time workers, 529 faculty, and has annual gross revenues of about $1,733,386,000.

[ 8 ] All faculty and postdoctoral research fellows at Dana–Farber hold the equivalent academic positions concurrently at Harvard University. There are more than 523,425 adult and pediatric patient visits (combined exam and office visits) a year, and it is involved in more than 1,000 clinical trials. It is internationally known for its research and clinical excellence.

[ citation needed ] Expertscape ranks its programs in aplastic anemia [ 9 ] and multiple myeloma [ 10 ] as best in the world.

[ citation needed ] It has been also ranked overall the third best cancer hospital in the United States by U.S. News & World Report .

[ 11 ] Dana–Farber is a member of the Multiple Myeloma Research Consortium .

In addition to being a principal teaching affiliate of Harvard Medical School, Dana–Farber is also a federally-designated Center for AIDS Research, and is a founding member of the Dana–Farber/Harvard Cancer Center (DF/HCC), [ 12 ] a research consortium that is one of the 39 federally-designated Comprehensive Cancer Centers . Providing advanced training in cancer treatment and research for an international faculty, Dana–Farber conducts community-based programs in cancer prevention, detection, and control in New England, and maintains joint programs with other Boston institutions, including St. Elizabeth's Medical Center , Brigham and Women's Hospital , Boston Children's Hospital , and Massachusetts General Hospital .

Dana–Farber is supported by the National Cancer Institute , the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases , and private foundations and individuals contributions.

The Jimmy Fund is the principal charity of the Institute named for one of its child patients. The Boston Red Sox adopted the Jimmy Fund as its official charity in 1953 and continues to prominently sponsor the charity.

[ citation needed ] Benjamin L. Ebert is President/CEO of Dana–Farber Cancer Institute.

[ 7 ] In 2015, Forbes listed the charity as the 37th biggest in the U.S.

[ 13 ] History [ edit ] In 1947, pediatric pathologist Sidney Farber founded the Children's Cancer Research Foundation (CCRF) with Variety Club to raise money for cancer research. The foundation launched the Jimmy Fund the following year with an advertising campaign featuring a child nicknamed "Jimmy", [ 14 ] and constructed the Jimmy Fund Building in the Longwood Medical Area in 1952 to house research facilities.

[ 15 ] In 1969, the Foundation expanded their programs to include patients of all ages, and in 1974 was renamed the Sidney Farber Cancer Center.

[ 15 ] In 1962, philanthropist Charles A. Dana , through the Dana Foundation , began financial support of the CCRF. The Dana Building was opened near the Jimmy Fund building in 1975, [ 16 ] and, in 1983, the organization's name was changed to Dana–Farber Cancer Institute in recognition of the foundation's support.

[ 14 ] In 1997, the Smith Research Laboratories building was opened across the street from the Dana Building and the inpatient hospital was moved to Brigham and Women's Hospital , freeing up space for research, laboratories, and adult outpatient care.

[ 15 ] The Yawkey Center for Cancer Care was opened adjacent to the Smith Laboratories in 2011 to provide additional outpatient facilities.

[ 17 ] In September 2023, Dana–Farber Cancer Institute announced a new partnership with Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and plans to build a new standalone inpatient hospital focused on treating adult cancer patients. This includes a departure from their current home and longtime affiliation with Brigham and Women's Hospital, which had been recognized among U.S. News & World Report's top cancer care facilities for 23 consecutive years.

[ 18 ] Breakthroughs [ edit ] Dana–Farber has a long history of breakthrough discoveries in cancer care and research.

[ citation needed ] 1947: Sidney Farber leads a team of researchers who are the first in the world to attain temporary remissions of acute lymphocytic leukemia , the most common cancer in children, using aminopterin . This, and another antifolate drug, methotrexate used by Dr. Farber, were discovered and supplied by Dr.

Yellapragada Subba Rao , Director, Research at Lederle Co. at Pearl River, NY.

[ citation needed ] 1954: Farber and his colleagues achieve the first remissions of Wilms' tumor , a common form of childhood cancer, and boost cure rates from 40 percent to 85 percent.

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Dana–Farber Cancer Institute" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 1976: Researchers at the Sidney Farber Cancer Center (now Dana–Farber) develop a new treatment for acute myelogenous leukemia that produces the first complete remissions of the disease in up to half of all patients.

[ citation needed ] 1978: Institute investigators develop combination chemotherapy for soft-tissue sarcomas resulting in a 50-percent response rate.

[ citation needed ] 1980: Dana–Farber president Baruj Benacerraf receives the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for the discovery of the major histocompatibility complex , which enables the immune system to recognize antigens .

[ citation needed ] 1982: Dana–Farber researchers develop and apply the CA-125 blood test for ovarian cancer . They also are among the first to suspect a relationship between the retrovirus that causes human T-cell leukemia (HTLV-1) and that which causes AIDS ( HIV-1 ).

[ citation needed ] 1991: Dana–Farber investigators help introduce the use of naturally occurring growth hormones following high-dose chemotherapy, making bone marrow transplantation safer and more effective.

[ citation needed ] 1993: Dana–Farber investigators discover the gene that increases the risk for a common type of colon cancer . The MSH2 gene and later the MLH1 gene (also by DFCI investigators) are linked to hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer ( HNPCC ).

[ citation needed ] 1996: Institute researchers dramatically advance the understanding of how HIV, the virus that causes AIDS, replicates and infects healthy cells.

Science magazine heralds this discovery as its "Breakthrough of the Year".

[ citation needed ] 1998: A drug called imatinib (Gleevec), the early work for which was done at Dana–Farber [ citation needed ] , achieves striking success in many patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia .

[ citation needed ] 1999: Working with colleagues at other hospitals, Dana–Farber scientists begin the first human studies of endostatin , one of a new generation of compounds that arrest or shrink tumors by shutting off their blood supply.

[ citation needed ] 2002: Dana–Farber researchers find that Gleevec, a targeted therapy that achieved striking success against chronic myelogenous leukemia, can shrink and even eliminate tumors in some patients with a rare and otherwise incurable digestive-tract cancer called gastrointestinal stromal tumor.

[ citation needed ] 2003: Scientists at Dana–Farber and the Whitehead Institute find a gene "signature" in several types of tumors that suggests they are likely to spread to other parts of the body, potentially leading to tests for determining whether tumors have the potential to metastasize.

[ citation needed ] 2005: Dana–Farber scientists report that the drug gefitinib (Iressa) produces dramatic benefits in non-small cell lung cancer patients who carry an abnormal version of a key protein, a potentially life-saving discovery for tens of thousands of patients around the world every year.

[ citation needed ] 2019: Dana–Farber physician and researcher William Kaelin Jr.

receives the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for "discoveries of how cells sense and adapt to oxygen availability." [ 19 ] Academic integrity issues [ edit ] In 2024, an investigation revealed evidence of research misconduct in dozens of studies authored by Dana-Farber researchers.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Notable Dana-Farber employees tied to the misconduct allegations included then President and CEO Laurie Glimcher , the Executive Vice President and COO William C. Hahn, and the Research Integrity Officer Barrett Rollins.

[ 2 ] The misconduct involved image discrepancies, including duplications of blots, bands, and plots. A review of the allegations was complicated by the authors' inability to provide the original data from older papers, citing lab storage limitations.

Elisabeth Bik , a recognized expert in image manipulation who examined some of the images, refrained from speculating on whether the manipulation was intentional. However, she noted that a large volume of data issues in a scholar's work can be "very suggestive of an intention to mislead." [ 20 ] Not all of the studies reported on required a correction or retraction. The Institute noted that, “The presence of image discrepancies in a paper is not evidence of an author's intent to deceive. That conclusion can only be drawn after a careful, fact-based examination which is an integral part of our response. Our experience is that errors are often unintentional and do not rise to the level of misconduct.” The corrections and retractions were part of a larger trend and use of AI in identifying image discrepancies and other issues from researchers, universities and research institutions around the world.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] More than 51 studies, many of them decades old, were affected. Dana-Farber's Office of Research Integrity immediately began a review of the papers and when needed, submitted corrections and retractions to the medical journals. In total, 7 papers were retracted [ 5 ] and 31 others were corrected, [ 21 ] and, in October 2024, Laurie Glimcher stepped down as President and CEO.

[ 7 ] Patient care [ edit ] Dana–Farber/St. Elizabeth's Cancer Center (DF/SEMC) and Dana–Farber/Brigham and Women's Cancer Center (DF/BWCC) are collaborations between Dana–Farber Cancer Institute, St. Elizabeth's Medical Center , and Brigham and Women's Hospital to care for adults with cancer. Dana–Farber provides outpatient services, while inpatient care is provided by St. Elizabeth's Medical Center and Brigham and Women's Hospital. DF/SEMC and DF/BWCC care for adult patients in more than a dozen specialized treatment centers.

[ citation needed ] Dana–Farber/Boston Children's Cancer and Blood Disorders Center is a more than 70-year-old partnership between Boston Children's Hospital and Dana–Farber Cancer Institute that delivers comprehensive care to children with and survivors of all types of childhood cancers.

They also work with several other local New England organizations that share a similar vision, such as Take a Swing at Cancer , [ 23 ] Angel's Hope, Childhood Cancer Lifeline of New Hampshire and Andrew's Helpful Hands.

Dana–Farber/Harvard Cancer Center [ edit ] The Dana–Farber/Harvard Cancer Center is the largest National Cancer Institute (NCI) designated Comprehensive Cancer Center in the nation. Founded in 1997, DF/HCC is an inter-institutional research enterprise that unites all of the cancer research efforts of the Harvard affiliated community. The primary goal of the Cancer Center is to encourage and promote collaborative interactions and translational research that will lead to new approaches to cancer prevention, diagnosis, and treatment.

[ citation needed ] DF/HCC is one of just 39 NCI designated Comprehensive Cancer Centers. Its members hail from the following institutions: Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center , Brigham and Women’s Hospital , Boston Children's Hospital , Dana–Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School , Harvard School of Public Health , Massachusetts General Hospital , and St. Elizabeth's Medical Center .

[ 24 ] References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Dana–Farber Cancer Institute .

^ Rankings, Newsweek (July 24, 2024).

"America's Best Cancer Hospitals 2024" .

Newsweek . Retrieved February 12, 2025 .

^ a b c Mueller, Benjamin (January 22, 2024).

"Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Seeks to Retract Flawed Studies" .

The New York Times . Retrieved August 17, 2024 .

^ a b Wosen, Jonathan; Chen, Angus (January 20, 2024).

"Dana-Farber cancer researchers moving to retract one paper, correct others in broad investigation of manipulated data" .

BostonGlobe.com . Retrieved August 17, 2024 .

^ a b Wosen, Jonathan; Chen, Angus (January 19, 2024).

"Dana-Farber cancer researchers moving to retract one paper, correct others in broad investigation of manipulated data" .

STAT . Retrieved August 17, 2024 .

^ a b "Prestigious cancer research institute has retracted 7 studies amid controversy over errors" .

NBC News . April 9, 2024 . Retrieved November 14, 2024 .

^ Chen, Angus (January 22, 2024).

"Dana-Farber expands studies to be retracted to 6, plus 31 to be corrected over mishandled data" .

BostonGlobe.com . Retrieved August 24, 2024 .

^ a b c Edelman, Larry (September 3, 2024).

"Dana-Farber CEO Laurie Glimcher to step down next month" .

BostonGlobe.com . Retrieved October 12, 2024 .

^ "Dana-Farber Cancer Institute 2019 Facts" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on July 17, 2015 . Retrieved July 16, 2015 .

^ "Expertscape: Aplastic Anemia, December 2013" . expertscape.com. December 2013 . Retrieved August 17, 2015 .

^ "Expertscape: Multiple Myeloma, February 2014" . expertscape.com. February 2014 . Retrieved February 18, 2014 .

^ "Best Hospitals Specialty Search: Cancer" .

U.S News & World Report . Retrieved August 1, 2025 .

^ "Dana-Farber/Harvard Cancer Center" . Retrieved October 15, 2007 .

^ "Dana-Farber Cancer Institute on the Forbes The 100 Largest U.S. Charities List" .

Forbes . Retrieved April 14, 2018 .

^ a b Miller, D.R. (2006). "A tribute to Sidney Farber – the father of modern chemotherapy".

British Journal of Haematology .

134 (1): 20– 26.

doi : 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2006.06119.x .

PMID 16803563 .

S2CID 45434777 .

^ a b c "Milestones in the History of Dana-Farber and the Jimmy Fund | Dana-Farber Cancer Institute" .

www.dana-farber.org . Retrieved January 3, 2025 .

^ "Richard A. and Susan F. Smith Research Laboratories" . Tutor Perini . Retrieved January 3, 2025 .

^ Ragusea, Adam (January 5, 2011).

"Dana Farber Introduces A New Weapon In The Cancer-Fighting Arsenal" .

Radio Boston . WBUR . Retrieved January 3, 2025 .

^ Sacchetti, Sharman (September 15, 2023).

"New hospital proposed as Boston-based medical giants change partnerships" .

WCVB . Retrieved January 6, 2024 .

^ "William G. Kaelin Jr – Facts – 2019" .

NobelPrize.org . Retrieved July 6, 2022 .

^ "Dana-Farber Cancer Institute Researchers Accused of Manipulating Data | News | The Harvard Crimson" .

www.thecrimson.com . Retrieved November 14, 2024 .

^ a b Chen, Angus; Wosen, Jonathan (January 22, 2024).

"Dana-Farber expands studies to be retracted to 6, plus 31 to be corrected over mishandled data" .

STAT . Retrieved June 5, 2024 .

^ Subbaraman, Nidhi.

"Harvard Teaching Hospital Seeks Retraction of Six Papers by Top Researchers" .

WSJ . Retrieved June 5, 2024 .

^ "tasc14" .

tasc14 . Retrieved April 14, 2018 .

^ "NCI Cancer Centers Program" . Archived from the original on May 5, 2008 . Retrieved June 7, 2007 .

v t e Massachusetts hospitals Active Barnstable County Cape Cod Hospital Falmouth Hospital Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital Cape Cod Berkshire County Austen Riggs Center Berkshire Medical Center Fairview Hospital VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Bristol County Arbour-Fuller Hospital Morton Hospital and Medical Center St. Luke's Hospital Taunton State Hospital Dukes County Martha's Vineyard Hospital Essex County Lawrence General Hospital Salem Hospital Franklin County VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Hampden County Baystate Health Holyoke Medical Center Mercy Medical Center Providence Behavioral Health Hospital Soldiers' Home in Holyoke VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Hampshire County Cooley Dickinson Hospital Northampton Veterans Affairs Medical Center Middlesex County Bedford Veterans Affairs Medical Center Cambridge Hospital CHA Everett Hospital Emerson Hospital Lahey Hospital & Medical Center Lowell General Hospital McLean Hospital MelroseWakefield Hospital MetroWest Medical Center Mount Auburn Hospital Newton-Wellesley Hospital Saints Medical Center Somerville Hospital Tewksbury Hospital Winchester Hospital Nantucket County Nantucket Cottage Hospital Norfolk County Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital - Milton Norwood Hospital South Shore Hospital Wrentham State School Plymouth County Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital-Plymouth Boston Medical Center – South Bridgewater State Hospital Brockton Hospital VA Boston Healthcare System Suffolk County Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Boston Children's Hospital Boston Medical Center Boston Medical Center – Brighton Brigham and Women's Faulkner Hospital Brigham and Women's Hospital Dana–Farber Cancer Institute Floating Hospital for Children Franciscan Children's Joslin Diabetes Center Lemuel Shattuck Hospital Massachusetts Eye and Ear Massachusetts General Hospital New England Baptist Hospital Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital Tufts Medical Center VA Boston Healthcare System Worcester County Adcare Hospital Athol Memorial Hospital Federal Medical Center, Devens Hahnemann Hospital Jewish Healthcare Center Milford Regional Medical Center Memorial Hospital Saint Vincent Hospital 2021 strike UMass Memorial Health Care VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Worcester Recovery Center and Hospital Defunct Barnstable County 551st United States Air Force Hospital Barnstable County Hospital Berkshire County North Adams Regional Hospital Bristol County Lovering Colony State Hospital Paul A. Dever State School Truesdale Hospital Dukes County Penikese Island Leper Hospital Essex County Benjamin Stickney Cable Memorial Hospital Children's Island Sanitarium Danvers State Hospital Essex Hospital Saugus General Hospital Hampden County Monson Developmental Center Hampshire County Belchertown State School Northampton State Hospital Westover Air Force Base Hospital Middlesex County Boston Regional Medical Center Community Memorial Hospital Gaebler Children's Center Lovell General Hospital Metropolitan State Hospital Middlesex County Hospital Murphy Army Hospital Nashoba Valley Medical Center Walter E. Fernald Developmental Center Norfolk County Foxborough State Hospital Medfield State Hospital New England Sinai Hospital Pondville State Hospital Quincy Medical Center Plymouth County Cranberry Specialty Hospital Lakeville Hospital Suffolk County Adams-Nervine Asylum Boston City Hospital Boston Consumptives Hospital Boston Emergency and General Hospital Boston Psychopathic Hospital Boston State Hospital Carney Hospital Dimock Community Health Center Complex Massachusetts Homeopathic Hospital Naval Hospital Boston New England Hospital for Women and Children Worcester County Dale General Hospital Gardner State Hospital Grafton State Hospital Lyman School for Boys Rutland Heights State Hospital State Reform School for Boys Templeton Developmental Center Westborough State Hospital Worcester City Hospital Worcester County Hospital Worcester State Hospital Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States France BnF data Czech Republic 2 Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dana–Farber_Cancer_Institute&oldid=1303834748 " Categories : Cancer research organizations Cancer organizations based in the United States NCI-designated cancer centers Medical research institutes in Massachusetts Teaching hospitals in Massachusetts Hospitals in Boston Harvard Medical School Hospitals established in 1947 Hospital buildings completed in 1947 Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from August 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from January 2025 Short description matches Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 Articles needing additional references from October 2024 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 09:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dana–Farber Cancer Institute 7 languages Add topic

