Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Notable instances 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Subvertising 12 languages Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Français Galego Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Parody advertising Two billboards with the same original content; the billboard on the right is an example of subvertising after being vandalized.

The ExxonMobil logo as subverted by Greenpeace .

Part of a series on Anti-consumerism Theories and ideas Asceticism Affluenza Alternative culture Anti-capitalism Autonomous building Billboard hacking Buyer's remorse Bioeconomics Buddhist economics Buy Nothing Day Collaborative consumption Collapsology Commodification Commodity fetishism Commune Compulsive buying disorder Conspicuous consumption Consumer capitalism Consumerism Conviviality Criticism of advertising Culture jamming Degrowth Do it yourself Downshifting Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological economics Ecovillage Ethical consumerism Feminist political ecology Food loss and waste Freeganism Gift economy Green consumption Hyperconsumerism Laconophilia Local food Microgeneration Non-possession Overconsumption Planned obsolescence Right to repair Political ecology Post-consumerism Simple living Slow Food Steady-state economy Subvertising Sustainable consumer behaviour Sustainable consumption Notable works Walden The Theory of the Leisure Class Brave New World The Affluent Society One-Dimensional Man The Society of the Spectacle ( book , film ) The Consumer Society: Myths and Structures [ fr ] Steal This Book Small Is Beautiful To Have or to Be?

Future Primitive and Other Essays Fight Club ( novel , film ) Escape from Affluenza No Logo Profit over People: Neoliberalism and Global Order The Cultural Creatives Affluenza: The All-Consuming Epidemic Evasion The Corporation Surplus: Terrorized into Being Consumers So, What's Your Price?

What Would Jesus Buy?

Organizations and groups Adbusters Crass CrimethInc.

Deep Green Resistance Democracy Now!

Earth Liberation Front Fifth Estate Freecycle Green Anarchy Institute for Social Ecology Monthly Review Rage Against the Machine Reverend Billy The Venus Project The Yes Men 350.org People Mauro Bonaiuti Noam Chomsky Erich Fromm Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen Edward Goldsmith Paul Goodman André Gorz Ivan Illich Serge Latouche Donella Meadows Pierre Rabhi John Ruskin E. F. Schumacher Bernard Stiegler Henry David Thoreau Related social movements Alter-globalization Amateurism Anarcho-communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-punk Anti-capitalism Anti-corporate activism Anti-globalization movement Communism Diggers (theater) Ecofeminism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Food Not Bombs Fossil fuel phase-out Green anarchism Green left Green politics Hippie Libertarian socialism Neo-Luddism New Left Occupy Wall Street Postmodernism Punk Situationists Slow movement Social anarchism Social ecology See also Advanced capitalism Advertising Barter Consumer behaviour Consumption (economics) Consumption (sociology) Cooperative Counterculture Disneyfication Ecological economics Economic materialism Economic problems Frugality Green economy Gross National Happiness Heterodox economics HospEx Illth Influence of mass media Informal sector Intentional community Left-wing politics McDonaldization Mutual aid Natural resource economics Non-monetary economy Permaculture Post-materialism Productivism Shopping Subsistence economy Sustainability Sweatshops Veblen good Workaholic v t e Subvertising (a portmanteau of subvert and advertising ) is the practice of making spoofs or parodies of corporate and political advertisements .

[ 1 ] The cultural critic Mark Dery coined the term in 1991.

[ 2 ] Subvertisements are anti-ads that deflect advertising's attempts to turn the people's attention in a given direction.

[ 3 ] According to author Naomi Klein , subvertising offers a way of speaking back to advertising, ‘forcing a dialogue where before there was only a declaration.’ [ 4 ] They may take the form of a new image or an alteration to an existing image or icon, often in a satirical manner.

[ 5 ] A subvertisement can also be referred to as a meme hack and can be a part of social hacking , billboard hacking or culture jamming .

[ 6 ] Although he rarely altered physical ads, American performance artist Joey Skaggs ' media interventions function as subvertisements. By parodying authoritative narratives and co-opting mass communication tools, he delivers countercultural messages which align with subvertising's intent to disrupt and critique dominant cultural messages using the very channels that propagate them.

[ 7 ] According to Adbusters , a Canadian magazine and a proponent of counter-culture and subvertising, "A well-produced 'subvert' mimics the look and feel of the targeted ad, promoting the classic ' double-take ' as viewers suddenly realize they have been duped. Subverts create cognitive dissonance , with the apparent aim of cutting through the ' hype and glitz of our mediated reality' to reveal a 'deeper truth within'.

[ citation needed ] Subvertising is a type of advertising hijacking ( détournement publicité ), where détournement techniques developed in the 1950s by the French Letterist International and later used by the better-known Situationist International have been used as a contemporary critical form to re-route advertising messages.

Notable instances [ edit ] In 1972, the logo of Richard Nixon's re-election campaign posters was subverted with two x's in Nixon's name (as in the Exxon logo) to suggest the corporate ownership of the Republican Party.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In Sydney , Australia in October 1979, a group of anti-smoking activists formed a group called B.U.G.A.U.P.

and began altering the text on tobacco billboards to subvert the messages of tobacco advertisers, although advertisements for other unhealthy products were also targeted.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] On November 6, 2008, The Yes Men recruited thousands of social activists to hand out 100,000 copies of a spoof New York Times newspaper set six months in the future.

[ 12 ] The goal was to utilize a tangible and trusted medium, the New York Times , to argue for a particular future, in that case, one where the Iraq War had ended. Other groups involved with this project included Anti-Advertising Agency , Code Pink , United for Peace and Justice , May First/People Link , and Improv Everywhere .

[ citation needed ] At the 2015 Paris COP21 climate conference, the collective known as Brandalism installed 600 posters that attacked what they perceived as the hypocrisy of corporate sponsors.

[ 13 ] In 2017, Brandalism and other groups of subvertisers founded the collective Subvertisers International.

[ 14 ] Using billboard hacking and other forms of subvertising, they promote the idea that advertising creates unhealthy body images, impacts democracy negatively, and sustains a culture of consumerism that takes a heavy toll on the planet.

Around 2018, a group in London called Legally Black changed the race of the characters in Harry Potter posters from white to black.

[ 13 ] In 2022, billboards in London, Bristol, Manchester, Sheffield, Brighton, and 11 other European cities, were hijacked to highlight the role of airline emissions in the climate crisis . They highlighted the large carbon footprint of flying, that the majority of flights are taken by a tiny fraction of the total population, and that airlines have missed all but one of the industry’s self-imposed sustainability targets.

[ 15 ] In January 2025, German police began investigating the distribution of political fliers from the far‑right Alternative für Deutschland party that closely resembled airline tickets and targeted "illegal immigrants".  The fliers were placed in the mailboxes of people living in immigrant areas.

Karlsruhe criminal police said they are seeking "persons unknown on suspicion of incitement of racial hatred".

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Steve Lambert – American artist (born 1976) Brandalism – UK activist artist collective (2012-) CODEPINK – American non-governmental organization Criticism of advertising Culture jamming – Form of protest to subvert media culture Cultures of Resistance – Brazilian filmmaker and activist (born 1966) Czech Dream Darren Cullen (cartoonist) – British artist and political cartoonist Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Doppelgänger brand image – Parody logo highlighting ethical isssues Hungarian Two Tailed Dog Party – Political party in Hungary Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Improv Everywhere – Comedic performance art group based in New York City May First/People Link Meme hack – Artistic style Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets United for Peace and Justice – Coalition of U.S.-based organizations Wacky Packages – Trading cards featuring parodies of consumer products References [ edit ] ^ Barley, Alexander (May 21, 2001).

"Battle of the image" .

New Statesman . Retrieved 2010-12-09 .

^ Dekeyser, Thomas (2020-08-09).

"Dismantling the advertising city: Subvertising and the urban commons to come" .

Environment and Planning D: Society and Space .

39 (2): 309– 327.

doi : 10.1177/0263775820946755 .

ISSN 0263-7758 .

^ Dery, Mark (1993).

Culture Jamming: Hacking, Slashing, and Sniping in the Empire of Signs . New York: Open Media.

^ Klein, Naomi (8 May 1997).

"Subvertising: Culture jamming reemerges on the media landscape" .

The Village Voice .

^ Bonner, Matt; Raoul, Vyvian (2022-11-28).

"Subvertising: Sharing a Different Set of Messages" .

The Commons Social Change Library . Retrieved 2023-03-02 .

^ "Clearing the Mindscape" .

Adbusters . March 4, 2009. Archived from the original on September 27, 2011 . Retrieved 2010-12-09 .

^ Harold, Christine (2004-09-01).

"Pranking rhetoric: "culture jamming" as media activism" .

Critical Studies in Media Communication .

21 (3): 189– 211.

doi : 10.1080/0739318042000212693 .

ISSN 1529-5036 .

^ "Exxon Victorious" .

Time . March 5, 1973. Archived from the original on February 5, 2008.

^ "Sore-Loserman: From political parody to charity's windfall. CNN. 4 Dec. 2000" . Archives.cnn.com . Retrieved 2014-03-29 .

^ "Civil Disobedience and Tobacco Control: The Case of BUGA UP, Simon Chapman" (PDF) . Tobacco Control Vol. 5, No. 3, 1996 . Retrieved 6 December 2019 .

^ McIntyre, Iain (2019-04-10).

"BUGA-UP - Billboard Utilising Graffitists Against Unhealthy Promotions" .

The Commons Social Change Library . Retrieved 2023-03-02 .

^ Chan, Sewell (2008-11-12).

"Liberal Pranksters Hand Out Times Spoof" .

City Room . Retrieved 2024-01-17 .

^ a b "The hackers using street ads to protest" . 23 March 2018.

^ Monks, Kieron (23 March 2018).

" 'Subvertising' hackers are using street ads to protest" .

CNN . Retrieved 2020-08-15 .

^ "Activists subvert poster sites to shame aviation and ad industries" .

the Guardian . 2022-09-22 . Retrieved 2022-09-23 .

^ Cole, Deborah (14 January 2025).

"German police investigate AfD flyers resembling plane tickets for immigrants" .

The Guardian . London, United Kingdom.

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2025-01-15 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Subvertising .

Adbusters.org v t e Culture jamming Forms Art intervention Billboard hacking Broadcast signal intrusion Détournement Flash mob Guerrilla communication Hacktivism Media prank Subvertising Tactical frivolity Groups Adbusters Anonymous Barbie Liberation Organization Billboard Liberation Front Billionaires for Bush The Bubble Project Cacophony Society Guerrilla Girls Improv Everywhere Luther Blissett Merry Pranksters monochrom Negativland RTMark Sisters of Perpetual Indulgence Society for Indecency to Naked Animals Space Hijackers Veterans of Future Wars Whirl-Mart Wu Ming The Yes Men Yippies Movements Discordianism Church of the SubGenius Provo Psychogeography Reverend Billy and the Church of Stop Shopping People Alan Abel Banksy Reverend Billy Captain Midnight Captain Crunch Ron English Abbie Hoffman Naomi Klein John Law Malaclypse the Younger Ben Masel Sal Randolph Jerry Rubin Joey Skaggs Ivan Stang Kerry Wendell Thornley Bill Wasik Robert Anton Wilson Peter Lamborn Wilson Works The Illuminatus! Trilogy Schrödinger's Cat Trilogy Principia Discordia Book of the SubGenius Temporary Autonomous Zone No Logo Steal This Book Events Notre-Dame Affair (1950) Saint Stupid's Day Parade (late 1970s) Burning Man (1986) Max Headroom signal hijacking (1987) Grunge speak (1992) K Foundation (1993) SantaCon (1994) Portland Urban Iditarod (2001) Pillow fight flash mob (2008) Related Anti-consumerism Artivist Critique of work List of culture jamming organizations and people Performance art Street art Subculture Surreal humour Operation Mindfuck Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Subvertising&oldid=1292145944 " Categories : Advertising Culture jamming techniques Guerrilla art and hacking art Promotion and marketing communications Derivative works Cultural activism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2019 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 12:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Subvertising 12 languages Add topic

