Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 History of development and suppression 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Freedom of thought 56 languages አማርኛ العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Shqip سنڌي Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Not to be confused with Freethought , Cognitive liberty , or Freedom of speech .

Freedom to hold a thought This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( July 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) "Without freedom of thought there can be no such thing as wisdom & no such thing as public liberty without freedom of speech", Benjamin Franklin , 1722 Freedom of thought is the freedom of an individual to hold or consider a fact, viewpoint, or thought , independent of others' viewpoints.

Overview [ edit ] Every person attempts to have a cognitive proficiency by developing knowledge, concepts, theories and assessing them in the given environment. This cognitive proficiency gives a sense of contentment and replaces the feeling of helplessness. Apart from bringing ease to the ego of a person, new knowledge and ideas also bring a hope for the future.

[ 1 ] Freedom of thought is the precursor and progenitor of—and thus is closely linked to—other liberties, including freedom of religion , freedom of speech, and freedom of expression.

[ 2 ] Though freedom of thought is axiomatic for many other freedoms, they are in no way required for it to operate and exist. The conception of a freedom or a right does not guarantee its inclusion, legality, or protection via a philosophical caveat. It is a very important concept in the Western world and nearly all democratic constitutions protect these freedoms.

For instance, the United States Bill of Rights contains the famous guarantee in the First Amendment that laws may not be made that interfere with religion "or prohibiting the free exercise thereof". U.S.

Supreme Court Justice Benjamin Cardozo reasoned in Palko v. Connecticut (1937): Freedom of thought... is the matrix, the indispensable condition, of nearly every other form of freedom. With rare aberrations a pervasive recognition of this truth can be traced in our history, political and legal.

[ 3 ] Such ideas are also a vital part of international human rights law . In the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), which is legally binding on member states of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), "freedom of thought" is listed under Article 18: Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion; this right includes freedom to change his religion or belief, and freedom, either alone or in community with others and in public or private, to manifest his religion or belief in teaching, practice, worship and observance.

The United Nations ' Human Rights Committee states that this "distinguishes the freedom of thought, conscience, religion or belief from the freedom to manifest religion or belief. It does not permit any limitations whatsoever on the freedom of thought and conscience or on the freedom to have or adopt a religion or belief of one's choice. These freedoms are protected unconditionally".

[ 4 ] Similarly, Article 19 of the UDHR guarantees that "Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference".

Article 9 of the European Convention on Human Rights states, "Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion." [ 5 ] History of development and suppression [ edit ] It is impossible to know with certainty what another person is thinking, making suppression difficult. The concept is developed throughout the Bible, most fully in the writings of Saul of Tarsus (e.g., "For why should my freedom [ eleutheria ] be judged by another's conscience [ suneideseos ]?" 1 Corinthians 10:29).

[ 6 ] Bronze statue of Giordano Bruno in Rome Although Greek philosophers Plato and Socrates had discussed freedom of thought minimally, the edicts of King Ashoka (3rd century BC) have been called the first decree respecting freedom of conscience.

[ 7 ] In European tradition, aside from the decree of religious toleration by Constantine I at Milan in 313, the philosophers Themistius , Michel de Montaigne , Baruch Spinoza , John Locke , Voltaire , Alexandre Vinet , and John Stuart Mill and the theologians Roger Williams and Samuel Rutherford have been considered major proponents of the idea of freedom of conscience (or "soul liberty" in the words of Williams).

[ 8 ] Queen Elizabeth I revoked a thought censorship law in the late sixteenth century, because, according to Sir Francis Bacon , she did "not [like] to make windows into men's souls and secret thoughts".

[ 9 ] During her reign, however, a number of books published by theorist Giordano Bruno spurred controversy, mentioning topics banned by the Catholic Church such as the possibility of an infinite universe. Unwilling to recant these ideas, Bruno was eventually burned as a heretic in Rome by the Italian Inquisition , in turn becoming a martyr for free thought.

[ 10 ] Oliver Cromwell is described by Ignaz von Döllinger as "the first among the mighty men of the world to set up one special religious principle, and to enforce it so far as in him lay: ... The principle of liberty of conscience and the repudiation of religious coercion".

[ 11 ] However, freedom of expression can be limited through censorship , arrests, book burning , or propaganda , and this tends to discourage freedom of thought. Examples of effective campaigns against freedom of expression are the Soviet suppression of genetics research in favor of a theory known as Lysenkoism , the book-burning campaigns of Nazi Germany , the radical anti-intellectualism enforced in Cambodia under Pol Pot and in Nazi Germany under Adolf Hitler , the strict limits on freedom of expression imposed by the Communist governments of the People's Republic of China and Cuba or by Capitalist dictatorships such as those of Augusto Pinochet in Chile and Francisco Franco in Spain.

The Sapir–Whorf hypothesis , which states that thought can be embedded in language , would support the claim that an effort to limit the use of words of language is actually a form of restricting freedom of thought.

[ citation needed ] This was explored in George Orwell 's novel 1984 , with the idea of Newspeak , a stripped-down form of the English language alleged to lack the capacity for metaphor and limiting expression of original ideas.

More recently, neuroimaging technology has raised concerns about entities possibly reading and subsequently suppressing thought. These concerns form the emerging fields of neuroethics and neuroprivacy .

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Attention theft Cognitive liberty Doublethink Freedom of conscience Freethought Four Freedoms , Franklin Roosevelt's speech Free speech zone Free will Intellectual freedom Mind control Prisoner of conscience Public opinion Thoughtcrime References [ edit ] ^ Main, T. F. (1967-06-01).

"Knowledge, Learning and Freedom from Thought" .

Australian & New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry .

1 (2): 64– 71.

doi : 10.3109/00048676709159167 .

ISSN 0004-8674 .

S2CID 144126437 .

^ Swaine, Lucas (2016-11-09). "Freedom of Thought as a Basic Liberty".

Political Theory .

46 (3): 405– 425.

doi : 10.1177/0090591716676293 .

ISSN 0090-5917 .

S2CID 151827391 .

^ Palko v. State of Connecticut , 302 U.S. 319 (1937).

^ "General Comment No. 22: The right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion (Art. 18) : . 30/07/93. CCPR/C/21/Rev.1/Add.4, General Comment No. 22. (General Comments)" .

United Nations Human Rights Website – Treaty Bodies Database .

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights . 1993-07-30 . Retrieved 2007-10-21 .

^ "The European Convention on Human Rights" .

Council of Europe .

^ Eugene J. Cooper, "Man's Basic Freedom and Freedom of Conscience in the Bible : Reflections on 1 Corinthians 8–10", Irish Theological Quarterly Dec 1975 ^ Luzzatti, Luigi (February 2006).

Luigi Luzzatti, "The First Decree on Freedom of Conscience" p. 47 in God in Freedom . Cosimo.

ISBN 978-1596054486 . Retrieved 15 September 2014 .

^ Luzzatti, p. 91.

^ Brimacombe, Peter (2000).

All the Queen's Men: The World of Elizabeth I . Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

125 .

ISBN 0312232519 .

^ Arturo Labriola, Giordano Bruno: Martyrs of free thought no. 1 ^ A.D. Lindsay: The Essentials of Democracy (2 ed.), 1948.

Further reading [ edit ] D.V. Coornhert , Synod on the Freedom of Conscience: A Thorough Examination during the Gathering Held in the Year 1582 in the City of Freetown English translation Richard Joseph Cooke, Freedom of thought in religious teaching (1913) Lucas Swaine, "Freedom of Thought as a Basic Liberty," Political Theory , 46:3 (2018): 405–425.

doi : 10.1177/0090591716676293 Eugene J. Cooper, "Man's Basic Freedom and Freedom of Conscience in the Bible : Reflections on 1 Corinthians 8–10", Irish Theological Quarterly Dec 1975 George Botterill and Peter Carruthers, 'The Philosophy of Psychology', Cambridge University Press (1999), p. 3 The Hon. Sir John Laws, 'The Limitations of Human Rights', [1998] P. L. Summer, Sweet & Maxwell and Contributors, p. 260 Voltaire (1954). "Liberté de penser".

Dictionnaire philosophique . Classiques Garnier (in French). Paris: Éditions Garnier. pp.

277– 81.

Roger Williams , The Bloudy Tenent of Persecution for Cause of Conscience (1644; 1867 reprint ) Samuel Rutherford , Lex, Rex ( 1644 ) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Freedom of thought .

The Bloody Tenent of Persecution (1867 reprint) (accessed July 10, 2009, on Google Books) Dictionary of the History of Ideas : Academic Freedom The Center for Cognitive Liberty & Ethics – a network of scholars elaborating the law, policy and ethics of freedom of thought John Bagnell Bury (1861–1927) A History of Freedom of Thought v t e Censorship Media regulation Books books banned Films banned films Internet circumvention Music Postal Press Radio Speech and expression Student media Televisions banned televisions Thought Video games banned video games Methods Bleeping Book burning Broadcast delay By copyright Cancel culture Censor bars Chilling effect Collateral censorship Concision Conspiracy of silence Content-control software Damnatio memoriae De-banking Deplatforming Euphemism Minced oath Expurgation Fogging Gag order Gatekeeping Hallin's spheres Heckling Heckler's veto Hush money Internet police Malinformation Media blackout Memory hole National intranet News embargo Newspaper theft Non-disclosure agreement Opinion corridor Overton window Pixelization Political correctness Prior restraint Propaganda Purge Redaction Revisionism Sanitization Self-censorship Shadow banning Social rejection Speech code Spiral of silence Strategic lawsuit Super-injunction Surveillance computer and network mass Taboo Whitewashing Word filtering Contexts AI Algorithmic Chinese censorship abroad Criminal Corporate Apple Facebook Google Hate speech Online Ideological Academic LGBT issues Media bias Moral police Moralistic fallacy Naturalistic fallacy Political censorship Banned parties Political prisoner Propaganda model Religious Blasphemy law Islamic Police Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Wikipedia By location Censorship by country Blasphemy law Freedom of speech Internet censorship In the Middle East In South Asia v t e Liberty Concepts Artistic freedom Cognitive liberty Free will Freedom of conscience Freedom of expression Freedom of Expression (book) Algeria Canada India South Africa Freethought Moral responsibility Personification of Liberty Libertas Negative liberty Positive liberty Rights Self-ownership Topfreedom By type Academic Civil Economic Financial Intellectual Internet Morphological Political By right Abortion Assembly Association Asylum Cannabis Choice Civil and political Clothing Death Digital Education Fair trial Family Freedom from discrimination Food Gun Health Housing Internet access Information Life Morphological Movement Personality Press Privacy Property Protest Religion Repair Resist Self-defense Sexual and reproductive health Sexuality Silence Speech Thought To be forgotten Truth Water and sanitation Workers' right to access the toilet See also All men are created equal Anarchism Autonomy Beard and haircut laws by country Civil libertarianism Clothing laws by country Dancing ban Decriminalization of sex work Drug liberalization Human rights Left-libertarianism Legality of recording by civilians LGBTQ rights Libertarianism Liberty, equality, brotherhood Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness Photography and the law Photography Is Not a Crime Pornography laws by region Prostitution law Psilocybin decriminalization in the United States Right-libertarianism Self-determination Stanley v. Georgia Universal Declaration of Human Rights v t e Human rights Humans Children Intersex people Women Fundamental concepts and philosophies Natural law Positive law Sovereignty Universal jurisdiction Distinctions Claim rights and liberty rights Individual and group rights Natural rights and legal rights Negative and positive rights Aspects Corporal punishment Organizations List of human rights organisations National human rights institutions By continent Africa Middle East Asia Europe North America South America Oceania Human rights abuses Atrocity crime Crime of apartheid Crimes against humanity Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Enforced disappearances Forced migration Genocide Human rights abuses against Palestinians by Israel at Guantánamo Bay detention camp during the Battle of Mosul (2016–2017) during the Gaddafi regime during the Libyan civil war (2011) in Afghanistan in Algeria in Angola in Argentina in Armenia in Australia in Austria in Azad Kashmir in Azerbaijan in Bahrain in Balochistan in Bangladesh in Belarus in Bolivia in Botswana in Brazil in Burkina Faso in Burundi in Cambodia in Canada in Chile in Chile under Augusto Pinochet in China in Cuba in Egypt in El Salvador in Ethiopia in France in Gabon in Ghana in Germany in Guatemala in Hong Kong in Egypt in Haiti in India in Indonesia in Iran in Iraq in Ireland in Israel in Italy in Jammu and Kashmir in Japan in Kashmir in Kazakhstan in Kenya in Kuwait in Kyrgyzstan‎ in Lebanon in Libya in Lithuania in Malawi in Malaysia in Manipur in Mexico in Morocco in Myanmar in Nepal in New Zealand in Nigeria in North Korea in Pakistan in Palestine in Panama in Papua New Guinea in Peru in Poland in Punjab, India in Romania in the Russia in Saudi Arabia in Sierra Leone in Sindh in South Africa in South Korea in Sri Lanka in Sudan in Switzerland in Syria in Taiwan in Thailand in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the Dominican Republic in the Philippines in the Soviet Union in the United Arab Emirates in the United States in Turkey in Uganda in Ukraine in Uzbekistan in Venezuela in Vietnam in Yemen in Zimbabwe of the Marcos dictatorship of the military dictatorship in Brazil (1964–1985) Incitement to genocide List of human rights abuses by country Murder Persecution Rape Slavery Torture Victims War crimes Related History of human rights List of global issues List of human rights awards Three generations Universal Declaration of Human Rights United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization Authority control databases National Germany United States Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐69545448d6‐lrmmb
Cached time: 20250813030712
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.503 seconds
Real time usage: 0.719 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2401/1000000
Revision size: 12476/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 122938/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4375/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 75479/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.273/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6855099/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  566.938      1 -total
 25.80%  146.251      1 Template:Reflist
 16.97%   96.227      1 Template:Short_description
 14.67%   83.169      5 Template:Navbox
 12.58%   71.313      2 Template:Cite_journal
 11.35%   64.366      1 Template:Censorship
  8.77%   49.723      1 Template:Commons_category
  8.47%   48.022      1 Template:Sister_project
  8.46%   47.973     10 Template:Main_other
  8.24%   46.706      1 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:557913:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250813030712 and revision id 1292055665. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Freedom_of_thought&oldid=1292055665 " Categories : Fundamental rights Human rights Human rights by issue Political terminology Philosophy of law Thought Censorship Political philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from July 2018 All articles with style issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 CS1 French-language sources (fr) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 23:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Freedom of thought 56 languages Add topic

