Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Variations Toggle Variations subsection 2.1 Epistemic structural realism 2.1.1 Newman problem 2.1.2 Response to the Newman problem 2.1.3 Further criticism 2.2 Ontic structural realism 2.3 Empirical structure realism 3 Definition of structure 4 Proposed structures 5 See also 6 Notes 7 Citations 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Structuralism (philosophy of science) 5 languages العربية Deutsch Español Français Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theory of science, reconstructing empirical theories Not to be confused with Structuralism (philosophy of mathematics) .

In the philosophy of science , structuralism [α] (also known as scientific structuralism [ 1 ] or as the structuralistic theory-concept ) [ 2 ] asserts that all aspects of reality are best understood in terms of empirical scientific constructs of entities and their relations, rather than in terms of concrete entities in themselves.

[ 3 ] Overview [ edit ] Part of a series on Epistemology Outline Category Schools Coherentism Contextualism Dogmatism Empiricism Fallibilism Fideism Foundationalism Infallibilism Infinitism Naturalism Perspectivism Pragmatism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Solipsism Structuralism Concepts Action Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Belief Credence Certainty Data Experience Information Justification Induction Knowledge Meaning Rationality Reason Truth Wisdom Domains Applied epistemology Evolutionary epistemology Formal epistemology Historical epistemology Metaepistemology Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Epistemologists Aristotle Sextus Empiricus Edmund Gettier Wang Yangming René Descartes David Hume Immanuel Kant W. V. O. Quine more...

Related fields Epistemic cognition Epistemic logic Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science v t e Structuralism is an active research program in the philosophy of science , which was first developed in the late 1960s and throughout the 1970s by several analytic philosophers .

As an instance of structuralism, the concept of matter should be interpreted not as an absolute property of nature in itself, but instead of how scientifically-grounded mathematical relations describe how the concept of matter interacts with other properties, whether that be in a broad sense such as the gravitational fields that mass produces or more empirically as how matter interacts with sense systems of the body to produce sensations such as weight.

[ 4 ] Structuralism's aim is to comprise all important aspects of an empirical theory in one formal framework. The proponents of this meta-theoretic theory are Frederick Suppe , Patrick Suppes , Ronald Giere , [ 5 ] [ 3 ] Joseph D. Sneed , Wolfgang Stegmüller , Carlos Ulises Moulines [ es ] , Wolfgang Balzer, John Worrall , Elie Georges Zahar, Pablo Lorenzano, Otávio Bueno , Anjan Chakravartty , Tian Yu Cao, Steven French , and Michael Redhead .

The term "structural realism" for the variation of scientific realism motivated by structuralist arguments, was coined by American philosopher Grover Maxwell [ es ] in 1968.

[ 6 ] In 1998, the British structural realist philosopher James Ladyman distinguished epistemic and ontic forms of structural realism.

[ 7 ] [ 3 ] Variations [ edit ] Epistemic structural realism [ edit ] The philosophical concept of (scientific) structuralism is related to that of epistemic structural realism ( ESR ).

[ 3 ] ESR, a position originally and independently held by Henri Poincaré (1902), [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Bertrand Russell (1927), [ 10 ] and Rudolf Carnap (1928), [ 11 ] was resurrected by John Worrall (1989), who proposes that there is retention of structure across theory change . Worrall, for example, argued that Fresnel's equations imply that light has a structure and that Maxwell's equations , which replaced Fresnel's, do also; both characterize light as vibrations. Fresnel postulated that the vibrations were in a mechanical medium called " ether "; Maxwell postulated that the vibrations were of electric and magnetic fields. The structure in both cases is the vibrations and it was retained when Maxwell's theories replaced Fresnel's.

[ 12 ] Because structure is retained, structural realism both (a) avoids pessimistic meta-induction [β] and (b) does not make the success of science seem miraculous, i.e., it puts forward a no-miracles argument .

[ 13 ] Newman problem [ edit ] The so-called Newman problem (also Newman's problem , Newman objection , Newman's objection ) refers to the critical notice of Russell's The Analysis of Matter (1927) published by Max Newman in 1928.

[ 14 ] [ 3 ] [ 15 ] Newman argued that the ESR claim that one can know only the abstract structure of the external world trivializes scientific knowledge. The basis of his argument is the realization that "[a]ny collection of things can be organized so as to have structure W , provided there are the right
number of them", where W is an arbitrary structure.

[ 16 ] Response to the Newman problem [ edit ] John Worrall (2000) advocates a version of ESR augmented by the Ramsey sentence reconstruction of physical theories [ 17 ] (a Ramsey sentence aims at rendering propositions containing non-observable theoretical terms clear by substituting them with observable terms). John Worrall and Elie Georges Zahar (2001) claim that Newman's objection applies only if a distinction between observational and theoretical terms is not made.

[ 18 ] Ramsey-style epistemic structural realism is distinct from and incompatible with the original Russellian epistemic structural realism [ 19 ] (the difference between the two being that Ramsey-style ESR makes an epistemic commitment to Ramsey sentences, while Russellian ESR makes an epistemic commitment to abstract structures, that is, to (second-order) isomorphism classes of the observational structure of the world and not the (first-order) physical structure itself).

[ 20 ] Ioannis Votsis (2004) claims that Russellian ESR is also impervious to the Newman objection: Newman falsely attributed the trivial claim "there exists a relation with a particular abstract structure" to ESR, while ESR makes the non-trivial claim that there is a unique physical relation that is causally linked with a unique observational relation and the two are isomorphic.

[ 21 ] Further criticism [ edit ] The traditional scientific realist and notable critic of structural realism [ 3 ] Stathis Psillos (1999) remarks that "structural realism is best understood as issuing an epistemic constraint on what can be known and on what scientific theories can reveal." [ 22 ] He thinks that ESR faces a number of insurmountable objections.

[ 23 ] These include among others that ESR's only epistemic commitment is uninterpreted equations which are not by themselves enough to produce predictions [ 24 ] [ 15 ] and that the "structure versus nature" distinction that ESR appeals to cannot be sustained.

[ 25 ] Votsis (2004) replies that the structural realist "does subscribe to interpreted equations, but attempts to distinguish between interpretations that link the terms to observations from those that do not" [ 26 ] and he can appeal to the Russellian view that "nature" just means the non-isomorphically specifiable part of entities.

[ 27 ] Psillos also defends David Lewis's descriptive-causal theory of reference [ 28 ] [ 3 ] (according to which the abandoned theoretical terms after a theory change are regarded as successfully referring "after all") [ 3 ] [ 28 ] and claims that it can adequately deal with referential continuity in conceptual transitions, during which theoretical terms are abandoned, [ 29 ] thus rendering ESR redundant.

Votsis (2004) replies that a scientific realist needs not tie the approximate truth of a theory to referential success.

[ 30 ] Notably, structural realism initially did not dictate any particular theory of reference ; [ 31 ] however Votsis (2012) proposed a structuralist theory of reference according to which "scientific terms are able to refer to individual objects, i.e. in a term-by-term fashion, but that to fix this reference requires taking into account the relations these objects instantiate" (in this view, structural descriptions serve as reference determiners).

[ 32 ] Ontic structural realism [ edit ] While ESR claims that only the structure of reality is knowable, ontic structural realism ( OSR ) goes further to claim that structure is all there is . In this view, reality has no "nature" underlying its observed structure. Rather, reality is fundamentally structural, though variants of OSR disagree on precisely which aspects of structure are primitive. OSR is strongly motivated by modern physics, particularly quantum field theory , which undermines intuitive notions of identifiable objects with intrinsic properties.

[ 3 ] Some early quantum physicists held this view, including Hermann Weyl (1931), [ 33 ] Ernst Cassirer (1936), [ 34 ] and Arthur Eddington (1939).

[ 35 ] Recently, OSR has been called "the most fashionable ontological framework for modern physics".

[ 36 ] Max Tegmark takes this concept even further with the mathematical universe hypothesis , which proposes that, if our universe is only a particular structure, then it is no more real than any other structure.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Empirical structure realism [ edit ] Empirical structure realism (ESR) holds that what is preserved across scientific theory change is not mathematical (formal) theory structures but so-called empirical structures. The empirical structure of an empirical theory is defined as the partition of space–time regions which share the same empirically adequate descriptions of the theory. On this view, later physical theories refine the empirical structures of earlier ones, so that continuity lies in the ability to distinguish empirical situations rather than in retaining specific formal or ontological commitments.

Balazs Gyenis argues that an "optimistic meta-induction" provides a realist stance that avoids problems associated with discarded theoretical entities.

[ 39 ] Definition of structure [ edit ] See also: Structure (mathematical logic) In mathematical logic, a mathematical structure is a standard concept. A mathematical structure is a set of abstract entities with relations between them. The natural numbers under arithmetic constitute a structure, with relations such as "is evenly divisible by" and "is greater than". Here the relation "is greater than" includes the element (3, 4), but not the element (4, 3). Points in space and the real numbers under Euclidean geometry are another structure, with relations such as "the distance between point P1 and point P2 is real number R1"; equivalently, the "distance" relation includes the element (P1, P2, R1). Other structures include the Riemann space of general relativity and the Hilbert space of quantum mechanics. The entities in a mathematical structure do not have any independent existence outside their participation in relations. Two descriptions of a structure are considered equivalent, and to be describing the same underlying structure, if there is a correspondence between the descriptions that preserves all relations.

[ 37 ] [ 40 ] Many proponents of structural realism formally or informally ascribe "properties" to the abstract objects; some argue that such properties, while they can perhaps be "shoehorned" into the formalism of relations, should instead be considered distinct from relations.

[ 41 ] Proposed structures [ edit ] In quantum field theory (QFT), traditional proposals for "the most basic known structures" divide into "particle interpretations" such as ascribing reality to the Fock space of particles, and "field interpretations" such as considering the quantum wavefunction to be identical to the underlying reality. Varying interpretations of quantum mechanics provide one complication; another, perhaps minor, complication is that neither fields nor particles are completely localized in standard QFT. A third, less obvious, complication is that "unitarily inequivalent representations" are endemic in QFT; for example, the same patch of spacetime can be represented by a vacuum by an inertial observer, but as a thermal heat bath by an accelerating observer that perceives Unruh radiation , raising the difficult question of whether the vacuum structure or heat bath structure is the real structure, or whether both of these inequivalent structures are separately real. Another example, which does not require the complications of curved spacetime, is that in ferromagnetism, symmetry-breaking analysis results in inequivalent Hilbert spaces. More broadly, QFT's infinite degrees of freedom lead to inequivalent representations in the general case.

[ 36 ] In general relativity , scholars often grant a "basic structure" status to the spacetime structure, sometimes via its metric .

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Constructive empiricism , a rival yet related view [ 42 ] Semantic view of theories , a view often associated with structuralism Structural-systematic philosophy , a particular form of structural realism Notes [ edit ] ^ α: Not to be confused with the distinct tradition of French (semiotic) structuralism .

^ β: So-called 'pessimistic meta-inductions' about theoretical knowledge have the following basic form: "Proposition p is widely believed by most contemporary experts, but p is like many other hypotheses that were widely believed by experts in the past and are disbelieved by most contemporary experts. We have as much reason to expect p to befall their fate as not, therefore we should at least suspend judgement about p if not actively disbelieve it." Citations [ edit ] ^ Alisa Bokulich, Peter Bokulich (eds.), Scientific Structuralism , Springer, 2011, p. xi.

^ Wolfgang Balzer, C. Ulises Moulines (ed.), Structuralist Theory of Science: Focal Issues, New Results , Walter de Gruyter, 1996, p. 226.

^ a b c d e f g h i j James Ladyman.

"Structural Realism" . Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved October 21, 2017 .

^ Kuhlmann, Meinard (August 2013). "What is Real?".

Scientific American : 45.

^ Alisa Bokulich, Peter Bokulich (eds.), Scientific Structuralism , Springer, p. 140 n. 52.

^ Maxwell, G. (1968), "Scientific Methodology and the Causal Theory of Perception", in: Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave (eds.), Problems in the Philosophy of Science , Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.

^ Ladyman, J., 1998. "What is structural realism?" Studies in History and Philosophy of Science , 29: 409–424.

^ Henri Poincaré, Science and Hypothesis . New York: Dover, 1952 [1902].

^ Poincaré's structuralism was combined with neo-Kantian views about the nature of arithmetic .

^ Bertrand Russell (1927).

The Analysis of Matter , London: George Allen & Unwin.

^ Rudolf Carnap (1928).

The Logical Structure of the World , Berkeley: University of California Press.

^ J. Worrall (1989). "Structural realism: The best of both worlds?" Dialectica , 43: p. 119; available online .

^ The term is due to Hilary Putnam (see Putnam, H., 1975.

Mathematics, Matter and Method , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 73).

^ M. H. A. Newman, 1928. "Mr. Russell's causal theory of perception," Mind , 37: 137–148.

^ a b Stathis Psillos .

"Realism and Theory Change in Science" . Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved September 15, 2019 .

^ Roman Frigg and Ioannis Votsis (2011), "Everything you always wanted to know about structural realism but were afraid to ask," European Journal for Philosophy of Science 1 (2):227–276, esp. p. 250.

^ Worrall, J. (2000), "Miracles and Models: Saving Structural Realism?", paper given to the Annual Meeting of the British Society for the Philosophy of Science, Sheffield, 2000.

^ Worrall, J. and Zahar, E. (2001), "Ramseyfication and Structural Realism", Appendix IV in E. Zahar, Poincare's Philosophy: From Conventionalism to Phenomenology , Chicago and La Salle (IL): Open Court.

^ Votsis, I. (2004), The Epistemological Status of Scientific Theories: An Investigation of the Structural Realist Account , University of London, London School of Economics, PhD Thesis, p. 122.

^ Votsis, I. (2004), The Epistemological Status of Scientific Theories: An Investigation of the Structural Realist Account , University of London, London School of Economics, PhD Thesis, pp. 43 and 122.

^ Votsis, I. (2004), The Epistemological Status of Scientific Theories: An Investigation of the Structural Realist Account , University of London, London School of Economics, PhD Thesis, p. 129.

^ Stathis Psillos, Scientific Realism: How Science Tracks Truth , Routledge, 1999, p. 142.

^ Votsis, I. (2004), The Epistemological Status of Scientific Theories: An Investigation of the Structural Realist Account , University of London, London School of Economics, PhD Thesis, pp. 68–9.

^ Stathis Psillos, Scientific Realism: How Science Tracks Truth , Routledge, 1999, p. 141.

^ Stathis Psillos, Scientific Realism: How Science Tracks Truth , Routledge, 1999, p. 148.

^ Votsis, I. (2004), The Epistemological Status of Scientific Theories: An Investigation of the Structural Realist Account , University of London, London School of Economics, PhD Thesis, pp. 73–4.

^ Votsis, I. (2004), The Epistemological Status of Scientific Theories: An Investigation of the Structural Realist Account , University of London, London School of Economics, PhD Thesis, p. 104.

^ a b Stathis Psillos, Scientific Realism: How Science Tracks Truth , Routledge, 1999, p. 279.

^ Stathis Psillos, Scientific Realism: How Science Tracks Truth , Routledge, 1999, p. 271.

^ Votsis, I. (2004), The Epistemological Status of Scientific Theories: An Investigation of the Structural Realist Account , University of London, London School of Economics, PhD Thesis, p. 148.

^ Votsis, I. (2004), The Epistemological Status of Scientific Theories: An Investigation of the Structural Realist Account , University of London, London School of Economics, PhD Thesis, p. 219.

^ Ioannis Votsis, "A Structuralist Theory of Reference" , Invited talk presented at the Reference and Scientific Realism Symposium, Wuhan University , August 17, 2012.

^ Hermann Weyl, 1950 [1931].

The Theory of Groups and Quantum Mechanics (translated by H. P. Robertson). New York: Dover.

^ Ernst Cassirer, 1956 [1936].

Determinism and Indeterminism in Modern Physics , New Haven: Yale University Press.

^ Arthur Eddington (1939), The Philosophy of Physical Science , Cambridge University Press.

^ a b Kuhlmann, Meinard, "Quantum Field Theory" , The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2015 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

^ a b Tegmark, Max (2014). "10: Physical Reality and Mathematical Reality".

Our mathematical universe : my quest for the ultimate nature of reality (First ed.). Knopf Doubleday Publishing.

ISBN 9780307744258 .

^ Berthold, Oswald. "Computational Universes." Berlin: Humboldt Universitat zu Berlin, Institut fur Informatik (2009), p. 15.

^ Gyenis, Balazs (2025). "Empirical structure physicalism and realism, Hempel's dilemma, and an optimistic meta-induction".

Synthese .

206 (76).

doi : 10.1007/s11229-025-05160-x .

^ Esfeld, Michael. "Ontic structural realism and the interpretation of quantum mechanics." European Journal for Philosophy of Science 3 .1 (2013): 19–32.

^ Ainsworth, Peter Mark (January 2010). "What is ontic structural realism?".

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics .

41 (1): 50– 57.

Bibcode : 2010SHPMP..41...50A .

doi : 10.1016/j.shpsb.2009.11.001 .

^ Votsis, I. (2004), The Epistemological Status of Scientific Theories: An Investigation of the Structural Realist Account , University of London, London School of Economics, PhD Thesis, p. 196.

References [ edit ] W. Balzer, C. U. Moulines, J. D. Sneed , An Architectonic for Science: the Structuralist Approach . Reidel, Dordrecht, 1987.

C. M. Dawe, "The Structure of Genetics," PhD dissertation, University of London, 1982.

Humphreys, P., ed. (1994).

Patrick Suppes : Scientific Philosopher , Vol. 2: Philosophy of Physics, Theory Structure and Measurement, and Action Theory , Synthese Library (Springer-Verlag).

J. D. Sneed , The Logical Structure of Mathematical Physics . Reidel, Dordrecht, 1971 (revised edition 1979).

Wolfgang Stegmüller , Probleme und Resultate der Wissenschafttheorie und Analytischen Philosophie: Die Entwicklung des neuen Strukturalismus seit 1973 , 1986.

Frederick Suppe , ed., The Structure of Scientific Theories . Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1977[1974].

John Worrall , "Structural Realism: the Best of Both Worlds" in: D. Papineau (ed.), The Philosophy of Science (Oxford, 1996).

T. Perrone, "Models, Theory Dislodgment, and Epistemic Non Asymptotic Enrichment", Idee, 7/2014, 211-230.

External links [ edit ] Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: "Structuralism in Physics" Ioannis Votsis – Structural Realism Bibliography (last updated on 29 June 2020) v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐4gmpr
Cached time: 20250816154007
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.343 seconds
Real time usage: 0.404 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1929/1000000
Revision size: 22596/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 99809/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2054/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 70353/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.159/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5519124/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  311.581      1 -total
 31.04%   96.726      1 Template:Reflist
 23.26%   72.488      1 Template:Epistemology_sidebar
 22.67%   70.636      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 20.17%   62.839      7 Template:Navbox
 19.49%   60.724      2 Template:Cite_web
 12.97%   40.400      1 Template:Short_description
 12.51%   38.987      1 Template:Analytic_philosophy
  8.52%   26.560      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.33%   25.950      1 Template:Startflatlist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:24718287:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816154007 and revision id 1306219164. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Structuralism_(philosophy_of_science)&oldid=1306219164 " Category : Scientific method Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 15:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Structuralism (philosophy of science) 5 languages Add topic

