Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Difference from ecofeminism 2 Ecosexuals 3 Human/nonhuman relationships 4 Performances and workshops Toggle Performances and workshops subsection 4.1 Goodbye Gauley Mountain: An Ecosexual Love Story (film) 5 See also 6 Bibliography 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Sexecology 5 languages Español فارسی Français Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Activism based around ecofetishism This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Sexecology" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's general notability guideline .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "Sexecology" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Sexecology , also known as ecosexuality , is a radical form of environmental activism based around nature fetishism , the idea of the earth as a lover. It invites people to treat the earth with love rather than see it as an infinite resource to exploit.

[ 1 ] It was founded by Elizabeth Stephens and Annie Sprinkle , who describe themselves as "two ecosexual artists-in-love", whose manifesto is to make environment activism "more sexy, fun, and diverse".

[ 2 ] Sexecology employs absurdist humor , performance art and sex-positivity , which Stephens claims "may produce new forms of knowledge that hold potential to alter the future by privileging our desire for the Earth to function with as many diverse, intact and flourishing ecological systems as possible." [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] The couple promote education, events such as the ecosex symposium, and activism, such as protecting the Appalachian Mountains from mountain top removal .

[ 5 ] Difference from ecofeminism [ edit ] Sexecology conceives of the earth not as a mother but as a lover.

[ 6 ] This conceptual shift invites people to engage their bodies and senses in acts of environmental preservation.

[ 3 ] [ further explanation needed ] Unlike ecofeminism , sexecology does not see an intrinsic link between women and nature ; some of the limitations of ecofeminism which sex ecology indirectly addresses are "the reliance on women's biological functions to establish a connection between women and nature, the uncritical over-privileging of women's experiences, the inappropriateness of designating ideal female characteristics, and the regressive political implications of associating women with nature".

[ 7 ] "The formulation of an Eco-Sexual identity is a practice of an erotic eco-logic, deconstructing heteronormative constructions of gender, sex, sexuality, and nature in order to continually queer and destabilize identities, actively form and retain spaces of lack that necessitate interdependency , and engage a permeable sensuous self in perpetual sensorial reciprocity with the sensing and sensible more-than-human environment. It is an identity identified by desire rather than a stable essence or being, and it is a desire for the more-than-human environment in which the human subject is sensorially implicit." [ 5 ] Ecosexuals [ edit ] Proponents of this movement are called "ecosexuals"; they are unafraid to engage in and embrace their erotic experience with the earth, such as bathing naked, having sex with vegetables or having an orgasm in a waterfall.

[ 1 ] Stephens describes ecosexuals as people who "... are related to cyborgs and are not afraid of engaging in intercourse with nature and/or with technology for that matter. We make love with the Earth through our senses." [ 3 ] Ecosexuals range from those who use sustainable sex products and like being nude in nature to those who "roll around in the dirt having an orgasm covered in potting soil " and those who "masturbate under a waterfall" [ 8 ] "[Sprinkle and Stephens] have officiated wedding ceremonies where they and fellow ecosexuals marry the earth, the moon, and other natural entities." [ 8 ] They have also stated that they believe there are over 100,000 people who identify as ecosexual worldwide.

[ 8 ] Human/nonhuman relationships [ edit ] Sexecology seeks to direct attention towards “the ways in which sex and sexuality affect the larger nonhuman world.” Ecosexuality is an orientation directed toward the non-human material world. With this direction, ecosexuality makes a bold statement that “these human bodies are part of the nonhuman material world.” The blur between human and non-human entities is essential to Sprinkle and Stephens’ demonstration of sexecology.

[ 9 ] Sexecology was influenced by contemporary theories around posthumanism and the relationships between humans and nonhumans.

[ 10 ] Elizabeth Stephens has said " Haraway ’s work has guided my understanding of the material consequences and the theoretical underpinnings embedded in human/nonhuman relationships that matrix our world. This has helped me understand how human exceptionalism has been constructed and privileged throughout the history of religion and science as well as in other secular practices in western culture. Human exceptionalism, in collaboration with global capitalism , has created the isolated space necessary for the ongoing practices that have produced the dangerously degraded environmental conditions in which we now live. The belief systems and ideologies that allow some people to think that they have the Darwinian survival skill and the rights that accompany those skills to use or destroy other human and non humans is now causing the kind of environmental degradation that affects the whole system sooner or later." [ 11 ] Performances and workshops [ edit ] “The Love Art Lab projects aim to instill hope, create an antidote to fear, and act as a call for action.” [ 12 ] It is a private demonstration into the work of the two founders of the movement, Sprinkle and Stephens, as the research how to become "lovers with the earth. The performances can be privately booked by contacting the two and are meant to be demonstrational, informative, and "radical." [ 12 ] Sprinkle and Stephens have performed a number of "weddings to the earth" across the world intended to break the barrier between human sexuality and nature. The performances include "Wedding to the Dirt, Wedding to Lake Kallavesi, Wedding to the Coal, Wedding to the Rocks, Wedding to the Snow, Wedding to the Moon, Wedding to the Appalachian Mountains, Wedding to the Earth, and Wedding to the Sea", to date. The intention, according to Sprinkles, is to "shift the metaphor from ‘Earth as Mother’ to ‘Earth as Lover´" [ 13 ] Sprinkle and Stephens have performed a two-women show 25 Ways to Make Love to the Earth (Theatre Piece) at the Kosmos Theatre in Vienna in 2010 to demonstrate how to "make love with the earth", including talking, singing, dancing, and stroking natural objects. The performances are educational as well as self-promoting of the movement.

[ 14 ] The aesthetic strategies of sexecology are influenced by Joseph Beuys ' concept of social sculpture , which sees art as having the potential to transform society.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] "... the production of visible art may effect the production of invisible ideological and class relations. For Joseph Beuys, sculpture and artistic creativity hold the potential to reshape the educational and governmental institutions that produce ideological subjects, as well as social, political, and economic systems. Art, Beuys argues, is the necessary condition for the production of a revolutionary society because it can both unravel the old order and engage everyone in the production of a new social order." [ 3 ] Ecosexuals have engaged in protests against mountaintop removal, as shown in the film Goodbye Gauley Mountain: An Ecosexual Love Story .

Goodbye Gauley Mountain: An Ecosexual Love Story (film) [ edit ] Goodbye Gauley Mountain: An Ecosexual Love Story (2013) is an autoethnographic documentary film by Elizabeth Stephens with Annie Sprinkle about the environmental issue of mountaintop removal in West Virginia, United States .

[ 17 ] West Virginia native Stephens returns to her childhood home to create a film that incorporates autobiography, a brief history of the coal industry , an inventory of activist strategies, an eco-sexual mini-manifesto, and finally, an example of the performance art Stephens and Sprinkle often employ to express their ecosexuality.

[ 18 ] Stephens presents a community struggling to reconcile their love of their natural mountainous environment with the fact that its destruction via MTR provides the local economy. The piece explores the negative consequences of mountaintop removal, both cosmetic and environmental, and culminates in an exploration of ecosexuality, followed by wedding ceremony in which Stephens and Sprinkle "marry" the mountain. “Ecosexuality inserts an ‘erotic’ humor that plays against the horrific subject matter. So far the feedback that I’ve received at film previews makes me realize that these are effective strategies for creating space to briefly cut the feeling of despair that MTR evokes.” See also [ edit ] A Cyborg Manifesto Alter-globalization Posthumanism New materialism Fuck for Forest Positive environmentalism List of earth deities Mother Nature Goddess movement Theatre of the Oppressed Bibliography [ edit ] Stefanie Iris Weiss.

Eco-Sex: Go Green Between the Sheets and Make Your Love Life Sustainable . Paperback. 224 pages, publisher: Ten Speed Press (March 30, 2010) ISBN 1580081185 References [ edit ] ^ a b Lechner, Marie.

"Annie Sprinkle, un cas d'écolo-sexe" . Next Libération . Retrieved 22 October 2013 .

^ "Sex Ecology" .

sexecology.org . Elizabeth Stephens and Annie Sprinkle. n.d . Retrieved 22 October 2013 .

^ a b c d "PAR: Goodbye Gauley Mountain: An Ecosexual Love Story " .

elizabethstephens.org . Elizabeth Stephens. n.d . Retrieved 22 October 2013 .

^ Van Houten, Corinne (July 21, 2013).

"Goodbye Gauley Mountain: An Ecosexual Love Story: Beth Stephens and Annie Sprinkle Marry A Mountain" .

Artcore .

2 (1).

^ a b c Reed, Jennifer J. (2015). Anderlini-D’Onofrio, SerenaGaia; Hagamen, Lindsay (eds.).

"From Ecofeminism to Ecosexuality: Queering the Environmental Movement" .

Ecosexuality: When Nature Inspires the Arts of Love : 92– 102.

^ "Elizabeth Stephens" .

Faculty List . Art Faculty UC Santa Cruz. Archived from the original on 1 November 2013 . Retrieved 22 October 2013 .

^ Archambault, Anne.

"A Critique of Ecofeminism" .

Canadian Woman Studies .

13 (3): 21 . Retrieved 30 October 2013 .

^ a b c Neil McArthur (2016-11-02).

"Ecosexuals Believe Having Sex with the Earth Could Save It | VICE" .

VICE . Retrieved 2016-12-02 .

^ Morris, Michael. "Material Entanglements With the Nonhuman World: Theorizing Ecosexualities in Performance." Electronic Thesis or Dissertation. Ohio State University, 2015.OhioLINK Electronic Theses and Dissertations Center. 02 Dec 2016.

^ Haraway, Donna (2008).

When Species Meet . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press . p. 360.

^ Stephens, Elizabeth.

"PAR: Goodbye Gauley Mountain:An Ecosexual Love Story" . Retrieved 22 October 2013 .

^ a b "Assuming the Ecosexual Position: Adventures of the Love Art Lab" .

anniesprinkle.org . n.d . Retrieved 2016-12-02 .

^ "Ecosex Weddings, weddings with nonhuman natural elements" .

sexecology.org . n.d . Retrieved 2016-12-02 .

^ "Dirty Sexecology: 25 Ways to Make Love to the Earth (Theater Piece)" .

sexecology.org . n.d . Retrieved 2016-12-02 .

^ Beuys, Joseph (2004).

What is Art?

. Forest Row: Clairview. p. 112.

^ Beuys, Joseph (1990).

Joseph Beuys in America : Energy Plan for the Western Man : Writings by and Interviews with the Artist . New York: Four Walls Eight Windows.

^ Archer, Greg (20 November 2013).

"Mountaintop Removal: Two Ecosexuals Fight Back Hard" .

Huffington Post .

^ Clemons, Tammy (2014).

"Goodbye Gauley Mountain: An Ecosexual Love Story" .

Journal of Appalachian Studies .

20 (1): 91– 93.

doi : 10.5406/jappastud.20.1.0091 .

External links [ edit ] Ecosex manifesto Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sexecology&oldid=1303834039 " Categories : Environmentalism Environmental movements Feminism Feminist art Feminist theory Performance art Posthumanism Pornography by genre Sexuality and society Sex positivism Sex-positive feminism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from November 2013 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with topics of unclear notability from August 2018 All articles with topics of unclear notability Articles with multiple maintenance issues Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2019 This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 09:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sexecology 5 languages Add topic

