Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Early history 2.2 Papal States 2.3 Under Italian rule (1871–1929) 2.4 Lateran treaties 2.5 World War II 2.6 Post-war history 3 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 3.1 Climate 3.2 Gardens 4 Governance Toggle Governance subsection 4.1 State and Holy See 4.2 Structure 4.2.1 Sede vacante 4.2.2 Papal nobility 4.3 Head of state 4.4 Government and justice 4.5 National and public security 4.5.1 Crime 4.6 Foreign relations 4.6.1 Non-party, non-signatory policy 5 Economy Toggle Economy subsection 5.1 Transport 5.2 Telecommunications and mass media 5.3 Postal service 5.4 Healthcare 5.5 Sustainability 6 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 6.1 Languages 6.2 Citizenship 6.3 Statistical oddities 7 Culture Toggle Culture subsection 7.1 Cultural heritage 7.2 Science 7.3 Sport 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Footnotes 9.2 Citation notes 9.3 Bibliography 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Vatican City 268 languages Acèh Адыгэбзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Anarâškielâ अंगिका Ænglisc Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Արեւմտահայերէն Armãneashti Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Авар Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Basa Banyumasan Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Bislama Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chavacano de Zamboanga ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Davvisámegiella Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski डोटेली ཇོང་ཁ Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara Eʋegbe فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego ГӀалгӀай 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî Хальмг 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Iñupiatun Ирон IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan Къарачай-малкъар ქართული کٲشُر Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Коми Kongo Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin Ladino ລາວ Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Luganda Lombard Magyar Madhurâ मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan Олык марий Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pälzisch Pangasinan پنجابی ပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏ Papiamentu پښتو Patois Перем коми ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Ποντιακά Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Ripoarisch Română Romani čhib Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya Gagana Samoa संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ سرائیکی Sardu Scots Seeltersk Sesotho Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Sranantongo Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Taqbaylit Tarandíne Татарча / tatarça တႆး తెలుగు Tetun ไทย Тоҷикӣ Lea faka-Tonga ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Türkmençe Удмурт Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro 文言 West-Vlams Winaray Wolof 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Obolo Betawi Kadazandusun Jaku Iban Yerwa Kanuri Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 41°54′09″N 12°27′09″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.90250°N 12.45250°E ﻿ / 41.90250; 12.45250 Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 11 August 2025 .

Enclaved Holy See's independent city-state This article is about the city-state in Europe. For the city-state's government, see Holy See .

Vatican City State Stato della Città del Vaticano ( Italian ) Status Civitatis Vaticanae ( Latin ) Flag Coat of arms Anthem: Inno e Marcia Pontificale ( Italian ) "Anthem and Pontifical March" noicon National Seal Sigillo dello Stato della Città del Vaticano ( Italian ) Sigillum Status Civitatis Vaticanae ( Latin ) National Seal of Vatican City Location of the Vatican City in Italy Capital Vatican City ( city-state ) 41°54.2′N 12°27.2′E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.9033°N 12.4533°E ﻿ / 41.9033; 12.4533 Official languages Italian [ 1 ] [ 2 ] National language Latin ( de jure ) Italian ( de facto ) [ a ] Religion Catholicism ( state religion ) Demonym(s) None ( de jure ) [ 4 ] Vatican ( de facto ) Government Unitary theocratic Catholic elective absolute monarchy [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] • Sovereign entity Holy See • Pope Leo XIV • President of the Governorate Raffaella Petrini Legislature Pontifical Commission [ b ] Independence from the Kingdom of the Franks and Italy • Donation of Pepin 756 (1269 years ago) • Lateran Treaty 11 February 1929 [ c ] (96 years ago) Area • Total 0.49 [ d ] km 2 (0.19 sq mi) ( 195th ) Population • 2024 estimate 882 [ 15 ] ( 237th ) • Density 1,800/km 2 (4,662.0/sq mi) ( 7th ) GDP ( PPP ) 2021 estimate • Total €14,859,970 • Per capita €19,450.22 Currency Euro ( € ) ( EUR ) Time zone UTC +1 ( CET ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC +2 ( CEST ) Calling code +379 [ e ] ISO 3166 code VA Internet TLD .va Vatican City UNESCO World Heritage Site Vatican City Criteria Cultural: i, ii, iv, vi Reference 286 Inscription 1984 (8th Session ) Vatican City , [ g ] [ h ] officially the Vatican City State ( Italian : Stato della Città del Vaticano ; [ i ] Latin : Status Civitatis Vaticanae ), [ j ] [ k ] often improperly shortened as the Vatican , is a landlocked sovereign state [ 18 ] [ 19 ] and city-state . It is an enclave within Rome , seat of the Catholic Church , and serves as the administrative centre of the Catholic Church.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] It became independent from the Kingdom of Italy in 1929 with the Lateran Treaty . Vatican City is governed by the See of Rome , commonly known as the Holy See , itself a sovereign entity under international law , which maintains its temporal power , governance, diplomacy, and spiritual independence.

Vatican is also used as a metonym for the Holy See, which is the central governing body of the Catholic Church and Vatican City, comprising the pope and the Roman Curia .

[ 22 ] With an area of 49 hectares (121 acres) [ d ] and a population of about 882 [ 15 ] in 2024, it is the smallest sovereign state in the world both by area and by population .

[ 23 ] It is among the least populated capitals in the world. As governed by the Holy See, Vatican City State is an ecclesiastical or sacerdotal - monarchical state ruled by the pope, who is the bishop of Rome and head of the Catholic Church .

[ 6 ] [ 24 ] The highest state functionaries are all Catholic clergy of various origins. After the Avignon Papacy (1309– 1377) the popes have mainly resided at the Apostolic Palace within what is now Vatican City, although at times residing instead in the Quirinal Palace in Rome or elsewhere.

The Holy See dates to early Christianity and is the principal episcopal see of the Catholic Church, which in 2018 had about 1.329 billion baptized Catholics in the world, in the Latin Church and 23 Eastern Catholic Churches .

[ 25 ] The independent state of Vatican City came into existence in 1929 via the Lateran Treaty between the Holy See and the Kingdom of Italy, which spoke of it as a new creation, [ 26 ] not as a vestige of the much larger Papal States (756–1870), which had previously encompassed much of Central Italy .

Vatican City contains religious and cultural sites such as St Peter's Basilica , the Sistine Chapel , the Vatican Apostolic Library , and the Vatican Museums . They feature some of the world's most famous paintings and sculptures. The economy of Vatican City is supported financially by donations from Catholic believers , by the sale of postage stamps and souvenirs, fees for admission to museums, and sales of publications. Vatican City has no taxes, and items are duty-free.

Name [ edit ] The name Vatican City was first used in the Lateran Treaty , signed on 11 February 1929, which established the modern city-state named after Vatican Hill , the geographic location of the state within the city of Rome . "Vatican" itself is derived from the name of an Etruscan settlement, Vatica or Vaticum , located in the general area the Romans called Ager Vaticanus , "Vatican territory".

[ 27 ] The Italian-language name of the city is Città del Vaticano or, more formally, Stato della Città del Vaticano , meaning 'State of Vatican City'. Its Latin name is Status Civitatis Vaticanae ; [ 28 ] [ 29 ] this is used in official documents by the Holy See , the Church and the pope .

History [ edit ] Further information: History of the Papacy and Holy See § History Early history [ edit ] The Vatican obelisk in St. Peter's Square was brought to Rome from Egypt by Caligula .

The name "Vatican" was already in use in the time of the Roman Republic for the Ager Vaticanus , a marshy area on the west bank of the Tiber across from the city of Rome, located between the Janiculum , the Vatican Hill and Monte Mario , down to the Aventine Hill and up to the confluence of the Cremera creek.

[ 30 ] The toponym Ager Vaticanus is attested until the 1st century AD: afterwards, another toponym appeared, Vaticanus , denoting an area much more restricted: the Vatican Hill, today's St. Peter's Square , and possibly today's Via della Conciliazione .

[ 30 ] Because of its vicinity to Rome's archenemy, the Etruscan city of Veii (another naming for the Ager Vaticanus was Ripa Veientana or Ripa Etrusca ), and for being subjected to the floods of the Tiber , the Romans considered this originally uninhabited part of Rome dismal and ominous.

[ 31 ] The particularly low quality of Vatican wine, even after the reclamation of the area, was commented on by the poet Martial ( AD 40 – c.

AD 102 ).

[ 32 ] Tacitus wrote that in AD 69, the Year of the Four Emperors , when the northern army that brought Vitellius to power arrived in Rome, a large proportion camped in the unhealthy districts of the Vatican, which resulted in many deaths among the common soldiery; and the Tiber being close by, the inability of the Gauls and Germans to bear the heat and the consequent greed with which they drank from the stream weakened their bodies, which were already an easy prey to disease .

[ 33 ] An early interpretation of the relative locations of the circus, and the medieval and current Basilicas of St. Peter One possible modern interpretation [ 34 ] During the Roman Empire , many villas were constructed there, after Agrippina the Elder (14 BC – 18 October AD 33) drained the area and laid out her gardens in the early-1st century AD. In AD 40 her son the emperor Caligula built in her gardens a circus for charioteers. It was later completed by the emperor Nero and named the Circus Gaii et Neronis , [ 35 ] usually called, simply, the Circus of Nero .

[ 36 ] The Vatican obelisk in St Peter's Square is the last visible remnant from the Circus of Nero . It was brought from Heliopolis in Roman Egypt by the emperor Caligula . The obelisk originally stood at the centre of the spina ( median ) of the Roman circus .

[ 37 ] The circus became the site of martyrdom for many Christians after the Great Fire of Rome in AD 64. Tradition states that it was in this circus that Saint Peter was crucified upside-down .

[ 38 ] In 1586, the obelisk was moved to its current position by Pope Sixtus V , using a method devised by the Italian architect Domenico Fontana .

[ 39 ] Opposite the circus was a cemetery separated by the Via Cornelia . Funeral monuments, mausoleums, small tombs, and altars to pagan gods of all kinds of polytheistic religions, were constructed before the construction of the Constantinian Basilica of St. Peter in the first half of the 4th century. A shrine dedicated to the Phrygian goddess Cybele and her consort Attis remained active long after the ancient Basilica of St. Peter was built nearby.

[ 40 ] Remains of this ancient necropolis were discovered during renovations by popes throughout the centuries, increasing in frequency during the Renaissance until it was systematically excavated from 1939 to 1941 on the order of Pope Pius XII .

The Constantinian basilica was built in 326 over what was believed to be the tomb of Saint Peter , buried in that cemetery.

[ 41 ] From then on, the land mass became more populated in connection with activity at the basilica. A palace was constructed nearby as early as the 5th century during the pontificate of Pope Symmachus (reigned 498–514).

[ 42 ] Papal States [ edit ] Main article: Papal States See also: History of the Papacy The Italian peninsula in 1796. The Papal States in central Italy are coloured purple.

Popes gradually came to have a secular role as governors of regions near Rome. They ruled the Papal States , which covered a large portion of the Italian peninsula , for more than a thousand years until the mid-19th century, when all the territory belonging to the papacy was seized by the newly created Kingdom of Italy .

For most of this time, the popes did not live at the Vatican. The Lateran Palace , on the opposite side of Rome, was their habitual residence for about a thousand years. From 1309 to 1377, they lived in Avignon in France. On their return to Rome, they chose to live at the Vatican. They moved to the Quirinal Palace in 1583, after work on it was completed under Pope Paul V (1605–1621). In 1870, after the capture of Rome , popes have lived in the Vatican. Their prior residence at the Quirinal Palace was taken over by the King of Italy .

Under Italian rule (1871–1929) [ edit ] Main article: Roman Question In 1870 the pope's holdings were left in an uncertain situation when Rome was annexed by Italian forces, bringing to completion the Italian unification , after a nominal resistance by the papal forces. Between 1861 and 1929, the status of the pope of Rome was referred to as the "Roman Question".

Italy made no attempt to interfere with the Holy See within the Vatican walls. However, it confiscated church property in many places. In 1871 the Quirinal Palace was confiscated by the king of Italy and became the royal palace. Thereafter, the popes resided undisturbed within the Vatican walls, and certain papal prerogatives were recognized by the Law of Guarantees , including the right to send and receive ambassadors. The popes did not recognize the Italian king's right to rule in Rome, and they refused to leave the Vatican compound until the dispute was resolved in 1929.

Pope Pius IX (1846–1878), the last ruler of the Papal States, was referred to as a " prisoner in the Vatican ". Forced to give up secular power, the popes focused on spiritual issues.

[ 43 ] Lateran treaties [ edit ] Main article: Lateran Treaty This situation was resolved on 11 February 1929, when the Lateran Treaty between the Holy See and the Kingdom of Italy was signed by Prime Minister and Head of Government Benito Mussolini on behalf of King Victor Emmanuel III and by Cardinal Secretary of State Pietro Gasparri for Pope Pius XI .

[ 26 ] [ 22 ] [ 44 ] The treaty, which was ratified [ 11 ] and took effect on 7 June 1929, [ 12 ] established the independent state of Vatican City and reaffirmed the special status of Catholic Christianity in Italy.

[ 44 ] World War II [ edit ] Main article: Vatican City in World War II Musicians of the British Army 's 38th (Irish) Brigade playing in front of St. Peter's Basilica in June 1944 The Holy See, which governed the Vatican City, pursued a policy of neutrality during World War II under the leadership of Pope Pius XII .

German troops occupied Rome after the September 1943 Armistice of Cassibile , with Allied forces pushing them out in 1944. Both sides respected the Vatican City's status as neutral territory .

[ 45 ] One of the main diplomatic priorities of Pius XII was to prevent the bombing of Rome. A high level of sensitivity led him to protest even the dropping of pamphlets over Rome by the Royal Air Force , claiming that the few which landed within the Vatican City violated its neutrality.

[ 46 ] The British government's policy towards the Vatican, as expressed in the minutes of a Cabinet meeting, was that we should on no account molest the Vatican City, but that our action as regards the rest of Rome would depend upon how far the Italian government observed the rules of war .

[ 46 ] After the United States entered into the war, US officials were against bombing the Vatican City, fearful of offending Catholic members of the American military, but said that they could not stop the British from bombing Rome if the British so decided . The US military even exempted Catholic servicemembers from air raids on Rome and other areas with a significant Catholic presence, unless they voluntarily agreed to participate. Notably, with the exception of Rome, and presumably the possibility of the Vatican, no Catholic US servicemember refused a mission within German-held Italy. On the other hand, the British insisted they would bomb Rome whenever the needs of the war demanded .

[ 47 ] In December 1942, the British envoy to the Holy See suggested that Rome be declared an open city , a suggestion that the Holy See took more seriously than was probably meant by the envoy, who did not want Rome to be an open city. Mussolini rejected the suggestion when the Holy See put it to him. In connection with the Allied invasion of Sicily , 500 United States Army Air Forces aircraft bombed Rome on 19 July 1943 , targeting Rome's railway hub in particular. Approximately 1,500 people were killed, and Pius XII, who had been described in the previous month as worried sick about the possibility of Rome being bombed, toured the affected areas. Another Allied bombing raid took place on 13 August 1943, after Mussolini had been ousted from power .

[ 48 ] The following day, the new Italian government declared Rome an open city, after consulting the Holy See on the wording of the declaration.

[ 49 ] Post-war history [ edit ] A view of St. Peter's Square from the top of Michelangelo's dome Pius XII refrained from creating cardinals during the war. By the end of World War II, there were several prominent vacancies: Cardinal Secretary of State , Camerlengo , Chancellor , and Prefect for the Congregation for the Religious among them.

[ 50 ] Pius XII created 32 cardinals in early 1946 , having announced his intention to do so in his preceding Christmas message.

In 1970 the Pontifical Military Corps , except for the Swiss Guard , was disbanded by Paul VI .

[ 51 ] The Gendarmerie Corps was transformed into a civilian police and security force.

In 1984 a new concordat between the Holy See and Italy modified provisions of the earlier treaty, including the position of Catholic Christianity as the Italian state religion, a position given to it by a statute of the Kingdom of Sardinia of 1848.

[ 44 ] In 1995 construction of a new guest house, Domus Sanctae Marthae , adjacent to St Peter's Basilica was criticized by Italian environmental groups, backed by Italian politicians. They claimed the new building would block views of the Basilica from nearby Italian apartments.

[ 52 ] For a short while the plans strained the relations between the Vatican and the Italian government. The head of the Vatican's Department of Technical Services robustly rejected challenges to the Vatican State's right to build within its borders.

[ 52 ] In 2015 John R. Morss wrote in the European Journal of International Law that due to the terms of the Lateran Treaty, Vatican City's status as a sovereign state, and the pope 's status as a head of state, are problematic.

[ clarification needed ] [ 53 ] Geography [ edit ] Main article: Geography of Vatican City A map of Vatican City, highlighting notable buildings and the Vatican gardens The territory of Vatican City is part of the Vatican Hill, and of the adjacent former Vatican Fields. It is in this territory that St Peter's Basilica , the Apostolic Palace , the Sistine Chapel , and museums were built, along with other buildings. The area was part of the Roman rione of Borgo until 1929. Being separated from Rome, on the west bank of the river Tiber, the area was an outcrop of Rome that was protected by being included within the walls of Leo IV (847–855), and later expanded by the current fortification walls, built under Paul III (1534–1549), Pius IV (1559–1565), and Urban VIII (1623–1644).

[ 54 ] The territory of Vatican City State according to the Lateran Treaty When the Lateran Treaty of 1929 that gave the state its form was being prepared, the boundaries of the proposed territory were influenced by the fact that much of it was all but enclosed by this loop. For some tracts of the frontier, there was no wall, but the line of certain buildings supplied part of the boundary, and for a small part of the frontier a modern wall was constructed.

[ 55 ] The territory includes St Peter's Square , distinguished from the territory of Italy only by a white line along the limit of the square, where it touches Piazza Pio XII. St. Peter's Square is reached through the Via della Conciliazione which runs from close to the Tiber to St Peter's. This grand approach was constructed by Benito Mussolini after the conclusion of the Lateran Treaty. St Peter's Square is also partially encircled by the Ricciolo d'Italia , a small strip of Italian territory.

[ 56 ] According to the Lateran Treaty, certain properties of the Holy See that are located in Italian territory, most notably the Papal Palace of Castel Gandolfo and the major basilicas , enjoy extraterritorial status similar to that of foreign embassies .

[ 44 ] [ 57 ] These properties, scattered all over Rome and Italy, house essential offices and institutions necessary to the character and mission of the Holy See.

[ 57 ] Castel Gandolfo and the named basilicas are patrolled internally by police agents of Vatican City State and not by Italian police . According to the Lateran Treaty, St. Peter's Square, up to but not including the steps leading to the basilica, is normally patrolled by the Italian police.

[ 44 ] There are no passport controls for visitors entering Vatican City from the surrounding Italian territory. There is free public access to Saint Peter's Square and Basilica and, on the occasion of papal general audiences, to the hall in which they are held. For these audiences and for major ceremonies in Saint Peter's Basilica and Square, tickets free of charge must be obtained beforehand. The Vatican Museums , incorporating the Sistine Chapel, usually charge an entrance fee. There is no general public access to the gardens. Guided tours for small groups can be arranged to the gardens and excavations under the basilica . Other Vatican locations are only open to individuals who have business to transact there.

[ 58 ] St. Peter's Square, the basilica and obelisk, from Piazza Pio XII Climate [ edit ] Vatican City's climate is the same as Rome's: a temperate , Mediterranean climate Csa . It has mild, rainy winters from October to mid-May, and hot, dry summers from May to September. Some minor local features, principally mists and dews, are caused by the anomalous bulk of St Peter's Basilica, the elevation, the fountains, and the size of the large paved square. The highest temperature ever recorded was 40.8 °C (105.4 °F) on 28 June 2022.

[ 59 ] Climate data for Vatican City (data of Aeroporto Roma-Ciampino "Giovan Battista Pastine") Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Year Record high °C (°F) 19.8 (67.6) 21.2 (70.2) 26.6 (79.9) 27.2 (81.0) 33.0 (91.4) 37.8 (100.0) 40.8 (105.4) 40.7 (105.3) 38.4 (101.1) 30.0 (86.0) 25.0 (77.0) 20.2 (68.4) 40.8 (105.4) Mean daily maximum °C (°F) 11.9 (53.4) 13.0 (55.4) 15.2 (59.4) 17.7 (63.9) 22.8 (73.0) 26.9 (80.4) 30.3 (86.5) 30.6 (87.1) 26.5 (79.7) 21.4 (70.5) 15.9 (60.6) 12.6 (54.7) 20.4 (68.7) Daily mean °C (°F) 7.5 (45.5) 8.2 (46.8) 10.2 (50.4) 12.6 (54.7) 17.2 (63.0) 21.1 (70.0) 24.1 (75.4) 24.5 (76.1) 20.8 (69.4) 16.4 (61.5) 11.4 (52.5) 8.4 (47.1) 15.2 (59.4) Mean daily minimum °C (°F) 3.1 (37.6) 3.5 (38.3) 5.2 (41.4) 7.5 (45.5) 11.6 (52.9) 15.3 (59.5) 18.0 (64.4) 18.3 (64.9) 15.2 (59.4) 11.3 (52.3) 6.9 (44.4) 4.2 (39.6) 10.0 (50.0) Record low °C (°F) −11.0 (12.2) −4.4 (24.1) −5.6 (21.9) 0.0 (32.0) 3.8 (38.8) 7.8 (46.0) 10.6 (51.1) 10.0 (50.0) 5.6 (42.1) 0.8 (33.4) −5.2 (22.6) −4.8 (23.4) −11.0 (12.2) Average precipitation mm (inches) 67 (2.6) 73 (2.9) 58 (2.3) 81 (3.2) 53 (2.1) 34 (1.3) 19 (0.7) 37 (1.5) 73 (2.9) 113 (4.4) 115 (4.5) 81 (3.2) 804 (31.7) Average precipitation days (≥ 1 mm) 7.0 7.6 7.6 9.2 6.2 4.3 2.1 3.3 6.2 8.2 9.7 8.0 79.4 Mean monthly sunshine hours 120.9 132.8 167.4 201.0 263.5 285.0 331.7 297.6 237.0 195.3 129.0 111.6 2,472.8 Source: https://www.wunderground.com/cat6/noaa-earth-had-its-third-warmest-year-record-2017 https://weatherspark.com/h/y/71896/2022/Historical-Weather-during-2022-in-Vatican-City In July 2007 the Vatican accepted a proposal by two firms based respectively in San Francisco and Budapest , [ 62 ] to become the first carbon neutral state by offsetting its carbon dioxide emissions with the creation of a Vatican Climate Forest in Hungary, [ 63 ] as a purely symbolic gesture [ 64 ] to encourage Catholics to do more to safeguard the planet.

[ 65 ] Nothing came of the project.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] In November 2008 the Vatican installed solar panels on the roof of the Paul VI Audience Hall .

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] Gardens [ edit ] Main article: Gardens of Vatican City Within the territory of the Vatican City are the Vatican Gardens (Italian: Giardini Vaticani ), [ 70 ] which account for about half of the Vatican territory. The gardens, established during the Renaissance and Baroque era, are decorated with fountains and sculptures.

The gardens cover approximately 23 hectares (57 acres). The highest point is 60 metres (197 ft) above mean sea level . Stone walls bound the area in the north, south, and west.

The gardens date back to medieval times when orchards and vineyards extended to the north of the Papal Apostolic Palace .

[ 71 ] In 1279 Pope Nicholas III (1277–1280) moved his residence back to the Vatican from the Lateran Palace and enclosed this area with walls.

[ 72 ] He planted an orchard ( pomerium ), a lawn ( pratellum ), and a garden ( viridarium ).

[ 72 ] A panorama of the gardens viewed from St. Peter's Basilica Governance [ edit ] Main article: Politics of Vatican City The politics of Vatican City takes place in the context of an absolute elective monarchy and being governed by the Holy See , in which the head of the Catholic Church holds power. The pope exercises principal legislative, executive, and judicial power over the State of Vatican City, which is a rare case of a non-hereditary monarchy.

State and Holy See [ edit ] The Vatican City State, created in 1929 by the Lateran Pacts , provides the Holy See with a temporal jurisdiction and independence within a small territory. It is distinct from the Holy See. The state can thus be deemed a significant but not essential instrument of the Holy See. The Holy See itself has existed continuously as a juridical entity since Roman Imperial times and has been internationally recognized as a powerful and independent sovereign entity since Late Antiquity to the present, without interruption even at times when it was deprived of territory (e.g. 1870 to 1929).

Vatican City is one of the few widely recognized independent states that has not become a member of the United Nations .

[ 73 ] The Holy See, which is distinct from Vatican City State, has permanent observer status , with all the rights of a full member except for a vote in the UN General Assembly .

Structure [ edit ] See also: Pontificate Pope Leo XIV , 2025 The government of Vatican City has a unique structure. As governed by the Holy See, the pope is the sovereign of the state, but he is supported by different bodies. Legislative authority is managed, in the pope's name, by the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State , a body of cardinals appointed by the pope for five-year periods. Executive power is exercised by the president of that commission , who is consequently also the president of the governorate, assisted by the general secretary and the deputy general secretary.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] The state's foreign relations are entrusted to the Holy See's Secretariat of State and diplomatic service.

Nevertheless, the pope has absolute power in the executive, legislative, and judicial branches over Vatican City, [ 76 ] and is thus the only absolute monarch in Europe.

[ 77 ] Operationally, there are departments that deal with health, security, telecommunications and other matters.

[ 76 ] Sede vacante [ edit ] The Cardinal Camerlengo presides over the Apostolic Camera , to which is entrusted the administration of the property and protection of other papal temporal powers and rights of the Holy See during the period of the empty throne or sede vacante (papal vacancy).

[ 78 ] Those of the Vatican State remain under the control of the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State . Acting with three other cardinals chosen by lot every three days, one from each order of cardinals ( cardinal bishop , cardinal priest , and cardinal deacon ), he in a sense performs during that period the functions of head of state of Vatican City.

[ 79 ] All the decisions these four cardinals take must be approved by the College of Cardinals as a whole.

Papal nobility [ edit ] Main article: Papal nobility The nobility that was closely associated with the Holy See at the time of the Papal States continued to be associated with the Papal Court after the loss of these territories, generally with merely nominal duties (see Papal Master of the Horse , Prefecture of the Pontifical Household , Hereditary officers of the Roman Curia , Black Nobility ). They also formed the ceremonial Noble Guard . In the first decades of the existence of the Vatican City State, executive functions were entrusted to some of them, including that of delegate for the State of Vatican City, now denominated president of the Commission for Vatican City. With the motu proprio Pontificalis Domus of March 1968, [ 80 ] Pope Paul VI abolished the honorary positions that had continued to exist until then, such as Quartermaster general and Master of the Horse .

Head of state [ edit ] Main articles: Pope and President of the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State See also: List of Sovereigns of the Vatican City State The Apostolic Palace ( Palazzo Apostolico ), the official residence of the pope. Here, Benedict XVI is at the window marked by a maroon banner hanging from the windowsill at centre.

As Vatican City is governed by the Holy See , the pope is ex officio the head of state , [ 81 ] a function dependent on his primordial function as bishop of the diocese of Rome and head of the Catholic Church .

[ 82 ] The term "Holy See" refers not to the Vatican state but to the pope's spiritual and pastoral governance, largely exercised through the Roman Curia .

[ 83 ] His official title with regards to Vatican City is Sovereign of the State of the Vatican City .

Pope Leo XIV , born Robert Francis Prevost in Chicago , United States, was elected on 8 May 2025. His principal subordinate government official for Vatican City as well as the country's de facto head of government is the president of the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State , who since 1952 exercises the functions previously belonging to the Governor of Vatican City . Since 2001, the president of the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State also has the title of president of the Governorate of the State of Vatican City. The president is the Italian sister Raffaella Petrini , who was appointed by Pope Francis on 1 March 2025, [ 84 ] and was reconfirmed by Pope Leo XIV on 9 May 2025.

[ 85 ] Government and justice [ edit ] See also: Politics of Vatican City and Law of Vatican City The Palace of the Governorate of Vatican City State Legislative functions are administered by the pope, but are also delegated to the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State , led by the president of the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State . Its members are cardinals appointed by the pope for terms of five years.

Acts of the commission must be approved by the Pope, through the Holy See's Secretariat of State , [ citation needed ] and must be published in a special appendix of the Acta Apostolicae Sedis .

Most of the content of this appendix consists of routine executive decrees, such as approval for a new set of postage stamps.

[ citation needed ] Executive authority is delegated to the president of the Governorate of Vatican City, who is also the president of the Pontificial Commission. In addition, the Governorate include two immediate collaborators of the president: the general secretary and the deputy general secretary, members of the General Secretariat, each appointed by the pope for five-year terms.

[ citation needed ] Important actions of the Governorate must be confirmed by the Pontifical Commission and by the Pope through the Secretariat of State.

[ citation needed ] Both the Pontifical Commission for Vatican City State and the president of the Governorate of Vatican City can be assisted by the councilors of Vatican City State in drafting legislation and other important issues. The president of the Governorate can convoke the members of the Council of Directors, together with external experts and people. The Governorate oversees the central governmental functions through several departments and offices.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 88 ] The directors and officials of these offices are appointed by the Pope for five-year terms.

[ citation needed ] The Governorate is organized into central offices, one for law and another for personnel matters, and directorates with roles in the following matters: Infrastructure and services Telecommunications and information systems Security and civil protection services Economy Health and hygiene Museums and cultural heritage Pontifical villas [ 89 ] [ 90 ] There are subsidiary bodies for monetary , disciplinary, personnel and personnel selection matters.

[ 91 ] In the pope's name, judiciary functions ( Vatican judiciary ) are exercised by four bodies: a Supreme Court, a Court of Appeal, a Tribunal and a Sole Judge, whose roles are established by the Vatican codes of criminal and civil procedure, and the 2013 " Motu Proprio On the Jurisdiction of Judicial Authorities of Vatican City State in Criminal Matters".

[ 92 ] At the Vatican's request, sentences imposed can be served in Italy (see the section on crime , below).

Due to obvious territorial constraints, many headquarters and offices of the Holy See are located on Italian territory. They are granted the same immunity as diplomatic missions thanks to the Lateran Treaty and are commonly defined as " extraterritorial areas".

[ 93 ] National and public security [ edit ] Main articles: Military in Vatican City , Pontifical Swiss Guard , Corps of Gendarmerie of Vatican City , and Corps of Firefighters of the Vatican City State A guard of the Vatican at his sentry box As Vatican City is an enclave within Italy, its military defence is provided by the Italian Armed Forces . There is no formal defence treaty with Italy, as Vatican City is a neutral state . Vatican City has no armed forces of its own, although the Swiss Guard is a military corps of the Holy See responsible for the personal security of the pope, and residents in the state. Soldiers of the Swiss Guard are entitled to hold Vatican City State passports and nationality.

[ 93 ] Swiss mercenaries were historically recruited by popes as part of an army for the Papal States. The Pontifical Swiss Guard was founded by Pope Julius II on 22 January 1506 as the pope's personal bodyguard and continues to fulfill that function. It is listed in the Annuario Pontificio under "Holy See", not under "State of Vatican City". In 2005, the Guard had 134 members. Recruitment is arranged by a special agreement between the Holy See and Switzerland.

[ 93 ] All recruits must be Catholic, unmarried males with Swiss citizenship who have completed their basic training with the Swiss Armed Forces with certificates of good conduct, be between the ages of 19 and 30, and be at least 174 cm (5 ft 9 in) in height. Members are equipped with small arms and the traditional halberd , and trained in bodyguarding tactics. Together with the Corps of Gendarmerie of Vatican City , the Swiss Guard have roles in the Italy-Vatican border control .

[ 93 ] The Palatine Guard and the Noble Guard , the last armed forces of the Vatican City State, were disbanded by Pope Paul VI in 1970.

[ 51 ] As the entire territory of Vatican City has been listed on the International Register of Cultural Property under Special Protection and, in 1984, among World Heritage Sites , the Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict provides international legal protection against armed conflicts .

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] A large part of the historical documents of the very extensive Vatican Apostolic Archive is stored in the "Bunker", which was inaugurated in 1980, a two-storey reinforced concrete vault, under the Cortile della Pigna , equipped with systems for fire protection , climate and humidity control , and physical security .

[ 96 ] A Vatican gendarmerie car Civil defence is the responsibility of the Corps of Firefighters of the Vatican City State , the national fire brigade . Dating its origins to the early nineteenth century, the Corps in its present form was established in 1941. It is responsible for fire fighting, and civil defence scenarios including flooding, natural disasters, and mass casualty incidents . The Corps is governmentally supervised through the Directorate for Security Services and Civil Defence, which is also responsible for the Gendarmerie (see below).

The Gendarmerie Corps ( Corpo della Gendarmeria ) is the gendarmerie , or police and security force, of Vatican City and the extraterritorial properties of the Holy See .

[ 97 ] The corps is responsible for security, public order , border control , traffic control , criminal investigation , and other general police duties in Vatican City including providing security for the pope outside Vatican City. The corps has 130 personnel and is a part of the Directorate for Security Services and Civil Defence (which also includes the Vatican Fire Brigade), an organ of the Governorate of Vatican City.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] Even though St Peter's Square is part of Vatican territory, it is normally safeguarded by Italian police forces .

[ 93 ] Crime [ edit ] Main article: Crime in Vatican City The crowds of tourists in St. Peter's Square are a target for pickpockets.

Crime in Vatican City consists largely of purse snatching, pickpocketing and shoplifting by outsiders.

[ 100 ] The tourist foot-traffic in St Peter's Square is one of the main locations for pickpockets in Vatican City.

[ 101 ] If crimes are committed in the square, the perpetrators may be arrested and tried by the Italian authorities, since that area is normally patrolled by Italian police.

[ 102 ] Under the Lateran Treaty, [ 44 ] Italy will, at the request of the Holy See, punish individuals for crimes committed within the Vatican City and will itself proceed against the person who committed the offence, if that person takes refuge in Italian territory. Persons accused of crimes recognized as such both in Italy and in Vatican City that are committed in Italian territory will be handed over to the Italian authorities if they take refuge in the Vatican City or in buildings that enjoy immunity under the treaty.

[ 44 ] [ 103 ] The Vatican City has no prison system, apart from a few detention cells for pre-trial detention.

[ 104 ] People convicted of committing crimes in the Vatican serve terms in Italian prisons ( Polizia Penitenziaria ), with costs covered by the Vatican.

[ 105 ] Foreign relations [ edit ] See also: Foreign relations of the Holy See and List of diplomatic missions of the Holy See The Ingresso di Sant'Anna , an entrance to Vatican City from Italy Vatican City State is a recognized national territory under international law . The Holy See conducts diplomatic relations on its behalf, in addition to the Holy See's own diplomacy, entering into international agreements in its regard. Vatican City thus has no diplomatic service of its own.

Because of space limitations, Vatican City is one of the few countries in the world that are unable to host embassies. Foreign embassies to the Holy See are located in Rome. Only during the Second World War were the staff of some embassies accredited to the Holy See given what hospitality was possible within the narrow confines of Vatican City – embassies such as that of the United Kingdom while Rome was held by the Axis Powers and Germany's when the Allies controlled Rome.

The size of Vatican City is unrelated to the large global reach exercised by the Holy See as an entity quite distinct from the state.

[ 106 ] Vatican City State itself participates in some international organizations whose functions relate to the state as a geographical entity, distinct from the non-territorial legal persona of the Holy See. These organizations are much less numerous than those in which the Holy See participates either as a member or with observer status. They include the following eight, in each of which Vatican City State holds membership: [ 107 ] [ 108 ] European Conference of Postal and Telecommunications Administrations (CEPT) European Telecommunications Satellite Organization (Eutelsat IGO) International Grains Council (IGC) International Institute of Administrative Sciences (IIAS) International Telecommunication Union (ITU) International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (ITSO) Interpol [ 109 ] Universal Postal Union (UPU) It also participates in: [ 107 ] World Medical Association World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) Non-party, non-signatory policy [ edit ] A map of the United Nations member states The Vatican City is not a member of the United Nations (UN), but the Holy See was granted observer status to the United Nations General Assembly in 1968; the only other country in a similar position is the partially recognized State of Palestine . Since it is not a member of the UN, the Vatican City is not subjected to the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice (ICJ). It engages with UN specialized agencies through its observer status, including the Central Emergency Response Fund , to which it contributed US$20,000 between 2006 and 2022.

[ 110 ] The Vatican City State is not a member of the International Criminal Court (ICC). In Europe, only Belarus is also a non-party, non-signatory state.

Ukraine and Monaco are signatory states that have not ratified and Russia withdrew from it in 2016.

The Vatican City State is not a member of the Council of Europe nor a party to the European Convention on Human Rights , thus is not subject to the European Court of Human Rights . Among European states, Belarus is also not a member, while Russia has ceased to be part of it after being expelled from the Council of Europe following the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine .

The OECD 's " Common Reporting Standard " (CRS), aiming at preventing tax evasion and money laundering , has also not been signed.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] [ 113 ] The Vatican City State has been criticized for money-laundering practices in the past decades.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] [ 116 ] The only other country in Europe that has not agreed to sign the CRS is Belarus.

The Vatican City State is one of few countries in the world that do not provide any publicly available financial data to the International Monetary Fund .

[ 117 ] [ failed verification ] Economy [ edit ] Main article: Economy of Vatican City View of Vatican City in the evening.

The Vatican City State budget includes the Vatican Museums and post office and is supported financially by the sale of stamps , coins , medals and tourist mementos; by fees for admission to museums; and by publications sales.

[ l ] The incomes and living standards of lay workers are comparable to those of counterparts who work in the city of Rome.

[ 118 ] Other industries include printing, the production of mosaics, and the manufacture of staff uniforms.

The Institute for Works of Religion (IOR, Istituto per le Opere di Religione ), also known as the Vatican Bank, is a financial agency situated in the Vatican that conducts worldwide financial activities. It has multilingual ATMs with instructions in Latin , possibly the only ATM in the world with this feature.

[ 119 ] Vatican City issues its own coins and stamps. It has used the Euro as its currency since January 1999, owing to a special agreement with the European Union . Euro coins and notes were introduced on 1 January 2002 — the Vatican City does not issue euro banknotes . Issuance of euro-denominated coins is strictly limited by treaty. More coins than usual are allowed in a year with a new papacy.

[ 120 ] Because of their rarity, Vatican euro coins are highly sought by collectors.

[ 121 ] Until the adoption of the Euro, Vatican coinage and stamps were denominated in their own Vatican lira currency, which was on par with the Italian lira .

Vatican euro coins with images of Pope Francis and Pope Benedict XVI Vatican City State, which employs nearly 2,000 people, had a surplus of 6.7 million euros in 2007. It ran a deficit in 2008 of over 15 million euros.

[ 122 ] In 2012 the US Department of State 's International Narcotics Control Strategy Report listed Vatican City for the first time among the nations of concern for money-laundering , placing it in the middle category, which includes countries such as Ireland, but not among the most vulnerable countries, which include the United States itself, Germany, Italy, and Russia.

[ 123 ] Vatican Museums' "New Wing", built by Raffaele Stern (1774–1820) In February 2014 the Vatican announced it was establishing a secretariat for the economy, to be responsible for all economic, financial, and administrative activities of the Holy See and the Vatican City State, headed by Cardinal George Pell . This followed the charging of two senior clerics including a monsignor with money-laundering offences. Pope Francis appointed an auditor-general authorized to carry out audits of any agency at any time and engaged a US financial services company to review the Vatican's 19,000 accounts, to ensure compliance with international money-laundering practices. The pontiff appointed the Administration of the Patrimony of the Apostolic See as the Vatican's central bank, with responsibilities similar to other central banks around the world.

[ 124 ] In 2022 the Vatican planned to release NFTs of its museum collection.

[ 125 ] Transport [ edit ] Main article: Transport in Vatican City The shortest national railway system in the world The Vatican City has a reasonably well-developed transport network considering its size, consisting mostly of a piazza and walkways. As a state that is 1.05 kilometres (1,150 yards) long and 0.85 km (930 yd) wide, [ 126 ] it has a small transportation system, with no airports or highways.

The only aviation facility in Vatican City is the Vatican City Heliport . Vatican City is one of the few independent countries without an airport , and is served by the airports that serve the city of Rome, Leonardo da Vinci-Fiumicino Airport and to a lesser extent Ciampino Airport .

[ 127 ] There is a standard gauge Vatican Railway and a Vatican City railway station , mainly used to transport freight. It is connected to Italy's network at Rome's Roma San Pietro railway station by an 852-metre-long (932 yd) spur, 300 metres (330 yd) of which is within Vatican territory.

[ 127 ] Pope John XXIII was the first pope to use the railway.

Pope John Paul II rarely used it.

[ 127 ] The closest metro station is Ottaviano – San Pietro – Musei Vaticani .

[ 128 ] Telecommunications and mass media [ edit ] A pay phone in the Vatican City The City is served by an independent, modern telephone system named the Vatican Telephone Service .

[ 129 ] The Vatican controls its own Internet top-level domain , which is registered as ( .va ). Broadband service is widely provided within Vatican City. Vatican City has a radio ITU prefix , HV, and this is sometimes used by amateur radio operators.

Vatican Radio , which was organized by Guglielmo Marconi , broadcasts on short-wave , medium-wave and FM frequencies and on the Internet.

[ 130 ] Its main transmission antennae are located in Italian territory, and exceed Italian environmental protection levels of emission. For this reason, the Vatican Radio has been sued . Television services are provided through another entity, the Vatican Television Center .

[ 131 ] L'Osservatore Romano is the multilingual semi-official newspaper of the Holy See. It is published by a private corporation under the direction of Catholic laymen, but reports on official information. The official texts of documents are in the Acta Apostolicae Sedis , the official gazette of the Holy See, which has an appendix for documents of the Vatican City State.

Vatican Radio, the Vatican Television Center, and L'Osservatore Romano are organs of the Holy See. They are listed in the Annuario Pontificio , which places them in the section "Institutions linked with the Holy See", ahead of the sections on the Holy See's diplomatic service abroad and the diplomatic corps accredited to the Holy See, after which is placed the section on the State of Vatican City. In 2015, these organisations were brought together under the Dicastery for Communication .

[ 132 ] Postal service [ edit ] Vatican City's post office was established in February 1929.

A postal system ( Poste Vaticane ) was created on 13 February 1929. On 1 August, the state started to release its own postal stamps, under the authority of the Philatelic and Numismatic Office of the Vatican City State .

[ 133 ] The city's postal service is sometimes said to be the best in the world , [ 134 ] and faster than the postal service in Rome.

[ 134 ] The international postal country code prefix is SCV . The postal code is 00120 – altogether SCV-00120 .

[ 135 ] Healthcare [ edit ] See also: Vatican Pharmacy and Bambino Gesù Hospital Sustainability [ edit ] The Vatican has implemented several environmental initiatives aimed to reduce its ecological footprint. Since 2008, the Vatican has expanded its solar energy systems, including the installation of photovoltaic panels at various locations such as the roof of the Paul VI Audience Hall . The city-state has introduced 35 electric vehicle charging stations to promote the use of electric vehicles and intends to gradually replace State-owned cars with electric vehicles.

[ 136 ] Well before the European Union's 2021 deadline, Vatican City successfully banned single-use plastics in 2019, reducing plastic waste. The Vatican's waste management system has improved, achieving a recycling rate of 55 per cent for municipal solid waste, with a goal of reaching the EU standard of 70–75 per cent.

[ 137 ] Energy-efficiency measures, such as installing LED lighting in St Peter's Basilica and transitioning to digital document management, have been implemented to reduce energy consumption and paper use. These efforts reflect the Vatican's commitment to the vision of Pope Francis's encyclical Laudato si' and the Apostolic Exhortation Laudate Deum .

Demographics [ edit ] See also: Women in Vatican City As of 2024 [update] Vatican City has a population of 882 residents, regardless of citizenship.

[ 15 ] There are 372 Vatican citizens residing elsewhere, [ 15 ] consisting of diplomats of the Holy See to other countries and cardinals residing in Rome.

[ 138 ] The population is composed of clergy, other religious members, laypeople serving the state (such as the Swiss Guard ) and their family members.

[ 139 ] In 2013 there were 13 families of the employees of the Holy See living in Vatican City.

[ 140 ] In 2019 there were 20 children of the Swiss Guards living at the Vatican.

[ 141 ] All citizens, residents, and places of worship in the city are Catholic . The city receives thousands of tourists and workers every day.

Vatican City population on 31 December 2024 [ 15 ] Citizenship Vatican other Residency other Vatican City Pope 1 Cardinals 56 10 Diplomats 316 Swiss Guard 104 Others 131 636 Total 618 636 372 246 882 1,254 Vatican City population on 1 March 2011 [ 139 ] Sex all male female Citizenship Vatican other Vatican other Vatican other Residency other Vatican City other Vatican City other Vatican City Pope 1 1 Cardinals 43 30 43 30 Diplomats 306 306 Swiss Guard 86 86 Other religious 50 197 49 102 1 95 Other lay 56 24 25 3 31 21 Total 572 221 540 105 32 116 349 223 349 191 32 444 296 148 793 645 148 Languages [ edit ] Further information: Languages of Vatican City The Seal of Vatican City. Note the use of the Italian language.

Vatican City has no formally enacted official language , but, unlike the Holy See which most often uses Latin for the authoritative version of its official documents, Vatican City uses only Italian in its legislation and official communications.

[ 142 ] Italian is the everyday language used by most of those who work in the state. In the Swiss Guard, Swiss German is the language used for giving commands. Individual guards take their oath of loyalty in their own languages: German, French, Italian or Romansh . The official websites of the Holy See [ 143 ] and of Vatican City [ 144 ] are primarily in Italian, with versions of their pages in a large number of languages, to varying extents.

Citizenship [ edit ] Unlike citizenship of other states, which is based either on jus sanguinis (birth from a citizen, even outside the state's territory) or on jus soli (birth within the territory of the state), citizenship of Vatican City is granted on jus officii , namely on the grounds of appointment to work in a certain capacity in the service of the Holy See. It usually ceases upon the cessation of the appointment. Citizenship is extended to the spouse and children of a citizen, provided that they are living together in the city.

[ 138 ] Some individuals are authorized to reside in the city but do not qualify or choose not to request citizenship.

[ 138 ] Anyone who loses Vatican citizenship and does not possess other citizenship automatically becomes an Italian citizen , as provided in the Lateran Treaty.

[ 44 ] The Holy See, not being a country, issues only diplomatic and service passports, whereas Vatican City issues ordinary passports for its citizens.

Statistical oddities [ edit ] In statistics comparing countries in per capita or per area metrics, Vatican City is often an outlier – these stem from the state's small size and ecclesiastical function.

[ 145 ] For example, as most of the roles which would confer citizenship are reserved for men, the gender ratio of Vatican City citizenship is several men per woman.

[ 146 ] Further oddities are petty crimes against tourists, resulting in a very high per-capita crime rate, [ 147 ] and the city-state leading the world in per-capita wine consumption due to its sacramental use .

[ 145 ] A jocular illustration of these anomalies is sometimes made by calculating a "popes per km 2 " statistic, which is greater than two because Vatican City is less than half a square kilometre in area.

[ 148 ] A 360-degree view from the dome of St. Peter's Basilica , looking over the Vatican's Saint Peter's Square (centre) and out into Rome, showing Vatican City in all directions Culture [ edit ] See also: Music of Vatican City Cultural heritage [ edit ] See also: Architecture of Vatican City and Vatican Museums St. Peter's Basilica is one of the most renowned works of Renaissance architecture.

[ 149 ] The Vatican City is home to some of the most famous art in the world.

St Peter's Basilica , designed by a succession of architects including Bramante , Michelangelo , Giacomo della Porta , Carlo Maderno and Gian Lorenzo Bernini , is a renowned work of Renaissance architecture . The Sistine Chapel is famous for its frescos, which include works by Perugino , Domenico Ghirlandaio and Sandro Botticelli , as well as the ceiling and Last Judgment by Michelangelo. The interiors of the Vatican were decorated by artists including Raphael and Fra Angelico .

The Vatican Apostolic Library and the collections of the Vatican Museums are of the highest historical, scientific and cultural importance.

[ 150 ] Added by UNESCO to the List of World Heritage Sites in 1984, the Vatican is the only site to consist of an entire state.

[ 151 ] It is the only UNESCO site registered as a centre containing monuments in the "International Register of Cultural Property under Special Protection" according to the 1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict .

[ 151 ] Science [ edit ] The Pontifical Academy of Sciences and the Casina Pio IV .

Following in the footsteps of the Pontifical Academy of New Lincei founded by Pope Pius IX in 1847, Pope Pius XI founded the Pontifical Academy of Sciences in 1936, which, located in the Casina Pio IV , guarantees academic freedom to contribute to mathematical , physical (including astronomy , Earth sciences , physics and chemistry ) and natural sciences (e.g., medicine , neuroscience , biology , genetics , biochemistry ), and confront epistemological issues, with interests also in the history of science . Among the academicians , there are or were the astrophysicist Martin John Rees , the mathematician Cédric Villani , the theoretical physicist Edward Witten , the Nobel Prize in Chemistry laureates Jennifer Doudna and Emmanuelle Charpentier , and Ernest Rutherford , the geneticists Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza and Francis Collins , the head transplant pioneer Robert J. White , the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Alexander Fleming .

[ 152 ] [ 153 ] The Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences is another pontifical academy of the Holy See located in the Vatican City, which deals with anthropology , communication studies , information sciences , cybernetics , economics , education , geography , history , law , linguistics , political science , psychology , behavioral sciences , sociology and demography .

[ 154 ] The seat of the Pontifical Academy for Life , whose domains are bioethics and ethics of technology , is at San Callisto complex , a Vatican extraterritorial property .

[ 155 ] [ 156 ] The Vatican Observatory , whose origins date back to the 16th century, continues to contribute to astronomical research, especially through a partnership with the University of Arizona and the infrared and optical Vatican Advanced Technology Telescope in Arizona , and to astronomical education and " popular science " projects. As a member of the International Astronomical Union and the International Center for Relativistic Astrophysics , it deals with research on cosmological models , stellar classification , binary stars , and nebulae . It has contributed to philosophical interdisciplinary studies at the Center for Theology and the Natural Sciences in Berkeley, California and research on the history of astronomy thanks to its extensive library, which includes a meteorite collection .

[ 157 ] Some of the Vatican telescopes of the astronomical institution named Vatican Observatory participated in creating the Carte du Ciel , but they have progressively become useless or limited for research purposes due to light pollution in their locations: Vatican City (the Gardens of Vatican City and near St. Peter's Basilica ) and the Vatican extraterritorial Palace of Castel Gandolfo .

[ citation needed ] Sport [ edit ] Main article: Sport in Vatican City The Vatican City is not a member of the International Olympic Committee and does not compete in the Olympic Games , though it has participated in some international sporting events, including the World Cycling Championships , [ 158 ] the Championships of the Small States of Europe and the Mediterranean Games .

[ 159 ] Vatican City has its own athletics association, Athletica Vaticana .

[ 160 ] Football in Vatican City is organized by the Vatican Amateur Sports Association , which holds the national championship, called the Vatican City Championship , with eight teams, including, for example, the Swiss Guard's FC Guardia and police and museum guard teams.

[ 161 ] The association organizes the Coppa Sergio Valci and the Vatican Supercoppa . It controls the Vatican City national football team , which is neither affiliated with UEFA nor FIFA .

See also [ edit ] Architecture of Vatican City Holy city Index of Vatican City-related articles Law of Vatican City Vatican News Outline of Vatican City Timeline of fictional stories set in Vatican City References [ edit ] Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Many other languages are used by institutions situated within the state, such as the Holy See , the Pontifical Swiss Guard , and the Pontifical Academy of Sciences .

The Holy See uses Latin as its official language and Italian as its main working and diplomatic language; in addition, its Secretariat of State uses English , French , German , Italian, Polish , Portuguese and Spanish . The Swiss Guard has three command languages: German, French and Italian; the chaplain of the guard reads aloud the full oath of allegiance in these three languages.

[ 3 ] ^ All powers delegated by the sovereign [ 9 ] [ 10 ] ^ The Lateran Treaty was ratified, [ 11 ] and took effect, on 7 June 1929.

[ 12 ] ^ a b The De Agostini Atlas Calendar listed the area of Vatican City as 44 ha in its 1930 edition [ 13 ] but corrected it to 49 ha in its 1945–1946 edition.

[ 14 ] The figure of 44 ha is still widely cited by many sources despite its inaccuracy.

^ ITU-T assigned code 379 to Vatican City. However, Vatican City is included in the Italian telephone numbering plan and uses the Italian country code 39, followed by 06 (for Rome) and 698.

^ Visitors and tourists are not permitted to drive inside the Vatican City without specific permission, which is normally granted only to those on official business inside the Vatican City.

^ / ˈ v æ t ɪ k ə n ˈ s ɪ t i / ⓘ ^ Sometimes "the Vatican City".

^ Stato della Città del Vaticano [ 16 ] [ 17 ] ( Italian pronunciation: [ˈstaːto della tʃitˈta ddel vatiˈkaːno] ) is the name used in the text of the state's Fundamental Law and in the state's official website .

^ The ecclesiastical , and therefore official, pronunciation is [ˈstatus tʃiviˈtatis vatiˈkane] ; the classical one is [ˈstatʊs kiːwɪˈtaːtɪs waːtɪˈkaːnae̯] .

^ In the languages used by the Secretariat of State of the Holy See (except English and Italian as already mentioned above): French : Cité du Vatican — État de la Cité du Vatican German : Vatikanstadt , cf.

Vatikan — Staat Vatikanstadt (in Austria: Staat der Vatikanstadt ) Polish : Miasto Watykańskie , cf.

Watykan — Państwo Watykańskie Portuguese : Cidade do Vaticano — Estado da Cidade do Vaticano Spanish : Ciudad del Vaticano — Estado de la Ciudad del Vaticano .

^ The Holy See's budget, which is distinct from that of Vatican City State, is supported financially by a variety of sources, including investments, real estate income, and donations from Catholic individuals, dioceses, and institutions; these help fund the Roman Curia (Vatican bureaucracy), diplomatic missions, and media outlets. Moreover, an annual collection taken up in dioceses and direct donations go to a non-budgetary fund known as Peter's Pence , which is used directly by the Pope for charity, disaster relief and aid to churches in developing nations.

Citation notes [ edit ] ^ Reuters Staff (6 October 2014).

"Pope ditches Latin as official language of Vatican synod" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2023 . Retrieved 23 May 2023 .

^ "What language is spoken at the Vatican?" .

Visiting The Vatican . 13 April 2023.

Archived from the original on 5 November 2023 . Retrieved 5 November 2023 .

^ Solemn oath of the Vatican Swiss guards . 6 May 2014.

Archived from the original on 11 December 2021 – via YouTube.

^ "Vatican City :: Italy Explained" . Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 2 February 2023 .

^ "Internet Portal of Vatican City State" . Vatican City State. Archived from the original on 24 May 2011 . Retrieved 9 July 2011 .

^ a b "Holy See (Vatican City)" .

CIA—The World Factbook . 22 September 2021.

Archived from the original on 26 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 January 2021 .

^ Robbers, Gerhard (2006) Encyclopedia of World Constitutions Archived 29 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine . Infobase Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-81606078-8 . p. 1009 ^ Nick Megoran (2009) "Theocracy" Archived 4 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine , p. 226 in International Encyclopedia of Human Geography , vol. 11, Elsevier ISBN 978-0-08-044911-1 ^ "Legislative and Executive Bodies" .

Vatican City State . Archived from the original on 24 May 2011 . Retrieved 17 April 2022 .

^ Pope John Paul II (26 November 2000).

"Fundamental Law of Vatican City State" (PDF) .

Vatican City State . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 February 2008 . Retrieved 17 April 2022 .

^ a b Ekpo, Anthony (2024).

The Roman Curia: History, Theology, and Organization . Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press . p. 8.

ISBN 978-1-64712-436-6 .

^ a b "Lateran Treaty" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Archived from the original on 18 March 2025 . Retrieved 25 March 2025 .

^ De Agostini Atlas Calendar Archived 3 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine , 1930, p. 99.

(in Italian) ^ De Agostini Atlas Calendar Archived 3 June 2020 at the Wayback Machine , 1945–1946, p. 128.

(in Italian) ^ a b c d e "Population" (in Italian). Vatican City State. 31 December 2024.

^ "Stato della Città del Vaticano" .

Archived from the original on 19 January 2020 . Retrieved 30 November 2019 .

^ "La Santa Sede" .

Vatican.va .

Archived from the original on 8 December 2021 . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

^ Ray, Michael (20 May 2023).

"Vatican City" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 18 March 2015 . Retrieved 21 May 2023 .

^ Duignan, Brian (31 March 2023).

"nation-state" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 17 May 2023 . Retrieved 21 May 2023 .

^ "Vatican City" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 18 March 2015 . Retrieved 18 May 2021 .

^ "Vatican country profile" .

BBC News . 17 November 2018.

Archived from the original on 25 August 2018 . Retrieved 24 August 2018 .

^ a b "Text of the Lateran Treaty of 1929" . Archived from the original on 25 February 2021 . Retrieved 3 August 2020 .

^ "Europe :: Holy See (Vatican City) — The World Factbook – Central Intelligence Agency" .

www.cia.gov . 22 September 2021.

Archived from the original on 26 January 2022 . Retrieved 25 January 2021 .

^ "Vatican City" . Catholic-Pages.com. Archived from the original on 22 March 2019 . Retrieved 12 August 2013 .

^ "Catholics increasing worldwide, reaching 1.329 billion" .

AsiaNews . 26 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 14 April 2021 . Retrieved 9 March 2021 .

^ a b "Preamble of the Lateran Treaty" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 21 July 2014 .

^ Richardson, L. (October 1992).

New Topographical Dictionary of Ancient Rome . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 405.

ISBN 0-8018-4300-6 .

^ "Apostolic Constitution" (in Latin).

Archived from the original on 12 September 2020 . Retrieved 3 August 2020 .

^ Pope Francis (8 September 2014).

"Letter to John Cardinal Lajolo" (in Latin). The Vatican.

Archived from the original on 18 April 2015 . Retrieved 28 May 2015 .

^ a b Liverani 2016 , p. 21 ^ Petacco 2016 , p. 11 ^ "Damien Martin, "Wine and Drunkenness in Roman Society" " (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 September 2014 . Retrieved 27 August 2013 .

^ Tacitus, The Histories , II, 93, translation by Clifford H. Moore (The Loeb Classical Library, first printed 1925) ^ Based on " Outline of St. Peter's, Old St. Peter's, and Circus of Nero ".

^ Lanciani, Rodolfo (1892).

Pagan and Christian Rome [ dead link ] Houghton, Mifflin.

^ "Vatican City in the Past" .

Archived from the original on 28 May 2019 . Retrieved 3 August 2020 .

^ Pliny the Elder , Natural History XVI.76.

^ "St. Peter, Prince of the Apostles" . Catholic Encyclopedia.

Archived from the original on 15 September 2019 . Retrieved 12 August 2013 .

^ Travels and Adventures Archived 29 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine , Chapter 3, Pero Tafur , digitized from The Broadway Travellers series, edited by Sir E. Denison Ross and Eileen Power , translated and edited with an introduction by Malcolm Letts (New York, London: Harper & brothers 1926) ^ "Altar dedicated to Cybele and Attis" . Vatican Museums.

Archived from the original on 24 January 2012 . Retrieved 26 August 2013 .

^ Fred S. Kleiner, Gardner's Art through the Ages (Cengage Learning 2012 Archived 12 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine ISBN 978-1-13395479-8 ), p. 126 ^ "Vatican" .

Columbia Encyclopedia (Sixth ed.). 2001–2005. Archived from the original on 7 February 2006.

^ Wetterau, Bruce (1994).

World History: A Dictionary of Important People, Places, and Events, from Ancient Times to the Present . New York: Henry Holt & Co.

ISBN 978-0-8050-2350-3 .

^ a b c d e f g h "Patti lateranensi, 11 febbraio 1929 – Segreteria di Stato, card. Pietro Gasparri" .

The Holy See .

Archived from the original on 19 January 2021 . Retrieved 5 April 2020 .

^ "Rome" . Ushmm.org.

Archived from the original on 15 December 2013 . Retrieved 12 December 2013 .

^ a b Chadwick 1988 , pp. 222–232.

^ Chadwick 1988 , pp. 232–236.

^ Chadwick 1988 , pp. 236–244.

^ Chadwick 1988 , pp. 244–245.

^ Chadwick 1988 , p. 304.

^ a b "Vatican City Today" . Vatican City Government. Archived from the original on 11 December 2007 . Retrieved 28 November 2007 .

^ a b Thavis, John (2013).

The Vatican Diaries: A Behind-the-Scenes Look at the Power, Personalities and Politics at the Heart of the Catholic Church . NY: Viking. pp.

121–122 .

ISBN 978-0-670-02671-5 .

^ Morss, John R. (November 2015).

"The International Legal Status of the Vatican/Holy See Complex" .

European Journal of International Law .

26 (4). OUP: 927.

doi : 10.1093/ejil/chv062 .

hdl : 10536/DRO/DU:30081648 .

ISSN 0938-5428 .

Archived from the original on 22 January 2021 . Retrieved 6 February 2021 .

^ "Holy See (Vatican City)" , The World Factbook , Central Intelligence Agency, 28 December 2022, archived from the original on 26 January 2022 , retrieved 4 January 2023 ^ Lateran Treaty of 1929, Article 3 ^ "La città del Vaticano" [The Vatican City].

www.inftub.com . Archived from the original on 10 July 2023 . Retrieved 25 March 2025 .

^ a b Lateran Treaty of 1929, Articles 13–16 ^ "Useful Information" .

The Holy See .

Archived from the original on 21 November 2019 . Retrieved 4 January 2023 .

^ "Vatican City 2022 Past Weather (Vatican City) – Weather Spark" .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2023 . Retrieved 18 December 2023 .

^ Tabelle climatiche 1971–2000 della stazione meteorologica di Roma-Ciampino Ponente dall'Atlante Climatico 1971–2000 Archived 10 January 2019 at the Wayback Machine – Servizio Meteorologico dell'Aeronautica Militare ^ "Visualizzazione tabella CLINO della stazione / CLINO Averages Listed for the station Roma Ciampino" .

Archived from the original on 19 August 2011 . Retrieved 13 June 2011 .

^ "Vatican footprint wrong-footed" .

The Global Warming Policy Forum . 26 May 2010.

Archived from the original on 2 January 2015 . Retrieved 2 January 2015 .

^ "The Vatican to go carbon neutral" . United Press International. 13 July 2007.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2009 . Retrieved 12 September 2009 .

^ Vatican signs up for a carbon offset forest , Catholic News Service , published 13 July 2007. Retrieved 3 August 2007 Archived 5 July 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Climate forest makes Vatican the first carbon-neutral state , Western Catholic Reporter , published 23 July 2007. Retrieved 3 August 2007 Archived 4 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Carbon offsets: How a Vatican forest failed to reduce global warming" Archived 1 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine .

The Christian Science Monitor ^ "Dangers lurk in offset investments" , Ethical Corporation published 19 September 2011. Retrieved 25 August 2012 Archived 27 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Going green: Vatican expands mission to saving planet, not just souls" , Catholic News Service , 25 May 2007, archived from the original on 12 June 2007 , retrieved 12 June 2007 ^ Glatz, Carol (26 November 2008), "Vatican wins award for creating rooftop solar-power generator" , Catholic News Service , archived from the original on 10 October 2017 ^ "Map of Vatican City" . saintpetersbasilica.org.

Archived from the original on 4 November 2021 . Retrieved 11 October 2009 .

^ "Al Pellegrino Cattolico: The Vatican Gardens " . 2008 Al Pellegrino Cattolico s.r.l. Via di Porta Angelica 81\83 (S.Pietro) I- 00193 Roma, Italy. Archived from the original on 13 April 2008 . Retrieved 21 November 2008 .

^ a b "Official Vatican City State Website: A Visit to the Vatican Gardens " . Uffici di Presidenza S.C.V. 2007. Archived from the original on 8 November 2008 . Retrieved 21 November 2008 .

^ Section, United Nations News Service (7 February 2017).

"UN News – FEATURE: Diplomacy of the conscience – The Holy See at the United Nations" .

UN News Service Section .

Archived from the original on 2 February 2018 . Retrieved 1 February 2018 .

^ "Origini e nature" [Origins and nature] (in Italian). Vatican City Directorate of Telecommunications and Computer Services. 21 December 2017 . Retrieved 23 May 2024 .

^ "Organi dello Stato" [State bodies] (in Italian). Vatican City Directorate of Telecommunications and Computer Services. 3 July 2018 . Retrieved 23 May 2024 .

^ a b "Vatican City" . Catholic-Pages.com. Archived from the original on 4 May 2007 . Retrieved 4 March 2007 .

^ " Learning with the Times: 7 Nation Still Under Absolute Monarchy Archived 12 December 2023 at the Wayback Machine ", The Times of India , published 10 November 2008. Retrieved 27 December 2020.

^ Visceglia, Maria Antonietta (1 January 2011).

"The Pope's Household And Court In The Early Modern Age" .

Royal Courts in Dynastic States and Empires . BRILL. pp.

237– 264.

doi : 10.1163/ej.9789004206229.i-444.57 .

ISBN 9789004206236 .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2023 . Retrieved 24 February 2023 .

^ "Universi Dominici Gregis (February 22, 1996) | John Paul II" .

The Holy See .

Archived from the original on 22 November 2019 . Retrieved 14 December 2022 .

^ Pontificalis Domus , archived from the original on 12 January 2014 ^ One of the titles of the Pope listed in the Annuario Pontificio is " Sovereign of Vatican City State " (page 23* in recent editions).

^ "In Biden's visit with the pope, a page from Reagan's playbook?" .

www.theconversation.com . 27 October 2021.

Archived from the original on 7 May 2022 . Retrieved 8 May 2022 .

^ "Code of Canon Law: text – IntraText CT" .

Archived from the original on 9 October 2020 . Retrieved 3 August 2020 .

^ "Pope Francis appoints an Italian nun as the first woman governor of Vatican City" .

America Magazine . 15 February 2025 . Retrieved 11 May 2025 .

^ Review, Global Banking and Finance (9 May 2025).

"Pope Leo temporarily confirms Vatican heads in current roles" .

Global Banking And Finance Review . Retrieved 11 May 2025 .

^ "Segreteria Generale" [General Secretariat].

vaticanstate.va (in Italian). Vatican City Directorate of Telecommunications and Computer Services. 25 March 2019 . Retrieved 23 May 2024 .

^ "Organi del potere legislativo ed esecutivo" [Executive and legislative bodies].

vaticanstate.va (in Italian). Vatican City Directorate of Telecommunications and Computer Services . Retrieved 23 May 2024 .

^ "Consiglio dei Direttori" [Council of Directors].

vaticanstate.va (in Italian). Vatican City Directorate of Telecommunications and Computer Services. 25 March 2019 . Retrieved 23 May 2024 .

^ "Uffici centrali" [Central offices].

vaticanstate.va (in Italian). Vatican City Directorate of Telecommunications and Computer Services. 25 March 2019 . Retrieved 23 May 2024 .

^ "Direzioni" [Directorates].

vaticanstate.va (in Italian). Vatican City Directorate of Telecommunications and Computer Services. 11 July 2018 . Retrieved 23 May 2024 .

^ "Organismi ausiliari" [Subsidiary bodies].

vaticanstate.va (in Italian). Vatican City Directorate of Telecommunications and Computer Services. 26 March 2019 . Retrieved 23 May 2024 .

^ "Organi del potere giudiziario" [Judiciary bodies].

vaticanstate.va (in Italian). Vatican City Directorate of Telecommunications and Computer Services . Retrieved 23 May 2024 .

^ a b c d e "Geografia" [Geography].

vaticanstate.va (in Italian). Vatican City Directorate of Telecommunications and Computer Services. 21 December 2017 . Retrieved 23 May 2024 .

^ Duursma, Jorri C. (1996).

Fragmentation and the International Relations of Micro-states: Self-determination and Statehood . Cambridge University Press. p. 396.

ISBN 978-0-521-56360-4 .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2021 . Retrieved 9 December 2020 .

^ "Extraterritorialità" [Extraterritoriality].

vaticanstate.va (in Italian). Vatican City Directorate of Telecommunications and Computer Services. 3 July 2018 . Retrieved 23 May 2024 .

^ "Bunker and storerooms" . Vatican Apostolic Archive . Retrieved 24 May 2024 .

^ "Corpo della Gendarmeria" (in Italian). Stato della Città del Vaticano. Archived from the original on 25 December 2012 . Retrieved 15 January 2013 .

^ "Gendarme Corps" . Office of the President of Vatican City State. 2007. Archived from the original on 23 October 2007 . Retrieved 15 October 2007 .

^ "Administrations and Central Offices" . Office of the President of Vatican City State. 2007. Archived from the original on 23 October 2007 . Retrieved 15 October 2007 .

^ "Vatican crime rate 'soars' " . BBC. 8 January 2003.

Archived from the original on 8 January 2008 . Retrieved 28 November 2007 .

^ "Vatican surpasses all nations... in pickpockets?" , Rome Reports , 14 February 2011, archived from the original on 15 November 2012 ^ Glatz, Carol (19 December 2013) "Man seriously injured after setting self on fire in St. Peter's Square" Archived 21 June 2019 at the Wayback Machine .

Catholic News Service ^ Shea, Alison (2009).

"Researching the Law of the Vatican City State" .

Hauser Global Law School Program .

New York University School of Law . Archived from the original on 17 October 2013.

^ "How Does Vatican City Deal With Criminals?" , Slate , 30 May 2012, archived from the original on 24 August 2018 , retrieved 18 April 2013 ^ " Is the Vatican a Rogue State?

Archived 6 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine " Spiegel Online . 19 January 2007. Retrieved 25 August 2010.

^ The Holy See and Diplomacy , Foreign and Commonwealth Office , archived from the original on 21 May 2009 ^ a b Vatican City State: Participation in International Organizations , Vatican City State, archived from the original on 10 July 2010 ^ See also appendix at end of "Bilateral Relations of the Holy See" Archived 9 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine . vatican.va ^ "Membership Vatican City State" .

Interpol . Archived from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 5 June 2012 .

^ "Contributions by donor" .

Central Emergency Response Fund .

Archived from the original on 7 August 2022 . Retrieved 23 August 2022 .

^ "AEOI: Status of Commitments" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 June 2019 . Retrieved 29 June 2019 .

^ "Jurisdictions participating in the Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters" (PDF) .

OECD .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 June 2019 . Retrieved 29 June 2019 .

^ "Signatories of the Multilateral Competent Authority Agreement on Automatic Exchange of Financial Account Information and Intended First Information Exchange Date" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 29 June 2019 . Retrieved 29 June 2019 .

^ Pullella, Philip (8 December 2017).

"Vatican should bring money-laundering cases to trial, watchdog agency says" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 2 June 2019 . Retrieved 29 June 2019 .

^ Perryer, Sophie (20 November 2018).

"Top 5 financial transgressions committed by the Vatican" .

European CEO .

Archived from the original on 27 March 2019 . Retrieved 29 June 2019 .

^ Willey, David (18 July 2013).

"The Vatican Bank is rocked by scandal again" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 29 June 2019 . Retrieved 29 June 2019 .

^ "IMF Data Portal" . International Monetary Fund.

^ "Holy See (Vatican City): Economy" .

CIA – The World Factbook .

Archived from the original on 26 January 2022 . Retrieved 10 October 2010 .

^ O'Malley, Seán P.

(28 September 2006).

"A Glimpse Inside the Vatican & Msgr. Robert Deeley's Guest Post" .

Archived from the original on 20 October 2007 . Retrieved 30 January 2008 .

^ "Agreements on monetary relations (Monaco, San Marino, the Vatican and Andorra)" .

Activities of the European Union: Summaries of legislation .

Archived from the original on 27 March 2010 . Retrieved 23 February 2007 .

^ "Benedict Vatican euros set for release" .

Catholic News . 21 April 2006.

Archived from the original on 11 September 2014 . Retrieved 25 September 2014 .

^ "Holy See's budget shortfall shrinks in 2008" , Christian Telegraph , archived from the original on 22 July 2011 The report quoted deals mainly with the revenues and expenses of the Holy See and mentions only briefly the finances of Vatican City.

^ Pullella, Philip (8 March 2012).

"U.S. adds Vatican to money-laundering 'concern' list." Archived 16 August 2021 at the Wayback Machine Reuters.

^ "Vatican financial system restructuring begins with new secretariat" . The Italy News.Net. 25 February 2014. Archived from the original on 20 July 2014 . Retrieved 25 February 2014 .

^ "The Vatican Will Create a NFT Gallery to 'Democratize Art' " . 2 May 2022.

Archived from the original on 5 May 2022 . Retrieved 5 May 2022 .

^ "Holy See – State of the Vatican City" . Vatican Papal Conclave.

Archived from the original on 29 May 2010 . Retrieved 28 November 2007 .

^ a b c "Railways of the World" . Sinfin.net.

Archived from the original on 10 October 2017 . Retrieved 8 August 2006 .

^ "The Vatican Museums & St Peter's, Rome; getting there –" .

www.rometoolkit.com .

Archived from the original on 5 March 2018 . Retrieved 19 March 2018 .

^ On call 24/7: Vatican phone system directs thousands of call each day , 24 July 2006, archived from the original on 19 December 2012 ^ "Vatican Radio – Index" . Vatican.va. 2 September 2005.

Archived from the original on 3 May 2009 . Retrieved 6 May 2009 .

^ "Vatican Television Center – Index" . Vatican.va.

Archived from the original on 3 May 2009 . Retrieved 6 May 2009 .

^ "Motu Proprio" .

www.comunicazione.va .

^ "The Early Definitives" . Vatican Philatelic Society. Archived from the original on 11 December 2007 . Retrieved 28 November 2007 .

^ a b Baker, Al (27 June 2004).

"Hail Marys Not Needed: Vatican Mail Will Deliver" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 1 January 2008 . Retrieved 28 November 2007 .

^ "International postal code: SCV-00120." www.vatican.va Archived 29 May 2010 at the Wayback Machine Holy See Press Office – General Information. Retrieved 23 October 2009.

^ "Vatican launches sustainable mobility programme 'Ecological Conversion 2023' – Vatican News" .

www.vaticannews.va . 16 November 2023 . Retrieved 21 April 2025 .

^ Glatz, Carol.

"Vatican City State set to end sale of single-use plastics" . Crus.

Archived from the original on 16 July 2019 . Retrieved 17 July 2019 .

^ a b c "Law on citizenship, residence and access" (PDF) (in Italian). Vatican City State. 22 February 2011.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 July 2022 . Retrieved 31 July 2022 .

^ a b "Population" (in Italian). Vatican City State. Archived from the original on 14 April 2019.

^ MrowiÅ„ska, Alina (26 February 2013).

"Behind The Walls: What It's Like To Live Inside The Vatican, For A Woman" .

Worldcrunch . NET TV – Catholic TV from the Diocese of Brooklyn.

Archived from the original on 13 November 2022 . Retrieved 22 October 2022 .

^ "Raising Children Within the Vatican: Life of a Swiss Guard Family" . Pew Research Center. 5 August 2019.

Archived from the original on 7 March 2023 . Retrieved 22 October 2022 .

^ Vatican City State appendix to the Acta Apostolicae Sedis is entirely in Italian.

^ "Vatican" .

The Holy See .

Archived from the original on 6 February 2015 . Retrieved 7 December 2021 .

^ "Vatican State" .

www.vaticanstate.va . Archived from the original on 11 October 2019.

^ a b "Vatican City drinks more wine per person than anywhere else in the world" .

The Independent . 25 February 2014.

Archived from the original on 27 July 2018 . Retrieved 27 July 2018 .

^ Mrowińska, Alina.

"Behind The Walls: What It's Like To Live Inside The Vatican, For A Woman" Archived 1 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine , Gazeta Wyborcza/Worldcrunch , 26 February 2013.

^ "Vatican crime rate 'soars' " . 8 January 2003.

Archived from the original on 5 February 2019 . Retrieved 6 March 2019 .

^ Miller, Anne; Mitchinson, John (14 March 2013).

"QI: some quite interesting facts about Popes" .

The Daily Telegraph .

ISSN 0307-1235 .

Archived from the original on 10 January 2022 . Retrieved 6 March 2019 .

^ "History, Architects, Relics, Art, & Facts" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . 20 July 1998 . Retrieved 18 August 2024 .

^ "The Vatican Library Goes Online and Digitizes Tens of Thousands of Manuscripts, Books, Coins, and More" .

Open Culture . 6 January 2020.

Archived from the original on 22 April 2022 . Retrieved 5 April 2022 .

^ a b "Vatican City – UNESCO World Heritage Centre" .

whc.unesco.org . UNESCO.

Archived from the original on 25 December 2017 . Retrieved 10 October 2009 .

^ "History" . Pontifical Academy of Sciences . Retrieved 24 May 2024 .

^ "Disciplines" . Pontifical Academy of Sciences . Retrieved 24 May 2024 .

^ "Disciplines" . The Pontifical Academy of Social Sciences . Retrieved 24 May 2024 .

^ "Pontifical academies" .

vatican.va .

Dicastery for Communication . Retrieved 24 May 2024 .

^ "Nuova sede dal Primo marzo 2024" [New headquarters from 1 March 2024] (in Italian). Pontifical Academy for Life . Retrieved 24 May 2024 .

^ "Specola vaticana" [Vatican Observatory].

vaticanstate.va (in Italian). Vatican City Directorate of Telecommunications and Computer Services . Retrieved 24 May 2024 .

^ Pender, Kieran (23 September 2022).

"Vatican sends holy rouleur Down Under on world road cycling mission" .

the Guardian . Retrieved 5 April 2024 .

^ "Vatican runner to compete in half marathon at Med Games" .

AP News . 28 June 2022.

Archived from the original on 17 March 2024 . Retrieved 5 April 2024 .

^ "Promoting solidarity and peace through sports" .

L'Osservatore Romano . 10 November 2023.

Archived from the original on 5 April 2024 . Retrieved 5 April 2024 .

^ "Life in the Guard" .

Pontifical Swiss Guard . Archived from the original on 4 February 2019 . Retrieved 10 September 2016 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Chadwick, Owen (1988).

Britain and the Vatican During the Second World War . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-36825-4 .

Nichols, Fiona (2006).

Rome and the Vatican . London: New Holland. pp.

85– 96.

ISBN 978-1-84537-500-3 .

[ permanent dead link ] Petacco, Laura (2016). " La Meta Romuli e il Terebinthus Neronis ". In Claudio Parisi Presicce; Laura Petacco (eds.).

La Spina: dall'Agro vaticano a via della Conciliazione (in Italian). Rome.

ISBN 978-88-492-3320-9 .

Liverani, Paolo (2016). " Un destino di marginalità: storia e topografia dell'area vaticana nell'antichità ". In Claudio Parisi Presicce; Laura Petacco (eds.).

La Spina: dall'Agro vaticano a via della Conciliazione (in Italian). Rome.

ISBN 978-88-492-3320-9 .

Further reading [ edit ] Kent, Peter C. (2002).

The Lonely Cold War of Pope Pius XII: The Catholic Church and the Division of Europe, 1943–1950 . Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press.

ISBN 978-0-7735-2326-5 .

Morley, John F. (1980).

Vatican Diplomacy and the Jews During the Holocaust, 1939–1943 . New York: Ktav Pub. House.

ISBN 978-0-87068-701-3 .

Ricci, Corrado; Begni, Ernesto (2003) [1914].

The Vatican: Its History, Its Treasures . Kessinger Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-7661-3941-1 .

Shaw, Tamsin, "Ethical Espionage" (review of Calder Walton, Spies: The Epic Intelligence War Between East and West , Simon and Schuster, 2023, 672 pp.; and Cécile Fabre , Spying Through a Glass Darkly: The Ethics of Espionage and Counter-Intelligence , Oxford University Press, 251 pp., 2024), The New York Review of Books , vol. LXXI, no. 2 (8 February 2024), pp.

32, 34–35.

[I]n Walton's view, there was scarcely a US covert action that was a long-term strategic success, with the possible exception of intervention in the Soviet–Afghan War (a disastrous military fiasco for the Soviets ) and perhaps support for the anti-Soviet Solidarity movement in Poland .

(p.

34.) External links [ edit ] Vatican City at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Official website Official website of the Holy See Vatican TV Channel on YouTube Vatican News Wikimedia Atlas of Vatican City Geographic data related to Vatican City at OpenStreetMap Inside the Vatican on National Geographic YouTube channel Vatican Chief of State and Cabinet Members Holy See (Vatican City) .

The World Factbook .

Central Intelligence Agency .

Holy See (Vatican City) from UCB Libraries GovPubs Vatican from BBC News The Vatican: spirit and art of Christian Rome , a book from The Metropolitan Museum of Art (fully available on the Internet as PDF ) v t e Vatican City articles Index Outline Holy See Properties Pope : Leo XIV List of sovereigns Vicar General for Vatican City History History of the papacy " Prisoner in the Vatican " Circus of Nero Old St. Peter's Basilica Papal tombs Navicella Leonine City Cortile del Belvedere Santo Stefano degli Ungheresi Lateran Treaty Borgo Nuovo Borgo Vecchio Piazza Scossacavalli Geography Major basilica St. Peter's Basilica Chair of Saint Peter Door of the Dead Monument to the Royal Stuarts St. Peter's Baldachin Saint Longinus Pietà Vatican Necropolis Saint Peter's tomb Papal tombs Tomb of the Julii Vatican Grottoes Apostolic Palace Redemptoris Mater Chapel Borgia Apartments Clementine Hall Loggias Papal apartments Stufetta del cardinal Bibbiena Cappella Paolina Raphael Rooms Niccoline Chapel Sala Ducale Sala Regia Scala Regia The Vision of Constantine Sistine Chapel altarpiece ceiling Room of Tears Vatican Museums Historical Paintings Modern and Contemporary Art Pio-Clementino Chiaramonti Gregoriano Etrusco Gregoriano Egiziano Pio Cristiano Ethnographic Bramante Staircase Maps Gregorian Tower Casina Pio IV Sant'Anna dei Palafrenieri Domus Sanctae Marthae Holy Spirit Chapel Gardens Santa Maria della Pietà in Camposanto dei Teutonici Collegio Teutonico Teutonic Cemetery Mater Ecclesiae Monastery Sant'Egidio in Borgo Santi Martino e Sebastiano degli Svizzeri Paul VI Audience Hall The Resurrection Passetto di Borgo San Pellegrino in Vaticano St. Peter's Square Via della Conciliazione Fountains Porta San Pellegrino Ricciolo d'Italia Saint John's Tower Santo Stefano degli Abissini Vatican Pharmacy Vatican Hill Politics Elections Foreign relations Vicar General Law Crime Fundamental Law Governance Pope Leo XIV Cardinal Secretary of State Vacant Government Roman Curia Apostolic Camera Commissions For Vatican City State Councils Congregations Dicasteries Military Corps of Gendarmerie Swiss Guard See also: Corps of Firefighters Economy Banking Vatican euro coins Communications .va [Internet domain] Poste Vaticane Postage stamps and postal history Homelessness Secretariat for the Economy Tourism Infrastructure Transport Heliport Rail Culture Academy of Sciences AT telescope observatory Architecture Archives Apostolic Archive Climate Forest Demographics Languages Library film Music Sistine Chapel Choir Philatelic and Numismatic Office Public holidays Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Information Service Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Radio Vatican Television Center Vatican News App Vatican Publishing House Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio L'Osservatore Romano Pope2you Religion Catholic Church Symbols Anthem Coat of arms Flag Sports Amateur Sports Association Cricket team National football team (Men) National football team (Women) Vatican Athletics Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal v t e Art of the Sistine Chapel Life of Moses Moses Leaving for Egypt 1 The Youth of Moses 2 The Crossing of the Red Sea 3/4/5 The Descent from Mount Sinai 3/6 The Punishment of the Sons of Korah 2 Testament and Death of Moses 7/8 Life of Christ The Baptism of Christ 1 The Temptations of Christ 2 The Vocation of the Apostles 4 The Sermon on the Mount 3 The Delivery of the Keys 1 The Last Supper 3/5 Ceiling 9 ( Gallery ) Scenes from Genesis The Separation of Light from Darkness The Creation of the Sun, Moon, and Plants The Separation of Land and Water The Creation of Adam The Creation of Eve The Fall and Expulsion from the Garden of Eden The Sacrifice of Noah The Flood The Drunkenness of Noah Prophets Jonah Jeremiah Ezekiel Joel Zechariah Isaiah Daniel Sibyls Persian Sibyl Erythraean Sibyl Delphic Sibyl Cumaean Sibyl Libyan Sibyl Altar wall The Last Judgment 9 Tapestries Raphael Cartoons 10 Related Art patronage of Julius II Restoration of the Sistine Chapel frescoes Sistine Chapel Choir Room of Tears Vatican City The Agony and the Ecstasy (1965 film) Key : 1 Pietro Perugino 2 Sandro Botticelli 3 Cosimo Rosselli 4 Domenico Ghirlandaio 5 Biagio d'Antonio 6 Piero di Cosimo 7 Luca Signorelli 8 Bartolomeo della Gatta 9 Michelangelo 10 Raphael Pope Sixtus IV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category v t e Holy See Apostolic see of Pope Leo XIV as bishop of the Diocese of Rome Sovereignty of Vatican City Legal status of the Holy See History Apostolic see Primacy of Peter History of papal primacy Patrimony of Saint Peter Old St. Peter's Basilica Lateran Palace Museum Duchy of Rome Donation of Sutri Donation of Pepin Avignon Papacy Papal States Temporal power Investiture Controversy Age of Revolution " Prisoner in the Vatican " Savoyard era Vatican City Lateran Treaty World War II Warsaw Pact Sovereign judicial entity under international law ( Legal status ) Officials Pope Leo XIV Cardinal Secretary of State Pietro Parolin Cardinals List Advisers Governance Secretariat of State College of Cardinals Conclave Government Roman Curia Apostolic Camera Commissions For Vatican City State Councils Congregations Dicasteries Foreign affairs ( Multilateral policy ) Section for Relations with States To the Holy See Of the Holy See Heads Italy United Nations Permanent Observer in Geneva European Union Permanent Observer to the Council of Europe Apostolic nunciature Nuncio Treaties Concordats Diocese of Rome with universal full communion ( Papal primacy ) Synods Ordinary general assemblies Extraordinary general assemblies Special assemblies Ecclesiastical province of Rome ( Vicariate : Rome , Vatican City ) Suburbicarian sees Ostia Velletri–Segni Porto–Santa Rufina Frascati Palestrina Albano Sabina–Poggio Mirteto Territorial abbeys Monte Cassino Subiaco Suffragan dioceses Gaeta Anagni-Alatri Civita Castellana Civitavecchia-Tarquinia Frosinone-Veroli-Ferentino Latina-Terracina-Sezze-Priverno Rieti Sora-Cassino-Aquino-Pontecorvo Tivoli Viterbo Properties including extra- territoriality Inside Rome Major basilicas St. Peter's Basilica Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Santa Maria Maggiore Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls Lateran Palace Lateran University Scala Sancta Sancta Sanctorum Adjoining buildings Palace of Saint Callixtus Gianicolo Hill area Pontifical Urban University Pontifical North American College Bambino Gesù Hospital Palazzo della Cancelleria Palace of the Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples Palace of the Holy Office Palace of the Congregation for the Oriental Churches Palazzo Pio Palazzo Maffei Marescotti (Palace of the Vicariate} Pontifical Roman Minor Seminary Collegio Teutonico Teutonic Cemetery Benedictine monastery Pontifical Oratory of San Paolo Beda College Paul VI Audience Hall St. Peter's Square Non- extraterritorial Palace of the Holy Apostles Palace of San Carlo ai Catinari Collegio Bellarmino Archaeological Institute Pontifical Oriental Institute Pontifical Lombard Seminary Russian College Two Palaces of Sant'Apollinare House of Retreat for the Clergy of Saints John and Paul Nympheum of Nero Outside Rome Palace of Castel Gandolfo Papal farm Gardens of the Villa Cybo Villa Barberini Adjacent gardens Pontifical College Josephinum Summer estate of Pontificio Collegio Urbano de Propaganda Fide Vatican Radio antennae area of Santa Maria di Galeria Non- extraterritorial Basilica della Santa Casa Basilica of Saint Francis of Assisi Basilica of Saint Anthony of Padua See also Acta Apostolicae Sedis Awards Papal household Peter's Pence Roman Rota Apostolic Penitentiary Apostolic Signatura Swiss Guard Vatican.va Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal v t e Papacy Episcopate of the bishop of Rome Jurisdiction Holy See ( full communion ) Pope Leo XIV as bishop of the Diocese of Rome primacy history Vatican City ( index , outline ) Enclaved in Rome , Italy Lateran Treaty , 1929 along with extraterritorial properties of the Holy See Headquarters Vatican City : Apostolic Palace papal apartments Sistine Chapel Italy : Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran ( cathedra ) Major basilicas Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran St. Peter's Basilica Basilica of Saint Mary Major Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls Titles ( Papal names ) His Holiness Bishop of Rome Vicar of Jesus Christ Successor of the Prince of the Apostles Supreme Pontiff of the Universal Church Patriarch of the West Primate of Italy Archbishop and Metropolitan of the Roman Province Sovereign of the Vatican City State Servant of the servants of God Symbols Coats of arms Coat of arms of the Holy See Cross Keys of Heaven Regalia and insignia Rota Umbraculum Proclamations Infallibility Apostolic constitution Bull list Encyclical Apostolic exhortation Ecclesiastical letter Interdict Activities Arbitration deposition Blessing " pontifical " Urbi et Orbi Conclave list Coronation Consistory Diplomacy Inauguration Mass High Mass Travel Vestments Camauro Falda Fanon Ferula Flabellum Mantle Mitre Mozzetta Pallium Ring of the Fisherman Shoes slippers Subcinctorium Tiara list Zucchetto Transportation Popemobile Sedia gestatoria Shepherd One Household Camerlengo Commander of the Swiss Guard Chaplain Palatinus papal majordomo Gentlemen Preacher Prefect Prelate of Honour Prince assistant Theologian Staff College of Cardinals cardinals list Roman Curia Apostolic Camera commissions for Vatican City State councils congregations dicasteries Synods Cappella Giulia Sistine Chapel Choir Related Antipope Western Schism Canonised popes Fat pope, thin pope Gammarelli Legends Orders, decorations, and medals Papabile Papal nobility " Black " Pontifical academy Pontifical colleges in Rome Major Seminary Pontifical university in Rome Popes by country Sexually active popes St. Peter's Square Swiss Guard Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal Geographic locale v t e Countries and dependencies of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia 2 Austria Azerbaijan 1 Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus 2 Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia 1 Germany Greece Hungary Iceland 3 Ireland Italy Kazakhstan 1 Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia 1 San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey 1 Ukraine United Kingdom Vatican City 4 States with limited recognition Abkhazia 2 Kosovo Northern Cyprus 2 South Ossetia 2 Transnistria Dependent territories Denmark Faroe Islands 3 autonomous country of the Kingdom of Denmark United Kingdom Akrotiri and Dhekelia 2 (Sovereign Base Areas) Gibraltar ( British Overseas Territory ) Crown Dependencies Bailiwick of Guernsey Alderney Guernsey Sark Bailiwick of Jersey Isle of Man Special areas of internal sovereignty Finland Åland ( autonomous region subject to the Åland convention of 1921) Norway Svalbard ( unincorporated area subject to the Svalbard Treaty ) United Kingdom England Scotland Wales Northern Ireland ( country of the United Kingdom subject to the British-Irish Agreement ) 1 Spans the conventional boundary between Europe and another continent.

2 Considered European for cultural, political and historical reasons but is geographically in Western Asia.

3 Oceanic islands within the vicinity of Europe are usually grouped with the continent even though they are not situated on its continental shelf.

4 Governed by the Holy See which has sovereignty over Vatican City.

Category Europe portal v t e Capitals of Europe Capitals of dependent territories and states whose sovereignty is disputed shown in italics .

Sovereign states Amsterdam , Netherlands 1 Andorra la Vella , Andorra Ankara , Turkey 2 Astana , Kazakhstan 2 Athens , Greece Baku , Azerbaijan 2 Belgrade , Serbia Berlin , Germany Bern , Switzerland Bratislava , Slovakia Brussels , Belgium 3 Bucharest , Romania Budapest , Hungary Chișinău , Moldova Copenhagen , Denmark Dublin , Ireland Helsinki , Finland Kyiv , Ukraine Lisbon , Portugal Ljubljana , Slovenia London , United Kingdom Luxembourg , Luxembourg Madrid , Spain Minsk , Belarus Monaco 4 Moscow , Russia Nicosia , Cyprus 2 Oslo , Norway Paris , France Podgorica , Montenegro Prague , Czech Republic Reykjavík , Iceland Riga , Latvia Rome , Italy San Marino , San Marino Sarajevo , Bosnia and Herzegovina Skopje , North Macedonia Sofia , Bulgaria Stockholm , Sweden Tallinn , Estonia Tbilisi , Georgia 2 Tirana , Albania Vaduz , Liechtenstein Valletta , Malta Vatican City 4 Vienna , Austria Vilnius , Lithuania Warsaw , Poland Yerevan , Armenia 2 Zagreb , Croatia States with limited recognition North Nicosia , Northern Cyprus 2 Pristina , Kosovo Sokhumi , Abkhazia 2 Tiraspol , Transnistria Tskhinvali , South Ossetia 2 Dependencies United Kingdom Constituent countries London , England Edinburgh , Scotland Cardiff , Wales Belfast , Northern Ireland Crown Dependencies and Overseas Territories Douglas , Isle of Man Episkopi Cantonment , Akrotiri and Dhekelia Gibraltar , Gibraltar St Helier , Jersey Saint Peter Port , Guernsey Other Longyearbyen , Svalbard (Norway) Tórshavn , Faroe Islands (Denmark) Federal states Austria Bregenz , Vorarlberg Eisenstadt , Burgenland Graz , Styria Innsbruck , Tyrol Klagenfurt , Carinthia Linz , Upper Austria Salzburg , Salzburg Sankt Pölten , Lower Austria Vienna , Vienna Belgium Communities Brussels , Flemish Community and French Community Eupen , German-speaking Community Regions Brussels , Brussels-Capital Region and Flanders Namur , Wallonia Bosnia and Herzegovina Banja Luka (de facto), Republika Srpska Brčko , Brčko District Sarajevo , Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina Germany Berlin , Berlin Bremen , Bremen Dresden , Saxony Düsseldorf , North Rhine-Westphalia Erfurt , Thuringia Hamburg , Hamburg Hanover , Lower Saxony Kiel , Schleswig-Holstein Magdeburg , Saxony-Anhalt Mainz , Rhineland-Palatinate Munich , Bavaria Potsdam , Brandenburg Saarbrücken , Saarland Schwerin , Mecklenburg-Vorpommern Stuttgart , Baden-Württemberg Wiesbaden , Hesse Russia Republics Cheboksary , Chuvashia Cherkessk , Karachay-Cherkessia Elista , Kalmykia Grozny , Chechnya Izhevsk , Udmurtia Kazan , Tatarstan Magas , Ingushetia Makhachkala , Dagestan Maykop , Adygea Nalchik , Kabardino-Balkaria Petrozavodsk , Karelia Saransk , Mordovia Simferopol , Crimea ( disputed ) Syktyvkar , Komi Ufa , Bashkortostan Vladikavkaz , North Ossetia–Alania Yoshkar-Ola , Mari El Autonomous okrugs Naryan-Mar , Nenets Krais Krasnodar , Krasnodar Krai Perm , Perm Krai Stavropol , Stavropol Krai Oblasts Arkhangelsk , Arkhangelsk Oblast Astrakhan , Astrakhan Oblast Belgorod , Belgorod Oblast Bryansk , Bryansk Oblast Ivanovo , Ivanovo Oblast Kaliningrad , Kaliningrad Oblast Kaluga , Kaluga Oblast Kirov , Kirov Oblast Kostroma , Kostroma Oblast Krasnogorsk and Moscow , Moscow Oblast (de facto) Kursk , Kursk Oblast Lipetsk , Lipetsk Oblast Murmansk , Murmansk Oblast Nizhny Novgorod , Nizhny Novgorod Oblast Orenburg , Orenburg Oblast Oryol , Oryol Oblast Penza , Penza Oblast Pskov , Pskov Oblast Rostov-on-Don , Rostov Oblast Ryazan , Ryazan Oblast Gatchina , Leningrad Oblast Samara , Samara Oblast Saratov , Saratov Oblast Smolensk , Smolensk Oblast Tambov , Tambov Oblast Tula , Tula Oblast Tver , Tver Oblast Ulyanovsk , Ulyanovsk Oblast Veliky Novgorod , Novgorod Oblast Vladimir , Vladimir Oblast Volgograd , Volgograd Oblast Vologda , Vologda Oblast Voronezh , Voronezh Oblast Yaroslavl , Yaroslavl Oblast Federal cities Moscow Saint Petersburg Sevastopol ( disputed ) Switzerland Aarau , Aargau Altdorf , Uri Appenzell , Appenzell Innerrhoden Basel , Basel-Stadt Bellinzona , Ticino Chur , Grisons Delémont , Jura Frauenfeld , Thurgau Fribourg , Canton of Fribourg Geneva , Canton of Geneva Herisau , Appenzell Ausserrhoden Lausanne , Vaud Liestal , Basel-Landschaft Lucerne , Canton of Lucerne Neuchâtel , Canton of Neuchâtel Sarnen , Obwalden Schaffhausen , Canton of Schaffhausen Schwyz , Canton of Schwyz Sion , Valais Solothurn , Canton of Solothurn Stans , Nidwalden St. Gallen , Canton of St. Gallen Glarus , Canton of Glarus Zug , Canton of Zug Zurich , Canton of Zürich Autonomous entities Italy Autonomous regions Cagliari , Sardinia Palermo , Sicily Trento , Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol Aosta , Aosta Valley Trieste , Friuli Venezia Giulia Portugal Autonomous regions Ponta Delgada , Angra do Heroísmo , & Horta , Azores Funchal , Madeira Spain Barcelona , Catalonia Las Palmas & Santa Cruz de Tenerife , Canary Islands Logroño , La Rioja Madrid , Community of Madrid Mérida , Extremadura Murcia , Region of Murcia Oviedo , Asturias Palma de Mallorca , Balearic Islands Pamplona , Navarre Santander , Cantabria Santiago de Compostela , Galicia Seville , Andalusia Toledo , Castilla–La Mancha (de facto) Valencia , Valencian Community Valladolid , Castile and León (de facto) Vitoria-Gasteiz , Basque Country (de facto) Zaragoza , Aragon Other Ajaccio , Corsica Collectivité (France) Batumi , Adjara (Georgia) Comrat , Gagauzia (Moldova) Karyes , Mount Athos (Greece) Mariehamn , Åland Islands (Finland) Nakhchivan , Nakhchivan (Azerbaijan) Novi Sad , Vojvodina (Serbia) Simferopol , Crimea (Ukraine) 1 Also the capital of the Kingdom of the Netherlands 2 Continental placement may vary depending on geographic convention being followed 3 Also the seat of the European Union, see Institutional seats of the European Union and Brussels and the European Union 4 A city-state Portals : Vatican City Italy Cities Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France 2 BnF data 2 Japan Czech Republic Spain Norway Sweden Vatican Israel Geographic MusicBrainz area Artists KulturNav People UK Parliament Other IdRef NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX 41°54′09″N 12°27′09″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.90250°N 12.45250°E ﻿ / 41.90250; 12.45250 NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐p2vmq
Cached time: 20250817043602
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.322 seconds
Real time usage: 2.668 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 19499/1000000
Revision size: 137743/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 827855/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 107034/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 70/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 610468/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.339/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25470329/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2076.554      1 -total
 37.88%  786.623      2 Template:Reflist
 21.36%  443.513     98 Template:Cite_web
 12.85%  266.738      1 Template:Infobox_country
  5.49%  114.047     11 Template:Cite_news
  5.16%  107.208      1 Template:Vatican_City_topics
  5.07%  105.337      1 Template:Country_topics
  4.76%   98.856      1 Template:Ubl
  4.53%   94.166      5 Template:Native_name
  4.13%   85.759      6 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:stable-pcache:32408:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043602 and revision id 1305322009. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vatican_City&oldid=1305322009 " Categories : Vatican City States and territories established in 1929 1929 establishments in Vatican City World Heritage Sites in Europe Countries in Europe Christian states Catholic pilgrimage sites Holy cities Countries and territories where Italian is an official language Properties of the Holy See Monarchies in Europe Catholic Church in Europe Catholic Church in Italy City-states Enclaved countries Landlocked countries Duty-free zones of Europe Enclaves and exclaves Religion and politics Theocracies Microstates in Europe Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Italian-language text Pages with Italian IPA Pages with Latin IPA Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Polish-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1: unfit URL CS1 Latin-language sources (la) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2022 Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Use Oxford spelling from December 2023 Use dmy dates from May 2025 Articles containing Latin-language text Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parameters Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from May 2025 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2024 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Articles with dead external links from February 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Pages using Sister project links with default search Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 11:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vatican City 268 languages Add topic

