Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work 2 Notes 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Zenodorus (mathematician) 13 languages Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Piemontèis Português Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek mathematician (c. 200–140 BC) Zenodorus ( Greek : Ζηνόδωρος ; c. 200 – c. 140 BC) was an ancient Greek mathematician .

Life and work [ edit ] Little is known about the life of Zenodorus, although he may have befriended Philonides and made two trips to Athens , as described in Philonides' biography. From the style of his writing, it is known that he lived not much later than Archimedes .

He is mentioned in Diocles ' On Burning Mirrors : And when Zenodorus the astronomer came down to Arcadia and was introduced to us, he asked us how to find a mirror surface such that when it is placed facing the sun the rays reflected from it meet a point and thus cause burning.

[ 1 ] Zenodorus is known for authoring the treatise On isoperimetric figures , now lost. Many of its propositions are known from Theon of Alexandria 's commentary on Ptolemy 's Syntaxis .  In his On isoperimetric figures , Zenodorus studies the areas and perimeters of different geometric figures.  The most important propositions proved by him are that, Of all regular polygons of equal perimeter, that is the greatest in area which has the most angles.

A circle is greater than any regular polygon of equal contour.

Of all polygons of the same number of sides and equal perimeter the equilateral and equiangular polygon is the greatest in area.

Of all solid figures the surfaces of which are equal, the sphere is the greatest in solid content..

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Toomer (1976) ^ Heath (1981) p. 207–213 ^ Kline (1972), p. 126 References [ edit ] Heath, Thomas Little (1981).

A History of Greek Mathematics, Volume II . Dover publications.

ISBN 0-486-24074-6 .

Morris Kline , Mathematical Thought From Ancient to Modern Times , Oxford University Press, 1972.

G. J. Toomer , Diocles On Burning Mirrors, Sources in the History of Mathematics and the Physical Sciences 1 (New York, 1976).

External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Zenodorus (mathematician)" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews History of the Isoperimetric Problem at Convergence v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Authority control databases International VIAF 2 WorldCat National Germany Greece People Deutsche Biographie DDB Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zenodorus_(mathematician)&oldid=1286430697 " Categories : Ancient Greek geometers 200s BC births 140s BC deaths 2nd-century BC Greek mathematicians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text This page was last edited on 19 April 2025, at 21:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Zenodorus (mathematician) 13 languages Add topic

