Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Use by Māori 1.2 Early Pākehā 2 Notable Features Toggle Notable Features subsection 2.1 Bridge to Nowhere 2.2 Tīeke Marae/Kāinga 3 Ecology Toggle Ecology subsection 3.1 Flora 3.2 Fauna 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Whanganui National Park 22 languages Basa Bali Bosanski Cebuano Deutsch Español Français Galego עברית ქართული Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk پنجابی Polski Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 39°35′0″S 175°5′0″E ﻿ / ﻿ 39.58333°S 175.08333°E ﻿ / -39.58333; 175.08333 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia National park of New Zealand Whanganui National Park IUCN category II ( national park ) Whanganui River flows through Whanganui National Park.

Interactive map of Whanganui National Park Location Wanganui, New Zealand Nearest city Wanganui, New Zealand Coordinates 39°35′0″S 175°5′0″E ﻿ / ﻿ 39.58333°S 175.08333°E ﻿ / -39.58333; 175.08333 Area 742 km 2 (286 sq mi) Established 1986 Governing body Department of Conservation The Whanganui National Park is a national park located in the North Island of New Zealand. Established in 1986, [ 1 ] it covers an area of 742 km 2 bordering the Whanganui River .

[ 2 ] It incorporates areas of Crown land, former state forest and a number of former reserves. The river itself is not part of the park, but is a popular paddling route titled the Whanganui Journey , one of New Zealand's "Great Walks" .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The New Zealand Department of Conservation highlights Whanganui National Park as being the National Park most closely tied to human settlement.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] Use by Māori [ edit ] The Whanganui river was a major trade and communication route for Māori, and would have been the main route into the central North Island. The river was once home to a network of pā alongside the river banks throughout what is now the Whanganui National Park.

[ 6 ] This was called ‘the plaited rope of Hinengākau’, named for a Te Āti Haunui-a-Pāpārangi ancestor.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The mid to late 19th century also saw the growing of wheat, and between the 1840s and 1860s flour mills were built to process this into flour that could be traded.

[ 9 ] Early Pākehā [ edit ] After the arrival of European settlers, Whanganui played a significant role for both Māori and European religious communities. In the 1840s there was widespread conversion to Christianity , which led to the establishment of Christian communities and building of chapels along the river. Likewise this area was also visited by followers of the Pai Mārire religion who had settlements nearby.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Notable Features [ edit ] Bridge to Nowhere [ edit ] The Bridge to Nowhere is a steel-reinforced concrete bridge, dating back to early 20th century European settlement in the area. From 1917 onwards, the New Zealand government offered retired serviceman returning from World War 1 discounted land, and loans for development, as part of the Soldier-Settler Scheme.

[ 11 ] This included land within the Mangapurua and Kaiwhakauka valleys within what is now the park. In 1919 a wooden swing bridge was constructed, which was replaced with a reinforced steel bridge in 1936. At the most populous point there were 30 farms in Mangapurua and 16 in Kaiwhakauka, however by 1942 only three farmers remained, and two years later the area was unpopulated. This decline was due in part to hardships of the land, including flooding and erosion, problems also experienced by Soldier-Settler Scheme recipients elsewhere. Today the bridge is used by park visitors and maintained by the Department of Conservation.

[ 12 ] Tīeke Marae/Kāinga [ edit ] The Tīeke Marae/Kāinga is a Department of Conservation hut and marae on the Whanganui Journey Great Walk . The buildings are situated near the Western border of the park, across the river from Parinui .

[ 13 ] The area upon which they are situated was the site of Māori communities at the time of European colonization, with contemporary European accounts recording the population of Tīeke to be 260 in 1847.

[ 14 ] The marae was established in the early 1990s by members of Tamahaki who trace their ancestry back to the original community. The land is currently subject to dispute, with the local Māori group, Te Whānau o Tieke, claiming that the land was confiscated illegally . The site is currently co-managed between the Department of Conservation and Te Whānau o Tieke.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] The site is open to the public, and available to be booked year round.

[ 13 ] Ecology [ edit ] Flora [ edit ] Whanganui National Park protects a large area of lowland forest and important habitat for native wildlife.

There are numerous stands of podocarp -hardwood forest made up of species including kāmahi and tawa , with rimu , mīro and tōtara on steeper terrain.

[ 17 ] In lower-lying areas near the river kahikatea , mataī and nīkau palm can be found. Large northern rātā grow throughout the park.

[ citation needed ] Fauna [ edit ] Many species of birds can be found throughout the park. The park protects the habitat of several thousand threatened North Island brown kiwi and the endangered blue duck (whio) . Other birds that frequent the park include the grey warbler , yellow-crowned kākāriki , New Zealand falcon (kārearea) , New Zealand pigeon (kererū) , Rifleman (titipounamu) , silvereye , tomtit , tūī and whitehead .

[ 4 ] [ 17 ] Many species of native fish inhabit the Whanganui River that runs through the park, where native freshwater crayfish (kōura) , black flounder , pouched lamprey and eels are also present.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Bridge to Nowhere, New Zealand National parks of New Zealand Protected areas of New Zealand Conservation in New Zealand References [ edit ] ^ Department of Conservation: "Whanganui National Park" , retrieved 21 April 2013 ^ "Data Table – Protected Areas – LINZ Data Service" .

Land Information New Zealand . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

^ "Great Walks" .

www.doc.govt.nz . Retrieved 5 January 2024 .

^ a b Department of Conservation: "Whanganui National Park. Flora & fauna" , retrieved 21 April 2013 ^ "Nature and conservation" .

Department of Conservation . Retrieved 25 April 2024 .

^ "Western North Island parks" .

Te Ara Encyclopedia of New Zealand . Retrieved 25 April 2024 .

^ Young, David.

"Whanganui tribes" .

Te Ara Encyclopedia of New Zealand . Retrieved 25 April 2024 .

^ "History of Whanganui" .

Discover Whanganui . Retrieved 25 April 2024 .

^ a b "History and culture" .

Department of Conservation . Retrieved 25 April 2024 .

^ Babbage, Stuart Barton (1937).

Hauhauism: An Episode in the Maori Wars 1863-1866 . Wellington: Reed Publishing (NZ) Ltd. p. 47.

^ "Repatriation of returned servicemen" .

NZHistory . Retrieved 25 April 2024 .

^ "History of the Bridge to Nowhere" .

Department of Conservation . Retrieved 25 April 2024 .

^ a b "Tīeke Marae/Kāinga" .

Department of Conservation . Retrieved 27 April 2024 .

^ Walton, A.

"Settlement Patterns in the Whanganui River Valley, 1839-1864" .

New Zealand Journal of Archeology : 131.

^ Levine, Hal (2 January 2013).

"Visiting Tieke Kāainga: the Authenticity of a Maori Welcome" .

Wiley Online Library . Retrieved 27 April 2024 .

^ Levine, Hal (18 February 2011).

"Tieke: Marae and/or Tourist Campsite? Confrontation and Cooperation in Whanganui National Park, New Zealand" .

Anthropological Forum .

21 : 43– 56 – via Taylor & Francis Online.

^ a b c "Nature and conservation" .

Department of Conservation . Retrieved 5 January 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Whanganui National Park .

Whanganui National Park Department of Conservation v t e Whanganui National Park , New Zealand Rivers Manganuioteao River Ōhura River Retaruke River Whangamōmona River Whanganui River Settlements and infrastructure Bridge to Nowhere Tieke Kāinga v t e Protected areas of New Zealand Conservation parks Ahuriri Aorangi Aotea Catlins Coromandel Craigieburn Eyre Mountains/Taka Ra Haka Hakatere Hāwea Hanmer Kaimai Mamaku Kaimanawa Kaweka Ka Whata Tu O Rakihouia Korowai / Torlesse Tussocklands Lake Sumner Mavora Lakes Mount Richmond Northland North-west Nelson Oteake Pirongia Pureora Remutaka Ruahine Raukumara Ruataniwha Tararua Te Kahui Kaupeka Te Papanui Victoria Whakarewarewa Whirinaki Te Pua-a-Tāne Ecological islands Brook Waimārama Sanctuary Bushy Park Sanctuary Mountain Maungatautari Orokonui Ecosanctuary Tawharanui Open Sanctuary Zealandia Government purpose reserves Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Pukaha / Mount Bruce National Wildlife Centre Historic reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Maungauika / North Head Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Stony Batter Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Marine reserves Akaroa Auckland Islands Cape Rodney-Okakari Point Hautai Hawea (Clio Rocks) Hikurangi Horoirangi Kahukura (Gold Arm) Kahurangi Kapiti Kermadec Islands Kutu Parera (Gaer Arm) Long Bay-Okura Long Island-Kokomohua Moana Uta (Wet Jacket Arm) Motu Manawa-Pollen Island Moutere Hauriri / Bounty Islands Moutere Ihupuku / Campbell Island Moutere Mahue / Antipodes Island Parininihi Piopiotahi (Milford Sound) Pohatu / Flea Bay Poor Knights Islands Punakaiki Taipari Roa (Elizabeth Island) Tapuae Taputeranga Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Tauparikākā Tāwharanui Te Angiangi Te Awaatu Channel (The Gut) Te Hapua (Sutherland Sound) Te Matuku Te Paepae o Aotea (Volkner Rocks) Te Tapuwae o Hua (Long Sound) Te Tapuwae o Rongokako Tonga Island Tuhua (Mayor Island) Ulva Island-Te Wharawhara Waiau Glacier Coast Westhaven (Te Tai Tapu) Whanganui-A-Hei (Cathedral Cove) Whangarei Harbour National parks Current Abel Tasman Aoraki / Mount Cook Arthur's Pass Egmont Fiordland Kahurangi Mount Aspiring Nelson Lakes Paparoa Rakiura Tongariro Westland Tai Poutini Whanganui Former Te Urewera National reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Lewis Pass Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Subantarctic Islands Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Recreation reserves Bastion Point Otago Central Rail Trail Truby King Recreation Reserve Regional parks Akatarawa Ambury Ashley Rakahuri Ātiu Creek Auckland Botanic Gardens Āwhitu Battle Hill Farm Belmont Duder East Harbour Ferrymead Glenfern Sanctuary Hunua Ranges Kaitoke Lake Tekapo Long Bay Mahurangi Motukorea Browns Island Muriwai Mutukaroa / Hamlins Hill Ōmana Onekawa Te Mawhai Orere Point Pākiri Pakuratahi Papamoa Hills Queen Elizabeth Scandrett Shakespear Tāpapakanga Tāwharanui Tawhitokino Te Ārai Te Muri Te Rau Pūriri Waharau Waimakariri River Wainuiomata Regional Park Waitākere Ranges Waitawa Wenderholm Whakanewha Whakatīwai Scenic reserves Alice Eaves Reserve Bruce Park Goldie Bush Peel Forest Park Waro Limestone Wetlands Awarua Wetland Farewell Spit Firth of Thames Kopuatai Peat Dome Manawatū Estuary Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Wairarapa Moana Whangamarino Other areas Fensham Reserve Hutt Water Collection Area Northern Pegasus Bay Wainuiomata Water Collection Area Whitireia Other Amenity area Ecological area Sanctuary area Wilderness area Wildlife management area v t e Whanganui River Source: Mount Tongariro — Flows into: Tasman Sea Administrative areas Manawatū-Whanganui Region Whanganui District Ruapehu District Towns and settlements (upstream to downstream) Kakahi Piriaka Manunui Taumarunui Whakahoro Parinui Tieke Kāinga Pipiriki Jerusalem Ranana Matahiwi Koriniti Ātene Parikino Kaiwhaiki Upokongaro Whanganui Major tributaries (upstream to downstream by confluence ) Whakapapa River Pungapunga River Ongarue River Ōhura River Retaruke River Tāngarākau River Whangamōmona River Manganui o te Ao River Other features (upstream to downstream) Tongariro National Park Whanganui National Park Bridge to Nowhere Moutoa Island Whanganui Journey PS Waimarie Longest New Zealand rivers 1: Waikato 2: Clutha / Mata-Au 3: Whanganui 4: Taieri 5: Rangitīkei 6: Mataura 7: Waiau 8: Waiau Toa / Clarence 9: Waitaki 10: Ōreti 11: Rangitaiki 12: Manawatū Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Whanganui_National_Park&oldid=1292662164 " Categories : IUCN Category II Whanganui National Park National parks of New Zealand Protected areas of Manawatū-Whanganui Protected areas established in 1986 1986 establishments in New Zealand Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2019 Use New Zealand English from February 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 04:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Whanganui National Park 22 languages Add topic

