Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 NBN Trust 3 Team 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents National Biodiversity Network 18 languages Azərbaycanca Čeština Ελληνικά فارسی Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands Português Română Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Biodiversity collaboration in the UK This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "National Biodiversity Network" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The National Biodiversity Network (UK) (NBN) is a collaborative venture set up in 2000 in the United Kingdom [ 1 ] committed to making biodiversity information available through various media, including on the internet via the NBN Atlas—the data search website of the NBN.

[ 2 ] Description [ edit ] It is estimated that up to 60,000 people routinely record biodiversity information in the UK and Ireland . Most of this effort is voluntary and is organised through about 2,000 national societies and recording schemes. The UK government through its agencies also collects biodiversity data and one of the principal elements for the collation and interpretation of this data is the network of Local Environmental Records Centres.

[ 3 ] In 2012, it had been listed in the top 1,000 UK charities that raised most donations.

[ 4 ] NBN Trust [ edit ] The NBN Trust [ 1 ] —the organisation facilitating the building of the Network—supports agreed standards for the collection, collation and exchange of biodiversity data and encourages improved access. The present partnership consists of over 200 public and voluntary organisations and individual members.

The NBN Atlas currently holds over 300 million species records from over 1000 different datasets (August 2024).

[ 2 ] Data on the NBN Atlas can be accessed by anyone interested in UK, Northern Ireland and Isle of Man wildlife and can be searched at many different levels, as it allows the viewing of distribution maps and the downloading of data by using a variety of interactive tools.  The maps can be customised by date range and can show changes in a species’ distribution.

The organisation believes that, by providing tools to make wildlife data accessible in a digitised and exchangeable form and by providing easy access to the information people need, wise and informed decisions can be made to ensure the natural environment is protected now and for future generations.

Team [ edit ] The National Biodiversity Network Trust employs a team to facilitate and co-ordinate its growth and development and is governed by a Board of Trustees. The NBN Trust is a registered charity.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Biological recording References [ edit ] ^ a b "nbn.org.uk" . nbn.org.uk. 2013-06-26 . Retrieved 2013-07-08 .

^ a b "NBN Atlas - UK's largest collection of biodiversity information" .

NBN Atlas . Retrieved 2018-06-27 .

^ "NFBR LRCs Contact Database" . Nbn-nfbr.org.uk. Archived from the original on 2012-10-24 . Retrieved 2013-07-08 .

^ "Britain's top 1,000 charities ranked by donations. Who raises the most money?" .

the Guardian . 2012-04-24 . Retrieved 2019-02-12 .

^ "Charity Details" .

beta.charitycommission.gov.uk . Archived from the original on 2018-06-27 . Retrieved 2018-06-27 .

External links [ edit ] Wikidata has the property: NBN System Key (P3240) (see uses ) Official website NBN Atlas (data) View the NBN Trust Strategy 2022 - 2027 Association of Local Environmental Records Centres - for more information on Local Environmental Records Centres National Forum for Biological Recording Authority control databases International ISNI National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Biodiversity_Network&oldid=1304277354 " Categories : Biodiversity Ecology organizations Ecological experiments Biodiversity databases Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from February 2017 All articles lacking reliable references This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 02:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Biodiversity Network 18 languages Add topic

