Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Influences and sources 2 Early Byzantine period Toggle Early Byzantine period subsection 2.1 Codex Theodosianus 2.2 Corpus Juris Civilis 3 Middle Byzantine period Toggle Middle Byzantine period subsection 3.1 Ecloga 3.2 The Farmer's Laws 3.3 The Sea Laws 3.4 Ecclesiastical law 3.4.1 Editions 4 Later Byzantine law 5 The Law School of Constantinople 6 Legacy 7 See also 8 Notes 9 Sources 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Byzantine law 13 languages العربية Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Հայերեն ქართული Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Byzantine culture Aristocracy and bureaucracy Army Art Architecture Calendar Cities Coinage Cuisine Dance Diplomacy Dress Economy Gardens Law Literature Medicine Music People Science v t e Byzantine law was essentially a continuation of Roman law with increased Orthodox Christian and Hellenistic influence. Most sources define Byzantine law as the Roman legal traditions starting after the reign of Justinian I in the 6th century and ending with the Fall of Constantinople in the 15th century. Although future Byzantine codes and constitutions derived largely from Justinian's Corpus Juris Civilis , their main objectives were idealistic and ceremonial rather than practical. Following Hellenistic and Near-Eastern political systems, [ 1 ] legislations were tools to idealize and display the sacred role and responsibility of the emperor as the holy monarch chosen by God and the incarnation of law " nómos émpsychos " , thus having philosophical and religious purposes that idealized perfect Byzantine kingship.

[ 2 ] Though during and after the European Renaissance Western legal practices were heavily influenced by Justinian's Code (the Corpus Juris Civilis ) and Roman law during classical times, [ 3 ] Byzantine law nevertheless had substantial influence on Western traditions during the Middle Ages and after.

The most important work of Byzantine law was the Ecloga , issued by Leo III , the first major Roman-Byzantine legal code issued in Greek rather than Latin. Soon after the Farmer's Law was established regulating legal standards outside the cities. While the Ecloga was influential throughout the Mediterranean (and Europe) because of the importance of Constantinople as a trading center, the Farmer's Law was a seminal influence on Slavic legal traditions including those of Russia .

Influences and sources [ edit ] Byzantium inherited most of its political institutions from the late Roman period. Similarly, Roman law constituted the basis for the Byzantine legal system. For many centuries, the two great codifications carried out by Theodosius II and Justinian respectively, were the cornerstones of Byzantine legislation. Of course, over the years these Roman codes were adjusted to the current circumstances and then replaced by new codifications, written in Greek. However, the influence of Roman law persisted, and it is obvious in codifications, such as Basilika , which was based on Corpus Juris Civilis . In the 11th century, Michael Psellos prides himself for being acquainted with the Roman legal legacy ("Ἰταλῶν σοφία").

[ 4 ] Although Byzantine law structure had largely a Roman constitutional body, the main difference of Byzantine law from its Roman counterpart was both in its application and interpretation which were subject and applied under different Hellenistic and Orthodox principles shared between the Byzantine academic currículum, [ 5 ] developing a legal system that encouraged different interpretations of law according to philanthropy and evergetia rather than the application of justice itself, acting for the well-being and benefit of the population rather than for the correct structuring of society.

[ 6 ] The various philanthropics values of different classical philosophies intermixed with jurisprudence were already a fixed custom in the different code books and constitutions of the Ancient Hellenistic and Near-eastern kingdoms which practiced jurisprudence like a branch of literature and philosophy rather than a science of its own as pioneered by the Roman approach. Said customs and constitutions instituted greater influence at Christianity's arrival, being included in Justinian's novels which dictated that the law should be interpreted on the basis of philanthropy and piety [ 7 ] as the emperors of the Macedonian dynasty had acted against the constant abuses and evasions of the dynatoi by imposing the allelengyon or through the different establishment of humanitarian and monastic institutions across the empire.

By the time the Ecloga and the Basilika were being codified, a further increase in Hellenistic and Christian values were also put into practice, all death penalties were replaced with amputations and severe economic sanctions while making further clarifications and references to the different Orthodox and Hellenistic concepts like that the judge should not only be the law incarnate, but also had to interpret it on the basis of "philanthrōpía " and "evergetikós" .

[ 7 ] Thus, verdicts were applied being directly influenced by the different values, ethics and philosophies of their Orthodox social environment and not by the legal provisions of the code books, resulting in the misapplication and misinterpretation of a theoretically and strictly non-malleable Roman law .

[ 8 ] In the absence of capable and efficient legal systems and the eclectic Byzantine approach to jurisprudence, most judges and legal processes across the empire were carried through simplified and vernacular laws such as The Farmers' Law , The Sea Laws , The Military Laws or the lesser known Mosaic Law , the different Orthodox and Hellenistic values or orally through the efficient and persuasive use of rhetoric rather than the legal provisions themselves, without Roman law seeing any proper fully systematized or continuing application whatsoever.

[ 9 ] In accordance with the Orthodox-Hellenistic concepts of Kingship, the main source of law in Byzantium remained the enactments of the emperor since he himself was the law ( nómos émpsychos ) . The latter initiated some major codifications of the Roman law, but they also issued their own "new laws", the Novels ("Novellae", "Νεαραὶ"). In the late Roman era the legislative interest of the emperors intensified, and laws were now regulating the main aspects of public, private, economic and social life.

[ 10 ] For example, Constantine I was the first to regulate divorce and Theodosius I intervened in faith issues, imposing a specific version of the Creed .

[ 11 ] From Diocletian to Theodosius I , namely during approximately 100 years, more than 2,000 laws were issued. Justinian alone promulgated approximately 600 laws. Gradually, the legislative enthusiasm receded, but still some of the laws of later emperors, such as Leo VI 's Novels , are of particular importance.

[ 12 ] The custom continued to play a limited role as a secondary source of law, but written legislation had a precedence.

[ 13 ] Early Byzantine period [ edit ] There is no definitively established date for when the Byzantine period of Roman history begins. During the 4th, 5th, and 6th centuries the Empire was split and united administratively more than once. But it was during this period that Constantinople was first established and the East gained its own identity administratively; thus, it is often considered the early Byzantine period. These developments, nevertheless, were key steps in the formation of Byzantine Law.

Codex Theodosianus [ edit ] Main article: Codex Theodosianus In 438, Emperor Theodosius published the Codex Theodosianus , which consisted of 16 books, containing all standing laws from the age of Constantine I until then.

Corpus Juris Civilis [ edit ] Main article: Corpus Juris Civilis Soon after his accession in 527, Justinian appointed a commission to collect and codify existing Roman law. A second commission, headed by the jurist Tribonian , was appointed in 530 to select matter of permanent value from the works of the jurists, to edit it and to arrange it into 50 books. In 533 this commission produced the Digesta .

Although Law as practiced in Rome had grown up as a type of case law, this was not the "Roman Law" known to the Medieval, or modern world. Now Roman law claims to be based on abstract principles of justice that were made into actual rules of law by legislative authority of the emperor or the Roman people. These ideas were transmitted to the Middle Ages in the great codification of Roman law carried throughout by the emperor Justinian. The Corpus Iuris Civilis was issued in Latin in three parts: the Institutes , the Digest (Pandects), and the Code (Codex). It was the last major legal document written in Latin.

The world's most widespread legal system, civil law , is based on the Corpus (in, for instance, most of Europe, Asia, South America, and Africa, as well as in the mixed jurisdictions of South Africa , Scotland , Quebec , the Philippines and Louisiana ).

Middle Byzantine period [ edit ] Following Justinian's reign the Empire entered a period of rapid decline partially enabling the Arab conquests which would further weaken the Empire. Knowledge of Latin, which had been in decline since the fall of the West, virtually disappeared, making many of the old legal codices almost inaccessible. These developments contributed to a dramatic weakening of legal standards in the Empire and a substantial drop in the standards of legal scholarship.

[ 14 ] Legal practice would become much more pragmatic and, as knowledge of Latin in the Empire waned, direct use of Justinian's "Corpus Juris Civilis" would be abandoned in favor of summaries, commentaries, and new compilations written in Greek .

Ecloga [ edit ] "Ecloga" redirects here. For other uses, see Eclogue .

This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( July 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The changes in the internal life of the empire that occurred in the years following the publication of Justinian's code called for a review of the legislation, so as to meet the requirements of the times. It was introduced within the framework of the reforms of Leo III the Isaurian (the first Isaurian emperor), and he also provided the modification of current laws. In 726, he issued the "Ecloga", that had his name as well as the name of his son Constantine.

"Ecloga", referring to both the civil and criminal law constituted, as was declared in the title, a "rectification (of the Justinian legislation) towards a more philanthropic version". The membership of the editing committee is not known, but its primary mission was, on the one hand, to modify those dispositions not to be aligned with the current times and, on the other, to prevent judges from taking money for their actions and to help them to solve cases properly.

The dispositions of "Ecloga" were influenced by the Christian spirit, as well as by the common law [ clarification needed ] , that protected and supported the institution of marriage and introduced the equality of all citizens in law. On the other hand, the penalties of amputation and blindness were introduced, reflecting the Byzantine concept in this period of changes.

[ 15 ] By means of his "Ecloga" Leo also addressed the judges, inviting them "neither the poor to despise nor the ones unjust to let uncontrolled" . Besides, in his effort to deter bribery in the execution of their duties he made their payment local and payable by the imperial treasury. "Ecloga" constituted the basic handbook of justice dispensation up to the days of the Macedonian emperors, that also assumed legislative activity, whereas later it influenced the ecclesiastic law of the Russian Orthodox Church. Formerly the researchers attributed the juridical collections "Farmer's Law", "Rhodian Sea Law" and "Military Laws" to Leo III the Isaurian .

The structure of the act is original and it isn't taken from any other source, considering that Leon didn't want to complete layer legal reform. It seems that his goal was just to modify Justinian's legal tradition in the most important segments of legal life, while still adapting it to the needs and actions of the Middle Ages.

[ citation needed ] It needed to be distinguished from its original model. Among the most important deviations from Justinian's Roman law are departure of consensuality when trading goods. So that a contract could exist, it was necessary for the object to either be given to the buyer or that a price be paid to the seller. As long as both sides finish their parts, the contract is not valid [ clarification needed ] even if there is downpayment being given as validation element. Patria potestas is decreasing its power influenced by Hellenistic and canon laws and the rights of women and children are increasing.

[ 16 ] But Ecloga brings even bigger and more controversial changes in criminal law, which can be seen in the frequent use of physical punishments, not typical for Justinian's law.

The Farmer's Laws [ edit ] With the exception of a few cities, and especially Constantinople , where other types of urban economic activities were also developed, Byzantine society remained at its heart agricultural. An important source regarding law, which reflects in a particularly characteristic way the internal life of the Byzantine villages during the Middle Byzantine Era (7th – end of 12th century) is the Nomos Georgikos , also known as the Lex Rustica or Farmer's Law . Due to its importance, the Farmer's Law roused the interest of researchers from a very early stage. Ever since it has been one of the most discussed texts concerning the internal history of Byzantium. It has been suggested that, because of the major influences caused by the influx of Slavs into the Empire at the time the Farmer's Law was established, various traditions were in fact an important influence of the Farmer's Law, both in terms of why it was developed and its content.

[ 17 ] It is a private collection, continuously enriched, and refers to specific cases relevant to rural property within the framework of the Byzantine rural "community". As evident by the dispositions of the "Law", peasants were organized in "communities" and collectively responsible for the payment of the total tax the "community" was liable for, being obliged to pay as well the amounts corresponding to indebted members of the community. As for the chronology of its writing, since the text itself bears no specific date, it is placed somewhere in between the second half of the 6th century and the middle of the 14th. Very early on, it was acknowledged as a legal handbook of great importance and greatly influenced much of the law of the Slavic countries and especially Serbia , Bulgaria and Russia .

The Sea Laws [ edit ] See also: Marine insurance § History Dating  problems, similar to the ones of the "Farmer's Law" , presents a code of equal character, the "Rhodian Sea Law" ( Nomos Rhodion Nautikos ).

[ 18 ] In the Digesta seu Pandectae (533) codification ordered by Justinian I (527–565) of the Eastern Roman Empire , an opinion written by the Roman jurist Paulus in approximately 235 AD at the beginning of the Crisis of the Third Century (235–284) was included about the Lex Rhodia ("Rhodian law") that articulates the general average principle of marine insurance established on the island of Rhodes in approximately 1000 to 800 BC, plausibly by the Phoenicians during the proposed Dorian invasion and emergence of the purported Sea Peoples during the Greek Dark Ages (c. 1100–c. 750 BC) that led to the proliferation of the Doric Greek dialect .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] It is a collection of maritime law regulations divided into three parts. The first part refers to the ratification of the "Naval Law" by the Roman emperors. The second specifies the participation of the crew in maritime profits and the regulations valid on the ship, while the third and largest refers to maritime law, as for example to the apportionment of responsibility in case of theft or damage to the cargo or the ship. The "Naval Law" was included in the Basilika of Leo VI the Wise as a complement to book 53.

Ecclesiastical law [ edit ] In accordance with the model of the secular legal associations, the canons of the ecclesiastic councils concerned ecclesiastic issues and  regulated the conduct of the clergy, as well as of the secular as concerned matters of belief. The "In Trullo" or "Fifth-Sixth Council", known for its canons, was convened in the years of Justinian II (691–692) and occupied itself exclusively with matters of discipline. The aim of the synod was to cover the gaps left in canon law by the previous Fifth (553) and Sixth Ecumenical Councils .

This collection of canons was divided into four parts: a) The canons ratifying the doctrinal decisions of the first six ecumenical councils along with the teachings of the Fathers of the Church.

b) The canons specifying the obligations of the ministrational clergy.

c) The canons referring to the monks.

d) The canons referring to the secular. The influence of these canons carried on in the future and they were extensively annotated by Balsamon, Zonaras and Aristenos, the three great ecclesiastic jurists of the 12th century.

Editions [ edit ] The Didache , from the 2nd century The Apostolic Church-Ordinance , from the 3rd century The Apostolic Constitutions , from 375 to 380 AD The Canons of the Apostles [ 22 ] There were also other Ancient Church Orders no longer extant in Greek. Later, more-scientific collections emerged, including: The Nomocanon of John Scholasticus , from the 6th century The Nomocanon in 14 titles of Heraclius , from the 7th century The Nomocanon of Photios , from the 9th century The Syntagma of Theodore Balsamon and his Scholia to the Nomocanon of Photios, from the 12th century The Synopsis Canonum by Alexios Aristenos , from the 12th century All of these books were compiled later by the Athonite monk Saint Nicodemus the Hagiorite and became the basis of the modern Eastern Orthodox canon law , his Pedalion .

Later Byzantine law [ edit ] The following legal texts were prepared in the later Byzantine Empire: The Prochiron of Basil the Macedonian, c. 870 [ 23 ] or 872, [ 24 ] which invalidates parts of the Ecloga and restores Justinians Laws, as well as Hellenising arcane Latin expressions.

The Epanagoge ( repetita proelectio legis ), [ 23 ] also of Basil the Macedonian , together with his sons, a second edition of the Prochiron, c. 879–886 [ 23 ] The Eisagoge of Photios, which includes novel law, c. 880 [ 24 ] The Basilicae (repurgatio veterum legum) or Basilics of Leo the Philosopher , together with his brother Alexander and Constantine VII , c. 900 [ 24 ] or 906–11, [ 23 ] which attempts to synthesise 6th century commentaries and glosses on Justinians laws by headings, and remove contradictions.  By the 11th century, the Basilics had replaced Justinian's laws as the primary source of Roman law.

The Synopsis (Basilicorum) maior , an abridgment of the Basilika from the late 9th century [ 25 ] The Epitome Legum , later known as the Ecloga ad Prochiron mutata, a synthesis of Justinian and the Epanagoge, c. 920–1 [ 23 ] [ 24 ] The Epanagoge aucta , a revision of the 9th century Epanagogue from c. 11th century.

[ 23 ] The Prochiron aucta , a revision of the 9th century Prochiron from c. 13th century.

[ 23 ] The Hexabiblos , a 14th-century compilation of the above books made by Constantine Harmenopoulos , a judge in Thessalonica The Hexabiblos aucta , a late 14th century revision of Harmenopoulos' work by  Ioannes Holobolos Other jurists (including at least one Emperor) prepared private collections of cases and commentaries, [ 23 ] but these did not form the body of law used by jurists at large.  It is held that the 113 Novels of Leo the Wise fall into this category.

[ 24 ] Lokin [ 24 ] argues that while later legal texts tended to rearrange or explain the 6th century work of Justinian, rather than create new law, they did alter the locus of authority for law ( legis vigor ) from the Emperor to God.  In Justinian's work, Mosaïc Law and God's authority support the Emperor, and are consultative, but do not temper his absolute authority.  This process has already begun in the Ecloga , which states law is God-given by way of Isaiah 8:20, and is made explicit first in the Prochiron.

[ 26 ] There was, however, 'legislative creep' over this period, where the redaction of old laws and case law created new laws in effect, although not explicitly cited as such.

[ 27 ] The Law School of Constantinople [ edit ] The best known center for legal teaching in the Byzantine Empire was the Law School of Constantinople. Founded in 425, [ 28 ] it was closed in 717 as Constantinople was besieged by the Umayyads , reopening in 866 only.

[ 29 ] It then probably remained open until the Sack of Constantinople by the Crusaders in 1204.

[ 30 ] Legacy [ edit ] During the early Middle Ages Roman/Byzantine Law played a major role throughout the Mediterranean region and much of Europe because of the economic and military importance of the Empire.

The Syro-Roman Law Book , a Syriac translation of a Greek original from the 5th century, was highly influential in eastern Christian communities after the early Muslim conquests. It was based on Roman case law and imperial statutes from the east of the empire.

After the Islamic conquests of the Eastern Mediterranean, the Islamic caliphates gradually codified their legal systems using Roman/Byzantine law as an important model. It has been suggested in fact that it was the Ecloga ’s publication that spurred the first major codification of Islamic imperial law.

[ 31 ] Slavic legal traditions, including countries ranging from Bulgaria to Russia , were substantially influenced by the Farmer's Law .

[ 32 ] To a lesser extent the Ecloga and other Byzantine codices influenced these areas as well. During the 18th and 19th centuries, as Russia increased its contact with the West, Justinian's Code began to be studied thus bringing in this influence.

In Western Europe, following the fall of the Roman Empire, the influence of Roman/Byzantine law became more indirect though always significant during much of the Middle Ages. During the European Renaissance, Western scholars embraced Justinian's Code as a basis for jurisprudence, shunning many of the later legal developments of the Byzantine Empire such as the Ecloga . This was to a great extent affected by the East/West ( Roman Catholic vs.

Eastern Orthodox ) split in the Church. The perception in the West was that Roman law that was recorded in Latin was truly Roman whereas later laws written in Greek was distinct and foreign.

See also [ edit ] Roman Law International Roman Law Moot Court Notes [ edit ] ^ Heather, Peter; Moncur, David (January 2001).

Politics, Philosophy, and Empire in the Fourth Century . Liverpool: Liverpool University Press.

doi : 10.3828/978-0-85323-106-6 (inactive 11 July 2025).

ISBN 978-0-85323-106-6 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Ostrogorski, Georgije (c. 1960).

The Byzantine emperor and the hierarchical world order . Bobbs-Merrill.

OCLC 703663516 .

^ "The Justinian Code and Its Influence - Global Connections" . Archived from the original on 2018-04-04 . Retrieved 2017-10-20 .

^ A. Cameron, The Byzantines , p. 153; G. Mousourakis, Context of Roman Law , p. 397.

^ Gautier, Paul (1981).

"La Diataxis de Michel Attaliate" .

Revue des études byzantines .

39 (1): 5– 143.

doi : 10.3406/rebyz.1981.2120 .

ISSN 0766-5598 .

^ Herrin, Judith (2013-04-07), "Ideals of Charity, Realities of Welfare" , Margins and Metropolis , Princeton University Press, doi : 10.23943/princeton/9780691153018.003.0014 , ISBN 9780691153018 , retrieved 2022-02-27 ^ a b Caner, Daniel (7 September 2021).

The rich and the pure : philanthropy and the making of Christian society in early Byzantium .

ISBN 978-0-520-38159-9 .

OCLC 1221013833 .

^ Tellegen-Couperus, Olga (2002-11-01).

A Short History of Roman Law .

doi : 10.4324/9780203416464 .

ISBN 9780203416464 .

^ Attaliata, Michael (1981).

La Diataxis de Michel Attaliate . Institut français d'études byzantines.

OCLC 17425442 .

^ M.T. Fögen, "Legislation in Byzantium", pp. 53–54; R. Morris, "Dispute Settlement", 126; G. Mousourakis, Context of Roman Law , pp. 399–400.

^ M.T. Fögen, "Legislation in Byzantium", pp. 56, 59.

^ A. Cameron, The Byzantines , p. 153; M.T. Fögen, "Legislation in Byzantium", pp. 53–54.

^ R. Morris, "Dispute Settlement", 126; G. Mousourakis, Context of Roman Law , pp. 401–402.

^ Mousourakis, George (2003).

The Historical and Institutional Context of Roman Law . Ashgate. pp.

402– 403.

ISBN 0-7546-2108-1 .

^ "The Present-Giving World of Early Byzantium" , The Rich and the Pure , University of California Press, pp.

11– 34, 2021-09-07, doi : 10.2307/j.ctv1wdvxfc.8 , retrieved 2023-11-21 ^ Tellegen-Couperus, Olga (2002-11-01).

A Short History of Roman Law .

doi : 10.4324/9780203416464 .

ISBN 978-0-203-41646-4 .

^ J. Fine, The Early Medieval Balkans: A Critical Survey from the Sixth to the Late Twelfth Century , pp. 90–91 ^ "Lex Rhodia - The Ancient Ancestor of Maritime Law - 800 BC" .

History of Insurance . Retrieved May 30, 2023 .

^ "The Civil Law, Volume I, The Opinions of Julius Paulus, Book II" .

Constitution.org . Translated by Scott, S.P. Central Trust Company. 1932 . Retrieved June 16, 2021 .

TITLE VII. ON THE LEX RHODIA. It is provided by the Lex Rhodia that if merchandise is thrown overboard for the purpose of lightening a ship, the loss is made good by the assessment of all which is made for the benefit of all.

^ The Documentary History of Insurance, 1000 B.C.–1875 A.D.

Newark, NJ : Prudential Press . 1915. pp.

5–6 . Retrieved June 15, 2021 .

^ "Duhaime's Timetable of World Legal History" .

Duhaime's Law Dictionary . Archived from the original on June 24, 2021 . Retrieved April 9, 2016 .

^ Pitra, Jean Baptiste Francois (1864). Juris ecc. Græcorum historia et monumenta. I. Rome.

^ a b c d e f g h Lambert Mears, Analysis of M. Ortolan's Institutes of Justinian, pp. 64–66 ^ a b c d e f Laiou and Simon (eds), Law and Society in Byzantium: Ninth-twelfth Centuries, p. 71 ^ G. Mousourakis, Roman Law and the Origins of the Civil Law Tradition, p. 226 ^ Laiou and Simon (eds), Law and Society in Byzantium: Ninth-twelfth Centuries, p. 77 ^ Laiou and Simon (eds), Law and Society in Byzantium: Ninth-twelfth Centuries, p. 85 ^ Mousourakis, George (2017).

The Historical and Institutional Context of Roman Law . Routledge. p. 363.

ISBN 9781351888417 .

^ Sherman, Charles Phineas (1917).

Roman Law in the Modern World. Volume I: History of Roman law and its descent into English, French, German, Italian, Spanish, and other modern law .

^ Mousourakis, George (2014).

Roman Law and the Origins of the Civil Law Tradition . Springer. p. 227.

ISBN 9783319122687 .

^ B. Jokisch, Islamic Imperial Law: Harun-Al-Rashid's Codification Project , pp. 484–485.

^ Elena Salogubova & Alan Zenkov, “Roman Law's Influence on Russian Civil Law and Procedure”, Russian Law Journal 6, no. 2 (2018): 118–33.

Sources [ edit ] Cameron, Averil (2009).

The Byzantines (in Greek). Translated by Giorgos Tzimas. Athens: Editions Psychogios.

ISBN 978-960-453-529-3 .

Chitwood, Zachary (2017).

Byzantine Legal Culture and the Roman Legal Tradition, 867–1056 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Fine, John V. A. Jr.

(1991) [1983].

The Early Medieval Balkans: A Critical Survey from the Sixth to the Late Twelfth Century . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 0-472-08149-7 .

Fögen, Marie Theres (1994). "Legislation in Byzantium: A Political and a Bureaucratic Technique". In Laiou, Angeliki E.

(ed.).

Law and Society in Byzantium . Dumbarton Oaks.

ISBN 0-88402-222-6 .

Humphreys, M. T. G. (2015).

Law, Power, and Imperial Ideology in the Iconoclast Era, c. 680–850 . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Jokisch, Benjamin (2007).

Islamic Imperial Law: Harun-Al-Rashid's Codification Project . Walter de Gruyter GmbH.

ISBN 9783110924343 .

Morris, Rosemary (1992). "Dispute Settlement in the Byzantine Provinces in the Tenth Century". In Davies, Wendy; Fouracre, Paul (eds.).

The Settlement of Disputes in Early Medieval Europe . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-42895-5 .

Mousourakis, George (2003).

The Historical and Institutional Context of Roman Law . Ashgate Publishing.

ISBN 0-7546-2108-1 .

Penna, Dafni; Meijering, Roos (2022).

A sourcebook on byzantine law: illustrating byzantine law through the sources . Leiden Boston: Brill.

ISBN 9789004514706 .

Stolte, Bernard (2018). “Byzantine Law: The Law of the New Rome”, in The Oxford Handbook of European Legal History , eds. Heikki Pihlajamäki, Markus D. Dubber, & Mark Godfrey. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 229–248.

Troianos, Spyros (2012).

"Byzantine Canon Law to 1100" . In Wilfried Hartmann; Kenneth Pennington (eds.).

The History of Byzantine and Eastern Canon Law to 1500 . Washington, DC: The Catholic University of America Press. pp.

115– 169.

ISBN 9780813216799 .

Troianos, Spyros (2012).

"Byzantine Canon Law from the Twelfth to the Fifteenth Centuries" . In Wilfried Hartmann; Kenneth Pennington (eds.).

The History of Byzantine and Eastern Canon Law to 1500 . Washington, DC: The Catholic University of America Press. pp.

170– 213.

ISBN 9780813216799 .

Wagschal, David (2015).

Law and Legality in the Greek East: The Byzantine Canonical Tradition, 381–883 . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Translations The Codex of Justinian: A New Annotated Translation, with Parallel Latin and Greek Text . Annotated and translated by Fred H. Blume. Edited by Bruce W. Frier. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016.

The Digest of Justinian , revised edn. Edited by Alan Watson. 2 vols. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1998.

The Novels of Justinian: A Complete Annotated English Translation . Translated by David Miller. Edited by Peter Sarris. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2018.

The Syro-Roman Lawbook: The Syriac text of the recently discovered manuscripts accompanied by a facsimile edition and furnished with an introduction and translation . Edited and translated by Arthur Võõbus. 2 vols. Stockholm: ETSE, 1982–3.

Ecloga: das Gesetzbuch Leons III. und Konstantinos’ V . Edited and translated by Ludwig Burgmann. Frankfurt: Löwenklau-Gesellschaft, 1983.

The Rhodian Sea-Law . Edited and translated by Walter Ashburner . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1909; reprint: Aalen: Scientia Verlag, 1976.

Eisagoge = La «Introducción al derecho (Eisagoge)» del patriarca Focio . Edited and translated by Juan Signes Codoñer & Francisco Javier Andrés Santos. Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, 2007.

Basilika = Basilicorum libri LX . Edited by H.J. Scheltema and N. van der Wal. 17 vols. Groningen: J.B. Wolters, 1953–88.

Nomos Stratiotikos = Le leggi penali militari dell’impero bizantino nell’alto Medioevo . Edited and translated by Pietro Verri. Rome: Scuola ufficiali carabinieri, 1978.

External links [ edit ] The Roman Law Library by Professor Yves Lassard and Alexandr Koptev v t e Byzantine Empire topics History Preceding Roman Empire Later Roman Empire Early (330–717) Constantinian–Valentinianic era Constantinian dynasty Valentinianic dynasty Theodosian era Leonid era Justinian era Heraclian era " Byzantine Dark Ages " Twenty Years' Anarchy Middle (717–1204) Isaurian era Nikephorian era Amorian era Macedonian era Doukid era Komnenian era Angelid era Late (1204–1453) Sack of Constantinople Fourth Crusade Frankokratia Latin Empire Byzantine successor states ( Nicaea / Epirus – Thessalonica / Morea / Trebizond – Theodoro ) Palaiologan era Decline of the Byzantine Empire Fall of Constantinople By modern region or territory Albania Anatolia Armenia Bulgaria Corsica Crete Cyprus Dalmatia Egypt Greece Italy Sardinia Sicily Maghreb Malta Mesopotamia Serbia Spain (Iberian Peninsula and Balearic Islands) Syria Thrace Governance Central Emperors Coronation Family tree Empresses Imperial bureaucracy Medieval Greek Senate Early Praetorian prefects Magister officiorum Comes sacrarum largitionum Comes rerum privatarum Quaestor sacri palatii Middle Logothetes tou dromou Sakellarios Logothetes tou genikou Logothetes tou stratiotikou Chartoularios tou sakelliou Chartoularios tou vestiariou Epi tou eidikou Protasekretis Epi ton deeseon Late Megas logothetes Mesazon Provincial Early Praetorian prefectures Dioceses Provinces Quaestura exercitus Exarchate of Ravenna Exarchate of Africa Middle Themata Kleisourai Bandon Catepanates Late Kephale Despotates Foreign relations Treaties Diplomats Diplomacy Wars Military Army Battle tactics Battles Beacon Generals Mercenaries Military manuals Military units Revolts Early Late Roman army East Roman army Foederati Bucellarii Scholae Palatinae Excubitors Middle Themata Kleisourai Tourma Droungos Bandon Tagmata Domestic of the Schools Hetaireia Akritai Varangian Guard Late Komnenian army Pronoia Vestiaritai Palaiologan army Allagion Paramonai Grand domestic Navy Karabisianoi Maritime themata Cibyrrhaeot Aegean Sea Samos Dromon Greek fire Droungarios of the Fleet Megas doux Admirals Naval battles Conflicts Persian Serbian Lombard Arab Bulgarian Rus Norman Georgian Seljuk Ottoman Religion and law Religion Eastern Orthodoxy Byzantine Rite Hesychasm Hayhurum Patriarchate of Constantinople Saints Oriental Orthodoxy Alexandrian Rite Armenian Rite West Syriac Rite Miaphysitism Ecumenical councils Arianism Monophysitism Paulicianism Iconoclasm Great Schism Bogomilism Mount Athos Missionary activity Bulgaria Moravia Serbs Kievan Rus' Jews Law Codex Theodosianus Corpus Juris Civilis Code of Justinian Ecloga Basilika Hexabiblos Mutilation Culture and society Architecture Secular Sacred Cross-in-square Domes Constantinople Basilica Cistern Baths of Zeuxippus Blachernae Palace Chora Church City Walls Great Palace of Constantinople Hagia Irene Hagia Sophia Hippodrome Pammakaristos Church Prison of Anemas Thessalonica Arch of Galerius and Rotunda Byzantine Bath Hagia Sophia Hagios Demetrios Panagia Chalkeon Walls of Thessaloniki Ravenna San Vitale Sant'Apollinare in Classe Sant'Apollinare Nuovo Other locations Daphni Monastery Hosios Loukas Nea Moni of Chios Panagia Gorgoepikoos Saint Catherine's Monastery Mystras Art Icons Enamel Glass Mosaics Early Byzantine mosaics Painters Macedonian period art Komnenian renaissance Economy Agriculture Coinage Mints Trade silk Silk Road Varangians Dynatoi Literature Novel Acritic songs Digenes Akritas Alexander Romance Historians Everyday life Calendar Cities Cuisine Dance Dress Flags and insignia Gardens Hellenization Music Lyra Octoechos People Byzantine Greeks Women Slavery Death Units of measurement Science Learning Encyclopedias Imperial Library Inventions Medicine Philosophy Rhetoric Scholars University University of Constantinople Impact Byzantine commonwealth Byzantine studies Museums Byzantinism Cyrillic script Neo-Byzantine architecture Greek scholars in the Renaissance Third Rome Megali Idea Index Outline Portal v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐qk2sk
Cached time: 20250814224526
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.821 seconds
Real time usage: 1.005 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3650/1000000
Revision size: 35384/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 224253/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3089/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 129419/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.531/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18087429/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  823.084      1 -total
 26.40%  217.269      1 Template:Reflist
 25.35%  208.682     20 Template:Cite_book
 11.63%   95.706      1 Template:Lang
 11.62%   95.666      1 Template:Byzantine_Empire_topics
 11.20%   92.207      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 10.18%   83.807      1 Template:Byzantine_culture
  9.98%   82.150      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.16%   67.127      1 Template:Short_description
  6.70%   55.156     10 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2587315:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814224526 and revision id 1300025105. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Byzantine_law&oldid=1300025105 " Categories : Byzantine law Legal history Hidden categories: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2022 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 Articles containing Latin-language text CS1 Greek-language sources (el) This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 21:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Byzantine law 13 languages Add topic

