Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins and arguments Toggle Origins and arguments subsection 1.1 Background and composition 1.2 Methodology and views expressed 2 Analysis and scholarly treatment 3 Reception 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View 4 languages العربية Deutsch 한국어 Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book by Prussian philosopher Immanuel Kant This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( April 2020 ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View Author Immanuel Kant Language German Subject Anthropology Kantianism Publication date 1798 Publication place Germany Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View ( German : Anthropologie in pragmatischer Hinsicht ) is a non-fiction book by German philosopher Immanuel Kant . The work was developed from lecture notes for a number of successful classes taught by Kant from 1772 to 1796 at the Albertus Universität in then Königsberg , Germany . While nominally detailing the nature of anthropology as a field, it additionally discusses a variety of topics in terms of Kantian thought .

[ 1 ] In the context of the historical development of philosophical writings , the work has attracted international attention. Scholars Victor L. Dowdell and Hans H. Rudnick, for example, have argued that Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View constitutes the best way for layperson readers to begin learning Kant's philosophy.

[ 2 ] Introduction to Kant's Anthropology ( French : Introduction à l'Anthropologie ) was devised by seminal historian of ideas Michel Foucault in the 1960s and depicts Foucault's desires in evaluating the differences between various peoples across different countries. While Foucault fundamentally appreciated the depth and scope of Kant's arguments, he additionally elaborated a large number of specific points given Foucault's particularly strong views on transcendental thought as a 20th-century philosopher.

Language barriers initially created problems in terms of distributing both of the aforementioned writings. Fortunately, Foucault's work received an English translation and widespread publication in the 2000s. Kant's original work likewise has attracted increased notice over time among differing audiences.

Origins and arguments [ edit ] Background and composition [ edit ] Kant's book sums up the work of his Albertus Universität course and its philosophical explorations, the writing evaluating the intersections of morality and nature within human experience.

[ 1 ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( April 2020 ) Kant's work distills the content that he taught in an annual course at the Albertus Universität in then Königsberg , Germany , a program which Kant set forth from 1772 until his retirement in 1796. The book came out in 1798 with the intent of exposing Kant's viewpoints on the then embryonic intellectual field of anthropology to a wider audience. Despite not being free, unlike other speaking engagements by Kant, the philosopher's classes on the topic had achieved widespread popular interest in contrast to previous attempts to spread his general ideas to the masses.

[ 1 ] Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View wound up being the last major work of Kant that was edited by the philosopher himself. The strain of his age and the state of his health had significantly affected his writing. Despite the meaning that he attached to the book, those factors meant that he found himself unable to do more much than arrange his lecture notes for publication.

[ 2 ] Summing up Kant's views on ideals in the context of the book's composition, scholar Frederick P. Van De Pitte has written, "Kant realized that man's rational capacity alone is not sufficient to constitute his dignity and elevate him above the brutes. If reason only enables him to do for himself what instinct does for the animal, then it would indicate for man no higher aim or destiny than that of the brute but only a different way of attaining the same end. However, reason is man's most essential attribute because it is the means by which a truly distinctive dimension is made possible for him. Reason, that is, reflective awareness, makes it possible to distinguish between good and bad, and thus morality can be made the ruling purpose of life. Because man can consider an array of possibilities, and which among them is the most desirable, he can strive to make himself and his world into a realization of his ideals." [ 2 ] Methodology and views expressed [ edit ] Within the work, Kant remarks that anthropology seeks to answer the fundamental question "what is the human being" and thus can be considered the academic discipline with the highest intellectual scope. A later reviewer commented about Kant's opinions that "[o]ne of the many lessons... is that at the empirical level of application, there is no sharp dividing line between morality and nature, since empirical psychology can function as empirical ethics for this purpose." In conclusion, according to the reviewer, "[h]uman beings in nature are acting, moral beings".

[ 1 ] Exploring in multiple aspects the causes and effects of people's behavior, Kant spends many pages on topics such as the biological as well as psychological capacity for individuals to live through and comprehend experiences. For instance, the writing details Kant's views on the external senses as well as the particular nature of different mental states from drunkenness to sleep . He expands to discussions on social organization and interpersonal relations while inserting numerous comments about different types of people as well as various life events. Many of these relate to observations of humanity itself, generally speaking.

[ 2 ] Specifically, Kant states that "a mind of slow apprehension is therefore not necessarily a weak mind" since "the one who is alert with
abstractions is not always profound" but "is more often very superficial." He argues, "[t]he deceiver is really the fool." On determination and mental resolve, in addition, Kant asserts that "[t]hrough failures one becomes intelligent" and "the one who has trained himself in this subject so that he can make others wise through their own failures... [thus] has used his intelligence." Kant defends what he describes as the seeking of knowledge by even the uncertain layperson, the philosopher arguing "[i]gnorance is not stupidity." [ 2 ] The book additionally features detailed accounts by Kant of him applying his " categorical imperative " concept to various issues in real experience.

[ 1 ] For example, he writes about the contrast between striving idealism and personal vice , the philosopher writing, "Young man! Deny yourself satisfaction (of amusement, of debauchery, of love, etc.), not with the Stoical intention of complete abstinence, but with the refined Epicurean intention of having in view an ever-growing pleasure. This stinginess with the cash of your vital urge makes you definitely richer through the postponement of pleasure, even if you should, for the most part, renounce the indulgence of it until the end of your life. The awareness of having pleasure under your control is, like everything idealistic, more fruitful and more abundant than everything that satisfies the sense through indulgence because it is thereby simultaneously consumed and consequently lost from the aggregate of totality." [ 2 ] On the subject of religion , he laments what he sees as unnecessary conflict in terms of cognitive purposes and the regular practice of devotion, Kant remarking, "What vexations there are in the external customs which are thought to belong to religion, but which in reality are related to ecclesiastical form! The merits of piety have been set up in such away that the ritual is of no use at all except for the simple submission of the believers to ceremonies and observances, expiations and mortifications (the more the better). But such compulsory services, which are mechanically easy (because no vicious inclination is thus sacrificed), must be found morally very difficult and burdensome to the rational man. When, therefore, the great moral teacher said, 'My commandments are not difficult,' he did not mean that they require only limited exercise of strength in order to be fulfilled. As a matter of fact, as commandments which require pure dispositions of the heart, they are the hardest that can be given. Yet, for a rational man, they are nevertheless infinitely easier to keep than the commandments involving activity which accomplishes nothing... [since] the mechanically easy feels like lifting hundredweights to the rational man when he sees that all the energy spent is wasted." [ 2 ] Comparing and contrasting different human groups, Kant makes a variety of assertions about men and women as well as different ethnicities , nationalities , and races . For instance, he writes about the sexes, "[t]he woman wants to dominate, [and] the man wants to be dominated". The philosopher argues in depth that nature "made women mature early and had them demand gentle and polite treatment from men, so that they would find themselves imperceptibly fettered by a child due to their own magnanimity" and additionally "would find themselves brought, if not quite to morality itself, then at least to that which cloaks it, moral behavior". In Kant's eyes, ideal marriage exists in such a way that a woman acts like a monarch while a man acts like a cabinet minister .

[ 2 ] In terms of differing nations, Kant asserts that important generalities can be made about the peoples of various areas, stating specifically, "England and France, the two most civilized nations on earth, who are in contrast to each other because of their different characters, are, perhaps chiefly for that reason, in constant feud with one another. Also, England and France, because of their inborn characters, of which the acquired and artificial character is only the result, are probably the only nations who can be assumed to have a particular and, as long as both national characters are not blended by the force of war, unalterable characteristics. That French has become the universal language of conversation, especially in the feminine world, and that English is the most widely used language of commerce among tradesmen, probably reflects the difference in their continental and insular geographic situation." [ 2 ] In sum, the philosopher views ethical analysis fundamentally as constituting "practical anthropology". He aims not to necessarily assign duties to individuals but to empower them intellectually so that they can properly set their own paths themselves. Dovetailing on the same issues, the concluding section of Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View discusses "the character of the species" and evaluates the necessity of giving space for personal freedom as a key element in broader social advancement.

[ 1 ] Analysis and scholarly treatment [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( April 2020 ) Scholars Victor L. Dowdell and Hans H. Rudnick have argued that Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View constitutes the best way for layperson readers to begin learning Kant's philosophy.

[ 2 ] Introduction to Kant's Anthropology (French: Introduction à l'Anthropologie ), Michel Foucault 's analysis of Kant's book, served as Foucault's secondary thesis (alongside a translation of Kant's work itself plus Foucault's writing Folie et Déraison: Histoire de la folie à l'âge classique ) in 1964.

[ citation needed ] While Foucault fundamentally appreciated the depth and scope of Kant's arguments, he additionally elaborated a large number of specific points given Foucault's particularly strong views on transcendental thought .

Foucault's work received an English translation and widespread publication in the 2000s. In his analysis, the French scholar evaluates the question of whether or not psychology has supplanted metaphysics in the evolution of reasoning. He specifically warns against this. Foucault additionally writes that Kant's understandings highlighted the fact that empirical knowledge about human nature has been intrinsically tied up with language. Thus, a person can be considered a citizen of the world insofar as he or she speaks.

[ 3 ] Reception [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( April 2020 ) Upon its initial release, Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View generated a considerable public response. The book ended up receiving the highest number of printings of any of Kant's works up to that time in its initial run.

[ 1 ] Despite this, multiple writers considered the work unworthy of serious intellectual analysis. For many years, it became seen as a lesser work in the context of Kant's entire bibliography .

[ 2 ] Recent analysis of the book has described it as a vital resource on Kant's thinking . For example, a 2007 article published by the journal Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews labeled it as "increasingly important", 
with reviewer Frederick Rauscher , a professor at Michigan State University and writer, noting the work's "complex nature" in detailing interesting topics.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Books portal Philosophy portal Psychology portal 1798 in literature Age of Enlightenment Anthropology Ethics History of ethical idealism Immanuel Kant bibliography The Critique of Practical Reason The Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals The Metaphysics of Morals Religion Within the Boundaries of Mere Reason Introduction to Kant's Anthropology , analysis by Michel Foucault Kantianism Philosophy of life References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h Rauscher, Frederick (12 June 2007).

"Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View" .

Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews . Retrieved April 7, 2020 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Kant, Immanuel (1996).

Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View . Translated by Victor Lyle Dowdell.

Southern Illinois University Press .

ISBN 9780809320608 .

^ Introduction to Kant's Anthropology . Semiotext(e) / Foreign Agents.

MIT Press . 11 July 2008.

ISBN 9781584350545 . Retrieved April 14, 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Immanuel Kant .

Anthropologie in pragmatischer Hinsicht - Archive.org Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View - Download - Epdf.pub Introduction to Kant's Anthropology by Micheal Foucault (Translated by Arianna Bove) NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐dssqj
Cached time: 20250815054920
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.435 seconds
Real time usage: 0.565 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2182/1000000
Revision size: 16248/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 63945/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15136/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 31931/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.283/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20589894/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  507.978      1 -total
 19.51%   99.087      1 Template:Reflist
 18.68%   94.868      1 Template:Lang
 16.57%   84.159      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 16.12%   81.890      1 Template:Short_description
 14.39%   73.079      1 Template:Cite_journal
 12.56%   63.827      5 Template:Ambox
 12.26%   62.294      1 Template:Infobox_book
  9.29%   47.175      1 Template:Infobox
  9.01%   45.767      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:63588825:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815054920 and revision id 1282863051. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anthropology_from_a_Pragmatic_Point_of_View&oldid=1282863051 " Categories : 1798 non-fiction books Anthropology books Books by Immanuel Kant Enlightenment philosophy Ethics books German non-fiction books German-language non-fiction books Philosophy textbooks Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from April 2020 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from April 2020 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles needing additional references from April 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Books with missing cover Articles containing German-language text Articles to be expanded from April 2020 All articles to be expanded All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2020 This page was last edited on 29 March 2025, at 02:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anthropology from a Pragmatic Point of View 4 languages Add topic

