Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Design 2 Use 3 Stationary or portable 4 Smart bassinets 5 Rolling 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Bassinet 14 languages العربية Asturianu Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Galego עברית 日本語 Српски / srpski Suomi 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of bed for the youngest infants This article is about a newborn's bed. For the medieval helmet, see bascinet . For the French politician, see Athanase Bassinet .

Modern reproduction of a medieval cot and rattle , c. 1465 Movable, but not portable, home bassinet Rooming-in bassinet A wooden cradle from India A bassinet , bassinette , or cradle is a bed specifically for babies from birth to about four months. Bassinets are generally designed to work with fixed legs or caster wheels, while cradles are generally designed to provide a rocking or gliding motion. Bassinets and cradles are distinguished from Moses baskets and carry cots , which are designed to be carried and sit directly on the floor or furniture. After four months, babies are often transferred to a crib (American usage) or cot (UK usage). In the United States , however, the bedside sleeper is the prevalent option, since they are generally bigger, recommended up to 6 months, and often used up to a year.

[ citation needed ] Design [ edit ] A bassinet is typically a basket-like structure on free-standing legs, often with casters.

[ 1 ] A cradle is typically set in a fixed frame, but with the ability to rock or glide.

[ 1 ] Use [ edit ] Bassinet usage in the United States nearly doubled to 20% from 1992 to 2006.

[ 2 ] Greater than 45% of babies up to two months used a bassinet.

[ 2 ] By 5–6 months, however, fewer than 10% of babies sleep in bassinets.

[ 2 ] In a hospital environment, a special form of sealed bassinet is used in a neonatal intensive care unit .

On many long-haul flights, most airlines provide a bassinet (which is attached to a bulkhead) to adults travelling with an infant, i.e., a child under the age of two. The use of the bassinet is restricted by the infant's size and weight.

[ 3 ] These need to be requested in advance with the airline. However, most USA and Canadian airlines have bassinet policies which mean they are only allocated at the airport gate.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Research has shown that the mattress influences SIDS outcomes; a firm mattress lowers SIDS risk.

[ 7 ] Some bassinets are designed to rock or swing freely, with many carers finding their child calmed by this action.  The process of lulling the child to sleep may be accompanied by prerecorded or live performance of lullabies .

Stationary or portable [ edit ] Although there are many variations, they fall generally into two categories: light and portable types sometimes called Moses baskets sturdier but less portable cradles In both cases, they are generally designed to allow the resting baby to be carried from place to place. Within the home, they are often raised on a stand or other surface to reduce back strain when bending over to tend the baby.  Wheeled frames to convert a bassinet into a pram or baby carriage are common.

Smart bassinets [ edit ] Bassinets that automatically soothe babies by sound and motion in response to crying recently have become available, starting with the Snoo in October 2016.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The Snoo has been criticized for its high price.

[ 10 ] Graco, 4Moms, and other companies have introduced cheaper competing products.

[ 11 ] Rolling [ edit ] At three or four months of age babies are able to roll over by themselves; this means they could tip the bassinet over, so for safety they must use an infant bed or toddler bed instead.

See also [ edit ] Baby bedding Baby transport References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bassinets (infant beds) .

^ a b Injury Prevention for Children and Adolescents: Research, Practice, and Advocacy , Karen DeSafey Lille, Ed. 2006. p.71.

^ a b c Pike, Jodi, and Rachel Y. Moon.

“Bassinet Use and Sudden Unexpected Death in Infancy.” The Journal of Pediatrics 153.4 (2008): 509–512.

^ "Airplane Bassinet Seats: A Guide To Airline Bassinet Seat Restrictions" .

flyingwithababy.com . 1 February 2013.

^ "Traveling with children & while pregnant - Special assistance - American Airlines" .

www.aa.com .

^ Example of airline travel information regarding children and infants , Lufthansa ^ "Flickr" .

Flickr .

^ SIDS & Kids Statement on the use of second hand mattresses ^ Quito, Anne (22 October 2016).

"This "smart crib" from MIT Media Lab-trained engineers is designed to quiet a crying baby in under a minute" .

Quartz . Retrieved 28 November 2021 .

^ Low, Cherlynn (18 October 2016).

"New smart crib aims to relieve frazzled, sleep-deprived parents" .

Engadget . Retrieved 28 November 2021 .

^ Frankel, Todd.

"Baby sleep aids are big business. But companies are peddling a fantasy" .

Washington Post . Retrieved 28 November 2021 .

^ Van Camp, Jeffrey (25 August 2021).

"Our Favorite High-Tech Bassinets for Cantankerous Tots" .

Wired . Retrieved 28 November 2021 .

v t e Bedding Adult beds ( bed sizes ) Banig Box-bed Bunk bed Cage bed Rope bed Camp bed Canopy bed Daybed Four-poster bed Futon Hammock Hospital bed Kang bed-stove Lit à la Turque Loft bed Charpai Murphy bed Petate Platform bed Polish bed Sleigh bed Sofa bed Trundle bed Infant beds Bassinet Cradle (bed) Infant bed Toddler bed Bed components Bed frame Bed sheet Bed skirt Cot side Footboard Headboard Mattresses Air mattress Cambodian mat Tick mattress Mahjong mat Mattress pad Mattress protector Memory foam Orthopedic mattress Waterbed Bed bases Box-spring Bunkie board Storage bed Blankets Afghan Comforter Duvet Duvet cover Electric blanket Hudson's Bay point blanket Lizhnyk Patchwork quilt Photo blanket Quilt Razai Security blanket Silk comforter Sleeping bag Sleeved blanket Weighted blanket Pillows Acupressure pillow Bamboo wife Bolster Contour leg pillow Cushion Dakimakura Eye pillow Orthopedic pillow Sex pillow Speaker pillow Throw pillow Related items Bed warmer Couch Nightstand Blanket fort Category Commons Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bassinet&oldid=1299867351 " Categories : Babycare Beds Infancy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2017 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 22:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bassinet 14 languages Add topic

