Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents François-André Vincent 24 languages العربية Български Català Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Italiano مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Svenska Татарча / tatarça Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French painter (1746–1816) François-André Vincent Portrait of François-André Vincent by Adélaïde Labille-Guiard , painted 1783 Born ( 1746-12-30 ) 30 December 1746 Paris Died 4 August 1816 (1816-08-04) (aged 69) Paris Nationality French Occupation Neoclassical painter Spouse Adélaïde Labille-Guiard ​ ​ ( m.

1799; died 1803) ​ François-André Vincent ( French pronunciation: [fʁɑ̃swa ɑ̃dʁe vɛ̃sɑ̃] ; 30 December 1746 – 4 August 1816) was a French neoclassical painter.

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Chancellor Antoine Chaumont de La Galaizière receiving homage from the First President of the Court of Lorraine in Nancy on March 21, 1737 Vincent was born in Paris in 1746, [ 2 ] the son of the miniaturist François-Elie Vincent . He studied under Joseph-Marie Vien and was a pupil of École Royale des Éleves Protégés. From 1771 to 1775 he studied at the French Academy in Rome . He travelled to Rome after winning the Prix de Rome with Germanicus Calms Sedition in his Camp in 1768, and was when he was installed at the Palais Mancini, where he painted numerous portraits, inspired by Jean-Honoré Fragonard 's style, who also was visiting Rome and Naples in the same time.

In 1790, Vincent was appointed master of drawings to Louis XVI of France , and in 1792 he became a professor at the Académie royale de peinture et de sculpture in Paris . In 1800, he married the painter Adélaïde Labille-Guiard who was well known for her mastery in portrait painting, a member of the Royal Academy and painter for the Royal Family.

He was a leader of the neoclassical and historical movement in French art, along with his rival Jacques-Louis David , another pupil of Vien. He was influenced by the art of classical antiquity , by the masters of the Italian High Renaissance , especially Raphael .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] François-André Vincent was one of the principal innovators of the  subjects and themes in French art of Neoclassical style and his works were of a high standard.

[ 2 ] He was one of the founder members of the Académie des Beaux-Arts – part of the Institut de France and the successor to the Académie royale – in 1795. Towards the end of his life he painted less due to ill health, but he continued to receive official honours.

Works [ edit ] Belisarius by François-André Vincent, 1776 President Mole Manhandled by Insurgents , 1779 Henry IV Bringing Food into Paris , 1783 Zeuxis Choosing the Most Beautiful Women from Croton as His Models , 1789 Georges Cuvier Alcibiades Being Taught by Socrates , 1777 William Tell 's leap (Tellensprung) from the boat of his captors at the Axen cliffs Greek priest The Ploughing Lesson Portrait of a man.

Portrait of Pierre Rousseau Portrait de la baronne de Chalvet-Souville, née Marie de Broutin (detail) See also [ edit ] Adélaïde Labille-Guiard Portrait of Baron Georges Cuvier (1769–1832), Whitfield Fine Art References [ edit ] ^ "The Painter François-André Vincent" . .edu . Retrieved 13 March 2015 .

^ a b c "VINCENT, François-André" . www.wga.hu . Retrieved 13 March 2015 .

^ "Francois-Andre_Vincent_1746-1816" . museefabre.montpellier-agglo.com.

Further reading [ edit ] Book about François-André Vincent's life: The Perfect Foil: FranCois-Andre Vincent and the Revolution in French Painting by Elizabeth C. Mansfield More works External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to François-André Vincent .

‹ The template below ( Authority control (arts) ) is being considered for deletion. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Artists ULAN RKD Artists SIKART KulturNav Victoria National Gallery of Canada People Deutsche Biographie Other SNAC Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=François-André_Vincent&oldid=1295175279 " Categories : French neoclassical painters Prix de Rome for painting Burials at Père Lachaise Cemetery 1746 births 1816 deaths Members of the Académie des beaux-arts 18th-century French painters French male painters 19th-century French painters 19th-century French male artists 18th-century French male artists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA Articles containing French-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 05:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents François-André Vincent 24 languages Add topic

