Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 List of works Toggle List of works subsection 2.1 Politics 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Hassan Hassanzadeh Amoli 12 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Deutsch فارسی Français Malagasy مصرى مازِرونی پنجابی Svenska اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Iranian Shi'ite theologian (1927-2021) Allamah Hassan Hassanzadeh Amoli Hasanzadeh Amoli at his own commemoration ceremony in 2013 Personal life Born Hassan Hassanzadeh Tabari Amoli ( 1927-02-10 ) 10 February 1927 Ira , Larijan , Imperial State of Persia Died 25 September 2021 (2021-09-25) (aged 94) Amol , Iran Nationality Iranian Religious life Religion Islam Denomination Shia Jurisprudence Ja'fari Creed Usuli Hasan Hasanzade Amoli ( Persian : حسن حسن‌زاده آملی : 10 February, 1927 [ 1 ] – 25 September, 2021) was an Iranian Shi'ite theologian known for his mystical tendencies [ 2 ] and Islamic philosophy .

[ 3 ] He was among clerics who overcame the traditional opposition to teaching philosophy courses at Shi'ite seminaries .

[ 4 ] He wrote many books in philosophy, mysticism, mathematics, astronomy, Persian and Arabic literature. He interpreted the Islamic philosophical tradition in a similar way to Mulla Sadra , which is a reconciliation of religion, reason and mysticism. His books include Sharh fusus al-hikam , Tashih nahj al-balagha , Insan dar 'urf-i 'irfan , Tashih kalila wa dimna .

He died on Saturday, 25 September 2021, at the age of 94.

[ 5 ] Iran's Supreme Leader Ayatollah Khamenei offered prayers on his body.

[ 6 ] Hassanzadeh Amoli was elected as one of the "Immortal figures of Iran" in 2003.

[ 7 ] Hassanzadeh-Amoli was father-in-law of Iranian conservative politician Baqer Larijani .

[ 8 ] Biography [ edit ] Allameh was born on February 12, 1928, in the village of Ira of Larijan and in 1944 he started to study in the Islamic seminary.

[ 9 ] At the age of 22, he went to Tehran to continue his studies in 1950, and had teachers such as Ayatollah Agha Seyyed Ahmad Lavasani, Allameh Sha'rani, and in Marvi school, Allameh Haj Mirza Abolhassan Sha'rani Tehrani, Allameh Rafiei Qazvini, Ayatollah Ghomshei, Ayatollah Mohammad Taghi Amoli, Hakim Mohammad Hossein Fazel Toni, Ayatollah Haj Mirza Ahmad Ashtiani.

[ 9 ] During these years, he studied interpretation, mathematics, astronomy, medicine. In 1963, he went to Qom and began teaching, and at the same time was a student of Allameh Tabatabai for 17 years. He also attended the philosophical and mystical lectures of Sayyid Muhammad Hasan Ilahi. Hasanzada speaks highly of these lectures, attributing part of his moral influence to them. He also studied with Sayyid Mahdi Qadi Tabataba'i, the son of Sayyid 'Ali Qadi Tabataba'i, who was an expert in Occult Sciences, philosophy, and mysticism .

[ 9 ] Hassanzadeh Amoli considered the Qur'an as the source of divine knowledge. He believed that Nahj al-Balaghah, Sahifa al-Sajadiyya, Usul Kafi, Bihar al-Anwar and other narrative collections are rooted in the Qur'an and are expositions of the Qur'an. According to him, the sayings of the infallible Imams stem from the Qur'an.

[ 10 ] According to Hassanzadeh, the Qur'an, philosophy and mysticism are not separate from each other. He considered the truth of religion and mysticism as one, and that is the knowledge of God.

[ 10 ] Hassan Hassanzadeh Amoli's house in Ira village, where he is also buried List of works [ edit ] Hassanzadeh Amoli has works in the fields of jurisprudence, philosophy, ethics, mysticism, religious wisdom, theology, hadith and rijal, interpretation of the Qur'an, mathematics and astronomy, Arabic and Persian literature , natural sciences, ancient medicine, alien and esoteric sciences. Some of his works are: [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Hizar-o-yik kalima Hizar-o-yik nukta Durus-i ma'rifat nafs Ilahinama Diwan-i ash'ar Insan-i kamil az didgah-i nahj al-balagha Insan dar 'urf-i 'irfan Sad-o-dah eshareh Wilayat takwini Wahdat az nigah 'arif wa hakim Gashti dar harkat Risala nur 'ala nur dar zikr wa zakir wa madhkur Risala anahu al-haq sharh-i asfar Medicine and dissection
Translation and explanations of some of his books such as "The Beginning and The End", "100 Words" can be found here: Politics [ edit ] Amoli has been an outspoken supporter of Ayatollah Khomeini and his successor Ali Khamenei , dedicating the book Insan dar 'urf-i 'irfan (the human from the standpoint of mysticism) to the latter.

[ 1 ] [ 13 ] Before June 6, 1963, he visited Ayatollah Khomeini and, on his orders, informed the political and social people of Amol.

[ 1 ] In the months leading up to the victory of the Revolution, he actively participated in the meetings of the Clergy Society of Mazandaran Province. He  also was on the battlefield during the Holy Defense .

[ 14 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c "A scholar and mystic who stood by the people and the revolution in word and deed" .

^ Gregory L. Bock (2019).

The Philosophy of Forgiveness . Vol. III: Forgiveness in World Religions. Vernon Press. p. 79.

ISBN 9781622735532 .

^ Eskandar Sadeghi-Boroujerdi (2019).

Revolution and its Discontents: Political Thought and Reform in Iran . Cambridge University Press. p. 333.

ISBN 9781108426343 .

^ Mehrzad Boroujerdi (1996).

Iranian Intellectuals and the West: The Tormented Triumph of Nativism . Syracuse University Press. p. 95.

ISBN 978-0-8156-0433-4 .

^ "Announcing a week of public mourning in Amol" .

^ "The prayer of the Supreme Leader of the Revolution on the body of Ayatollah Hassanzadeh Amoli" .

^ "Immortal figures of Iran" .

^ Selim Celal (22 January 2018), "ANALYSIS - How strong is Larijani block in Iran?" , Anadolu Agency , retrieved 1 September 2019 ^ a b c "A scholar and mystic who stood by the people in word and deed" .

^ a b "Ayatollah Hassanzadeh Amoli Hakim, mystic, writer and mathematician \"Conversation and Interview\" " .

^ "Works and writings of Hassanzadeh Amoli" . Archived from the original on 6 December 2021 . Retrieved 29 September 2021 .

^ "Bibliography of Allameh Hassanzadeh Amoli" .

^ Hassanzadeh Amoli, Man in the Mysticism of Mysticism, 2001, p.7 .

^ "The presence of Allameh Hassanzadeh Amoli in the meetings of the militant clerics on the eve of the victory of the revolution" .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hassan Hassanzadeh Amoli .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Netherlands Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hassan_Hassanzadeh_Amoli&oldid=1263035024 " Categories : 1929 births 2021 deaths Iranian ayatollahs Iranian Islamists Shia Islamists People from Amol Islamic philosophers Iranian Science and Culture Hall of Fame recipients in Theology Qom Seminary alumni Iranian Muslim mystics Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2021 Pages using infobox religious biography with unsupported parameters Articles having same image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing Persian-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 December 2024, at 09:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hassan Hassanzadeh Amoli 12 languages Add topic

