Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Significance of its notable members Toggle Significance of its notable members subsection 2.1 Kitarō Nishida 2.2 Hajime Tanabe 2.3 Keiji Nishitani 2.4 Masao Abe 2.5 Shizuteru Ueda 2.6 Eshin Nishimura 3 Criticism 4 Members 5 References 6 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 6.1 Readings by members 6.2 Secondary sources on members 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Kyoto School 17 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Japanese philosophical movement Kitarō Nishida , considered the founder of the Kyoto School of philosophical thought, c. 1943.

The Kyoto School of Philosophy at Kyoto University Topics Shin Buddhism Logic of basho Nothingness Zen Mu Kenosis Metanoetics Sunyata Interfaith dialogue Individuals Kitaro Nishida Hajime Tanabe Jun Tosaka Shūzō Kuki Tetsuro Watsuji Kiyoshi Miki Keiji Nishitani Shin'ichi Hisamatsu Masao Abe D. T. Suzuki Historical background Meiji Restoration Nationalism and WW II Occupation of Japan Post-occupation v t e The Kyoto School ( 京都学派 , Kyōto-gakuha ) is the name given to the Japanese philosophical movement centered at Kyoto University that assimilated Western philosophy and religious ideas and used them to reformulate religious and moral insights unique to the East Asian philosophical tradition.

[ 1 ] However, it is also used to describe postwar scholars who have taught at the same university, been influenced by the foundational thinkers of Kyoto school philosophy, and who have developed distinctive theories of Japanese uniqueness. To disambiguate the term, therefore, thinkers and writers covered by this second sense appear under The Kyoto University Research Centre for the Cultural Sciences .

Beginning roughly in 1913 with Kitarō Nishida , it survived the serious controversy it garnered after World War II to develop into a well-known and active movement. However, it is not a "school" of philosophy in the traditional sense of the phrase, such as with the Frankfurt School or Plato's Academy . Instead, the group of academics gathered around Kyoto University as a de facto meeting place. Its founder, Nishida, steadfastly encouraged independent thinking.

According to James Heisig, the name "Kyoto School" was first used in 1932 by a student of Nishida and Hajime Tanabe .

Jun Tosaka considered himself to be part of the ' Marxist left-wing ' of the school.

[ 2 ] Afterwards, the media and academic institutions outside Japan began to use the term. By the 1970s it had become a universally accepted term.

History [ edit ] Masao Abe writes in his introduction to a new English translation of Nishida's magnum opus that if one thinks of philosophy in terms of Kant or Hegel , then there is no philosophy taking place in Japan. But if it is instead thought of in the tradition carried out by Augustine and Kierkegaard , then Japan has a rich philosophical history, composed of the great thinkers Kūkai , Shinran , Dōgen , and others.

[ 3 ] The group of philosophers involved with the Kyoto School in its nearly 100-year history is a diverse one. Members often come from very different social backgrounds. At the same time, in the heat of intellectual debate they did not hesitate to criticise each other's work.

The following criteria roughly characterize the features of this school: Teaching at Kyoto University or at a nearby affiliated school.

Sharing some basic assumptions about using Asian thought in the framework of Western philosophical tradition.

Introducing and rationally investigating the meaning of " nothingness " and its importance in the history of philosophical debate.

Expanding on the philosophical vocabulary introduced by Nishida.

Generally, most were strongly influenced by the German philosophical tradition, especially the thought of Kant , Hegel , Nietzsche , and Heidegger . In addition, many employed their cultural resources in formulating their philosophy and bringing it to play to add to the philosophical enterprise.

While their work was not expressly religious it was informed significantly by it. For example, Hajime Tanabe and Keiji Nishitani wrote on Christianity and Buddhism and identified common elements between the religions.

[ 4 ] For this reason, some scholars classify the intellectual products of the school as "religious philosophy." Although the group was fluid and largely informal, traditionally whoever occupied the Chair of the Department of Modern Philosophy at the University of Kyoto was considered its leader. Nishida was the first, from 1913 to 1928. Hajime Tanabe succeeded him until the mid-1930s. By this time, Nishitani had graduated from Kyoto University, studied with Martin Heidegger for two years in Germany , and returned to a teaching post since 1928. From 1955 to 1963, Nishitani officially occupied the Chair. Since his departure, leadership of the school crumbled — turning the movement into a very decentralized group of philosophers with common beliefs and interests.

Significance of its notable members [ edit ] The significance of the group continues to grow, especially in American departments of religion and philosophy. Since the mid-1980s, there has been a growing interest in East/West dialogue , especially inter-faith scholarship.

Masao Abe traveled to both coasts of the United States on professorships and lectured to many groups on Buddhist-Christian relations.

The Kyoto School of Philosophy also influenced education in Japan, giving rise to the Kyoto School of Education. Nishida had various writings such as "On Education" (1933) and deeply influenced his student, philosopher of education Kimura Motomori.

[ 5 ] Kimura in turn taught Mori Akira (also the student of Tanabe), who connected the Kyoto School's ideas to pragmatism and moral education. Through these figures, the ideas of the Kyoto School spread to philosophy of education and even educational practice.

[ 6 ] Although Daisetsu Teitarō Suzuki was closely connected to the Kyoto School and in some ways critical to the development of thought that occurred there — he personally knew Nishida, Tanabe, and Nishitani — he is not considered a true member of the group.

[ 7 ] Tetsurō Watsuji became a lecturer at Kyoto Imperial University , joining Nishida Kitaro , Tanabe Hajime and Nishitani Keiji . While Watsuji joined their department, he is not typically considered a member of the Kyoto School owing to the intellectual independence in his work.

[ 8 ] Kitarō Nishida [ edit ] Main article: Kitarō Nishida Kitarō Nishida , the school's founder, is most known for his groundbreaking work An Inquiry into the Good and later for his elucidation of the "logic of basho " (Japanese: 場所; usually translated as "place," or the Greek τόπος topos ). This brought him fame outside Japan and contributed largely to the attention later paid to philosophers from the Kyoto School.

Nishida's work is notable for a few reasons. Chief among them is how much they are related to the German tradition of philosophy since Schopenhauer . The logic of basho is a non-dualistic 'concrete' logic, meant to overcome the inadequacy of the subject-object distinction essential to the subject logic of Aristotle and the predicate logic of Kant , through the affirmation of what he calls the 'absolutely contradictory self-identity' — a dynamic tension of opposites that, unlike the dialectical logic of Hegel, does not resolve in a synthesis. Rather, it defines its proper subject by maintaining the tension between affirmation and negation as opposite poles or perspectives.

Nishitani describes East Asian philosophy as something very different from what the Western tradition of Descartes , Leibniz or Hume would indicate.

It is 'intuitive and practical,' with its emphasis on religious aspects of experience not lending themselves readily to theoretical description. True wisdom is to be distinguished from intellectual understanding of the kind appropriate to the sciences. The 'appropriation' of Nishida's thought...'embraces difficulties entirely different from those of intellectual understanding'...and those who 'pretend to understand much but do not really understand, no matter how much they intellectually understand' are the object of his scorn.

[ 1 ] Nishida wrote The Logic of Place and the Religious Worldview , developing more fully the religious implications of his work and philosophy through "Absolute Nothingness," which "contains its own absolute self-negation within itself." [ 9 ] By this Nishida means that while the divine is dynamically paradoxical, it should not be construed as pantheism or transcendent theism .

Nishitani and Abe spent much of their academic lives dedicated to this development of nothingness and the absolute.

[ citation needed ] Hajime Tanabe [ edit ] Main article: Hajime Tanabe Keiji Nishitani [ edit ] Main article: Keiji Nishitani Keiji Nishitani , one of Nishida's main disciples, became the doyen in the post-war period. Nishitani's works, such as his Religion and Nothingness , primarily dealt with the Western notion of nihilism , inherited from Nietzsche , and religious interpretation of nothingness , as found in the Buddhist idea of śūnyatā and the specifically Zen Buddhist concept of mu .

Masao Abe [ edit ] Main article: Masao Abe Shizuteru Ueda [ edit ] Main article: Shizuteru Ueda Shizuteru Ueda was a disciple of Keiji Nishitani .

Eshin Nishimura [ edit ] Main article: Eshin Nishimura Criticism [ edit ] Today, there is a great deal of critical research into the school's role before and during the Second World War .

Hajime Tanabe bears the greatest brunt of the criticism for bringing his work on the "Logic of Species" into Japanese politics, which was used to buttress the militarist project to formulate imperialist ideology and propaganda . Tanabe's notion is that the logical category of "species" and nation are equivalent, and each nation or "species" provides a fundamental set of characteristics which define and determine the lives and outlooks of those who participate in it.

Members [ edit ] Kitarō Nishida : 1870–1945 (KU Philosophy Dept. 1910–13, Chair 1913–28) Hajime Tanabe : 1885–1962 (KU Philosophy Dept.?, Chair, 1928–35?) Tomonaga Sanjūrō Keiji Nishitani : 1900–1990 (KU Philosophy Dept. 1928–35, Chair 1935–63) Kuki Shūzō Masao Abe Miki Kiyoshi Tosaka Jun Hisamatsu Shin'ichi Shizuteru Ueda Saneshige Komaki Yamauchi Tokuryū [ 10 ] Takeuchi Yoshinori References [ edit ] ^ a b D.S. Clarke, Jr. "Introduction" in Nishida Kitaro by Nishitani Keiji, 1991.

^ Heisig 2001, p. 4.

^ Masao Abe, "Introduction" in An Inquiry into the Good , 1987 (1921).

^ Tanabe in Philosophy as Metanoetics and Demonstratio of Christianity , and Nishitani in Religion and Nothingness and On Buddhism .

^ Takaya, Shoko (2022). "Historical Nature in Nishida and Kimura Motomori: Nature, Culture, and Education in Harmony and Struggle".

European Journal of Japanese philosophy .

7 : 171-190.

^ Standish, Paul; Saito, Naoko (2012).

Education and the Kyoto School of Philosophy: Pedagogy for Human Transformation . Springer.

^ Robert Lee, "Review of The Buddha Eye: An Anthology of the Kyoto School ," in The Journal of Asian Studies , Vol. 42, No. 4 (August, 1983).

^ Davis, Bret W. (2022), "The Kyoto School" , in Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2022 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2023-03-14 .

^ Davis, Bret W. (2023), Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.), "The Kyoto School" , The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2023 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2025-06-14 .

^ Jannel, Romaric (26 July 2022).

"Nāgārjuna's Tetralemma in Yamauchi Tokuryū's Philosophy" .

The Eastern Buddhist . Third Series.

2 (1): 55– 68.

doi : 10.15070/00011240 . Retrieved 14 February 2023 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Scholarly books The Buddha Eye: An Anthology of the Kyoto School.

Edited by Frederick Franck. New York: Crossroad Publishing, 1982.

— Seventeen essays, most from The Eastern Buddhist , on Zen and Pure Land Buddhism.

Kyoto School Philosophy: A Call for a Paradigm Shift in Philosophical Thought Archived 2012-04-03 at the Wayback Machine , by Horo Atsuhiko. Nanzan Bulletin 16, 1992, pp. 15–32.

The Philosophy of the Kyoto School , edited by Fujita Masakatsu. 2001.

— Anthology of texts by Kyoto scholars themselves, with additional biographical essays.

The Thought of the Kyoto School , edited by Ohashi Ryosuke. 2004.

— Collection of essays dealing with the history of its name, and its members contributions to philosophy.

Carter, Robert E.; Kasulis, Thomas P. (2013).

The Kyoto School: An Introduction .

Albany, New York : SUNY Press .

ISBN 978-1-4384-4541-0 .

Philosophers of Nothingness , by James Heisig. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 2001.

ISBN 0-8248-2481-4 — Excellent introduction to the School's history and content; includes rich multilingual bibliography.

Absolute Nothingness: Foundations for a Buddhist-Christian Dialogue , Hans Waldenfels. New York: Paulist Press, 1980.

— Good early work, focuses mostly on Nishitani's relevance for the perspective of Buddhist-Christian dialogue.

James W. Heisig , John C. Maraldo (Ed.): "Rude Awakenings. Zen, the Kyoto School, & the Question of Nationalism", Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1994.

Journal articles "The Religious Philosophy of the Kyoto School: An Overview," by James Heisig.

Japanese Journal of Religious Studies Vol.17, No.1 (1990), pp. 51–81.

"Heidegger and Buddhism," by T. Umehara.

Philosophy East and West , Vol.20 (1970), pp. 271–281.

"Nishida's Philosophy of 'Place'," by Masao Abe, International Philosophical Quarterly Vol.28, No.4 (Winter 1988), pp. 355–371.

"In Memoriam: Keiji Nishitani (1900-1990)," by E. Kawamura-Hanoka.

Buddhist-Christian Studies , Vol.12 (1992), pp. 241–245.

Readings by members [ edit ] For further information, see the Nanzan Institute's Bibliography for all Kyoto School members .

Kitaro Nishida, An Inquiry into the Good , translated by Masao Abe and Christopher Ives. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1987 (1921).

——, Art and Morality , translated by D. Dilworth and Valdo Viglielmo. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1973.

——, Intelligibility and the Philosophy of Nothingness , translated by Robert Schinzinger. Westport: 1958.

Tanabe, Hajime, "Demonstratio of Christianity", in Introduction to the Philosophy of Tanabe: According to the English Translation of the Seventh Chapter of the Demonstration of Christianity ,  translated by Makoto Ozaki, Rodopi Bv Editions, January 1990, ISBN 90-5183-205-2 , ISBN 978-90-5183-205-1 , ASIN B0006F1CBU .

——, "The Logic of the Species as Dialectics," trns. David Dilworth; Taira Sato, in Monumenta Nipponica , Vol. 24, No. 3, 1969, pp. 273–288.

——, Philosophy as Metanoetics (Nanzan Studies in Religion and Culture), Yoshinori Takeuchi, Valdo Viglielmo, and James W. Heisig (Translators), University of California Press, April 1987, ISBN 0-520-05490-3 .

Keiji Nishitani, Religion and Nothingness , Berkeley: University of California Press, 1982.

ISBN 0-520-04946-2 ——, The Self-Overcoming of Nihilism , translated by Graham Parkes and Setsuko Aihara. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1990.

Yoshinori Takeuchi, The Heart of Buddhism , translated by James Heisig. New York: 1983.

Secondary sources on members [ edit ] Nishida Kitaro , by Nishitani Keiji, translated by Yamamoto Sesaku and James Heisig.  Berkeley: University of California Press, 1991.

The Religious Philosophy of Tanabe Hajime , edited by Taitetsu Unno and James Heisig. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990.

The Religious Philosophy of Nishitani Keiji , edited by Taitetsu Unno. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990.

External links [ edit ] Philosophy portal Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy The Fascist Next Door? Nishitani Keiji and the Chuokoron Discussions in Perspective , Discussion Paper by Xiaofei Tu in the Electronic Journal of Contemporary Japanese Studies , 27 July 2006.

v t e Kyoto University Colleges Engineering Informatics Law Letters Medicine Science Facilities Kosobe Conservatory Primate Research Institute Research Centre for the Cultural Sciences Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences Seto Marine Biological Laboratory Yoshida dormitory Yukawa Institute for Theoretical Physics Media African Study Monographs People Kitaro Nishida Keiji Nishitani Hajime Tanabe Related Kyoto School Takigawa incident v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐ttf4f
Cached time: 20250816105227
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.606 seconds
Real time usage: 0.773 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1740/1000000
Revision size: 17765/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 150458/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1752/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 65426/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.404/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15221312/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  628.333      1 -total
 22.36%  140.512      1 Template:Nihongo
 21.76%  136.719      1 Template:Reflist
 15.90%   99.892      2 Template:Cite_journal
 14.16%   88.970      1 Template:Kyoto_School
 13.88%   87.230      1 Template:Sidebar
 10.05%   63.152      1 Template:Short_description
  8.75%   54.968      9 Template:Navbox
  7.21%   45.328      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
  6.82%   42.824      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:490321:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816105227 and revision id 1300662006. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kyoto_School&oldid=1300662006 " Categories : Kyoto School Philosophical schools and traditions Japanese philosophy Kyoto University Empire of Japan Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Japanese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2011 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 17:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kyoto School 17 languages Add topic

