Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In philosophy Toggle In philosophy subsection 1.1 Abstract objects and causality 1.2 Quasi-abstract entities 2 Concrete and abstract thought in psychology 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Abstract and concrete 11 languages العربية Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Português Sunda Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Metaphysics concept covering the divide between two types of entities "Abstract entity" redirects here. For conceptual abstraction, see Abstraction . For the album by Kiana, see Abstract Entity .

In philosophy and the arts , a fundamental distinction exists between abstract and concrete entities. While there is no universally accepted definition, common examples illustrate the difference: numbers , sets , and ideas are typically classified as abstract objects, whereas plants , dogs , and planets are considered concrete objects.

[ 1 ] Philosophers have proposed several criteria to define this distinction: Spatiotemporal existence – Abstract objects exist outside space-time , while concrete objects exist within space-time.

Causal influence – Concrete objects can cause and be affected by other entities (e.g., a rock breaking a window), whereas abstract objects (e.g., the number 2) lack causal powers and do not cause anything to happen in the physical world.

Metaphysical relation – In metaphysics , concrete objects are specific, individual things ( particulars ), while abstract objects represent general concepts or categories ( universals ).

Ontological domain – Concrete objects belong to the physical realm (or both the physical and mental realms), whereas abstract objects belong to neither.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Another view is that it is the distinction between contingent existence versus necessary existence; however, philosophers differ on which type of existence here defines abstractness, as opposed to concreteness. Despite this diversity of views, there is broad agreement concerning most objects as to whether they are abstract or concrete, [ 1 ] such that most interpretations agree, for example, that rocks are concrete objects while numbers are abstract objects.

Abstract objects are most commonly used in philosophy , particularly metaphysics, and semantics . They are sometimes called abstracta in contrast to concreta . The term abstract object is said to have been coined by Willard Van Orman Quine .

[ 5 ] Abstract object theory is a discipline that studies the nature and role of abstract objects. It holds that properties can be related to objects in two ways: through exemplification and through encoding. Concrete objects exemplify their properties while abstract objects merely encode them. This approach is also known as the dual copula strategy .

[ 6 ] In philosophy [ edit ] The type–token distinction identifies physical objects that are tokens of a particular type of thing.

[ 7 ] The "type" of which it is a part is in itself an abstract object. The abstract–concrete distinction is often introduced and initially understood in terms of paradigmatic examples of objects of each kind: Examples of abstract and concrete objects Abstract Concrete Tennis A tennis match Redness Red light reflected off of an apple and hitting one's eyes Five Five cars Justice A just action Humanity (the property of being human) Human population (the set of all humans) Abstract objects have often garnered the interest of philosophers because they raise problems for popular theories. In ontology , abstract objects are considered problematic for physicalism and some forms of naturalism . Historically, the most important ontological dispute about abstract objects has been the problem of universals . In epistemology , abstract objects are considered problematic for empiricism . If abstracta lack causal powers and spatial location, how do we know about them? It is hard to say how they can affect our sensory experiences, and yet we seem to agree on a wide range of claims about them.

Some, such as Ernst Mally , [ 8 ] Edward Zalta [ 9 ] and arguably, Plato in his Theory of Forms , [ 9 ] have held that abstract objects constitute the defining subject matter of metaphysics or philosophical inquiry more broadly. To the extent that philosophy is independent of empirical research, and to the extent that empirical questions do not inform questions about abstracta, philosophy would seem especially suited to answering these latter questions.

In modern philosophy , the distinction between abstract and concrete was explored by Immanuel Kant [ 10 ] and G. W. F. Hegel .

[ 11 ] Gottlob Frege said that abstract objects, such as propositions, were members of a third realm, [ 12 ] different from the external world or from internal consciousness .

[ 1 ] (See Popper's three worlds .) Abstract objects and causality [ edit ] Another popular proposal for drawing the abstract–concrete distinction contends that an object is abstract if it lacks causal power. A causal power has the ability to affect something causally. Thus, the empty set is abstract because it cannot act on other objects. One problem with this view is that it is not clear exactly what it is to have causal power. For a more detailed exploration of the abstract–concrete distinction, see the relevant Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy article.

[ 9 ] Quasi-abstract entities [ edit ] In the 2010s, there was some philosophical interest in the development of a third category of objects known as the quasi-abstract . Quasi-abstract objects have drawn particular attention in the area of social ontology and documentality . Some argue that the over-adherence to the platonist duality of the concrete and the abstract has led to a large category of social objects having been overlooked or rejected as nonexistent because they exhibit characteristics that the traditional duality between concrete and abstract regards as incompatible.

[ 13 ] Specifically, the ability to have temporal location, but not spatial location, and have causal agency (if only by acting through representatives).

[ 14 ] These characteristics are exhibited by a number of social objects, including states of the international legal system.

[ 15 ] Concrete and abstract thought in psychology [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Jean Piaget uses the terms "concrete" and "formal" to describe two different types of learning. Concrete thinking involves facts and descriptions about everyday, tangible objects, while abstract ( formal operational ) thinking involves a mental process.

Abstract idea Concrete idea Dense things sink.

It will sink if its density is greater than the density of the fluid.

You breathe in oxygen and breathe out carbon dioxide.

Gas exchange takes place between the air in the alveoli and the blood.

Plants get water through their roots.

Water diffuses through the cell membrane of the root hair cells.

See also [ edit ] Abstract structure Conceptual framework Emic and etic Incorporeality Nominalism Non-physical entity Observation Philosophy of mathematics Platonic realm Platonism Present Problem of universals References [ edit ] ^ a b c Rosen, Gideon (2020).

"Abstract Objects" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 4 January 2021 .

^ Honderich, Ted (2005). "abstract entities".

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . Oxford University Press.

^ Craig, Edward (1996). "Abstract objects".

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Routledge.

^ Abrams, Meyer Howard; Harpham, Geoffrey Galt (2011).

A Glossary of Literary Terms . Cengage Learning.

ISBN 978-0495898023 . Retrieved 18 September 2012 .

^ Armstrong, D. M. (2010).

Sketch for a systematic metaphysics . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 2.

ISBN 9780199655915 .

^ Zalta 1983 , p. 33.

^ Carr, Philip (2012) "The Philosophy of Phonology" in Philosophy of Linguistics (ed. Kemp, Fernando, Asher), Elsevier, p. 404 ^ Ernst Mally – The Metaphysics Research Lab ^ a b c Rosen, Gideon.

"Abstract Objects" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ KrV A51/B75–6. See also: Edward Willatt, Kant, Deleuze and Architectonics , Continuum, 2010 p. 17: "Kant argues that cognition can only come about as a result of the union of the abstract work of the understanding and the concrete input of sensation." ^ Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel: The Science of Logic , Cambridge University Press, 2010, p. 609. See also: Richard Dien Winfield, Hegel's Science of Logic: A Critical Rethinking in Thirty Lectures , Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2012, p. 265.

^ Gottlob Frege , "Der Gedanke. Eine logische Untersuchung", in: Beiträge zur Philosophie des deutschen Idealismus 1 (1918/19), pp. 58–77; esp. p. 69.

^ B. Smith (2008), "Searle and De Soto: The New Ontology of the Social World". In The Mystery of Capital and the Construction of Social Reality . Open Court.

^ Robinson, E. H. (2011).

"A Theory of Social Agentivity and Its Integration into the Descriptive Ontology for Linguistic and Cognitive Engineering" (PDF) .

International Journal on Semantic Web and Information Systems .

7 (4): 62– 86.

doi : 10.4018/ijswis.2011100103 . Archived from the original (PDF) on Aug 10, 2017.

^ E. H. Robinson (2014), "A Documentary Theory of States and Their Existence as Quasi-Abstract Entities", Geopolitics 19 (3), pp. 1–29.

Sources [ edit ] Zalta, Edward N.

(1983).

Abstract Objects: An Introduction to Axiomatic Metaphysics . Synthese Library. Vol. 160. Dordrecht, Netherlands: D. Reidel Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-90-277-1474-9 .

External links [ edit ] Abstract and concrete at PhilPapers Nominalism, Realism, Conceptualism , from The Catholic Encyclopedia Abstract vs. Concrete in Writing , from Writing for Results v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force Authority control databases Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abstract_and_concrete&oldid=1304712193 " Categories : Abstract object theory Abstraction Cognition Metaphysical properties Consciousness Metaphysical theories Metaphysics of mind Theory of mind Syntax–semantics interface Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2021 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 18:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abstract and concrete 11 languages Add topic

