Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Risorgimento Hegelianism 2 Gentile and Croce 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Italian idealism 1 language Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Late 19th and early 20th Century italian philosophy inspired by German idealism Benedetto Croce and Giovanni Gentile Italian idealism , born from interest in the German movement and particularly in Hegelian doctrine , developed in Italy starting from the spiritualism of the nineteenth-century Risorgimento tradition, and culminated in the first half of the twentieth century in its two greatest exponents: Benedetto Croce and Giovanni Gentile .

Risorgimento Hegelianism [ edit ] In the age of Romanticism , Italian patriots' philosophical circles, especially in Naples , found in Hegelian idealism the way to give a spiritual and cultural imprint to the historical path towards national unification .

[ 1 ] The interest in the Hegelian doctrine in Italy spread especially for the works of Augusto Vera (1813–1885) and Bertrando Spaventa (1817–1883), without omitting also the importance of the studies on Hegel " Aesthetic " by Francesco De Sanctis (1817–1883), author of the Storia della letteratura italiana .

De Sanctis's concept of art and of literary history , inspired by Hegel, will stimulate the genesis of Crocian idealism.

[ 2 ] Augusto Vera , author of writings and commentaries about Hegel, was a famous philosopher in Europe, who interpreted the Hegelian Absolute in a religious and transcendent sense.

[ 3 ] An opposite interpretation was formulated by Bertrand Spaventa , for whom the Spirit was immanent in the history of philosophy .

Reconstructing the development of Italian philosophy , Spaventa argued that Italian Renaissance thought of Bruno and Campanella had been at the origin of modern philosophy , but had stopped due to the Counter-Reformation . Its task now was to catch up with European philosophy , linking up with Vico 's mind philosophy, which along with those of Galluppi , Rosmini , and Gioberti , had anticipated themes of Kantism and German idealism .

Se la filosofia non è una vana esercitazione dell'intelletto, ma quella forma reale della vita umana, nella quale si compendiano e trovano il loro vero significato tutti i momenti anteriori dello spirito, è cosa naturale che un popolo libero si riconosca e abbia la vera coscienza di se stesso anche ne' suoi filosofi.

[ 4 ] If philosophy is not a vain exercise of the intellect, but the real form of human life within which are compounded and find their true meaning all the past moments of the spirit, then it is natural for a free people to recognize itself and find the true conscience of itself in its own philosophers.

[ 4 ] Spaventa reformulated the Hegelian dialectic , reinterpreting it from the perspective of Kantian and Fichtian conscientialism or subjectivism .
He considered the act of thinking prevalent with respect to the phases of objectification and synthesis. That is, he supported the need to «mentalise» Hegel , because the Mind is the protagonist of every original production.
The synthesis of the actual thinking of the Spirit was then placed by Spaventa, as the only reality, not only after the hegelian moments of Idea and of Nature , but so as to permeate them also from the beginning.

[ 5 ] Gentile and Croce [ edit ] See also: Actual idealism After a parenthesis characterized by positivism , in 1913 Giovanni Gentile (1875–1944) with the publication of The reform of Hegelian dialectics resumed Spaventa's interpretation of the Hegelian Idea , seeing in Hegelian Spirit the category of becoming as coinciding with the pure act of thought in which the whole reality of nature, history and spirit was transfused.

[ 6 ] Every thing exists only in the mental act of thinking it: there are no single empirical entities separated from the trascendental consciousness ; even the past lives only in the actual, present moment of memory. To Gentile, who considered himself the "philosopher of Fascism ", [ 7 ] actual idealism was the sole remedy to philosophically preserving free agency , by making the act of thinking self-creative, and, therefore, without any contingency and not in the potency of any other fact.

[ 6 ] Gentile reproached Hegel for having built his dialectic with elements proper to "thought", that is to say that of determined thought and of the sciences . For Gentile, instead, only in "thinking in action" is dialectical self-consciousness that includes everything.

Una concezione idealistica mira a concepire lo stesso assoluto, il tutto, come idea: ed è perciò intrinsecamente idealismo assoluto. Ma assoluto l'idealismo non può essere se l'idea non coincide con lo stesso atto del conoscerla; perché - è questa la più profonda origine delle difficoltà in cui si dibatte il platonismo - se l'idea non fosse lo stesso atto per cui l'idea si conosce, l'idea lascerebbe fuori di sè qualche cosa, e l'idealismo pertanto non sarebbe più assoluto.

[ 8 ] An idealistic conception aims at conceiving the absolute, the whole, as an idea, and is therefore intrinsically absolute idealism. But absolute it cannot be unless the idea coincides with the act of knowing it, because — and here we find the very root of the difficulty in which Platonism is entangled — were the idea not the act itself through which it is known, it would leave something outside itself, and the idealism would then no longer be absolute.

[ 8 ] Gentile made a pivotal distinction to factors concerning Idealism's own criteria for reality, which have stood since Berkeley 's adage « esse est percipi » by distinguishing between the concrete real «act of thinking» ( pensiero pensante ), and the abstract «static thought» ( pensiero pensato ).

[ 6 ] To his actual vision was opposed since 1913 Benedetto Croce (1866–1952, cousin of Bertrando Spaventa ) who in his Essay on Hegel interpreted Hegelian thought as immanentist historicism : he also understood the Hegelian dialectic of the opposites in a different way, integrating it with that of the «distincts».

[ 6 ] According to Croce, in fact, the life of the Spirit also consists of autonomous moments that are not opposed, but rather distinct, that is: " Art ", intuitive knowledge of the particular , which aims to beauty ; " Philosophy ", logical knowledge of the universal , which aims to truth ; " Economy ", volition of the particular, which aims to usefulness ; " Ethics ", volition of the universal, which aims to good .

[ 6 ] Referring to Giambattista Vico , Croce identified philosophy with history , understood not as a capricious sequence of events, but the implementation of Reason , in the light of which it becomes possible the historical understanding of the genesis of facts, and their simultaneous justification with her own unfolding.

La storia non è mai giustiziera, ma sempre giustificatrice; e giustiziera non potrebbe farsi se non facendosi ingiusta, ossia confondendo il pensiero con la vita, e assumendo come giudizio del pensiero le attrazioni e le repulsioni del sentimento.

[ 9 ] History never metes out justice, but always justifies ; she could not carry out the former act without making herself unjust — that is to say, confounding thought with life, taking the attractions and repulsions of sentiment for the judgments of thought.

[ 9 ] Historian 's task is therefore to overcome every form of emotionality towards the studied matter, and to present it in form of knowledge , without referring to good or evil.

[ 6 ] After having characterized Italian philosophical culture for over forty years, after the Second World War the neo-idealism entered a crisis, replaced by existentialism , neo-positivism , phenomenology and marxism .

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Actual idealism Giovanni Gentile Benedetto Croce Bertrando Spaventa Italian philosophy Notes [ edit ] ^ Guido Oldrini, Gli Hegeliani di Napoli , Milan, Feltrinelli, 1964.

^ Garin 2008 , pp. 974–976.

^ Garin 2008 , pp. 961–964.

^ a b Bertrando Spaventa , La filosofia italiana nelle sue relazioni con la filosofia europea , Giovanni Gentile ed., Bari: G. Laterza & f., 1908 (translated by Eugenio Garin , History of Italian Philosophy , Giorgio A. Pinton ed., vol. 1, page XLV, Rodopi, 2008).

^ Garin 2008 , pp. 964–974.

^ a b c d e f g Garin 2008 , pp. 995–1066.

^ M. E. Moss (2004), Mussolini's Fascist Philosopher: Giovanni Gentile Reconsidered . New York: Peter Lang.

ISBN 9780820468389 .

^ a b Giovanni Gentile , The Theory of Mind as Pure Act [1916], chapter XVII, § 1, pp. 253-254, translated by Herbert Wildon Carr, London, Macmillan, 1922.

^ a b Benedetto Croce , Theory and history of historiography [1917], p. 89, translated by Douglas Ainslie, London, Harrap, 1921.

References [ edit ] Garin, Eugenio (2008).

History of Italian Philosophy . Translated by Giorgio A. Pinton. New York: Rodopi.

ISBN 9789042023215 .

Myra E. Moss, Mussolini's Fascist Philosopher: Giovanni Gentile Reconsidered , Peter Lang, 2004 ISBN 9780820468389 Myra E. Moss, Benedetto Croce: Essays on Literature and Literary Criticism , SUNY Press, 1990 ISBN 9781438413754 Bruce Haddock, James Wakefield, Thought Thinking: The Philosophy of Giovanni Gentile , Imprint Academic, 2015 ISBN 9781845408510 Roger Wellington Holmes, The idealism of Giovanni Gentile , The Macmillan company, 1937 Patrick Romanell, Croce Versus Gentile , AMS Press, 1982 ISBN 9780404169794 Giuseppe Casale, Benedetto Croce Between Naples and Europe , Peter Lang Pub Incorporated, 1994 ISBN 9780820420547 (in Italian) Eugenio Garin , Cronache di filosofia italiana. 1900-1943 , Bari, Laterza, 1955 (in Italian) Ugo Spirito , L'idealismo italiano e i suoi critici , Florence, Le Monnier, 1930 (in Italian) Augusto Guzzo , A. Plebe, Gli hegeliani d'Italia , Turin,  Società editrice internazionale, 1953 (in Italian) Guido Oldrini, L'idealismo italiano tra Napoli e l'Europa , Milan, Guerini, 1998 ISBN 9788878028715 (in Italian) Piero Di Giovanni, Giovanni Gentile: la filosofia italiana tra idealismo e anti-idealismo , Milan, FrancoAngeli, 2003 ISBN 9788846451019 (in Italian) Bertrando Spaventa , Opere , Francesco Valagussa and Vincenzo Vitiello eds., Milan, Bompiani, 2008 ISBN 9788858762837 (in Italian) Giovanni Gentile , L'attualismo , Emanuele Severino ed., Milan, Giunti, 2014 ISBN 9788858766705 External links [ edit ] "Idealism (italian) and after" . Routledge History of Philosophy. Taylor & Francis e-Library. 2005 . Retrieved March 6, 2018 .

"Idealism and Liberalism in an Italian 'New Liberal Theorist' " . The Historical Journal. 1987 . Retrieved March 6, 2018 .

Michele Ciliberto (2012).

"Idealismo e non idealismo: il contributo italiano alla storia del Pensiero" (in Italian). Treccani . Retrieved March 6, 2018 .

Gianluca Miligi (2002).

"L'idealismo italiano: intervista a Gennaro Sasso" (PDF) (in Italian). Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana, per l'Enciclopedia Multimediale delle Scienze Filosofiche . Retrieved March 6, 2018 .

Portals : Italy Philosophy v t e Idealism Forms Absolute British Actual Canadian German Italian Monistic Epistemological Platonic Subjective Objective Transcendental Indian Monistic (Shaivism) Magical (thaumaturgic) Buddhist (consciousness-only) Practical Political Related topics Metaphysics Idea Plato's Theory of Ideas Anti-realism Consciousness-only Rationalism Panpsychism Phenomenalism Idealistic pluralism Idealistic Studies v t e Italy articles History Overview Timeline of Italian history By topic Citizenship Currency and coinage Economy Fashion Flags Genetic Historic states Judaism LGBT Military Music Name Postage Railways Prehistory Prehistory Neolithic Villanovan Terramare Rinaldone Apennine Nuragic Golasecca Canegrate Latial Ancient Ancient peoples Italic peoples Latins Osci Picentes Samnites Umbri Veneti Etruscans Celts Magna Graecia Ligures Messapians Ancient Rome Kingdom Republic Roman conquest Roman Italy Empire Western Empire Middle Ages Middle Ages Italy under Odoacer Ostrogoths Byzantium Lombards Papal States the Holy Roman Empire the Sardinian Judicates Arabs Normans Guelphs and Ghibellines Lombard League Kingdom of Sicily War of the Sicilian Vespers Kingdom of Naples Early modern Italian city-states Florence Siena Milan Maritime republics Venice Genoa Pisa Amalfi Kingdom of Sardinia Grand Duchy of Tuscany Duchy of Savoy Renaissance Italian Wars Early Modern period Napoleonic Italy Austrian occupation and Kingdom of Lombardy-Venetia Kingdom of the Two Sicilies Late modern Unification First War of Independence Second War of Independence Niçard exodus Expedition of the Thousand Proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy Third War of Independence Capture of Rome Monarchy and the World Wars Kingdom of Italy Colonial Empire World War I Fourth War of Independence Fascist Italy World War II Fall of the Fascist regime Resistance and Social Republic Civil War Contemporary Republic Institutional referendum Istrian–Dalmatian exodus Economic Boom Years of Lead Maxi Trial Mani pulite Coronavirus pandemic Geography Italian geographical region Peninsula Climate Climate change Geology Fauna Flora Mountains Prealps Alps Apennines Volcanism Volcanoes Beaches Canals Caves Earthquakes Islands Lakes Marine protected areas National parks Regional parks Rivers Valleys Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights LGBT rights Judiciary Law Law enforcement Military Nationality Parliament Political parties President ( List ) Prime Minister ( List ) Council of Ministers Regions Provinces Metropolitan cities Cities Comune Municipalities Security and intelligence Economy Economy Italian regions by GDP Agriculture Automotive industry Banking Banks Central Bank Brands Companies Energy Exports Science and technology Southern question Stock exchange Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport air rail road Welfare Wine Society Aristocracy Censorship Corruption Crime Demographics Education Emigration and diaspora Gambling Health Healthcare Immigration Inventions and discoveries Italians People Languages Italian Regional Life expectancy Orders, decorations, and medals Poverty Prostitution Public administration Racism Religion Social class Terrorism Water supply and sanitation Women Culture Duecento Trecento Quattrocento Cinquecento Seicento Settecento Ottocento Anthem Architecture Art Castles Cathedrals Cinema Coat of arm Cuisine Design Fashion Flag Folklore Gardens Internet Italophilia Libraries Literature Media Museums Music Mythology National symbols Palaces Philosophy Public holidays Sport Television Theatre Traditions World Heritage Sites Italy portal Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Italian_idealism&oldid=1215599174 " Categories : Italian philosophy Modern history of Italy Idealism Culture of Italy 19th century in Italy 20th century in Italy Hidden categories: Articles containing Italian-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) This page was last edited on 26 March 2024, at 02:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Italian idealism 1 language Add topic

