Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure of a supersymmetry algebra 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Supersymmetry algebra 2 languages 한국어 Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia In theoretical physics , a supersymmetry algebra (or SUSY algebra ) is a mathematical formalism for describing the relation between bosons and fermions . The supersymmetry algebra contains not only the Poincaré algebra and a compact subalgebra of internal symmetries, but also contains some fermionic supercharges, transforming as a sum of N real spinor representations of the Poincaré group . Such symmetries are allowed by the Haag–Łopuszański–Sohnius theorem .  When N >1 the algebra is said to have extended supersymmetry . The supersymmetry algebra is a semidirect sum of a central extension of the super-Poincaré algebra by a compact Lie algebra B of internal symmetries.

Bosonic fields commute while fermionic fields anticommute. In order to have a transformation that relates the two kinds of fields, the introduction of a Z 2 -grading under which the even elements are bosonic and the odd elements are fermionic is required. Such an algebra is called a Lie superalgebra .

Just as one can have representations of a Lie algebra , one can also have representations of a Lie superalgebra , called supermultiplets .  For each Lie algebra, there exists an associated Lie group which is connected and simply connected , unique up to isomorphism , and the representations of the algebra can be extended to create group representations .  In the same way, representations of a Lie superalgebra can sometimes be extended into representations of a Lie supergroup .

Structure of a supersymmetry algebra [ edit ] The general supersymmetry algebra for spacetime dimension d , and with the fermionic piece consisting of a sum of N irreducible real spinor representations, has a structure of the form ( P × Z ).

Q .( L × B ) where P is a bosonic abelian vector normal subalgebra of dimension d , normally identified with translations of spacetime. It is a vector representation of L .

Z is a scalar bosonic algebra in the center whose elements are called central charges.

Q is an abelian fermionic spinor subquotient algebra, and is a sum of N real spinor representations of L . (When the signature of spacetime is divisible by 4 there are two different spinor representations of L , so there is some ambiguity about the structure of Q as a representation of L .) The elements of Q , or rather their inverse images in the supersymmetry algebra, are called supercharges. The subalgebra ( P × Z ).

Q is sometimes also called the supersymmetry algebra and is nilpotent of length at most 2, with the Lie bracket of two supercharges lying in P × Z .

L is a bosonic subalgebra, isomorphic to the Lorentz algebra in d dimensions, of dimension d ( d –1)/2 B is a scalar bosonic subalgebra, given by the Lie algebra of some compact group, called the group of internal symmetries. It commutes with P , Z , and L , but may act non-trivially on the supercharges Q .

The terms "bosonic" and "fermionic" refer to even and odd subspaces of the superalgebra.

The terms "scalar", "spinor", "vector", refer to the behavior of subalgebras under the action of the Lorentz algebra L .

The number N is the number of irreducible real spin representations. When the signature of spacetime is divisible by 4 this is ambiguous as in this case there are two different irreducible real spinor representations, and the number N is sometimes replaced by a pair of integers ( N 1 , N 2 ).

The supersymmetry algebra is sometimes regarded as a real super algebra, and sometimes as a complex algebra with a hermitian conjugation. These two views are essentially equivalent, as the real algebra can be constructed from the complex algebra by taking the skew-Hermitian elements, and the complex algebra can be constructed from the real one by taking tensor product with the complex numbers .

The bosonic part of the superalgebra is isomorphic to the product of the Poincaré algebra P .

L with the algebra Z × B of internal symmetries.

When N >1 the algebra is said to have extended supersymmetry .

When Z is trivial, the  subalgebra P .

Q .

L is the super-Poincaré algebra .

See also [ edit ] Adinkra symbols Super-Poincaré algebra Superconformal algebra Supersymmetry algebras in 1 + 1 dimensions N = 2 superconformal algebra References [ edit ] Bagger, Jonathan; Wess, Julius (1992), Supersymmetry and supergravity , Princeton Series in Physics (2nd ed.), Princeton University Press , ISBN 0-691-02530-4 , MR 1152804 Haag, Rudolf ; Sohnius, Martin; Łopuszański, Jan T. (1975), "All possible generators of supersymmetries of the S-matrix", Nuclear Physics B , 88 (2): 257– 274, Bibcode : 1975NuPhB..88..257H , doi : 10.1016/0550-3213(75)90279-5 , MR 0411396 v t e Supersymmetry General topics Supersymmetry Supersymmetric gauge theory Supersymmetric quantum mechanics Supergravity Superstring theory Super vector space Supergeometry Supermathematics Superalgebra Lie superalgebra Super-Poincaré algebra Superconformal algebra Supersymmetry algebra Supergroup Superspace Harmonic superspace Super Minkowski space Supermanifold Concepts Supercharge R-symmetry Supermultiplet Short supermultiplet BPS state Superpotential D-term FI D-term F-term Moduli space Supersymmetry breaking Konishi anomaly Seiberg duality Seiberg–Witten theory Witten index Wess–Zumino gauge Localization Mu problem Little hierarchy problem Electric–magnetic duality Theorems Coleman–Mandula Haag–Łopuszański–Sohnius Nonrenormalization Field theories Wess–Zumino N = 1 super Yang–Mills 4D N = 1 N = 4 super Yang–Mills Super QCD MSSM NMSSM 6D (2,0) superconformal ABJM superconformal Supergravity Pure 4D N = 1 supergravity 4D N = 1 supergravity N = 8 supergravity Higher dimensional 11D supergravity Type I supergravity Type IIA supergravity Type IIB supergravity Gauged supergravity Superpartners Axino Chargino Gaugino Goldstino Graviphoton Graviscalar Higgsino LSP Neutralino R-hadron Sfermion Sgoldstino Stop squark Superghost Researchers Affleck Bagger Batchelor Berezin Dine Fayet Gates Golfand Iliopoulos Montonen Olive Salam Seiberg Siegel Roček Rogers Wess Witten Zumino v t e Industrial and applied mathematics Computational Algorithms design analysis Automata theory Automated theorem proving Coding theory Computational geometry Constraint satisfaction Constraint programming Computational logic Cryptography Information theory Statistics Mathematical software Arbitrary-precision arithmetic Finite element analysis Tensor software Interactive geometry software Optimization software Statistical software Numerical-analysis software Numerical libraries Solvers Discrete Computer algebra Computational number theory Combinatorics Graph theory Discrete geometry Analysis Approximation theory Clifford analysis Clifford algebra Differential equations Ordinary differential equations Partial differential equations Stochastic differential equations Differential geometry Differential forms Gauge theory Geometric analysis Dynamical systems Chaos theory Control theory Functional analysis Operator algebra Operator theory Harmonic analysis Fourier analysis Multilinear algebra Exterior Geometric Tensor Vector Multivariable calculus Exterior Geometric Tensor Vector Numerical analysis Numerical linear algebra Numerical methods for ordinary differential equations Numerical methods for partial differential equations Validated numerics Variational calculus Probability theory Distributions ( random variables ) Stochastic processes / analysis Path integral Stochastic variational calculus Mathematical physics Analytical mechanics Lagrangian Hamiltonian Field theory Classical Conformal Effective Gauge Quantum Statistical Topological Perturbation theory in quantum mechanics Potential theory String theory Bosonic Topological Supersymmetry Supersymmetric quantum mechanics Supersymmetric theory of stochastic dynamics Algebraic structures Algebra of physical space Feynman integral Poisson algebra Quantum group Renormalization group Representation theory Spacetime algebra Superalgebra Supersymmetry algebra Decision sciences Game theory Operations research Optimization Social choice theory Statistics Mathematical economics Mathematical finance Other applications Biology Chemistry Psychology Sociology " The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Mathematics in the Natural Sciences " Related Mathematics Organizations Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics Japan Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics Société de Mathématiques Appliquées et Industrielles International Council for Industrial and Applied Mathematics European Community on Computational Methods in Applied Sciences Category Mathematics portal / outline / topics list NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐694955c78b‐xfdhs
Cached time: 20250731115549
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.245 seconds
Real time usage: 0.318 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 356/1000000
Revision size: 5567/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 50662/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 0/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 7/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 20900/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.159/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 3238268/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  233.241      1 -total
 49.12%  114.577      1 Template:Supersymmetry_topics
 47.95%  111.834      4 Template:Navbox
 44.08%  102.810      2 Template:Citation
  6.65%   15.519      1 Template:Industrial_and_applied_mathematics
  0.65%    1.516      3 Template:\ Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:18865642:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250731115549 and revision id 1199306219. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Supersymmetry_algebra&oldid=1199306219 " Categories : Supersymmetry Lie algebras This page was last edited on 26 January 2024, at 18:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Supersymmetry algebra 2 languages Add topic

