Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The Shift 2 Theological implications 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Constantinian shift 8 languages Alemannisch Български Deutsch Español فارسی Italiano ქართული Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political and theological changes Battle of the Milvian Bridge , Raphael , Vatican Rooms. The artist depicted the troops of Constantine bearing the labarum .

The Constantinian shift was, according to some theologians and historians of antiquity , a set of political and theological changes that took place during the 4th-century under the leadership of Emperor Constantine the Great .

Rodney Clapp claims that the shift or change started in the year 200.

[ 1 ] The term was popularized by the Mennonite theologian John H. Yoder .

[ 2 ] He claims that the change was not just freedom from persecution but an alliance between the State and the Church that led to a kind of Caesaropapism . The claim that there ever was a Constantinian shift has been disputed; Peter Leithart argues that there was a "brief, ambiguous 'Constantinian moment' in the fourth century", but that there was "no permanent, epochal 'Constantinian shift ' ".

[ 3 ] The Shift [ edit ] Icon depicting the Emperor Constantine (centre) and the bishops of the First Council of Nicaea holding the Nicene Creed Constantine the Great (reigned 306–337) adopted Christianity as his system of belief after his victory at the Battle of Milvian Bridge in 312.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] The following year, 313, he issued the Edict of Milan with his eastern colleague, Licinius . The edict legalised Christianity alongside other religions in the Roman Empire . 
In 325 the First Council of Nicaea signalled consolidation of Christianity under an orthodoxy endorsed by Constantine. While this did not make other Christian groups outside the adopted definition illegal, dissenting Arian bishops were initially exiled. But Constantine reinstated Arius just before the heresiarch died in 336 and exiled the Orthodox Athanasius of Alexandria from 335 to 337. In 380 Emperor Theodosius I made Christianity the Roman Empire's official religion (see State church of the Roman Empire ). In 392 Theodosius passed legislation prohibiting all pagan cultic worship.

[ 7 ] During the 4th century, however, there was no real unity between church and state: in the course of the Arian controversy , Arian or semi-Arian emperors exiled leading Trinitarian bishops, such as Athanasius (335, 339, 356, 362, 365), Hilary of Poitiers (356), and Gregory of Nyssa (374 [ 8 ] ); just as leading Arian and Anomoean theologians such as Aëtius (fl. 350) also suffered exile.

Towards the end of the century, Bishop Ambrose of Milan made the powerful Emperor Theodosius I (reigned 379–395) do penance for several months after the massacre of Thessalonica (390) before admitting him again to the Eucharist . On the other hand, only a few years later, Chrysostom , who as bishop of Constantinople criticized the excesses of the royal court, was eventually banished (403) and died (407) while traveling to his place of exile.

Theological implications [ edit ] Separation of church and state in the history of the Catholic Church Overview Two kingdoms doctrine in Roman Catholicism Relations between the Catholic Church and the State Catholic integralism Politics of Vatican City Sovereignty and loyalty Papal deposing power Sovereign immunity § Holy See Dual loyalty § Historical examples Fourth vow § In the Society of Jesus Documents Donation of Constantine Dictatus papae Unam sanctam To the Christian Nobility of the German Nation Papal Jurisdiction Act 1560 (Scotland) Disputationes de Controversiis Mirari vos Quanta cura Syllabus of Errors Dignitatis humanae Church–state relations in Argentina § 2005 Episcopal Conference document Historical controversies Constantinian shift / Constantinianism Investiture Controversy Society of Jesus § Political intrigue Cisalpinism vs.

Ultramontanism Americanism (heresy) § American response 20th-century topics History of Christian thought on persecution and tolerance § The mid-20th-century Spanish model Letitia Dunbar-Harrison Christian anarchism § Catholic Worker Movement Current topics Evo Morales and the Roman Catholic Church Radio Maryja § Involvement in politics Laudato si' § Impact on the United States political system Catholic social teaching Conscience clause in medicine in the United States § Catholic doctrine Canon 915 § Politicians consistently promoting permissive abortion or euthanasia laws Bp. W. Francis Malooly on Canon 915 Bp. Edward J. Slattery § Illegal immigrants v t e Critics of state-aligned Christianity often point to the ascension of Constantine as the beginning of Caesaropapism : according to this critique, the official Christianity of the Roman state rapidly became a religious and metaphysical justification for the existence, exercise, and expansion of worldly political power, ultimately facilitating earthly Christian empire both for Rome and its successors across Christendom . Similar criticisms are levied by Christian anarchists , who claim that the Constantinian shift triggered the Great Apostasy by transforming the religion into a means for preserving the ruling elite's power and justifying violence.

[ 9 ] Augustine of Hippo , who originally had rejected violence in religious matters, later justified it theologically against those he considered heretics, such as the Donatists , who themselves violently harassed their opponents.

[ 10 ] Before him, Athanasius believed that violence was justified in weeding out heresies that could damn all future Christians.

[ 11 ] He felt that any means was justified in repressing Arian belief.

[ 12 ] In 385, Priscillian , a bishop in Spain, was the first Christian to be executed for heresy, though the most prominent church leaders rejected this verdict.

Theologians critical of the Constantinian shift also see it as the point at which membership in the Christian church became associated with a social concept of citizenship, rather than reflecting one's internal decisions and feelings. American theologian Stanley Hauerwas notes the shift as forming part of the foundation for the contemporary American conception of Christianity, one that is closely associated with patriotism and civil religion .

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Antichrist Constantinianism Christianity in the Roman Empire Divine right of kings Donation of Constantine Erastianism Great Apostasy Historicism (Christianity) Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire Sacralism References [ edit ] ^ Clapp, Rodney (1996).

A Peculiar People . InterVarsity Press. p.

23 .

What might be called the Constantinian shift began around the year 200 and took more than two hundred years to grow and unfold to full bloom.

^ e.g. in Yoder, John H. (1996). "Is There Such a Thing as Being Ready for Another Millennium?". In Miroslav Volf; Carmen Krieg; Thomas Kucharz (eds.).

The Future of Theology: Essays in Honor of Jurgen Moltmann . Eerdmanns. p. 65.

The most impressive transitory change underlying our common experience, one that some thought was a permanent lunge forward in salvation history, was the so-called Constantinian shift.

^ Peter Leithart , Defending Constantine: The Twilight of an Empire and the Dawn of Christendom , p 287.

^ Lactantius XLIV, 5 ^ Eusebius XXVII–XXXII ^ Brown 2006, 60.

^ Theodosian Code, XVI.1.2 ^ Schaff, Philip , ed. (2007) [1893].

Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers . Second. Vol. V. Gregory of Nyssa. Cosimo. p. vii.

ISBN 978-1-60206516-1 . Retrieved 2012-12-16 .

374[:] Gregory is exiled under Valens ^ Christoyannopoulos, Alexandre (2010).

"Christian Anarchism: A Revolutionary Reading of the Bible" .

New Perspectives on Anarchism . Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books . pp.

149– 168.

^ "The Donatists and Their Relation to Church and State « Biographia Evangelica" . Archived from the original on 2019-12-27 . Retrieved 2019-06-04 .

^ Olson, 172 ^ Barnes, 230.

Further reading [ edit ] Timothy Barnes , Constantine and Eusebius , 1981 Theodosian Code , Henry Bettenson , ed., Documents of the Christian Church, (London: Oxford University Press, 1943), p. 31. see: http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/theodcodeXVI.html Archived 2007-02-27 at the Wayback Machine Peter Brown , The Rise of Western Christendom (Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2003),60.

James Bulloch, From Pilate to Constantine , 1981 Eusebius of Caesarea , Life of Constantine , Library of Nicene and Post Nicene Fathers, 2nd series (New York: Christian Literature Co., 1990), Vol I, 489–91. see: http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/source/conv-const.html Alistair Kee, Constantine Versus Christ , 1982 Lactantius, Lucius Caecilius Firmianus, On the manner in which the persecutors died (English translation of De Mortibus Persecutorum ) see: http://www.intratext.com/IXT/ENG0296/_P18.HTM Ramsay MacMullen , Christianising the Roman Empire , 1984 Roger E. Olson , The Story of Christian Theology , 1999 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Constantinian shift .

Social Constantinianism - an Evangelical perspective on the Constantinian shift Basil's Struggle with Arianism after Constantine.

Timeline of Fourth-Century Roman Imperial Laws showing the Constantinian shift Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Constantinian_shift&oldid=1256395295 " Categories : Constantine the Great and Christianity Ecclesiology Christian terminology 4th-century Christianity Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 9 November 2024, at 19:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Constantinian shift 8 languages Add topic

