Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical reception of the text 2 Summary of the text 3 Significance 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions 3 languages Català Français Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (also called De Partitione Oratoria Dialogus , Partitiones Oratoriae , or De Partitionbus Oratoriae , translated to be "On the subdivisions of oratory") is a rhetorical treatise , written by Cicero . According to the method of the Middle Academy , the treatise is sometimes described as a "catechism of rhetoric", for it is presented in the form of questions and answers.

[ 1 ] Cicero wrote it as a handbook for his young son, Marcus, and structured the text as a dialogue between the two of them.

Historical reception of the text [ edit ] Scholars debate exactly when the text was written, presumably in 54 BCE or in 46 BCE.

Around 54 BCE, Cicero was extremely interested in his son Marcus’ education, and he was not satisfied with the boy's teacher. He expressed interest in teaching Marcus himself. At this time, Marcus was eleven years of age; the simple structure of the treatise of questions and answers would have been very appropriate for this age.   Furthermore, Cicero relates in his letters at this earlier point that he is very interested in Marcus’ education.

[ 2 ] However, some scholars believe boys of this age were too young to be taught rhetoric. Thus, the treatise would have been written in 46 BCE, just before then 19-year-old Marcus left for Athens to study rhetoric. By this time in his life (from the year 56 onwards), Cicero could no longer voice his political principles without the risk of exile. “He had lost his freedom of speech and speech was his life.” [ 3 ] A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions would thus be one of Cicero's treatises in this period of his life, written after his most famous dialogue on rhetoric, De oratore .

[ 4 ] Summary of the text [ edit ] The treatise begins when Cicero's son asks his father, “I wish...to hear the rules concerning the principles of speaking...Into how many parts is the whole system of speaking divided?” [ 5 ] His father replies, “Is there anything, my Cicero, which I can be more desirous of than that you should be as learned as possible?” [ 6 ] Cicero then undertakes a systematic discussion of eloquence. He says rhetoric is arranged under three headings – “first of all, the power of the orator; secondly, the speech; thirdly, the subject of the speech.” [ 7 ] The orator's power consists of ideas and words, which must be “discovered and arranged.” “To discover” applies mostly to ideas and “to be eloquent” applies more to language.

[ 8 ] There are five “companions of eloquence” - “voice, gesture, expression of countenance,... action,... and memory.” [ 9 ] There are four parts of a speech: two of them explain a subject – “narration” and “confirmation;” two of them excite the minds of the hearers – “the opening” and “the peroration” (the conclusion).

[ 10 ] The narration and confirmation add credibility to the speech while the opening and conclusion should produce feelings.

[ 11 ] He then goes on to say the “cause” or subject of a speech is “divided according to the divisions of hearers.” [ 12 ] There are three kinds of subjects: embellishment, aimed to give pleasure; judicial, aimed to either make a judge punish or forgive; and deliberation, aimed to persuade the assembly to either hope or fear (see Aristotle on rhetorical genre ).

[ 13 ] Of these causes, Cicero goes deepest into judicial oratory, therefore emphasizing “the desirableness of maintaining the laws, and the danger with which all public and private affairs are threatened." [ 14 ] Cicero ends his treatise with a humanistic view of rhetoric that praises expansive education.

“And without a knowledge of these most important arts how can an orator have either energy or variety in his discourse, so as to speak properly of things good or bad, just or unjust, useful or useless, honourable or base?” [ 15 ] Significance [ edit ] The text may show the first sign of Cicero's mature view of rhetoric, later expanded in De Oratore . In De Inventione , Cicero had outlined a technical idea of rhetoric based on the handbooks of his era. But as he aged, his view changed to an “all-encompassing” ideal modeled on Philo ’s rhetorical teachings. Previous to and during Cicero’s lifetime, there was a quarrel between rhetoricians and philosophers over whether rhetoric was restricted to only the forensic and technical sphere, or if it included the abstract and philosophical realm. “Specifically, Cicero suggest[s] ascending from the [restrictive] to the [general] in a speech.” [ 16 ] This work thus merges rhetoric as a more simplistic, teachable art with the themes of De Oratore , praising the ideal orator who appreciates and utilizes expansive education and training.

References [ edit ] ^ Taylor, Hinnis.

Cicero: A Sketch of his Life and Work.

Chicago: A. C. McClurg, 1916. pg. 330.

^ Gilleland, Brady B.

Classical Philology , Vol: 56, No. 1. Ch. The Date of Cicero’s  “Partitiones Oratoriae.” pg. 29-32. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1961.

^ Fantham, Elaine .

The Roman World of Cicero’s De Oratore . New York: Oxford University Press, 2006. pg. 9.

^ May, James M. and Jakob Wisse.

Cicero: On the Ideal Orator.

New York: Oxford University Press, 2001. pg. 22.

^ Cicero, Marcus Tullius. Translr. Yonge, C. D.

The Orations of Marcus Tullius Cicero.

Vol. 4. Ch. A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions. pp. 486-526. London: G. Bell and Sons, 1921. p. 486 ^ Orat. Part, trans. Young, 486.

^ Orat. Part, trans. Young, 486.

^ Orat. Part, trans. Young, 487.

^ Orat. Part, trans. Young, 487.

^ Orat. Part, trans. Young, 487.

^ Orat. Part, trans. Young, 493.

^ Orat. Part, trans. Young, 489.

^ Orat. Part, trans. Young, 489.

^ Orat. Part, trans. Young, 525.

^ Orat. Part, trans. Young, 526.

^ Reinhardt, Tobias . The Classical Quarterly. Vol. 50. Ch. Rhetoric in the Fourth  Academy. pg. 531-535. The Classical Association. Great Britain: Cambridge University Press, 2000.

External links [ edit ] Latin Wikisource has original text related to this article: De Partitione Oratoria A free, online edition of the text v t e Marcus Tullius Cicero Personal life Political career Writings Treatises Rhetoric and politics De Inventione De Oratore Book III De Partitionibus Oratoriae De Optimo Genere Oratorum Brutus Orator De Legibus Philosophical Hortensius Academica Consolatio De Finibus Bonorum et Malorum Tusculanae Disputationes De Natura Deorum De Divinatione De Fato Cato Maior de Senectute Laelius de Amicitia De Officiis De Re Publica Somnium Scipionis Paradoxa Stoicorum Marcus Tullius Cicero Orations Political De Imperio Cn. Pompei In Catilinam I–IV In Toga Candida Pro Milone Pro Marcello Philippicae Judicial Pro Quinctio Pro Roscio Amerino Divinatio in Caecilium In Verrem Pro Tullio Pro Caecina Pro Cluentio Pro Archia Poeta Pro Caelio Letters Epistulae ad Atticum Epistulae ad Brutum Epistulae ad Familiares Epistulae ad Quintum Fratrem Portrayals Cicero at His Villa at Tusculum (1839 painting) Related Summum bonum Terentia (wife) Tullia (daughter) Cicero Minor (son) Quintus Tullius Cicero (brother) Cicero, Illinois Cicero, New York Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Poland Vatican Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=A_Dialogue_Concerning_Oratorical_Partitions&oldid=1303448286 " Categories : Rhetoric works Works by Cicero on oratory This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 02:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions 3 languages Add topic

