Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Bourgeois state 2 The Communist Manifesto and The German Ideology Toggle The Communist Manifesto and The German Ideology subsection 2.1 Modifications 3 Notes 4 References 5 Sources Toggle the table of contents Marx's theory of the state 5 languages Español हिन्दी Polski Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( April 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article contains too many or overly lengthy quotations .

Please help summarise the quotations . Consider transferring direct quotations to Wikiquote or excerpts to Wikisource .

( September 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Karl Marx 's thought envisages dividing the history of the State into three phases: pre-capitalist states, states in the capitalist (i.e. present) era and the state (or absence of one) in post-capitalist society. Complicating this is the fact that Marx's own ideas about the state changed as he grew older, differing in his early pre- communist phase, in the young Marx phase which predates the unsuccessful 1848 uprisings in Europe , and in his later work.

Marx initially followed an evolutionary theory of the state . He envisioned a progression from a stateless society marked by chaos to the emergence of organized communities as nomadic groups settled due to agricultural developments. With settlement came the division of labor , gender roles , and territorial boundaries, sparking disputes that birthed slave societies where vanquished people were subjugated.

Subsequently, feudal societies arose, characterized by a hierarchy involving nobility, clergy, and peasantry, wherein power predominantly resided with the former two. The growth of commerce introduced a new player, the bourgeoisie , within the peasantry, catalyzing a power-shift through revolutions , and birthing capitalist societies.

Marx's narrative anticipated the proletariat rising against capitalist exploitation, fostering a socialist society through their own revolution . Ultimately, he envisioned the dissolution of the state, [ citation needed ] [ a ] paving the way for a classless, communist society to flourish.

Bourgeois state [ edit ] In Marx's 1843 Critique of Hegel's Philosophy of Right , his basic conception is that the state and civil society are separate. However, he already saw some limitations to that model, arguing: The political state everywhere needs the guarantee of spheres lying outside it.

[ 1 ] He as yet was saying nothing about the abolition of private property, does not express a developed theory of class, and "the solution [he offers] to the problem of the state/civil society separation is a purely political solution, namely universal suffrage." (Evans, 112) By the time he wrote The German Ideology (1846), Marx viewed the state as a creature of the bourgeois economic interest. Two years later, that idea was expounded in The Communist Manifesto : [ 2 ] The executive of the modern state is nothing but a committee for managing the common affairs of the whole bourgeoisie.

[ 3 ] This represents the high point of conformance of the state theory to an economic interpretation of history in which the forces of production determine peoples' production relations and their production relations determine all other relations, including the political.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Although "determines" is the strong form of the claim, Marx also uses "conditions". Even "determination" is not causality and some reciprocity of action is admitted. The bourgeoisie control the economy, therefore they control the state. In this theory, the state is an instrument of class rule.

The Communist Manifesto and The German Ideology [ edit ] The Communist Manifesto was a short polemical work, but more detail on the theories concerned can be obtained by going back to The German Ideology , where Marx wrote: [ 6 ] [ 7 ] The Relation of State and Law to Property In the case of the nations which grew out of the Middle Ages , tribal property evolved through various stages — feudal landed property, corporative moveable property, capital invested in manufacture — to modern capital, determined by big industry and universal competition, i.e. pure private property, which has cast off all semblance of a communal institution and has shut out the State from any influence on the development of property. To this modern private property corresponds the modern State, which, purchased gradually by the owners of property by means of taxation, has fallen entirely into their hands through the national debt, and its existence has become wholly dependent on the commercial credit which the owners of property, the bourgeois , extend to it, as reflected in the rise and fall of State funds on the stock exchange . By the mere fact that it is a class and no longer an estate , the bourgeoisie is forced to organise itself no longer locally, but nationally, and to give a general form to its mean average interest. Through the emancipation of private property from the community, the State has become a separate entity, beside and outside civil society; but it is nothing more than the form of organisation which the bourgeois necessarily adopt both for internal and external purposes, for the mutual guarantee of their property and interests. The independence of the State is only found nowadays in those countries where the estates have not yet completely developed into classes, where the estates, done away with in more advanced countries, still have a part to play, and where there exists a mixture; countries, that is to say, in which no one section of the population can achieve dominance over the others. This is the case particularly in Germany . The most perfect example of the modern State is North America . The modern French , English and American writers all express the opinion that the State exists only for the sake of private property, so that this fact has penetrated into the consciousness of the normal man.

[ 8 ] Economic Dependence of the State on the Bourgeoisie With the development and accumulation of bourgeois property, i.e., with the development of commerce and industry, individuals grew richer and richer while the state fell ever more deeply into debt. This phenomenon was evident already in the first Italian commercial republics ; later, since the last century, it showed itself to a marked degree in Holland , where the stock exchange speculator Pinto drew attention to it as early as 1750, [ 9 ] and now it is again occurring in England . It is therefore obvious that as soon as the bourgeoisie has accumulated money, the state has to beg from the bourgeoisie and in the end it is actually bought up by the latter. This takes place in a period in which the bourgeoisie is still confronted by another class, and consequently the state can retain some appearance of independence in relation to both of them. Even after the state has been bought up, it still needs money and, therefore, continues to be dependent on the bourgeoisie; nevertheless, when the interests of the bourgeoisie demand it, the state can have at its disposal more funds than states which are less developed and, therefore, less burdened with debts. However, even the least developed states of Europe, those of the Holy Alliance , are inexorably approaching this fate, for they will be bought up by the bourgeoisie; then Stirner will be able to console them with the identity of private and state property, especially his own sovereign, who is trying in vain to postpone the hour when political power will be sold to the "burghers" who have become "angry".

[ 10 ] Modifications [ edit ] By the early 1850s, political events in Europe, which he covered in articles for the New-York Daily Tribune as well as a number of more substantial pieces, were forcing Marx to modify his theory to allow considerably more autonomy for the state. By 1851, the mid-century rebellions had all given way to conservatism and the principal countries of Europe had autocratic or aristocratic governments, namely Napoleon III in France , Frederick Wilhelm IV in Germany and in England a parliament populated mainly by members of the aristocratic class, whether Whig or Conservative . Yet at the same time, the bourgeoisie had economic power in places. For Marx, this was clearly an anomalous situation and gave it considerable attention.

[ 11 ] His solution is what Jon Elster has described as the " abdication " or " abstention " theory.

[ 12 ] It contends that the bourgeoisie found that the advantages of wielding direct power were under the circumstances outweighed by various costs and disadvantages, so they were willing to tolerate an aristocratic or despotic government as long as it did not act too detrimentally to their interests. Marx makes several points. Regarding England, he says of the bourgeoisie that "if the aristocracy is their vanishing opponent the working class is their arising enemy. They prefer to compromise with the vanishing opponent rather than to strengthen the rising enemy, to whom the future belongs".

[ 13 ] Marx also suggests that it would be better for the bourgeoisie not to wield power directly because this would make their dominance too obvious, creating a clear target for proletarian attack.

[ 14 ] It is better to make the workers fight a "two front war" (Elster) against the aristocracy in government and the bourgeoisie in the economy. Among other things, this would make it difficult for the proletarians to form a clear conception of who was their principal enemy. Regarding France, he suggests that the bourgeoisie recognized that they had been better off under the monarchy (1830–1848) than during the brief period when they wielded power themselves (1848–1851) "since they must now confront the subjugated classes and contend against them without mediation, without the concealment afforded by the crown".

[ 15 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Friedrich Engels allegedly attributed the idea of the withering away of the state to Marx. Compare: Rockmore, Tom (7 June 2018). "3: Transition through Politics: On the Withering Away of the State".

Marx's Dream: From Capitalism to Communism . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 205.

ISBN 9780226554662 . Retrieved 26 November 2024 .

Korsch's statement uncritically follows the Leninist line that the concept of the withering away of the state is attributable to both Marx and Engels, whereas in fact it is traceable [...] to Engels alone. [...] There is no further evidence [...] to support the inference that Marx himself ever held such a view.

References [ edit ] ^ Separation but with limitations: Evans, p 112. The quote is from the Critique , p 115, in Evans, p 112.

^ Marx, Karl; Engels, Friedrich (1848).

The Communist Manifesto .

"Chapter I. Bourgeois and Proletarians" . Marxists Internet Archive. Retrieved 10 August 2019.

^ The sentence is about a quarter of the way through Chapter I: "Bourgeois and Proletarians".

^ Marx, Karl; Engels, Friederich.

"The German Ideology: Chapter 1 - On Feuerbach" .

Marxists.org . Retrieved 2 October 2018 .

^ Marx, Karl.

"Economic Manuscripts: Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy" .

Marxists.org . Retrieved 2 October 2018 .

^ a b Marx, Karl.

"The German Ideology. Chapter Three: Saint Max" .

Marxists.org . Retrieved 2 October 2018 .

^ Blunden, Andy .

"MECW File Not Found" .

Marxists.org . Retrieved 2 October 2018 .

^ Marx, Karl.

"Part I: Feuerbach. Opposition of the Materialist and Idealist Outlook" .

Marxists.org . Retrieved 10 August 2019 .

^ Isaac Pinto, Lettre sur la Jalousie du Commerce in Traité de la Circulation et du Crédit.

^ Marx, Karl.

"5. Society as Bourgeois Society" .

Marxists.org . Retrieved 10 August 2019 .

^ Evans, p 126: "for Marx the failure of the bourgeoisie to act as a ruling class, to give their economic power political substance, was one of the major features of the post-1848 situation, as true of England and France as of Germany." ^ Elster, Chap 8.

^ "The Chartists", New York Daily Tribune , 25 August 1852; in Evans, p 126.

^ Evans, p 116. He cites Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Napoleon .

^ Marx, Karl (1852) [1963].

The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte . New York: International Publishers. p 49. In Elster, p. 147.

Sources [ edit ] Evans, Michael (1975).

Karl Marx . London.

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐gtwkj
Cached time: 20250812020851
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.512 seconds
Real time usage: 0.650 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1913/1000000
Revision size: 14438/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 106092/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11817/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 58139/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.294/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7203159/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  506.320      1 -total
 25.66%  129.906      1 Template:Marxism
 24.82%  125.654      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 19.28%   97.602      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 16.44%   83.217      1 Template:Efn
 15.73%   79.668      1 Template:Cite_book
 14.42%   73.007      1 Template:Short_description
 13.97%   70.752      1 Template:Reflist
 12.42%   62.891      1 Template:Sidebar
 11.96%   60.558      2 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:22098884:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812020851 and revision id 1296407378. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marx%27s_theory_of_the_state&oldid=1296407378 " Categories : Marxist theory State ideologies Marxism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from April 2017 All articles that may contain original research Wikipedia articles with style issues from September 2017 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 20:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marx's theory of the state 5 languages Add topic

