Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ruins Toggle Ruins subsection 1.1 The ancient port 1.2 Palace 1.3 Theatre 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Apollonia (Cyrenaica) 17 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Galego Italiano ქართული مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 32°54′07″N 21°58′11″E ﻿ / ﻿ 32.90194°N 21.96972°E ﻿ / 32.90194; 21.96972 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Apollonia, Cyrenaica ) Ancient Cyrenaican town For other uses of Apollonia, see Apollonia (disambiguation) .

Apollonia Eastern port of Apollonia Shown within Libya Alternative name Sozusa Location Marsa Susa, Jabal al Akhdar , Libya Coordinates 32°54′07″N 21°58′11″E ﻿ / ﻿ 32.90194°N 21.96972°E ﻿ / 32.90194; 21.96972 Type Settlement History Founded 7th century BC Abandoned 7th century AD Site notes Public access yes Map of Apollonia Map of underwater ruins at Apollonia made by divers in 1958–1959 Late apsidal building at Apollonia superimposed on earlier structures (grid square C4) drawn by divers in 1958–1959 Theatre in Apollonia Palace in Apollonia with the Eastern Basilica in the background Apollonia ( Greek : Ἀπολλωνία ) in Cyrenaica (modern Libya ) was founded by Greek colonists and became a significant commercial centre in the southern Mediterranean . It served as the harbour of Cyrene , 20 km (12 mi) to the southwest.

Apollonia became autonomous from Cyrene at latest by the time the area came within the power of Rome , when it was one of the five cities of the Libyan Pentapolis , growing in power until, in the 6th century AD, it became the capital of the Roman province of Libya Superior or Libya Pentapolitana. The city became known as Sozusa , which explains the modern name of Marsa Susa [ 1 ] or Susa , which grew up long after the cessation of urban life in the ancient city after the Arab occupation of AD 643.

[ 2 ] Sozusa was an episcopal see and is included in the Catholic Church 's list of titular sees .

[ 3 ] Ruins [ edit ] The early foundation levels of the city of Apollonia are below sea level due to submergence in earthquakes, while the upper strata of the later Byzantine Christian periods are several meters above sea level, built on the accumulated deposits of previous periods. The existence of buildings in the sea was noted by Beechey (1827), with some rough drawings, and Goodchild (1950s) and André Laronde also published archaeological surveys of the site.

[ 4 ] In 1958 and 1959 Nicholas Flemming, then an undergraduate at Cambridge University, led teams of undergraduates trained in scuba diving and underwater surveying to map the large sector of the city beneath the sea. The results of this work were published, complete with maps and diagrams of underwater buildings in the references cited below. Carlo Beltrame and colleagues have recently made an underwater photographic survey of some of the buildings.

The Crete earthquake and tsunami of 21 July 365 AD apparently caused extensive damage to the city and harbor.

The Apollonia (Susa) Museum houses many artifacts found on the ancient site.

The ancient port [ edit ] The remains of the ancient port in Apollonia are extremely well preserved because they are underwater. The difference in sea level, indeed, was estimated to be around 3.70-3.80 m.

[ 5 ] The port is relatively early in date, dating from the 6th/7th Century BC, and this makes it unique as no other complete port is this old.

[ 6 ] Palace [ edit ] The Palace of the Dux was excavated by Goodchild between 1959 and 1962.

[ 7 ] It was last used as the Byzantine Duke's Palace and contains over 100 rooms. A marble inscription testifies to its use as a Roman military commander's house, however the identification of the name and status of the man who built the palace is problematic.

[ 8 ] Theatre [ edit ] The well-preserved Greek theatre stands facing the sea outside the old city walls. This monument dates to the 3rd century BC and is therefore one of the oldest sites in Apollonia. The structure was modified under Domitian, suggesting its use as an arena for gladiatorial fights.

[ 9 ] The 5th century saw the abandonment of the theatre and the re-use of the columns from the stage as spolia in the eastern basilica. The cavea has 28 seat levels.

The ancient theatre See also [ edit ] Barca Ptolemais, Cyrenaica List of ancient Greek cities References [ edit ] ^ Hogarth, David George (1911).

"Cyrene" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 7 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

704– 705.

^ D. White, "Apollonia (Marsa Susa) Libya" in The Princeton Encyclopedia of Classical Sites (Princeton University Press, 1976) ^ Annuario Pontificio 2013 (Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 2013, ISBN 978-88-209-9070-1 ), p. 975 ^ (in French) André Laronde , Apollonia de Cyrénaïque : Archéologie et Histoire, Journal des savants , no 1, 1996, p. 3-49 [1] ^ Baika, K., 2013, "Apollonia" in "Shipsheds of the Ancient Mediterranean" ^ "Ancient Coastal Settlements, Ports and Harbours | Ancient Ports - Ports Antiques" .

^ The palace of the Dux, Ellis, 1985 ^ The Eerdmans Encyclopedia of Early Christian Art and Archaeology, Volume 1, Finney ^ livius.org LookLex Archived 2012-05-13 at the Wayback Machine Beechey, F.W. 1827.

Proceedings of an Expedition to Explore the North African coast . John Murray, London.

Flemming, N.C. 1959.	"Underwater adventure in Apollonia".

Geographical Magazine , v. 31, pp. 497–508.

Flemming, N.C. 1971.

Cities in the Sea . Doubleday, New York, 222 pp; New English Library, London, 222pp.

Flemming, N.C. and Webb, C.O, 1986. "Tectonic and eustatic coastal changes during the last 10,000 years derived from archaeological data".

Zeitschrift für Geomorphologie . December, Suppl – Bd62, p. 1 29.

The ancient port of Apollonia is an archaeological treasure to be preserved.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Apollonia, Libya .

v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Apollonia_(Cyrenaica)&oldid=1269795134 " Categories : Ancient Greek archaeological sites in Libya Jabal al Akhdar Populated places in ancient Cyrenaica Catholic titular sees in Africa Populated places of the Byzantine Empire Greek colonies in Libya Crete and Cyrenaica Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 January 2025, at 12:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Apollonia (Cyrenaica) 17 languages Add topic

