Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Teams Toggle Teams subsection 2.1 Baseball 2.2 Football 2.3 Lacrosse (men's) 2.4 Track and field 2.5 Athletic facilities 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents RPI Engineers 3 languages Deutsch Français Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Rensselaer Engineers ) Sports teams of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Athletic teams representing Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute RPI Engineers University Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Association Division III Conference Liberty League , ECAC Hockey Athletic director Kristie Bowers Location Troy, New York Varsity teams 21 Football stadium East Campus Stadium Arena East Campus Arena Baseball stadium Robison Field Other venues Houston Field House Mascot Puckman Nickname Engineers Colors Cherry and white [ 1 ] Website rpiathletics .com The RPI Engineers are composed of 21 teams representing Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute in intercollegiate athletics, including men and women's basketball, cross country, ice hockey, lacrosse, soccer, swimming & diving, tennis, and track and field. Men's sports include baseball, football, and golf. Women's sports include field hockey, and softball. The Engineers compete in the NCAA Division III and are members of the Liberty League for all sports except ice hockey, which competes in NCAA Division I , as a member of ECAC Hockey .

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] The school's teams were originally nicknamed the "Fighting Engineers" in 1925, likely by a student writing for the paper, and called so due to the energy of the players.

[ 3 ] In 1995, the nickname of some of the school's teams was officially changed from the Engineers to the Red Hawks; however, the hockey, football, cross-country, tennis and track and field teams all chose to retain the Engineers name. The Red Hawks name was never much liked by the student body; a Red Hawk mascot was frequently taunted by fans who threw objects at him and chanted, "kill the chicken!". Finally, in 2009 the nickname was changed back to Engineers. In contrast, the official ice hockey mascot, Puckman (an anthropomorphic hockey puck with an engineer's helmet) has always been very popular.

During the 1970s and 1980s, one RPI cheer was: E to the x, dy/dx, E to the x, dx Cosine, secant, tangent, sine 3.14159 Square root, cube root, log of pi Disintegrate them, RPI!

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Teams [ edit ] Men's sports Women's sports Baseball Basketball Basketball Cross Country Cross Country Field Hockey Football Ice Hockey Golf Lacrosse Ice Hockey Soccer Lacrosse Softball Soccer Swimming & Diving Swimming & Diving Tennis Tennis Track and Field 1 Track and Field 1 1 – includes both indoor and outdoor Baseball [ edit ] The Engineers baseball squad is perennially atop the Liberty League standings, and has seen eight players move on to the professional ranks, including four players selected in the MLB draft. (No RPI Engineer has played in the majors, but Dave Lohrman and Bill Snyder, who were both drafted in 1997, made it as far as AAA ball.) The team is coached by Karl Steffen (Ithaca '78). The Engineers play their home games at the historic Robison Field.

Football [ edit ] American rugby was played on campus in the late 1870s. Intercollegiate football begin as late as 1886 when an RPI team first played a Union College team on a leased field in West Troy (Watervliet). Since 1903, RPI and nearby Union have been rivals in football, making it the oldest such rivalry in the state. The teams have played for the Dutchman's Shoes since 1950. RPI Football had their most successful season in 2003, when they finished 11–2 and lost to St. Johns (Minn.) in the NCAA Division III semi final game.

[ 6 ] Lacrosse (men's) [ edit ] The origins of RPI men's lacrosse began in the 1930s, when the school had a club team; not much else is known about the team when it was a student run club. In 1942, Ned Harkness began coaching the team after the institution recognized it as a varsity sport. Coach Harkness was working part-time as coach and full-time at a local job in Troy, New York. After one season, Harkness was drafted into the Canadian Air Force, leaving the team until his return in 1945.

[ 7 ] By this point the 13 man roster had significantly grown, and the team began to compete at the highest level with schools around the country such as Dartmouth, Princeton , West Point , Stevens, Yale , and Williams.

[ 7 ] RPI's lacrosse team in a demonstration game at the 1948 London Olympics The 1948 men's lacrosse team represented the United States in the 1948 Olympics in London. This team was undefeated in the United States that year with a record of 11–0, winning the national championship. The team continued this streak into London to beat several English teams while also playing to a 5–5 tie with the British all star team, winning 7 of the 8 games played, with one tie and no losses.

[ 8 ] The Olympic Sports committee does not list lacrosse as an official event, so these games were considered exhibition matches. Despite this, the RPI lacrosse team received gold medals from the summer games.

[ 9 ] This 1948 men's team showed such dedication that, when during a trip on a dilapidated bus to an away game the bus broke down, the team proceeded to push the bus for "miles" before the a towing company arrived to tow the team and the bus the rest of the way to the match (which they won).

[ 7 ] RPI also won the Wingate Memorial Trophy as national collegiate champions (shared with Virginia ) in 1952.

[ 10 ] Future NHL head coach Ned Harkness coached the lacrosse and ice hockey teams, winning national championships in both sports.

Recently RPI men's lacrosse continues the tradition of the 1948 team by being one of the top division III schools in the nation. The NCAA ranked RPI 17th in the nation before the 2021 season was cancelled due to Covid-19 .

[ 11 ] Track and field [ edit ] The track and field team competes as part of NCAA Division 3 and the Liberty League.

Athletic facilities [ edit ] Houston Field House The Houston Field House is a 4,780‑seat multi-purpose arena located on the RPI campus. It opened in 1949 and is home to the RPI Engineers men's and women's ice hockey teams. The Field House was renovated starting in 2007 as part of the major campus improvement project to build the East Campus Athletic Village. The renovations included locker rooms upgrades, addition of a new weight room, and a new special reception room dedicated to Ned Harkness.

[ 12 ] Additionally, as part of the renovations through a government grant, solar panels were installed on the roof to supply power to the building.

East Campus Athletic Village, under construction As part of the Rensselaer Plan, the Institute recently completed a major project to improve its athletic facilities with the East Campus Athletic Village. The plan included construction of a new and much larger 4,842‑seat football stadium, a basketball arena with seating for 1,200, a new 50-meter pool, an indoor track and field complex, new tennis courts, new weight rooms and a new sports medicine center.

[ 13 ] The Institute broke ground on August 26, 2007, and construction of the first phase is expected to last two years.

[ 14 ] The estimated cost of the project is $78 million for phase one and $35–$45 million for phase two.

[ 15 ] Since the completion of the new stadium, the bleachers on the Class of '86 football field on the central campus have been removed and the field has become an open space. In the future the new space could be used for expansions of the academic buildings, but for now members of the campus planning team foresee a "historic landscape with different paths and access ways for students and vehicles alike".

[ 16 ] References [ edit ] ^ Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Brand Style Guidelines (PDF) . Retrieved June 12, 2016 .

^ "The Official Website of the RPI Engineers" . rpiathletics.com . Retrieved 2017-02-09 .

^ Shankle, George Earlie (1937).

American Nicknames . New York: H.W. Wilson Company. p. 443.

^ "E to the X" . RPI Information . Retrieved 3 September 2018 .

^ "Witness's recollection of the cheer originating at RPI" . Retrieved 2 March 2010 .

^ DiTursi, Dan (2004-01-14).

"Football 2003: A season to remember" . Retrieved 18 February 2009 .

^ a b c "Unknown" .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "When RPI ruled lacrosse" . 13 July 2012.

^ "London Calling: RPI Lacrosse Goes to the Olympics | Institute Archives and Special Collections" .

^ "Timeline of RPI History-1959" . Retrieved 21 January 2007 .

^ "Men's Lacrosse Ranked 17th in Preseason Poll" .

Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Athletics . 21 August 2023.

^ "Houston Field House Renovation" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 October 2008 . Retrieved 10 September 2008 .

^ "Giving to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute - Athletics" . Archived from the original on 3 September 2011 . Retrieved 5 September 2011 .

^ "Rensselaer Breaks Ground for East Campus Athletic Village; First Phase to be Completed by Fall 2009" (Press release). RPI. September 4, 2007 . Retrieved 3 March 2010 .

^ "East Campus Athletic Village on Schedule for Fall 2009" . Archived from the original on 11 January 2009 . Retrieved 20 December 2008 .

^ The Polytechnic (2 August 2007).

"Master Plan Undergoes Public Review" . Archived from the original on 16 July 2011 . Retrieved 2 December 2007 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute athletics .

Official website v t e Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Academics Rensselaer at Work Lally School of Management & Technology Center for Computational Innovations Rensselaer Technology Park Culture People History Fraternities and sororities Genericon Grand Marshal Week The Polytechnic RPI songs WRPI Buildings List of buildings Amos Eaton Hall Carnegie Building Center for Biotechnology and Interdisciplinary Studies Chapel + Cultural Center EMPAC Folsom Library Greene Building Gurley Building Hirsch Observatory Houston Field House Jonsson Engineering Center Low Center West Hall Winslow Building Athletics Teams Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Venues Houston Field House Category v t e Liberty League Current full members Bard Raptors Clarkson Golden Knights Hobart and William Smith Statesmen and Herons Ithaca Bombers RPI Engineers RIT Tigers Rochester Yellowjackets St. Lawrence Saints Skidmore Thoroughbreds Union Garnet Chargers Vassar Brewers Current associate members Buffalo State Bengals 1 NYU Violets 5 St. John Fisher Cardinals 4 Wellesley Blue 3 Former full member Hamilton Continentals Former associate members Coast Guard Bears 1 Merchant Marine Mariners 2 Mount Holyoke Lyons 3 Springfield Pride 1 Susquehanna River Hawks 1 WPI Engineers 1 1 football 2 football and men's golf 3 women's golf 4 men's and women's rowing 5 men's and women's golf v t e Sports teams based in New York State Baseball MLB New York Mets New York Yankees IL Buffalo Bisons Rochester Red Wings Syracuse Mets EL Binghamton Rumble Ponies SAL Brooklyn Cyclones Hudson Valley Renegades ALPB Long Island Ducks Staten Island FerryHawks EPBL Plattsburgh Redbirds FL New York Boulders Tri-City ValleyCats ACBL Hampton Whalers NYCBL Cortland Crush Genesee Rapids Hornell Dodgers Olean Oilers Rochester Ridgemen Rome Generals Sherrill Silversmiths Syracuse Salt Cats Syracuse Spartans Wellsville Nitros PGCBL Elmira Pioneers Jamestown Jammers Newark Pilots Watertown Rapids Basketball NBA Brooklyn Nets New York Knicks WNBA New York Liberty G League Long Island Nets Westchester Knicks BSL Jamestown Jackals TBL Albany Patroons ABA Buffalo eXtreme Entertainment Teams Harlem Wizards Esports CDL Cloud9 New York OWL New York Excelsior Football NFL Buffalo Bills AFL Albany Firebirds WFA New York Sharks EFL Watertown Red & Black GDFL Albany Metro Mallers Hockey NHL Buffalo Sabres New York Islanders New York Rangers PWHL New York Sirens AHL Rochester Americans Syracuse Crunch Utica Comets ECHL Adirondack Thunder FPHL Binghamton Black Bears Watertown Wolves NAHL Elmira Aviators Jamestown Rebels Rochester Jr. Americans Soccer MLS New York City FC USLS Brooklyn FC USLC Brooklyn FC (2026) Buffalo Pro Soccer (2027) MLSNP New York City FC II USL1 Westchester SC NISA New York Cosmos (hiatus) USL2 Blackwatch Rush F.A. Euro FC Buffalo Hudson Valley Hammers Long Island Rough Riders Manhattan SC Pathfinder FC Westchester Flames NPSL Buffalo Stallions Cedar Stars FC Flower City Union Kingston Stockade FC New York Shockers WPSL Brooklyn City FC Clarkstown SC Downtown United SC Fox Soccer Academy New York Athletic Club New York Dutch Lions FC New York Shockers SUSA FC United Women's Soccer Albany Rush FC Berlin Rochester Lady Lancers Syracuse Pulse USL W League FC Buffalo Long Island Rough Riders MASL Utica City FC Lacrosse NLL Albany FireWolves Buffalo Bandits Rochester Knighthawks PLL New York Atlas UWLX Long Island Sound WPLL New York Fight Upstate Pride Roller derby WFTDA Assault City Roller Derby Central New York Roller Derby Gotham Roller Derby Hellions of Troy Hudson Valley Horrors Roller Derby Ithaca League of Women Rollers Long Island Roller Rebels Queen City Roller Derby Roc City Roller Derby Suburbia Roller Derby MRDA New York Shock Exchange Rugby league USARL White Plains Wombats NARL New York R.L.F.C.

Rugby union USAR New York Athletic Club RFC Old Blue Team tennis WTT New York Empire College athletics ( NCAA Division I ) Adelphi Panthers ( women's bowling ) Albany Great Danes Army Black Knights Binghamton Bearcats Buffalo Bulls Brockport Golden Eagles ( women's gymnastics ) Clarkson Golden Knights ( men's and women's ice hockey ) Canisius Golden Griffins CCNY Beavers ( women's fencing ) Colgate Raiders Columbia Lions Cortland Red Dragons ( women's gymnastics ) Cornell Big Red Daemen Wildcats ( women's bowling and men's volleyball ) Dominican Chargers ( men's volleyball ) D'Youville Saints ( men's volleyball ) Fordham Rams Hilbert Hawks ( women's bowling ) Hobart Statesmen ( men's lacrosse ) Hofstra Pride Hunter Hawks ( men's and women's fencing ) Ithaca Bombers ( women's gymnastics ) Iona Gaels Le Moyne Dolphins LIU Sharks Manhattan Jaspers Marist Red Foxes Molloy Lions ( women's bowling ) NYU Violets ( men's and women's fencing ) Niagara Purple Eagles Queens Knights ( women's fencing ) RPI Engineers ( men's and women's ice hockey ) Roberts Wesleyan Redhawks ( women's bowling and men's volleyball ) Rochester Yellowjackets ( men's squash ) RIT Tigers ( men's and women's ice hockey ) St. Bonaventure Bonnies St. John's Red Storm St. Lawrence Saints ( men's and women's ice hockey ) St. Thomas Aquinas Spartans ( men's volleyball ) Siena Saints Stony Brook Seawolves Syracuse Orange Union Garnet Chargers ( men's and women's ice hockey ) Vassar Brewers ( men's and women's fencing ) Wagner Seahawks Yeshiva Maccabees ( men's and women's fencing ) College athletics ( NCAA Division II ) Adelphi Panthers Daemen Wildcats Dominican Chargers Dowling Golden Lions D'Youville Saints Mercy Mavericks Molloy Lions NYIT Bears (Suspended) Pace Setters Queens Knights Roberts Wesleyan Redhawks Saint Rose Golden Knights St. Thomas Aquinas Spartans Staten Island Dolphins College athletics ( NCAA Division III ) Alfred Saxons Alfred State Pioneers Bard Raptors Baruch Bearcats Brockport Golden Eagles Brooklyn Bulldogs Buffalo State Bengals Canton Roos Cazenovia Wildcats CCNY Beavers Clarkson Golden Knights Cobleskill Fighting Tigers Cortland Red Dragons Delhi Broncos Elmira Soaring Eagles Farmingdale Rams Fredonia Blue Devils Geneseo Knights Hamilton Continentals Hartwick Hawks Hilbert Hawks Hobart Statesmen Houghton Highlanders Hunter Hawks Ithaca Bombers John Jay Bloodhounds Keuka Wolves Lehman Lightning Bugs Manhattanville Valiants Medgar Evers Cougars Merchant Marine Mariners Maritime Privateers Mount Saint Mary Blue Knights Mount Saint Vincent Dolphins Morrisville Mustangs Nazareth Golden Flyers New Paltz Hawks City Tech Yellow Jackets NYU Violets Old Westbury Panthers Oneonta Red Dragons Oswego Lakers Plattsburgh Cardinals Potsdam Bears Pratt Cannoners Purchase Panthers RPI Engineers Rochester Yellowjackets RIT Tigers Russell Sage Gators Skidmore Thoroughbreds St. John Fisher Cardinals St. Joseph's (Brooklyn) Bears St. Joseph's (Long Island) Golden Eagles St. Lawrence Saints Sarah Lawrence Gryphons SUNY Poly Wildcats Union Garnet Chargers Utica Pioneers Vassar Brewers Wells Express William Smith Herons Yeshiva Maccabees York Cardinals College athletics ( USCAA ) Albany College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences Panthers Berkeley Knights Bryant & Stratton College, Albany Bobcats Bryant & Stratton College, Buffalo Bobcats Bryant & Stratton College, Greece Bobcats Bryant & Stratton College, Syracuse Bobcats Culinary Institute of America Steels Five Towns Sounds The King's Lions Paul Smith's Bobcats SUNY ESF Mighty Oaks Vaughn Warriors Villa Maria Knights Word of Life Bible Institute Huskies College athletics ( NJCAA Division I ) Globe Institute of Technology Knights Monroe Mustangs ASA Avengers College athletics ( NJCAA Division II ) SUNY Erie Kats Genesee Cougars Hudson Valley Vikings Jamestown (Jamestown) Jayhawks Jamestown (Olean) Cattaraugus Jaguars Monroe Tribunes SUNY Niagara Thunderwolves SUNY Orange Colts SUNY Sullivan Generals College athletics ( NJCAA Division III ) SUNY Adirondack Wolves Borough of Manhattan Panthers Bronx Broncos SUNY Broome Hornets Cayuga Spartans Clinton Cougars Columbia-Greene Twins Corning Red Barons Dutchess Falcons Finger Lakes Lakers FIT Tigers Fulton–Montgomery Raiders Genesee Cougars Herkimer County Generals Hostos Caimans Jefferson Cannoners Mohawk Valley Hawks Nassau Lions North Country Saints Onondaga Lazers Queensborough Tigers Rockland Fighting Hawks Schenectady County Royals Suffolk County Sharks SUNY Sullivan Generals Tompkins Cortland Panthers SUNY Ulster Senators See also: Sports in New York City , Sports in Buffalo , Sports in Rochester , Sports in Syracuse , and Sports in New York's Capital District Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=RPI_Engineers&oldid=1301320924 " Category : RPI Engineers Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 05:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents RPI Engineers 3 languages Add topic

