Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Length 2 Area 3 Capacity 4 Mass 5 Time 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Irish units of measurement Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Old Irish units of measurement ) Obsolete system of measurement used in Ireland Early Irish law texts record a wide variety of units of measurement , organised into various systems . These were used from Early Christian Ireland (Middle Ages) or perhaps earlier, before being displaced by Irish measure from the 16th century onward.

Length [ edit ] A troighid ("foot") was the length of a man's foot, divided into twelve ordlach , "thumb-lengths". These figures assume a man's foot to measure 25 cm (9.8 in).

Table of length units Unit Meaning Relative value SI value Imperial value Notes grán grain 1 ⁄ 36 0.7 cm 1/4 inch ordlach thumb-length 1 ⁄ 12 2.1 cm 0.8 in bas palm 1 ⁄ 3 8.4 cm 3.3 in dorn fist 5 ⁄ 12 or 1 ⁄ 2 10.4 or 12.5 cm 4 or 5 in troighid foot 1 25 cm 9.9 in céim step 2.5 62.5 cm 2 ft 1 in deiscéim [ m ] double-step 6 1.5 m 4 ft 11 in fertach rod 12 3 m 9 ft 10 in forrach 144 36 m 39.4 yards A magh-space was a unit set at the distance from which a cock-crow or bell could be heard. Other units such as inntrit and lait appear in documents; their value is uncertain, perhaps being equivalent to 1 and 2 fertach s respectively.

Ancient Laws of Ireland reads ceithri orlaighi i mbais, teora basa i troighid (4 thumb-lengths in a palm, 3 palms in a foot).

[ 1 ] and "Catalogue of the Irish manuscripts in the British Museum v.1" gives ceithri gráine an t-órdlach (4 grains in the thumb-length).

Stair Ercuil ocus a bás: the life and death of Hercules mentions ceim curadh (warrior's paces).

Area [ edit ] The basic unit of area was the tir-cumaile , "land of three cows ", as it was an area of land that was at some point worth three cows. It is sometimes erroneously interpreted as the area needed to graze three cows, but it is far too large for that; in modern Ireland, a cow grazes on about 0.4 ha, so twenty or more could graze a tir-cumaile . Ireland in total covered about 870,000 tir-cumaile .

Table of area units Unit Meaning Relative value SI value Imperial value Notes tir-cumaile land of three cows n/a 9.3 ha 23 ac 72 square forraigh achar acre 1 Adopted following Norman invasions.

seisrech plough-land 120 baile townland 1,440 The term "townland" is still used to designate very small named areas in the countryside.

tuath 4,320 Originally a term for a petty kingdom.

Capacity [ edit ] A hen 's eggshell was used as a standard unit, roughly 55 ml.

Table of capacity units Unit Meaning Relative value SI value Imperial value Notes og eggshell 1 ⁄ 12 55 mL 2 fl. oz.

méisrin little measure 1 660 mL 1 pint 3 fl. oz.

olderb great vessel 12 7.92 L 1.74 gallons oilmedach great mead [vessel] 144 95 L 21 gallons Mass [ edit ] Table of mass units Unit Meaning Relative value SI value Imperial value Notes grán grain 1 ⁄ 8 0.05 g 0.772 Gr One grain of the best wheat .

pinginn, penginn pennyweight 1 0.4 g 6.173 Gr screpul(l), scripul(l), screaball scruple 3 1.2 g 18.519 Gr ungae , uinge ounce 72 28 g 1 oz Word borrowed from the Latin uncia , although an older native name was mann .

The Manners and Customs of Ireland lists two types of unge : unge mór at 20 pennyweights (31.1 g) and unge beg at 10 pennyweights (15.6 g).

[ 2 ] A screpall óir ( gold scruple) was used for measuring gold weight and was equal to a quarter-ounce (7 g).

[ 3 ] Time [ edit ] A night ( oídhche ) was used as a measure for time in preference to a day. As was normal for Islam and Jews and in line with the Bible (It was evening and morning of the first day), the Irish held that a new day began at sunset, not at sunrise, so that a Wednesday night would precede the day of Wednesday.

See also [ edit ] List of obsolete units of measurement Metrication in Ireland Irish measure References [ edit ] Joyce, P. W.

(1906).

"23: Measures, Weights, Mediums of Exchange" .

A Smaller Social History of Ancient Ireland . Retrieved 20 May 2015 .

"tir cumaile [Old Irish]" .

sizes.com . Sizes, Inc. 1 September 2008 . Retrieved 20 May 2015 .

Seebohm, Frederic; Hugh Exton, Seebohm (1914).

"2: The Irish units of tribute and food-rent" .

Customary acres and their historical importance, being a series of unfinished essays" . Longman's, Green, & co . Retrieved 20 May 2015 .

^ "EDIL - Irish Language Dictionary" .

^ "EDIL - Irish Language Dictionary" .

^ "EDIL - Irish Language Dictionary" .

v t e Systems of measurement Current General International System of Units (SI) UK imperial system US customary units (USCS/USC) Chinese Hong Kong Specific Apothecaries' Avoirdupois Troy Astronomical Electrical English Engineering Units (US) Natural Atomic Geometrised Heaviside–Lorentz Planck Quantum chromodynamical Stoney Background Metric Overview Outline History Metrication UK/US Overview Comparison Foot–pound–second (FPS) Historic Metric metre–kilogram–second (MKS) metre–tonne–second (MTS) centimetre–gram–second (CGS) gravitational Europe Cornish Cypriot Czech Danish Dutch English Winchester Exchequer Estonian Finnish French Traditional Mesures usuelles German Greek Byzantine Hungarian Icelandic Irish Italian Latvian Luxembourgian Maltese Norwegian Ottoman Polish Portuguese Romanian Russian Scottish Serbian Slovak Spanish Swedish Swiss Welsh Asia Afghan Cambodian Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Mongolian Myanmar Nepalese Omani Pakistani Philippine Pegu Singaporean Sri Lankan Syrian Taiwanese Tatar Thai Vietnamese Africa Algerian Ethiopian Egyptian Eritrean Guinean Libyan Malagasy Mauritian Moroccan Seychellois Somali South African Tunisian Tanzanian North and Central America Costa Rican Cuban Haitian Honduran Mexican Nicaraguan Puerto Rican South America Argentine Bolivian Brazilian Chilean Colombian Paraguayan Peruvian Uruguayan Venezuelan Ancient Arabic Biblical and Talmudic Egyptian Greek Hindu Indian Mesopotamian Persian Roman List articles Humorous Obsolete Unusual Other Absolute scale N-body Modulor Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Irish_units_of_measurement&oldid=1292295016 " Categories : Irish units of measurement Obsolete units of measurement Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Irish-language text This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 06:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Irish units of measurement Add languages Add topic

