Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Biodiversity and Biological Resource 3 National Biodiversity Authority and State Biodiversity Boards Toggle National Biodiversity Authority and State Biodiversity Boards subsection 3.1 Functions 4 Regulations 5 Benefit sharing 6 Penalties 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Biological Diversity Act, 2002 4 languages Igbo മലയാളം தமிழ் 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Biological Diversity Act ) Indian act for the preservation of biological diversity in India Biological Diversity Act, 2002 Parliament of India Long title An Act to provide for conservation of biological diversity, sustainable use of its components, and fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the use of biological resources, knowledge and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Citation Act No. 18 of 2003 Enacted by Parliament of India Assented to 5 February 2003 Commenced 1 October 2003 and 1 July 2004 [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Status: In force The Biological Diversity Act, 2002 is an Act by the Parliament of India for the preservation of biological diversity in India, and provides the mechanism for equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the use of traditional biological resources and knowledge . The Act was enacted to meet the obligations under the Convention on Biological Diversity , because India is a signatory to the treaty.

History [ edit ] The Act was enacted to meet the obligations under Convention on Biological Diversity , of which India was a part in 2002.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Biodiversity and Biological Resource [ edit ] Biodiversity has been defined under Section 2(b) of the Act as "the variability among living organisms from all sources and the ecological complexes of which they are part, and includes diversity within species or between species and of eco-systems ". The Act also defines, Biological resources as "plants, animals and micro-organisms or parts thereof, their genetic material and by-products (excluding value added products) with actual or potential use or value, but does not include human genetic material." [ 5 ] National Biodiversity Authority and State Biodiversity Boards [ edit ] Main article: National Biodiversity Authority The National Biodiversity Authority (NBA) is a statutory autonomous body, headquartered in Chennai , under the Ministry of Environment and Forests , Government of India established in 2003 to implement the provisions under the Act. State Biodiversity Boards (SBB) has been created in 28 States along with  31,574 Biological management committees (for each local body) across India.

Functions [ edit ] Regulation of acts prohibited under the Act Advise the Government on the conservation of biodiversity Advise the Government on selection of biological heritage sites Take appropriate steps to oppose the grant of intellectual property rights in foreign countries, arising from the use of biological resources or associated traditional knowledge.

[ 6 ] Regulations [ edit ] A foreigner, non-resident Indian, as defined in the clause (30) of section 2 of The Income-tax Act, 1961 , or a foreign company or body corporate need to take permission from the NBA before obtaining any biological resources or associated knowledge from India for research, survey, commercial utilisation.

[ 7 ] Indian citizens or body corporates need to take permission from the concerned State Biodiversity Board.

[ 8 ] Result of research using biological resources from India cannot be transferred to a non-citizen or a foreign company without the permission of NBA. However, no such permission is needed for publication of the research in a journal or seminar, or in case of a collaborative research made by institutions approved by Central Government.

[ 9 ] The NBA while granting such permission may make an order for benefit sharing or royalty based on utilisation of such protection.

[ 10 ] Benefit sharing [ edit ] Benefit sharing out of usage of biological resources can be done in following manner: Joint ownership of intellectual property rights 2 3 4 Transfer of technology Location of production, research development units in the area of source Payment of monetary and non-monetary compensation Setting up of venture capital fund for aiding the cause of benefit claimers [ 11 ] Penalties [ edit ] If a person, violates the regulatory provisions he/she will be "punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and where the damage caused exceeds ten lakh rupees, fine may commensurate {be in proportion} with the damage caused, or with both." [ 10 ] Any offence under this Act is non-bailable and is cognizable.

See also [ edit ] List of Biodiversity Heritage Sites of India Traditional Knowledge Digital Library Indigenous intellectual property Convention on Biological Diversity Bioprospecting Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers' Rights Act, 2001 References [ edit ] ^ "S.O.753(E), [01/07/2004]- Coming into force of sections of the Biodiversity Act, 2002" . Ministry of Environment and Forest. Archived from the original on 8 April 2012 . Retrieved 24 April 2013 .

^ "S.O.1146 (E)- Bringing into force Sections 1 and 2; Sections 8 to 17; Sections 48,54,59,62,63,64 and 65 w.e.f. 1st October, 2003" . Ministry of Environment and Forest. Archived from the original on 8 April 2012 . Retrieved 24 April 2013 .

^ "Environmental legislation" , The Statesman , 19 January 2017 ^ "Biological Diversity Act 2002 and establishment of National Biodiversity Authority, Chennai" , Ministry of Environment and Forests , archived from the original on 30 March 2013 , retrieved 24 April 2013 ^ Section 2(c) of Biological Diversity Act, 2002 ^ Section 18 of Biological Diversity Act, 2002 ^ Section 3 of Biological Diversity Act, 2002 ^ Section 7 of Biological Diversity Act, 2002 ^ Section 4&5 of Biological Diversity Act, 2002 ^ a b Section 6 of Biological Diversity Act, 2002 ^ Section 21(2) of Biological Diversity Act, 2002 External links [ edit ] Biological Diversity Act, 2002 National Biodiversity Authority Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biological_Diversity_Act,_2002&oldid=1304982876 " Categories : Acts of the Parliament of India 2002 2002 in the environment Environmental law in India Indian intellectual property law Traditional knowledge Biodiversity Convention on Biological Diversity Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2020 Use Indian English from September 2013 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 09:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biological Diversity Act, 2002 4 languages Add topic

