Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Birdwhistell's work 2 Modern applications 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Kinesics 20 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español Estremeñu Euskara Français Gaeilge Italiano Кыргызча Magyar Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Русский Slovenčina Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Interpretation of body motion communication Not to be confused with Kinetics .

Kinesics is the interpretation of body communication such as facial expressions and gestures , nonverbal behavior related to movement of any part of the body or the body as a whole. The equivalent popular culture term is body language , a term Ray Birdwhistell , considered the founder of this area of study, [ 1 ] neither used nor liked (on the grounds that what can be conveyed with the body does not meet the linguist's definition of language).

Birdwhistell's work [ edit ] Kinesics was first used in 1952 by an anthropologist named Ray Birdwhistell . Birdwhistell wished to study how people communicate through posture, gesture, stance and movement.

[ 2 ] His ideas over several decades were synthesized and resulted in the book Kinesics and Context.

[ 3 ] Interest in kinesics specifically and nonverbal behaviour generally was popularized in the late 1960s and early 1970s by such popular mass-market (nonacademic) publications as How to Read a Person Like a Book .

[ 4 ] Part of Birdwhistell's work involved filming people in social situations and analyzing them to show elements of communication that were not seen otherwise. One of his most important projects was The Natural History of an Interview, a long-term interdisciplinary collaboration including Gregory Bateson , Frieda Fromm-Reichmann , Norman A. McQuown, Henry W. Brosin and others.

[ 5 ] Drawing heavily on descriptive linguistics , Birdwhistell argued that all movements of the body have meaning and that nonverbal behaviour has a grammar that can be analyzed in similar terms to spoken language. Thus, a "kineme" is "similar to a phoneme because it consists of a group of movements which are not identical, but which may be used interchangeably without affecting social meaning." [ 6 ] Birdwhistell estimated that no more than 30 to 35 percent of the social meaning of a conversation or an interaction is carried by the words.

[ 7 ] He also concluded that there were no universals in these kinesic displays, a claim that was disputed by Paul Ekman , who was interested in analysis of universals, especially in facial expression .

[ 8 ] Modern applications [ edit ] In a current application, kinesic behavior is sometimes used as signs of deception by interviewers looking for clusters of movements to determine the veracity of the statement being uttered, although kinesics can be equally applied in any context and type of setting to construe innocuous messages whose carriers are indolent or unable to express verbally.

Relevant concepts [ 9 ] include: Emblems - Body movements or gestures that are directly translatable into a word or phrase Illustrators - Accompany or reinforce verbal messages Batons - Temporally accent or emphasize words or phrases Ideographs - Trace the paths of mental journeys Deictic movements - Point to a present object Kinetographs - Depict a bodily action Spatial movements - Depict a spatial relationship Pictographs - Draw a picture of their referent Rhythmic movements - Depict the rhythm or pacing of an event Affect Displays - Show emotion Regulators - Control the flow and pace of communication Manipulators - Release physical or emotional tension Kinesic behaviors are an important part of nonverbal communication . Body movements convey information, but interpretations vary by culture. As many movements are carried out at a subconscious or at least a low-awareness level, kinesic movements carry a significant risk of being misinterpreted in an intercultural communication situation.

See also [ edit ] Intercultural competence Metacommunicative competence Nonverbal communication Body language Cold reading Eye contact Facial expression Gesture Posture Proxemics Paralanguage References [ edit ] ^ Danesi, M (2006). "Kinesics".

Encyclopedia of Language & Linguistics . pp.

207– 213.

doi : 10.1016/B0-08-044854-2/01421-8 .

ISBN 9780080448541 .

^ Birdwhistell, R. L. (1952). Introduction to Kinesics: An Annotation System for Analysis of Body Motion and Gesture . Washington, DC: Department of State, Foreign Service Institute.

^ Birdwhistell, R. 1970.

Kinesics and Context . University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia.

^ Nierenberg, G. I., & Calero, H. H. (1971).

How to Read a Person Like a Book . New York: Hawthorn Books.

^ Jump up ^ Leeds-Hurwitz, W. (1987). The Social History of The Natural History of an Interview: A multidisciplinary investigation of social communication.

Research on Language and Social Interaction , 20, 1-51.

^ Knapp, M. 1972.

Nonverbal Communication in Human Interaction . Reinhart and Winston, New York, pp. 94-5.

^ McDermott, R. 1980. Profile: Ray L. Birdwhistell.

The Kinesis Report , 2, 3: 1-16.

^ Ekman, P; Friesen, W (1971).

"Constants across cultures in the face and emotion" (PDF) .

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

17 (2): 124– 9.

doi : 10.1037/h0030377 .

PMID 5542557 .

S2CID 14013552 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-02-28 . Retrieved 2015-02-28 .

^ Ekman, Paul (2004). "Emotional and Conversational Nonverbal Signals".

Language, Knowledge, and Representation . pp.

39– 50.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4020-2783-3_3 .

ISBN 978-94-015-7073-2 .

External links [ edit ] Look up kinesics in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Report on kinesics by David B. Givens for the Center for Nonverbal Studies.

On the Origin of Language by Andrej Poleev.

v t e Nonverbal communication Modalities Physical Blushing Body language / Kinesics Body-to-body communication Facial expression Facial Action Coding System Microexpression Subtle expression Gesture List Speech-independent gestures Haptic communication Imitation Interpersonal synchrony Laughter Oculesics Eye contact Pupil dilation Olfaction Posture Proxemics Speech Affect Emotional prosody Paralanguage Intonation Loudness Prosody Rhythm Stress Tone Voice quality Social context Chronemics Conventions Display rules Habitus High-context and low-context cultures Interpersonal relationship Social norm Other Emoticon / Smiley One-bit message Missed call Silent service code Unconscious Microexpression Non-verbal leakage Multi-faceted Affect display Deception Emotion recognition First impression Intimacy Broader concepts Cognitive academic language proficiency Communication Emotional intelligence Nunchi People skills Semiotics Social behavior Social competence Social cue Social skills Unsaid Further information Disorders Aprosodia Asperger syndrome Autism Fragile X Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder Rett syndrome Dyssemia Nonverbal learning disorder Social (pragmatic) communication disorder Neuroanatomy Limbic system / Limbic lobe Mirror neuron Applications Cold reading Lie detection Freudian slip Poker tell Targeted advertising Technology Computer processing of body language Emotion recognition in conversation Gesture recognition List of facial expression databases Sentiment analysis Key people Ray Birdwhistell Charles Darwin Paul Ekman Related Animal communication Behavioral communication Aggressive Assertive Passive Passive-aggressive Impression management Meta-communication Monastic sign lexicons Verbal communication Manual-tactile verbal Sign language Tactile signing Tadoma Art and literature Mime Mimoplastic art Subtext Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kinesics&oldid=1302153152 " Categories : Interpersonal communication Linguistics Nonverbal communication Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 18:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kinesics 20 languages Add topic

