Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Precursors 2 History 3 Tableau économique 4 Characteristics Toggle Characteristics subsection 4.1 Natural order 4.2 Individualism and laissez-faire 4.3 Private property 4.4 Diminishing returns 4.5 Investment capital 5 Subsequent developments 6 See also Toggle See also subsection 6.1 People 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Physiocracy 55 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Physiocrat ) School of thought in economics François Quesnay , a physician who is considered the founding father of physiocracy, published the "Tableau économique" (Economic Table) in 1758 Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours , a prominent physiocrat. In his book La Physiocratie , du Pont advocated low tariffs and free trade.

Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Physiocracy (French: physiocratie ; from the Greek for "government of nature") is an economic theory developed by a group of 18th-century Age of Enlightenment French economists. They believed that the wealth of nations derived solely from the value of "land agriculture" or " land development " and that agricultural products should be highly priced.

[ 1 ] Their theories originated in France and were most popular during the second half of the 18th century. Physiocracy became one of the first well-developed theories of economics.

[ 2 ] François Quesnay (1694–1774), the Marquis de Mirabeau (1715–1789) and Anne-Robert-Jacques Turgot (1727–1781) dominated the movement, [ 3 ] which immediately preceded the first modern school, classical economics , which began with the publication of Adam Smith 's The Wealth of Nations in 1776.

The physiocrats made a significant contribution in their emphasis on productive work as the source of national wealth. This contrasted with earlier schools, in particular mercantilism , which often focused on the ruler's wealth, accumulation of gold, or the balance of trade . Whereas the mercantilist school of economics held that value in the products of society was created at the point of sale, [ 4 ] by the seller exchanging his products for more money than the products had "previously" been worth, the physiocratic school of economics was the first to see labor as the sole source of value.  However, for the physiocrats, only agricultural labor created this value in the products of society.

[ 4 ] All "industrial" and non-agricultural labors were "unproductive appendages" to agricultural labor.

[ 4 ] Quesnay was likely influenced by his medical training, particularly by the work of William Harvey who explained  how blood flow and the circulatory system is vital to the human body; Quesnay held that the circulation of wealth was vital to the economy. Societies at the time were also overwhelmingly agrarian. This may be why they viewed agriculture as the primary source of a nation's wealth. This is an idea which Quesnay purported to demonstrate with data, comparing a workshop to a farm. He analyzed "how money flowed between the three classes of farmers, proprietors, and artisans, in the same mechanical way that blood flows between different organs" and claimed only the farm produced a surplus that added to the nation's wealth.
Physiocrats viewed the production of goods and services as equivalent to the consumption of the agricultural surplus, since human or animal muscle provided the main source of power and all energy derived from the surplus from agricultural production.  Profit in capitalist production was really only the "rent" obtained by the owner of the land on which the agricultural production took place.

[ 4 ] "The physiocrats damned cities for their artificiality and praised more natural styles of living. They celebrated farmers." [ 5 ] They called themselves les Économistes , but are generally referred to as "physiocrats" to distinguish their beliefs from the many schools of economic thought that followed.

[ 6 ] Precursors [ edit ] Physiocracy is an agrarianist philosophy which developed in the context of the predominantly rural, pre-industrial European society of the time. In the late Roman Republic , the dominant senatorial class was not allowed to engage in banking or commerce [ 7 ] but relied on their latifundia , large plantations, for income. They circumvented this rule through freedmen proxies who sold surplus agricultural goods.

Other inspiration came from China's economic system , then the largest in the world. Chinese society broadly distinguished four occupations , with scholar-bureaucrats (who were also agrarian landlords ) at the top and merchants at the bottom (because they did not produce but only distributed goods made by others). Leading physiocrats like François Quesnay were avid Confucianists who advocated China's agrarian policies.

[ 8 ] Some scholars have advocated connections with the school of agriculturalism , which promoted utopian communalism.

[ 9 ] One of the integral parts of physiocracy, laissez-faire , was adopted from Quesnay's writings on China, [ 10 ] being a translation of the Chinese Taoism term wu wei .

[ 11 ] The concept natural order of physiocracy originated from "Way of Nature" of Chinese Taoism.

[ 8 ] History [ edit ] The growing power of the centralized state control in the era of enlightened absolutism necessitated centralized, systematic information on the nation. A major innovation was the collection, use and interpretation of numerical and statistical data, ranging from trade statistics, harvest reports, and death notices to population censuses. Starting in the 1760s, officials in France and Germany began increasingly to rely on quantitative data for systematic planning, especially regarding long-term economic growth. It combined the utilitarian agenda of "enlightened absolutism" with the new ideas being developed in  economics. In Germany the trend was especially strong in Cameralism while in France it was an important theme in physiocracy.

[ 12 ] Pierre Le Pesant, sieur de Boisguilbert served as a member of Louis XIV 's local administration of Paris, and wrote pamphlets and booklets on subjects related to his work: taxation, grain trade , and money. Le Pesant asserted that wealth came from self-interest and markets were connected by money flows (i.e. an expense for the buyer is revenue for the producer). Thus he realized that lowering prices in times of shortage – common at the time – was dangerous economically as it acted as a disincentive to production. Generally, Le Pesant advocated less government interference in the grain market, as any such interference would generate "anticipations" which would prevent the policy from working.

[ 13 ] For instance, if the government bought corn abroad, some people would speculate that there was likely to be a shortage and would buy more corn, leading to higher prices and more of a shortage. This was an early example of advocacy of free trade. In anonymously published tracts, Vauban proposed a system known as La dîme royale : this involved major simplification of the French tax code by switching to a relatively flat tax on property and trade. Vauban's use of statistics contrasted with earlier empirical methods in economics.

[ 3 ] The event that led Mirabeau to devote himself to political economy was undoubtedly his work on a manuscript of Richard Cantillon 's Essai sur la nature du commerce en général , which he had in his possession as early as 1740.

[ 14 ] He elaborated a commentary of this text that gradually became his Ami des hommes .

[ 15 ] Around the time of the Seven Years' War between France and England (1756–63), the physiocracy movement grew. Several journals appeared, signaling an increasing audience in France for new economic ideas. Among the most important were the Journal Œconomique (1721–72), which promoted agronomy and rational husbandry and the Journal du commerce (1759–62), which was heavily influenced by the Irishman Richard Cantillon (1680–1734), both dominated by physiocrats; the Journal de l'agriculture, du commerce et des finances (1765–74) and the Ephémérides du citoyen (1767–72 and 1774–76).

[ 3 ] Also, Vincent de Gournay (1712–1759), the Intendant du commerce , brought together a group of young researchers including François Véron Duverger de Forbonnais (1722–1800) and one of the two most famous physiocrats, Anne-Robert-Jacques Turgot (1727–1781). The other, François Quesnay (1694–1774), was among those writing prolifically in contemporaneous journals.

[ 3 ] Tableau économique [ edit ] The Tableau économique or Economic Table is an economic model first described by François Quesnay in 1759, which laid the foundation of the physiocrats’ economic theories.

[ 16 ] It also contains the origins of modern ideas on the circulation of wealth and the nature of interrelationships in the economy.

[ 6 ] The model Quesnay created consisted of three economic agents: the "proprietary" class consisted only of landowners; the "productive" class consisted of agricultural laborers; the "sterile" class was made up of artisans and merchants. The flow of production and cash between the three classes originated with the proprietary class because they owned the land and bought from both of the other classes.

Characteristics [ edit ] Natural order [ edit ] This article's factual accuracy is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help to ensure that disputed statements are reliably sourced .

( November 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The physiocrats thought there was a " natural order " that allowed human beings to live together. Men did not come together via a somewhat arbitrary " social contract ." Rather, they had to discover the laws of the natural order that would allow individuals to live in society without losing significant freedoms.

[ 17 ] This concept of natural order had originated in China. The Chinese had believed that there can be good government only when a perfect harmony exists between the "Way of Man" (governmental institutions) and the "Way of Nature" (Quesnay's natural order).

[ 8 ] Individualism and laissez-faire [ edit ] Main articles: Individualism and Laissez-faire The physiocrats, especially Turgot, believed that self-interest was the motivation for each segment of the economy to play its role. Each individual is best suited to determine what goods they want and what work would provide them with what they want out of life. While a person might labor for the benefit of others, they will work harder for their own benefit; however, each person's needs are being supplied by many other people. The system works best when there is a complementary relationship between one person's needs and another person's desires, and so trade restrictions place an unnatural barrier to achieving one's goals. Laissez-faire was popularized by physiocrat Vincent de Gournay who is said to have adopted the term from François Quesnay 's writings on China.

[ 10 ] Private property [ edit ] None of the theories concerning the value of land could work without strong legal support for the ownership of private property. Combined with the strong sense of individualism, private property becomes a critical component of the Tableau's functioning.
The physiocrats believed in the institution of private property. They saw property as a tree and its branches, as social institutions.
They actually stated that landlords must enjoy 2/5 on the land surpluses. They also advocated that landlords should be given dues, otherwise they would take the land away from the cultivators.

Diminishing returns [ edit ] Main article: Diminishing returns Turgot was one of the first to recognize that "successive applications of the variable input will cause the product to grow, first at an increasing rate, later at a diminishing rate until it reaches a maximum." [ 16 ] This was a recognition that the productivity gains required to increase national wealth had an ultimate limit, and, therefore, wealth could not be infinite.

Investment capital [ edit ] Both Quesnay and Anne Robert Jacques Turgot, Baron de Laune recognized that capital was needed by farmers to start the production process, and both were proponents of using some of each year's profits to increase productivity. Capital was also needed to sustain the laborers while they produced their product. Turgot recognizes that there is opportunity cost and risk involved in using capital for something other than land ownership, and he promotes interest as serving a "strategic function in the economy." [ 16 ] Subsequent developments [ edit ] The ideas of the Physiocrats had an influence on Adam Smith , David Ricardo , John Stuart Mill , and above all Henry George , who appears at first to have come to similar beliefs independently.

[ 18 ] George was the driving force behind what became known as the Single Tax movement (not to be confused with Flat Tax ). The Single Tax is a proposal for the use of the annual rental value of land ( land value taxation ) as the principal or sole source of public revenue.

The New Physiocratic League is a current Georgist political movement which seeks to revive elements of physiocracy.

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Physiocratic School ".

Agrarianism Classical economics Classical liberalism Flour War Free market French Liberal School Geolibertarianism Georgism Jeffersonian democracy Land value tax People [ edit ] Richard Cantillon François Quesnay Anne Robert Jacques Turgot Jean Claude Marie Vincent de Gournay Victor de Riqueti, marquis de Mirabeau Honoré Gabriel Riqueti, comte de Mirabeau Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours Pierre-Paul Lemercier de La Rivière de Saint-Médard Nicolas Baudeau Silvio Gesell Henry George Mykola Rudenko Notes [ edit ] ^ "physiocrat" .

Oxford Dictionaries . Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on July 4, 2014 . Retrieved 27 October 2013 .

^ Bertholet, Auguste; Kapossy, Béla (2023).

La Physiocratie et la Suisse (PDF) (in French). Geneva: Slatkine.

ISBN 9782051029391 .

^ a b c d Steiner (2003), pp. 61–62 ^ a b c d Karl Marx and Frederick Engels (1988), pp. 348, 355, 358.

^ Why Americans Value Rural Life by David B. Danbom ^ a b The Penguin Dictionary of Economics , George Bannock, R. E. Baxter and Evan Davis. 5th Edition. Penguin Books 1992 p. 329.

^ Byrd (1995), 34 ^ a b c Derk Bodde (2005), Chinese Ideas in the West p.6, Reprinted with permission in China: A Teaching Workbook, Asia for Educators, Columbia University ^ Maverick, Lewis A. (1938). "Chinese Influences Upon the Physiocrats". Economic History 3.

^ a b Baghdiantz McCabe, Ina (2008).

Orientalism in Early Modern France: Eurasian Trade Exoticism and the Ancien Regime . Berg Publishers. pp.

271– 272.

ISBN 978-1845203740 .

^ Clarke, J.J. (1997).

Oriental Enlightenment: The Encounter Between Asian and Western Thought . Routledge. p. 50.

ISBN 978-0415133760 .

^ Lars Behrisch, "Statistics and Politics in the 18th Century." Historical Social Research/Historische Sozialforschung (2016) 41#2: 238–257.

online ^ Steiner (2003), p. 61 ^ Bertholet, Auguste (2020). "The intellectual origins of Mirabeau".

History of European Ideas .

47 : 91– 96.

doi : 10.1080/01916599.2020.1763745 .

S2CID 219747599 .

^ "Correspondance Mirabeau – Sacconay (1731–1787)" .

Lumières.Lausanne . Archived from the original on 2020-05-31.

^ a b c Henry William Spiegel (1983) The Growth of Economic Thought , Revised and Expanded Edition, Duke University Press. pp. 189, 195–96 ^ Rist, Charles; Gide, Charles (1915).

A history of economic doctrines from the time of the physiocrats to the present day . D.C. Heath and Company.

^ Bertholet, Auguste (2021).

"Constant, Sismondi et la Pologne" .

Annales Benjamin Constant .

46 : 78– 81.

^ "Economic Reform Platform | New Physiocrats" .

New Physiocrats . Retrieved 2018-03-05 .

References [ edit ] Byrd, Robert (1995).

The Senate of the Roman Republic .

US Government Printing Office Senate Document 103–23.

Charbit, Yves; Arundhati Virmani (2002) "The Political Failure of an Economic Theory: Physiocracy" , Population , Vol. 57, No. 6. (Nov. – Dec., 2002), pp. 855–883, Institut National d'Études Démographiques "Theories of Surplus Value" from the Economic Manuscripts of 1861–1863" contained in Collected Works of Karl Marx and Frederick Engels: Volume 30, New York: International Publishers, 1988.

Gide, Charles and Charles Rist , A History of Economic doctrine from the time of the Physiocrats to the present day . 1915 Muller, A. L. (1978) Quesnay's Theory of Growth: A Comment , Oxford Economic Papers, New Series, Vol. 30, No. 1., pp. 150–156.

Smith, George H.

(2008).

"Physiocracy" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage ; Cato Institute . pp.

378– 379.

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

Spiegel, Henry William (1983), The Growth of Economic Thought , Revised and Expanded Edition, Duke University Press [ ISBN missing ] Steiner, Phillippe (2003) "Physiocracy and French Pre-Classical Political Economy" , Chapter 5. in eds. Biddle, Jeff E, Davis, Jon B, & Samuels, Warren J.

: A Companion to the History of Economic Thought .

Blackwell Publishing , 2003.

The History of Economic Thought Website , The New School of Social Research . 6 Feb. 2006 Tableau Économique – Modern view Vinje, Victor Condorcet: Economics as if Soil and Health Matters (Nisus Publications, 2017) [ ISBN missing ] External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Physiocracy .

Look up physiocracy in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

The Physiocrats – In Our Time – BBC Radio 4, 2013 v t e Physiocrats Anne Robert Jacques Turgot François Quesnay Jacques Claude Marie Vincent de Gournay John Law Nicolas Baudeau Pierre le Pesant Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours Richard Cantillon Victor de Riqueti v t e Schools of economic thought Pre-modern Ancient schools Medieval Islamic Scholasticism Modern era Early modern Cameralism Mercantilism Physiocrats School of Salamanca Late modern American (National) Austrian Birmingham Classical Ricardian Distributist English historical Freiwirtschaft French liberal Georgism German historical Malthusian Manchester Marginalism Marxist economics Marxian critique of political economy Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne Socialist Contemporary (20th and 21st centuries) Behavioral Buddhist Capability approach Carnegie Chartalism Modern Monetary Theory Chicago Constitutional Cracovian Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiburg Geneva Institutional Keynesian Neo- Neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis New Post- Circuitism Keynes–Marx synthesis Monetarism Market Neo-Malthusian Neo-Marxian Neo-Ricardian Neo-Schumpeterian Neoliberalism New classical Rational expectations theory Real business-cycle theory New institutional New neoclassical synthesis Organizational Public choice Regulation Saltwater/freshwater Stockholm Structuralist Supply-side Technocracy movement Thermoeconomics Virginia Social credit Related Critique of political economy History of economic thought History of macroeconomic thought Economics Political economy Mainstream economics Heterodox economics Post-autistic economics Degrowth World-systems theory Economic systems Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐qwrvm
Cached time: 20250814222739
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.688 seconds
Real time usage: 0.859 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2341/1000000
Revision size: 20812/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 97468/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1934/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 84448/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.478/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21961043/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  743.956      1 -total
 23.47%  174.576      1 Template:Reflist
 14.68%  109.197      1 Template:Capitalism_sidebar
 14.58%  108.475      1 Template:Langx
 14.42%  107.260      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.88%   95.842      2 Template:Cite_web
 10.33%   76.818      1 Template:Short_description
  6.97%   51.844      3 Template:Navbox
  5.93%   44.089      1 Template:Disputed
  5.81%   43.193      1 Template:Physiocrats Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:45440:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814222739 and revision id 1303263182. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Physiocracy&oldid=1303263182 " Categories : Physiocrats Classical liberalism Preclassical economics Agrarianism Land value taxation Georgism Schools of economic thought Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing French-language text Accuracy disputes from November 2019 All accuracy disputes Pages with missing ISBNs This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 00:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Physiocracy 55 languages Add topic

