Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 1980s 1.2 1990s 1.3 2000s 1.4 2010s 1.5 2020s 2 Reactions 3 Awards 4 Controversies Toggle Controversies subsection 4.1 General controversies 4.2 Science coverage 4.2.1 Climate change denial 4.2.2 Ozone depletion denial 4.2.3 Second-hand smoke denial 4.2.4 Controversial reporting on the COVID-19 pandemic 4.3 Allegations of racism 4.3.1 Sam Francis controversy 4.3.2 Southern Poverty Law Center report 4.4 Coverage of Barack Obama 4.5 Islamophobia and anti-Muslim 5 Staff Toggle Staff subsection 5.1 Editors-in-chief 5.2 Managing editors 5.3 Opinion editors 5.4 Current commentary contributors 5.5 Former contributors 5.6 Others 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents The Washington Times 29 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American broadsheet newspaper For the newspaper with a similar name published from 1894 to 1939, see The Washington Times (1894–1939) . For the newspaper with a similar name published from 1939 to 1954, see Washington Times-Herald .

The Washington Times America's Newspaper Front page for August 22, 2016 Type Daily newspaper Format Broadsheet Owner(s) Operations Holdings (via The Washington Times, LLC) Founder(s) Sun Myung Moon Publisher Larry Beasley Editor-in-chief Christopher Dolan General manager David Dadisman [ 1 ] News editor Victor Morton Managing editor, design Cathy Gainor Opinion editor Charles Hurt Sports editor David Eldridge Founded May 17, 1982 ; 43 years ago ( 1982-05-17 ) Political alignment Conservative Language English Headquarters 3600 New York Avenue NE Washington, D.C.

20002 Circulation 52,059 daily (as of 2019) [ 2 ] ISSN 0732-8494 OCLC number 8472624 Website www .washingtontimes .com This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The Washington Times is an American conservative daily newspaper published in Washington, D.C.

It covers general interest topics with an emphasis on national politics . Its broadsheet daily edition is distributed throughout Washington, D.C. and the greater Washington metropolitan area , including suburban Maryland and Northern Virginia . It also publishes a subscription-based weekly tabloid edition aimed at a national audience.

[ 3 ] The first edition of The Washington Times was published on May 17, 1982. The newspaper was founded by Unification Church leader Sun Myung Moon , and it was owned until 2010 by News World Communications , an international media conglomerate founded by Moon. It is currently owned by Operations Holdings, which is a part of the Unification Church movement.

[ 4 ] The Washington Times has been known for its conservative political stance, often supporting the policies of Republican presidents Ronald Reagan , George H. W. Bush , George W. Bush , and Donald Trump .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] During the 1990s and 2000s, The Washington Times published stories supporting neo-confederate historical revisionism. It also drew controversy by publishing conspiracy theories and racist columns by a former editor about U.S. president Barack Obama .

The Washington Times has published columns contradicting scientific consensus on multiple environmental and health issues.

History [ edit ] 1980s [ edit ] The headquarters of The Washington Times on New York Avenue NE in Washington, D.C.

The Washington Times was founded May 17, 1982, by News World Communications , a New York City -based international media conglomerate associated with the Unification Church , which also owns United Press International (UPI) and newspapers in Japan , South America , and South Korea .

[ 7 ] Bo Hi Pak , chief aide to Unification Church founder and leader Sun Myung Moon , was the founding president and founding chairman of the board.

[ 8 ] Moon asked Richard L. Rubenstein , a rabbi and college professor who had written on the Holocaust , to serve on the board of directors.

[ 9 ] The newspaper's first editor and publisher was James R. Whelan .

[ 10 ] The Washington Times was founded one year after The Washington Star , a Washington, D.C.

daily newspaper, went out of business, leaving the city with The Washington Post as its only  daily newspaper. A large percentage of the newspaper's news staff came from the Star .

Unusual among daily newspapers when The Washington Times was founded, the newspaper published full color front pages in all its sections and color elements throughout. It also used ink that it advertised as being less likely to come off on the reader's hands than the type used by The Washington Post .

[ 11 ] At its start, it had 125 reporters, 25 percent of whom were members of the Unification Church of the United States .

[ 12 ] President Ronald Reagan read The Washington Times every day during his presidency.

[ 13 ] In 1997, he said: "The American people know the truth. You, my friends at The Washington Times , have told it to them. It wasn't always the popular thing to do. But you were a loud and powerful voice. Like me, you arrived in Washington at the beginning of the most momentous decade of the century. Together, we rolled up our sleeves and got to work. And—oh, yes—we won the Cold War ." [ 14 ] After a brief editorship under Smith Hempstone , Arnaud de Borchgrave , a former UPI and Newsweek reporter, became executive editor, serving from 1985 to 1991.

[ 15 ] Borchgrave was credited with encouraging energetic reporting by staff but was known to make unorthodox journalistic decisions. During his tenure, The Washington Times mounted a fundraising drive for Contra rebels in Nicaragua and offered rewards for information leading to the arrest of Nazi war criminals .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] From 1985 to 2008, News World published a weekly news magazine called Insight on the News , also called just Insight , as a companion to The Washington Times .

Insight ' s reporting sometimes resulted in journalistic controversy.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] 1990s [ edit ] A Washington Times dispenser In 1991, Moon said he had spent between $900 million and $1 billion on The Washington Times .

[ 22 ] By 2002, Moon had spent between $1.7 billion and $2 billion, according to different estimates.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Wesley Pruden , previously a correspondent and then a managing editor of The Washington Times , was named executive editor in 1991.

[ 25 ] During his editorship, the paper took a strongly conservative and nativist editorial stance.

[ 26 ] In 1992, North Korean leader Kim Il Sung gave his first and only interview with the Western news media to The Washington Times reporter Josette Sheeran , who later became executive director of the United Nations World Food Programme .

[ 27 ] In 1992, The Washington Times had one-eighth the circulation of The Washington Post (100,000 compared to 800,000) and two-thirds of its subscribers subscribed to both papers.

[ 28 ] In 1994, it introduced a weekly national edition, which was published in a tabloid format and distributed nationally.

[ 29 ] U.S. President George H. W. Bush encouraged the political influence of The Washington Times and other Unification Church movement activism in support of American foreign policy .

[ 5 ] In 1997, the Washington Report on Middle East Affairs , which is critical of U.S. and Israeli policies, praised The Washington Times and its sister publication, The Middle East Times , for what it called their objective and informative coverage of Islam and the Middle East , while criticizing The Washington Times for its generally pro-Israel editorial positions. The Report suggested that these newspapers and The Christian Science Monitor , each owned by religious institutions, were less influenced by pro-Israel pressure groups than corporate-owned newspapers.

[ 30 ] 2000s [ edit ] The printing and distribution center of The Washington Times In 2002, at an event held to celebrate The Washington Times ' 20th anniversary, Moon said, " The Washington Times is responsible to let the American people know about God" and " The Washington Times will become the instrument in spreading the truth about God to the world." [ 23 ] In 2004, David Ignatius , a correspondent for The Washington Post , reported that Chung Hwan Kwak , a leader in the Unification Church, wanted The Washington Times to "support international organizations such as the United Nations and to campaign for world peace and interfaith understanding." This, Ignatius wrote, created difficulties for Pruden and some of The Washington Times ' columnists. Ignatius also mentioned the Unification Church movement's reconciliatory attitude towards North Korea , which at the time included joint business ventures, and Kwak's advocacy for greater understanding between the U.S. and the Islamic world as issues of contention. Ignatius predicted that conservatives in Congress and the George W. Bush administration would support Pruden's position over Kwak's.

[ 31 ] In 2006, Moon's son, Hyun Jin Moon , president and CEO of News World Communications, dismissed managing editor Francis "Fran" Coombs following accusations of racist editorializing. Coombs had made some racist and sexist comments, for which he was sued by other employees at The Washington Times .

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] In January 2008, Pruden retired, and John F. Solomon , who worked with the Associated Press and had most recently been head of investigative reporting and mixed media development at The Washington Post , was appointed executive editor.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] A month later, The Washington Times changed some of its style guide to conform more to what was becoming mainstream media usage. It announced that it would no longer use words like " illegal aliens " and " homosexual " and, in most cases, opt for "more neutral terminology" like "illegal immigrants" and "gay", respectively. It also decided to stop using "Hillary" when referring to then U.S. Senator Hillary Clinton , and the word "marriage" in the expression " gay marriage " would no longer appear in quotes in the newspaper. These policy changes drew criticism from some conservatives.

[ 37 ] Prospect magazine attributed The Washington Times ' apparent political moderation to differences of opinion over the United Nations and North Korea, and wrote, "The Republican right may be losing its most devoted media ally." [ 38 ] In November 2009, The New York Times reported that The Washington Times would no longer be receiving funds from the Unification Church movement and might have to cease publication or become an online publication only.

[ 39 ] Later that year, it dismissed 40 percent of its 370 employees and stopped its subscription service, instead distributing the paper free in some areas of the Washington metropolitan area , including federal government departments and agencies. However, a subscription website owned by the paper, theconservatives.com, and the Times ' three-hour radio program , America's Morning News , both continued.

[ 40 ] The paper also announced that it would cease publication of its Sunday edition, along with other changes, partly in order to end its reliance on subsidies from the Unification Church.

[ 41 ] On December 31, 2009, The Washington Times announced that it would no longer be a full-service newspaper, eliminating its metropolitan news and sports sections.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] 2010s [ edit ] The Washington Times newsroom In July 2010, the Unification Church issued a letter protesting the direction The Washington Times was taking and urging closer ties with it.

[ 44 ] In August 2010, a deal was made to sell it to a group more closely related to the movement. Editor-in-chief Sam Dealey said that this was a welcome development among the Times ' staff.

[ 45 ] In November 2010, Moon and a group of former editors purchased The Washington Times from News World Communications for $1. This ended a conflict within the Moon family that had been threatening to shut down the paper completely.

[ 46 ] In June 2011, Ed Kelley, formerly of The Oklahoman , was hired as editor overseeing both news and opinion content.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] In March 2011, The Washington Times announced that some former staffers would be rehired and that the paper would bring back its sports, metro, and life sections.

[ 49 ] In 2012, Douglas D. M. Joo stepped down as senior executive, president, and chairman.

[ 50 ] Times president Tom McDevitt took his place as chairman, and Larry Beasley was hired as the company's new president and chief executive officer .

[ 51 ] In March 2013, The Washington Times partnered with Herring Networks to create a new conservative cable news channel, One America News Network (OAN), which began broadcasting in mid‑2013.

[ 52 ] In July 2013, The Washington Times hired David Keene , former president of the National Rifle Association and chairman of the American Conservative Union , to serve as its opinion editor.

[ 53 ] In September 2013, Solomon returned as editor and vice president of content and business development.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Solomon's tenure was marked by a focus on profitability.

[ 56 ] In September 2015, the newspaper had its first profitable month, ending a streak of monthly financial losses over the paper's first 33 years.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] In December 2015, Solomon left for Circa News .

The Washington Times opinion editor Charles Hurt was one of Trump's earliest supporters in Washington, D.C.

[ 59 ] During the 2016 presidential election , The Washington Times did not endorse a presidential candidate, but it endorsed Trump for reelection in the 2020 presidential election .

[ 60 ] 2020s [ edit ] In 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic , The Washington Times received between $1 million and $2 million in federal -backed small business loans from Citibank as related of the Paycheck Protection Program . The Washington Times which it said helped retain of its 91 employees.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] During the 2024 presidential election , The Washington Times endorsed Trump for election.

[ 63 ] Reactions [ edit ] In the 1980s, reporters for The Washington Times visited imprisoned then South African activist Nelson Mandela , who wrote about the newspaper in his autobiography, Long Walk to Freedom . He said, "They seemed less intent on finding out my views than on proving that I was a Communist and a terrorist. All of their questions were slanted in that direction, and when I reiterated that I was neither a Communist nor a terrorist, they attempted to show that I was not a Christian either by asserting that the Reverend Martin Luther King never resorted to violence." [ 64 ] [ 65 ] The Washington Times holds a conservative political stance.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] In 1995, the Columbia Journalism Review wrote that The Washington Times "is like no major city daily in America in the way that it wears its political heart on its sleeve. No major paper in America would dare be so partisan." [ 25 ] In 2002, The Washington Post reported that the newspaper "was established by Moon to combat communism and be a conservative alternative to what Moon perceived as the liberal leanings of The Washington Post . Since then, the paper has fought to prove its editorial independence, trying to demonstrate that it is neither a "Moonie paper" nor a booster of the political right but rather a fair and balanced reporter of the news." [ 23 ] In October 2002, veteran Washington Post editor Ben Bradlee complimented The Washington Times , saying, "I see them get some local stories that I think the Post doesn't have and should have had." [ 70 ] In 2007, Mother Jones reported that The Washington Times had become "essential reading for political news junkies" soon after its founding, and described it as a "conservative newspaper with close ties to every Republican administration since Reagan." [ 71 ] In August 2008, in a Harper's essay, American historian [ 72 ] Thomas Frank linked The Washington Times to the modern American conservative movement, saying: "There is even a daily newspaper— The Washington Times —published strictly for the movement's benefit, a propaganda sheet whose distortions are so obvious and so alien that it puts one in mind of those official party organs one encounters when traveling in authoritarian countries." [ 73 ] In January 2011, conservative commentator Paul Weyrich said, " The Washington Post became very arrogant and they just decided that they would determine what was news and what wasn't news and they wouldn't cover a lot of things that went on. And The Washington Times has forced the Post to cover a lot of things that they wouldn't cover if the Times wasn't in existence." [ 74 ] In December 2012, The New York Times wrote that The Washington Times had become "a crucial training ground for many rising conservative journalists and a must-read for those in the movement. A veritable who's who of conservatives— Tony Blankley , Frank J. Gaffney Jr.

, Larry Kudlow , John Podhoretz and Tony Snow —has churned out copy for its pages." [ 39 ] The Columbia Journalism Review noted that reporters for The Washington Times had used it as a springboard to other mainstream news outlets.

[ 24 ] Awards [ edit ] In 2013, The Washington Times won two Sigma Delta Chi Awards from the Society of Professional Journalists for excellence in journalism, including "Professional Journalists for Deadline Reporting (Daily Circulation of 1–50,000)" and "Investigative Reporting (Daily Circulation 1–50,000)".

In 2014, Thom Loverro, lead sports columnist for The Washington Times , won a Sigma Delta Chi Award for Sports Column Writing.

In 2018, Guy Taylor and Dan Boylan, reporters for The Washington Times , won Honorable Mentions for the 31st annual Gerald R. Ford Journalism Prize for Distinguished Reporting on the Presidency.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] In 2019, The Washington Times advertising department won first and third place in the VPA News and Advertising contest in the Special Sections (standalone section non-slick cover) category. Outstanding design and creative artwork for the Qatar and Rolling Thunder Special Section covers landed the department the award.

[ 77 ] In 2020, Alexander Hunter, designer and editorial illustrator for The Washington Times , won the Sigma Delta Chi Award for excellence in journalism.

[ 78 ] Controversies [ edit ] General controversies [ edit ] Some former employees, including Whelan, have insisted that The Washington Times was always under Moon's control. Whelan, whose contract guaranteed editorial autonomy, left the paper in 1984 when the owners refused to renew his contract.

[ 79 ] Three years later, editorial page editor William P. Cheshire and four of his staff resigned, charging that, at the explicit direction of Sang Kook Han, a top official of the Unification Church, executive editor Arnaud de Borchgrave had stifled editorial criticism of political repression in South Korea under President Chun Doo-hwan .

[ 80 ] In 1982, The Washington Times refused to publish film critic Scott Sublett's negative review of the movie Inchon , which was also sponsored by the Unification Church.

[ 81 ] In 1988, The Washington Times published a misleading story suggesting that Democratic presidential candidate Michael Dukakis had sought psychiatric help, and included a quote from Dukakis' sister-in-law saying "it is possible" he visited a psychiatrist. However, The Washington Times clipped the full quote by the sister-in-law, which was: "It's possible, but I doubt it." [ 25 ] [ 82 ] Reporter Peggy Weyrich quit in 1991 after one of her articles about Anita Hill 's testimony in the Clarence Thomas Supreme Court nominee hearings was rewritten to depict Hill as a "fantasizer".

[ 64 ] During the presidency of Bill Clinton The Washington Times reporting on his alleged sex scandals was often picked up by other, more respected, news media which contributed to enhanced public awareness of the topic,  and eventually to Clinton's impeachment .  In 1999 the Senate voted to acquit Clinton, allowing him to complete his second term as president.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] In a 1997 column in The Washington Times , Frank Gaffney falsely alleged that a seismic incident in Russia was a nuclear detonation at that nation's Novaya Zemlya test site, which would have meant that Russia had violated the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTB).

[ 85 ] Subsequent scientific analysis of the Novaya Zemlya event showed that it was a routine earthquake .

[ 86 ] Reporting on the allegation, the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists observed that following its publication: " fax machines around Washington, D.C. and across the country poured out pages detailing Russian duplicity. They came from Frank Gaffney." [ 85 ] In 2002, The Washington Times published a story accusing the National Educational Association (NEA), the largest teachers' union in the United States, of teaching students that the policies of the U.S. government were partly responsible for the 2001 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center .

[ 87 ] The NEA responded to the story by denying all of its accusations.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] Brendan Nyhan , later a  political science professor at the University of Michigan , wrote that The Washington Times story was a lie and a myth.

[ 87 ] In 2018, The Washington Times published a commentary piece by retired U.S. Navy admiral James A. Lyons which promoted conspiracy theories about the murder of Seth Rich . Lyon wrote that it was "well known in intelligence circles that Seth Rich and his brother, Aaron Rich, downloaded the DNC emails and was paid by WikiLeaks for that information." [ 68 ] [ 90 ] The piece cited no evidence for the assertion.

[ 68 ] [ 91 ] Aaron Rich filed a lawsuit against The Washington Times , saying that it acted with "reckless disregard for the truth" and that it did not retract or remove the piece after "receiving notice of the falsity of the statements about Aaron after the publication".

[ 68 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] Rich and The Washington Times settled their lawsuit, and the paper issued an unusually robust retraction.

[ 90 ] [ 94 ] On January 6, 2021, after violent pro-Trump rioters attacked the United States Capitol , The Washington Times published a false story quoting an unidentified retired military officer claiming that the facial recognition system company XRVision had used its technology and identified two members of antifa amid the mob.

[ 95 ] XRVision quickly denied this, sending a cease and desist to The Washington Times , and issued a statement saying that its technology had actually identified two Neo-Nazis and a believer in the QAnon conspiracy theory and that it had not done any detection work for a retired military officer authorized to share that information. On January 7, the article was removed from the website and replaced with a corrected version.

[ 96 ] Before the correction, Representative Matt Gaetz cited the original story as proof that antifa were partially responsible for the attack in the floor debate of the 2021 United States Electoral College vote count , and it was widely shared on social media.

[ 96 ] The Washington Times has twice published articles, one written by the ambassador of Turkey to the United States and one by an attorney and lobbyist for the Turkish government, that featured Armenian genocide denial .

[ 97 ] Science coverage [ edit ] Climate change denial [ edit ] The Washington Times has promoted climate change denial .

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] [ 102 ] [ 103 ] Michael E. Mann , director of the Earth System Science Center at Pennsylvania State University , characterizes The Washington Times as a prominent outlet that propagates "climate change disinformation".

[ 99 ] Naomi Oreskes , Professor of the History of Science at Harvard University , and Erik M. Conway , historian of science at NASA 's Jet Propulsion Laboratory at the California Institute of Technology , wrote in their 2010 book Merchants of Doubt that The Washington Times has given the public a false sense that the science of anthropogenic climate change was in dispute by giving disproportionate coverage of fringe viewpoints and by preventing scientists from rebutting coverage in The Washington Times .

[ 100 ] The Washington Times reprinted a column by Steve Milloy criticizing research of climate change in the Arctic without disclosing Milloy's financial ties to the fossil fuel industry.

[ 104 ] In 1993, The Washington Times published articles purporting to debunk climate change.

[ 105 ] It headlined its story about the 1997 Kyoto Protocol on climate change: "Under the deal, the use of coal, oil and other fossil fuel in the United States would be cut by more than one-third by 2002, resulting in lower standards of living for consumers and a long-term reduction in economic growth." [ 64 ] During the Climatic Research Unit email controversy (also known as "Climategate") in 2009 in the lead-up to the UN Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen , The Washington Times wrote in an editorial: "these revelations of fudged science should have a cooling effect on global-warming hysteria and the panicked policies that are being pushed forward to address the unproven theory." [ 106 ] Eight committees investigated the controversy and found no evidence of fraud or scientific misconduct. In 2010, The Washington Times published an article claiming that February 2010 snow storms "Undermin[e] The Case For Global Warming One Flake At A Time".

[ 107 ] A 2014 The Washington Times editorial mocked the "global warming scam" and asserted: "The planetary thermometer hasn't budged in 15 years. Wildfires, tornadoes, hurricanes and other 'extreme' weather events are at normal or below-normal levels. Pacific islands aren't submerged. There's so much ice the polar bears are celebrating." [ 108 ] The Washington Times cited a blog post in support of these claims; PolitiFact fact-checked the claims in the blog post and concluded it was "pants-on-fire" false.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] The Washington Times later said that a NASA scientist claimed that global warming was on a "hiatus" and that NASA had found evidence of global cooling ; Rebecca Leber of The New Republic said that the NASA scientist in question said the opposite of what The Washington Times claimed.

[ 110 ] In 2015, The Washington Times published a column by Republican Texas congressman Lamar Smith in which he argued that the work of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration was "not good science, [but] science fiction." The American Association for the Advancement of Science and six other scientific organizations objected to Smith's politicalisation of scientific research saying: "Scientists should not be subjected to fraud investigations or harassment simply for providing scientific results that some may see as politically controversial. Science cannot thrive when policymakers—regardless of party affiliation—use policy disagreements as a pretext to attack scientific conclusions." [ 103 ] In November 2021, a study by the Center for Countering Digital Hate described The Washington Times as being among "ten fringe publishers" that together were responsible for nearly 70 percent of Facebook user interactions with content that denied climate change. Facebook disputed the study's methodology.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] [ 113 ] Ozone depletion denial [ edit ] In the 1990s, The Washington Times published columns which cast doubt on the scientific consensus on the causes of ozone depletion (which had led to the "ozone hole"). It published columns disputing the science as late as 2000.

[ 114 ] In 1991, NASA scientists warned of the potential of a major Arctic ozone hole developing in the spring of 1992 due to elevated levels of chlorine monoxide in the Arctic stratosphere . However, as the Arctic winter was unusually warm, the chemical reactions needed for ozone depletion did not occur. Even though the science was not incorrect, The Washington Times , along with other conservative media, subsequently created a " crying wolf " narrative, where scientists were portrayed as political activists who were following an environmental agenda rather than the science. In 1992, it published an editorial saying: "This is not the disinterested, objective, just-the-facts tone one ordinarily expects from scientists... This is the cry of the apocalyptic, laying the groundwork for a decidedly non-scientific end: public policy... it would be nice if the next time NASA cries 'wolf,' fewer journalists, politicians and citizens heed the warning like sheep." [ 115 ] Second-hand smoke denial [ edit ] In 1995, The Washington Times published a column by Fred Singer , who is known for promoting views contrary to mainstream science on a number of issues, where Singer referred to the science on the adverse health impact of second-hand smoke as the "second-hand smoke scare" and accused the Environmental Protection Agency of distorting data when it classified second-hand smoke as harmful. Singer's column also denied the scientific consensus on climate change and on the health risks of exposure to environmental radiation .

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] In 1995, The Washington Times published an editorial titled "How not to spend science dollars" condemning a grant to the National Cancer Institute to study how political contributions from tobacco companies shape policy-making and the voting behavior of politicians.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] Controversial reporting on the COVID-19 pandemic [ edit ] In January 2020, The Washington Times published two articles about the COVID-19 pandemic that suggested that the virus was created by the government of the People's Republic of China as a biological weapon . One article quoted a former Israeli intelligence officer as a source.  The two articles were shared on hundreds of social media sites, potentially reaching an audience of millions.

[ 120 ] Allegations of racism [ edit ] Under Pruden's editorship (1992–2008), The Washington Times regularly printed excerpts from racist hard-right publications including VDARE and American Renaissance , and from Bill White , leader of the American National Socialist Workers' Party, in its Culture Briefs section.

[ 26 ] In 2013, Columbia Journalism Review reported that under Pruden's editorship The Washington Times was: "a forum for the racialist hard right, including white nationalists , neo-Confederates, and anti-immigrant scare mongers." [ 26 ] Between 1998 and 2004, the Times covered every biennial American Renaissance conference, hosted by the white supremacist New Century Foundation . According to the Columbia Journalism Review , "the paper's coverage of these events—which are hotbeds for holocaust deniers , neo-Nazis , and eugenicists —was stunningly one sided", and favorably depicted the conference and attendees.

[ 26 ] In 2009, journalist David Neiwert wrote that it championed, "various white-nationalist causes emanating from the neo-Confederate movement (with which, until a recent housecleaning, two senior editors had long associations.)" [ 121 ] A page in The Washington Times ' Sunday edition was devoted to the American Civil War , on which the Confederacy was several times described with admiration.

[ 26 ] [ 32 ] [ 122 ] In 1993, Pruden gave an interview to the neo-Confederate magazine Southern Partisan , which has been called "arguably the most important neo-Confederate periodical" by the Southern Poverty Law Center , [ 123 ] where he said: "Every year I make sure that we have a story in the paper about any observance of Robert E. Lee's birthday ." [ 32 ] Pruden said, "And the fact that it falls around Martin Luther King's birthday ," to which a Southern Partisan interviewer interjected, "Makes it all the better," with Pruden finishing, "I make sure we have a story. Oh, yes." [ 32 ] Sam Francis controversy [ edit ] Further information: Dinesh D'Souza and Sam Francis (writer) The Washington Times employed Sam Francis , a white nationalist, as a columnist and editor, beginning in 1991 after he was chosen by Pat Buchanan to take over his column.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] [ 126 ] [ 127 ] [ 128 ] In 1995, Francis resigned or was forced out after Dinesh D'Souza reported on racist comments that Francis made at a conference hosted by American Renaissance the previous year.

[ 129 ] [ 124 ] [ 125 ] [ 130 ] [ 131 ] At the conference, Francis called on whites to: "reassert our identity and our solidarity, and we must do so in explicitly racial terms through the articulation of a racial consciousness as whites... The civilization that we as whites created in Europe and America could not have developed apart from the genetic endowments of the creating people." [ 130 ] Francis was an aide to Republican senator John East of North Carolina before joining the editorial staff of The Washington Times in 1986.

[ 130 ] Five years later, he became a columnist for the newspaper, and his column became syndicated.

[ 130 ] In addition to his journalistic career, Francis was an adjunct scholar at the Ludwig von Mises Institute of Auburn, Alabama .

[ 132 ] In June 1995, editor-in-chief Wesley Pruden "had cut back on Francis' column" after The Washington Times ran his essay criticizing the Southern Baptist Convention for its approval of a resolution which apologized for slavery .

[ 133 ] In the piece, Francis asserted that "The contrition of the Southern Baptists for slavery and racism is a bit more than a politically fashionable gesture intended to massage race relations" [ 134 ] and that "Neither slavery' nor racism' as an institution is a sin." [ 130 ] In September 1995, Pruden dismissed Francis from The Washington Times after conservative journalist Dinesh D'Souza, in a column in The Washington Post , described Francis's appearance at the 1994 American Renaissance conference: A lively controversialist, Francis began with some largely valid complaints about how the Southern heritage is demonized in mainstream culture. He went on, however, to attack the liberal principles of humanism and universalism for facilitating "the war against the white race". At one point he described country music megastar Garth Brooks as "repulsive" because "he has that stupid universalist song ( We Shall Be Free ) , in which we all intermarry." [ 135 ] After D'Souza's column was published, Pruden "decided he did not want the Times associated with such views after looking into other Francis writings, in which he advocated the possible deportation of legal immigrants and forced birth control for welfare mothers." [ 130 ] When Francis died in 2005, The Washington Times wrote a "glowing" obituary that omitted his racist beliefs and his firing from the paper, and described him as a "scholarly, challenging and sometimes pungent writer"; in response, editor David Mastio of the conservative Washington Examiner wrote in an obituary: "Sam Francis was merely a racist and doesn't deserve to be remembered as anything less." [ 136 ] [ 137 ] Mastio added that Francis: "led a double life – by day he served up conservative, red meat that was strong but never quite out of bounds by mainstream standards; by night, unbeknownst to the Times or his syndicate, he pushed white supremacist ideas." [ 136 ] [ 137 ] Southern Poverty Law Center report [ edit ] The Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC) noted that The Washington Times had, by 2005, published at least 35 articles by Marian Kester Coombs, who was married to managing editor Francis Coombs. She had a record of racially incendiary rhetoric and had written for the white nationalist magazine The Occidental Quarterly , [ 138 ] which has been described as a "stalwart" of the alt-right movement in the United States [ 139 ] and as a "far-right, racially obsessed US magazine".

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] The SPLC highlighted columns written by Marian Kester Coombs in The Washington Times , in which she asserted that the whole of human history was "the struggle of ... races"; that non-white immigration is the "importing [of] poverty and revolution" that will end in "the eventual loss of sovereign American territory"; and that Muslims in England "are turning life in this once pleasant land into a misery for its native inhabitants." [ 138 ] Coverage of Barack Obama [ edit ] In 2007 The Washington Times ' companion news magazine Insight on the News , also called just Insight , published a story which claimed that someone on the campaign staff of American presidential candidate Senator Hillary Clinton had leaked a report to one of Insight's reporters which said that Obama had "spent at least four years in a so-called madrassa, or Muslim seminary, in Indonesia".

[ 142 ] Insight's editor, Jeff Kuhner , also claimed that the source said that the Clinton campaign was "preparing an accusation that her rival Senator Barack Obama had covered up a brief period he had spent in an Islamic religious school in Indonesia when he was six."  Clinton denied the allegations. When interviewed by the New York Times , Kuhner refused to name the person said to be the reporter's source to the New York Times .

[ 143 ] Insight's story was reported on first by conservative talk radio and Fox News Channel , and then by The New York Times and other major newspapers.

[ 143 ] CNN reporter John Vause visited State Elementary School Menteng 01 , a secular public school which Obama had attended for one year after attending a Roman Catholic school for three, and found that each student received two hours of religious instruction per week in his or her own faith. He was told by Hardi Priyono, deputy headmaster of the school, "This is a public school. We don't focus on religion. In our daily lives, we try to respect religion, but we don't give preferential treatment." [ 144 ] Students at Besuki wore Western clothing, and the Chicago Tribune described the school as "so progressive that teachers wore miniskirts and all students were encouraged to celebrate Christmas ".

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] [ 147 ] Interviews by Nedra Pickler of the Associated Press found that students of all faiths have been welcome there since before Obama's attendance. Akmad Solichin, the vice principal of the school, told Pickler: "The allegations are completely baseless.  Yes, most of our students are Muslim, but there are Christians as well. Everyone's welcome here ... it's a public school." [ 148 ] In 2008, The Washington Times published a column by Frank Gaffney that promoted the false conspiracy theories which asserted that President Barack Obama was born in Kenya and was courting the " jihadist vote". Gaffney also published pieces in 2009 and 2010 promoting the false assertion that Obama is a Muslim .

[ 149 ] In a 2009 column entitled " 'Inner Muslim' at work in Cairo", Pruden wrote that President Obama was the: "first president without an instinctive appreciation of the culture, history, tradition, common law and literature whence America sprang. The genetic imprint writ large in his 43 predecessors is missing from the Obama DNA." [ 26 ] In another 2009 column, Pruden wrote that Obama had "no natural instinct or blood impulse" for what America was about because he was "sired by a Kenyan father" and "born to a mother attracted to men of the Third World ." [ 26 ] Pruden's columns stirred controversy, leading The Washington Times to assign David Mastio, its deputy editor, to edit his work.

[ 26 ] In 2016, The Washington Times claimed that $3.6 million in federal funds were spent on a 2013 golf outing for President Obama and pro-golfer Tiger Woods which was widely reported on by the American news media in 2013.

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] [ 152 ] [ 153 ] Snopes rated the article "mostly false", because the estimated cost included both official presidential travel and a brief vacation in Florida . The online article contained hyperlinks to other, unrelated, stories from The Washington Times . These links' appearance were not readily distinguishable from the citation links sometimes used to support or substantiate reporting.

[ 150 ] Not included in The Washington Times the article were any links to the Government Accountability Office (GAO) report of expenditure for the 2013 trip, which included a detailed overview of President Obama's activities of February 15 to 18, 2013.

[ 154 ] Islamophobia and anti-Muslim [ edit ] Gaffney, known for his "long history of pushing extreme anti-Muslim views", wrote weekly columns for The Washington Times from the late 1990s to 2016.

[ 155 ] [ 156 ] According to John Esposito , a Professor of Religion and International Affairs and of Islamic Studies at Georgetown University , Gaffney's "editorial track record in the Washington Times is long on accusation and short on supportive evidence." [ 157 ] In columns for the Times , Gaffney helped to popularize conspiracy theories that Islamic terrorists were infiltrating the Bush administration, the conservative movement and the Obama administration.

[ 158 ] [ 159 ] [ 160 ] In 2015, the Times published a column describing refugees fleeing the Syrian Civil War as an "Islamic Trojan Horse " conducting a "'jihad' by another name".

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] The Muslim advocacy group Council on American–Islamic Relations listed The Washington Times among media outlets it said "regularly demonstrates or supports Islamophobic themes." [ 163 ] In 1998, the Egyptian newspaper Al-Ahram wrote that The  Washington Times its editorial policy was "rabidly anti- Arab , anti-Muslim and pro-Israel." [ 164 ] Staff [ edit ] Editors-in-chief [ edit ] James R. Whelan (1982–1984) Smith Hempstone (1984–1986) Arnaud de Borchgrave (1986–1992) Wesley Pruden (1992–2008) John F. Solomon (2008–2009) (2013–2015) Sam Dealey (2010) Ed Kelley (2011–2012) David S. Jackson (2012–2013) Christopher Dolan (present as of 2024) Managing editors [ edit ] Josette Shiner (1992–1997) Francis Coombs (?–2008) [ 165 ] Cathy Gaynor (present as of 2024) [ 166 ] Opinion editors [ edit ] Ann Crutcher (1984–1985) William P. Cheshire (1985–1987) Tony Snow (1987–1990) Tod Lindberg (1991–1998) Tony Blankley (2002–2007) Richard Miniter [ 167 ] (2009) Brett Decker (2009–2013) Wesley Pruden (2013) David Keene (2014–2016) Charles Hurt (2016–present) [ 168 ] Current commentary contributors [ edit ] Jennifer Harper ("Inside the Beltway" columnist) Charles Hurt (opinion editor and columnist) Mark Kellner (faith and family reporter) Robert H. Knight (opinion columnist) Stephen Moore (opinion columnist) Everett Piper (opinion columnist) Cal Thomas (opinion columnist) [ 169 ] Former contributors [ edit ] George Archibald (congressional, political, United Nations, and education reporter) Bruce Bartlett (opinion columnist) David Brooks (editorial writer, film reviewer) Amanda Carpenter (columnist) Ben Carson (opinion columnist) Monica Crowley (online opinion editor and columnist) Dave Fay (editor and journalists, deceased) Bruce Fein (opinion columnist) Sam Francis (editor and columnist, deceased) Frank Gaffney (columnist) Madison Gesiotto Gilbert (opinion columnist) Michael Hayden (opinion columnist) Nat Hentoff (opinion columnist) Shirley A. Husar (opinion columnist) Ernest Istook (opinion columnist) Drew Johnson (columnist) Tom Knott (sports columnist) Larry Kudlow (economics columnist) Jeff Kuhner (opinion columnist) Willie Lawson (opinion columnist) Tod Lindberg (opinion columnist) Herbert London (opinion columnist) (deceased) Michelle Malkin (columnist) John McCaslin ("Inside the Beltway" columnist) Oliver North (opinion columnist) Ted Nugent (opinion columnist) Rand Paul [ 170 ] [ 171 ] (opinion columnist) Jeremiah O'Leary John Podhoretz (columnist) Wesley Pruden (editor emeritus and opinion columnist) Fred Reed (journalist) Rob Redding (journalist and talk host) James S. Robbins (opinion columnist) Bill Sammon (White House correspondent) Mercedes Schlapp (opinion columnist) Thomas Sowell (columnist) Mark Steyn (opinion columnist) [ 172 ] Janine Turner (opinion columnist) Harlan K. Ullman (opinion columnist) Diana West (opinion columnist) Others [ edit ] Julia Duin : Religion editor Daniel Wattenberg : Arts and Entertainment editor This literature-related list is incomplete ; you can help by adding missing items .

( October 2021 ) See also [ edit ] United States portal Journalism portal Media in Washington, D.C.

, List of newspapers in Washington, D.C.

News World Communications The Unification Church and politics Unification Church of the United States The Washington Post (1877–present) The Washington Star (1852–1981) Washington Times-Herald , a former Washington, D.C. daily newspaper founded by William Randolph Hearst as The Evening Times [ 173 ] Fox News Insight on the News References [ edit ] ^ "Rolling Thunder rides into DC for the 29th time" (PDF) .

We will not forget . May 27, 2016. p. 2.

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 15, 2016 . Retrieved June 7, 2016 .

^ "District of Columbia Newspaper Circulation" (PDF) .

ANR .

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 20, 2019 . Retrieved February 27, 2020 .

^ "Subscribe: National Weekly – Washington Times" .

The Washington Times . Archived from the original on February 2, 2016 . Retrieved October 2, 2020 .

^ "About Us" . Operations Holdings.

Archived from the original on July 18, 2018 . Retrieved March 19, 2018 .

^ a b Goodman, Walter (January 21, 1992).

"Review/Television; Sun Myung Moon Changes Robes" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 9, 2019.

^ Boot, Max (2018). "The Cost of Capitulation".

The Corrosion of Conservatism: Why I Left the Right . Liveright Publishing. p. 124.

ISBN 9781631495670 .

LCCN 2018036979 .

^ "Sun Myung Moon Paper Appears in Washington" .

The New York Times . May 18, 1982.

Archived from the original on June 30, 2012 . Retrieved February 13, 2017 .

^ Pak was founding president of The Washington Times Corporation (1982–1992), and founding chairman of the board.

Bo Hi Pak , Appendix B: Brief Chronology of the Life of Dr. Bo Hi Pak, in Messiah: My Testimony to Rev. Sun Myung Moon, Vol I by Bo Hi Pak (2000), Lanham, MD: University Press of America.

^ "Rabbi Joins the Board of Moonie Newspaper".

The Palm Beach Post . May 21, 1982.

^ Weber, Bruce (December 3, 2012).

"James R. Whelan, First Editor of The Washington Times, Dies at 79" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on May 23, 2020 . Retrieved September 17, 2020 .

^ Frum, David (2000).

"God Moves to Dallas" .

How We Got Here: The 70's . New York City: Basic Books. p. 146.

ISBN 978-0-465-04195-4 .

LCCN 00271770 .

^ Bumiller, Elisabeth (May 17, 1982).

"The Nation's Capital Gets A New Daily Newspaper" .

The Washington Post . p. C01.

Archived from the original on September 6, 2008.

^ Clarkson, Fred (August–September 1987).

"Behind the Times" .

Fairness & Accuracy in Reporting .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2006.

^ Gorenfeld, John (June 19, 2005).

"Dear Leader's Paper Moon" .

The American Prospect .

Archived from the original on March 28, 2012.

^ Gamarekian, Barbara (May 18, 1991).

" Washington Times Editor Resigns, But Will Stay On to Write Articles" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 25, 2015.

^ Roberts, Sam (February 16, 2015).

"Arnaud de Borchgrave, Journalist Whose Life Was a Tale Itself, Dies at 88" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 30, 2019 . Retrieved March 11, 2016 .

^ Langer, Emily (February 15, 2015).

"Arnaud de Borchgrave, swashbuckling Newsweek foreign correspondent, dies" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2020 . Retrieved May 23, 2018 .

^ Insightmag, a Mustread Columbia Journalism Review January 27, 2007 ^ Kirkpatrick, David D.

(January 29, 2007).

"Feeding Frenzy For a Big Story, Even if It's False" .

The New York Times . Retrieved November 25, 2007 .

^ "Resources: Who Owns What" .

The Columbia Journalism Review . November 24, 2003. Archived from the original on July 28, 2012 . Retrieved February 2, 2008 .

"News World Communications is the media arm of Reverend Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church." ^ Annys Shin (May 3, 2004).

"News World Layoffs to Idle 86 Workers" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on January 3, 2024 . Retrieved January 15, 2017 .

^ Anderson, Damian (December 23, 1991).

"Reverend Sun Myung Moon Speaks on Our Mission During the Time of World Transition" .

Unification.net .

Archived from the original on February 18, 2019 . Retrieved July 1, 2013 .

^ a b c Ahrens, Frank (May 23, 2002).

"Moon Speech Raises Old Ghosts as the Times Turns 20" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2020 . Retrieved August 16, 2009 .

^ a b Chinni, Dante (September–October 2002).

"The Other Paper: The Washington Times's Role" .

Columbia Journalism Review . No. 5. Archived from the original on April 19, 2006.

^ a b c Freedman, Allan (March–April 1995).

"Washington's Other Paper" .

Columbia Journalism Review . Archived from the original on February 23, 2004.

^ a b c d e f g h Blake, Mariah (February 11, 2013).

" The Washington Times takes a giant step—backwards" .

Columbia Journalism Review .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2020 . Retrieved June 29, 2018 .

^ Rosenthal, Elisabeth (August 11, 2007).

"A Desire to Feed the World and Inspire Self-Sufficiency" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 23, 2019.

^ Jones, Alex S.

(January 27, 1992).

"The Media Business; Washington Times Moves to Reinvent Itself" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 1, 2016.

^ William, Glaberson (June 27, 1994).

"The Media Business; Conservative Daily Tries to Expand National Niche" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2016.

^ As U.S. Media Ownership Shrinks, Who Covers Islam?

Archived April 21, 2005, at the Library of Congress Web Archives, Washington Report on Middle East Affairs , December 1997 ^ Ignatius, David (June 18, 2004).

"Tension of the Times" .

The Washington Post . p. A29.

Archived from the original on November 6, 2012.

Insiders say the church's new line is that with the end of the Cold War, it's important to support international organizations such as the United Nations and to campaign for world peace and interfaith understanding. That stance would be awkward for The Washington Times's hard-line editor in chief, Wesley Pruden, and its stable of neoconservative columnists.

^ a b c d Blumenthal, Max (September 20, 2006).

"Hell of a Times" .

The Nation .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2020.

^ Archibald, George (September 29, 2006).

"Top Washington Times Editor's Wife Confirms Racism Allegations" .

HuffPost . Retrieved November 2, 2022 .

^ State Native to lead DC newspaper Archived February 11, 2009, at the Wayback Machine Connecticut Post January 26, 2008 ^ Abruzzese, Sarah (February 11, 2008).

"Ex-Washington Post Reporter to Lead a Rival" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on January 12, 2012 – via Yahoo! Finance .

^ Wemple, Erik (February 29, 2008).

"Playing Center: John Solomon is pushing evenhandedness at the Washington Times " .

Washington City Paper . Archived from the original on February 9, 2013 . Retrieved March 1, 2008 .

^ Koppelman, Alex (February 27, 2008).

"Washington Times updates style guide" .

Salon .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2008 . Retrieved July 1, 2013 .

^ "News & curiosities" .

Prospect . No. 126. September 2006. Archived from the original on September 3, 2007.

^ a b Parker, Ashley (November 30, 2009).

"With Tumult at the Top, Washington Times Faces Uncertainty" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on June 24, 2017.

^ Parker, Ashley (December 2, 2009).

"Large Staff Cuts Announced at the Washington Times" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on July 16, 2017.

^ Washington Times Dropping Sunday Edition As Part of 'Refocused' Approach , [ dead link ] Editor & Publisher , December 21, 2009 ^ "Washington Times cuts sports section, others" .

The Daily Record .

Associated Press . December 31, 2009.

Archived from the original on October 20, 2014 . Retrieved April 28, 2020 .

^ Daly, Dan (January 1, 2010).

"Daly: Eulogy for sports" .

The Washington Times .

Archived from the original on March 10, 2010.

^ Romenesko, Jim (July 22, 2010).

"Unification Church CEO, others respond to unsigned blog post about Washington Times" .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2010 – via the Poynter Institute .

^ "Deal in Works for The Washington Times" .

The New York Times .

Associated Press . August 25, 2010.

Archived from the original on July 16, 2017.

^ Shapira, Ian (November 3, 2010). "Moon group buys back Washington Times ".

The Washington Post . p. C1.

^ Washington Times names Ed Kelley as editor; will oversee news coverage and opinion content , The Washington Post , June 10, 2011 ^ "Washington Times Names Ed Kelley As Editor" .

CBS Baltimore .

Associated Press . June 10, 2011.

Archived from the original on September 9, 2015 . Retrieved April 28, 2020 .

^ Hagey, Keach (March 16, 2011).

"Washington Times relaunching Monday" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on March 4, 2016.

^ Sands, David R. (October 14, 2012).

"Longtime Times executive Joo resigns, takes job in Korea" .

The Washington Times .

Archived from the original on July 20, 2016 . Retrieved February 7, 2016 .

^ "New Times CEO moves quickly to name leadership team, set path to profitability" .

The Washington Times . October 16, 2012.

Archived from the original on March 25, 2014 . Retrieved February 7, 2016 .

^ * Harper, Jennifer (March 13, 2013).

" The Washington Times extending reach with cable network" .

The Washington Times .

Archived from the original on December 16, 2014 . Retrieved March 15, 2013 .

* Freedlander, David (March 14, 2013).

"One America News Network, New Conservative Cable Channel, Sets Launch" .

The Daily Beast .

Archived from the original on March 30, 2019 . Retrieved March 15, 2013 .

Hagey, Keach (March 14, 2013).

"Herring Plans to Launch New Conservative News Network" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on August 14, 2019 . Retrieved March 15, 2013 .

^ Byers, Dylan (July 15, 2013).

"David Keene, ex-NRA president, named Washington Times opinion editor" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on October 8, 2014 . Retrieved December 26, 2018 .

^ "Solomon returns to lead content, business strategies at The Washington Times " .

The Washington Times . July 8, 2013.

Archived from the original on November 21, 2013 . Retrieved February 7, 2016 .

^ Romenesko, Jim (July 8, 2013).

"John Solomon returns to The Washington Times " . Archived from the original on April 23, 2016 . Retrieved April 7, 2016 .

^ Wemple, Erik (December 7, 2015).

"John Solomon leaves Washington Times, joins Circa re-launch" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 22, 2016.

^ "The Washington Times reports first profitable month" .

Associated Press . October 15, 2015.

Archived from the original on March 7, 2016 . Retrieved February 7, 2016 .

^ Harper, Jennifer (October 14, 2015).

" Washington Times reaches profitability after 33 years, $1 billion in losses" .

The Washington Times .

Archived from the original on October 5, 2016.

^ Lowry, Rich (July 20, 2016).

"The Trump Dynasty Takes Over the GOP" .

Politico Magazine .

Archived from the original on October 27, 2016 . Retrieved May 3, 2017 .

^ Washington Times , October 26, 2020, Donald Trump for Reelection Archived October 27, 2020, at the Wayback Machine ^ James Bikales (July 6, 2020).

"Here are the major media companies that received coronavirus relief loans" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2020 . Retrieved July 10, 2020 .

^ Syed, Moiz; Willis, Derek (July 7, 2020).

"THE WASHINGTON TIMES LLC – Coronavirus Bailouts – ProPublica" .

ProPublica .

Archived from the original on July 11, 2020 . Retrieved July 10, 2020 .

^ The Washington Post , 2.8.2024 ^ a b c Ritchie, Donald A. (2005).

"Company Town Papers" .

Reporting from Washington: The History of the Washington Press Corps . Oxford University Press. pp.

262– 263.

ISBN 9780195178616 .

LCCN 2004018892 .

^ Mandela, Nelson (1994).

Long Walk to Freedom . Little, Brown and Company. pp.

453– 454.

ISBN 9780316545853 .

LCCN 94079980 .

^ Glaberson, William (June 27, 1994).

"Conservative Daily Tries to Expand National Niche" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2022 . Retrieved January 30, 2022 .

The Washington Times, the conservative daily that is linked to the Rev. Sun Myung Moon's Unification Church ^ Hall, Mimi (March 22, 2001).

"Bush, aides boost access of conservative media" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2013.

Cheney talked to The Washington Times , a much smaller newspaper known for its conservative tilt ^ a b c d Darcy, Oliver (March 27, 2018).

"Seth Rich's brother sues right-wing activists, Washington Times over conspiracy theories" .

CNN Money . pp. Unification Church.

Archived from the original on June 29, 2018 . Retrieved May 22, 2018 .

...The Washington Times, a conservative newspaper...

^ Shipoli, Erdoan A. (2018). "Desecuritization and Resecuritization of Islam in US Foreign Policy: The Obama and the Trump Administrations Unification Church".

Islam, Securitization, and US Foreign Policy . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 247.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-71111-9 .

ISBN 9783319711102 .

LCCN 2018935256 .

^ Scott, Sherman (September–October 2002).

"Donald Graham's Washington Pos' " .

Columbia Journalism Review . No. 5. Archived from the original on November 24, 2003 . Retrieved March 19, 2018 .

^ Ridgeway, James (April 27, 2007).

"Bush Sr. To Celebrate Rev. Sun Myung Moon – Again" .

Mother Jones .

Archived from the original on December 13, 2013.

^ "Bill Moyers interviews Thomas Frank" .

Bill Moyers Journal .

PBS . August 1, 2008.

Archived from the original on June 18, 2012 . Retrieved February 6, 2016 .

^ Frank, Thomas (August 2008).

"The wrecking crew: How a gang of right-wing con men destroyed Washington and made a killing" .

Harper's Magazine . pp.

35– 45.

Archived from the original on December 25, 2017.

^ "Welcome mediachannel.org - BlueHost.com" .

www.mediachannel.org . Archived from the original on January 7, 2011.

^ "Journalism Award Prizes" .

Gerald R. Ford Foundation . Archived from the original on March 6, 2021 . Retrieved December 29, 2020 .

^ "Reporting on the Presidency Honorable Mention 2017" .

Gerald R. Ford Foundation . June 4, 2018 . Retrieved December 29, 2020 .

^ Staff, Virginia Press.

"VPA News & Advertising Contest Page" .

Virginia Press Association . Archived from the original on October 19, 2020 . Retrieved March 8, 2021 .

^ "Times cartoonist Hunter wins SPJ award for excellence in journalism" .

The Washington Times .

Archived from the original on October 16, 2020 . Retrieved October 19, 2020 .

^ Rasky, Susan F.

(July 23, 1984).

"Ex-Publisher Says Moon Church Ran Newspaper" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2016 . Retrieved June 20, 2014 .

^ "Five resign from Washington Times".

The Washington Post . April 15, 1987.

^ Romano, Lois (September 18, 1982).

"Review is Killed" .

The Washington Post . p. C1.

Archived from the original on April 29, 2020 . Retrieved April 29, 2020 .

^ Randolph, Eleanor (August 13, 1988).

"Reporter Quits over Dukakis Story" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on April 29, 2020 . Retrieved December 27, 2018 .

^ D'Antonio, Michael (2020).

The Hunting of Hillary: The Forty-Year Campaign to Destroy Hillary Clinton . St. Martin's Publishing Group. p. 288.

ISBN 978-1250154606 .

^ Glass, Andrew (October 8, 2017).

"House votes to impeach Clinton, Oct. 8, 1998" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2020 . Retrieved June 12, 2019 .

^ a b Isaacs, John (November–December 1997).

"Spinning to the Right" .

Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists .

53 (6): 14– 15.

Bibcode : 1997BuAtS..53f..14I .

doi : 10.1080/00963402.1997.11456781 .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2017 . Retrieved July 22, 2016 – via Google Books.

^ van der Vink, Gregory; Park, Jeffrey; Allen, Richard; Wallace, Terry; Hennet, Christel (May 1988).

"False Accusations, Undetected Tests and Implications for the CTB Treaty" .

Arms Control Association . Archived from the original on May 23, 2018 . Retrieved July 22, 2016 .

^ a b Nyhan, Brendan (September 5, 2002).

"The big NEA-Sept. 11 lie" .

Salon .

Archived from the original on September 24, 2015 . Retrieved December 24, 2018 .

^ Young, Cathy (September 2, 2002).

"An unfair attack on teachers union" .

The Boston Globe .

Archived from the original on July 12, 2015 . Retrieved April 17, 2008 .

^ Chase, Bob (August 20, 2002).

"Letter to The Washington Times from NEA President" (Press release).

National Education Association . Archived from the original on May 17, 2008 . Retrieved April 17, 2008 .

^ a b Darcy, Oliver (October 1, 2018).

" The Washington Times settles lawsuit with Seth Rich's brother, issues retraction and apology for its coverage" .

CNN Money .

Archived from the original on February 21, 2019 . Retrieved October 1, 2018 .

^ a b Eltagouri, Marwa (March 27, 2018).

"Brother of slain DNC staffer Seth Rich sues right-wing activists, newspaper over conspiracy theories" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on July 15, 2019 . Retrieved May 22, 2018 .

^ Darcy, Oliver (May 21, 2018).

"Former Seth Rich family spokesman files lawsuit against individuals, media outlet he says defamed him" .

CNN Money .

Archived from the original on September 4, 2019 . Retrieved May 22, 2018 .

^ Anapol, Avery (March 27, 2018).

"Brother of slain DNC staffer sues Washington Times, conservative activists" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on August 5, 2018 . Retrieved May 22, 2018 .

^ "Retraction: Aaron Rich and the murder of Seth Rich" .

The Washington Times . September 30, 2018.

Archived from the original on October 1, 2018 . Retrieved October 1, 2018 .

^ Grynbaum, Michael M.; Alba, Davey ; Epstein, Reid J. (March 1, 2021).

"How Pro-Trump Forces Pushed a Lie About Antifa at the Capitol Riot" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved March 1, 2021 .

^ a b Cox, Chelsey (January 8, 2021).

"Fact check: False claim of facial recognition of antifa members during U.S. Capitol riot" .

USA Today . Retrieved January 8, 2021 .

^ Zarifian, Julien (2013).

"The United States and the (Non-)Recognition of the Armenian Genocide" .

Études arméniennes contemporaines (1): 75– 95.

doi : 10.4000/eac.361 .

^ McCright, Aaron M.; Dunlap, Riley E. (August 2011). "Organized Climate Change Denial". In Dryzek, John S.

; Norgaard, Richard B.

; Schlosberg, David (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Climate Change and Society . Oxford Handbooks. Oxford University Press. p. 152.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199566600.003.0010 .

ISBN 9780199566600 .

LCCN 2011929381 .

^ a b Mann, Michael E.

(March 2012). "The Origins of Denial".

The Hockey Stick and the Climate Wars: Dispatches from the Front Lines . Columbia University Press. p. 64.

ISBN 9780231526388 .

LCCN 2011038813 .

^ a b Kitcher, Philip (June 4, 2010). "The Climate Change Debates".

Science .

328 (5983): 1230– 1234.

Bibcode : 2010Sci...328.1230K .

doi : 10.1126/science.1189312 .

S2CID 154865206 .

^ Beilinson, Jerry (April 29, 2014).

"Playing Climate-Change Telephone" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on July 20, 2017 . Retrieved May 22, 2018 .

^ Vincent, Emmanuel (August 28, 2015).

"Analysis of "Deceptive temperature record claims" " .

Science Feedback .

Climate Feedback .

Archived from the original on September 16, 2024 . Retrieved September 16, 2024 .

^ a b Hiltzik, Michael (December 4, 2015).

"The attack on climate change scientists continues in Washington" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2016.

^ Oreskes, Naomi ; Conway, Erik M.

(2010). "Conclusion: Of Free Speech and Free Markets".

Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Global Warming . Bloomsbury Press. p. 247.

ISBN 9781608192939 .

LCCN 2009043183 .

Archived from the original on May 16, 2020 . Retrieved December 29, 2018 .

^ Stevens, William K. (September 14, 1993).

"Scientists Confront Renewed Backlash on Global Warming" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 10, 2019 . Retrieved December 28, 2018 .

^ Mayer, Frederick (February 2012).

"Stories of Climate Change: Competing Narratives, the Media, and U.S. Public Opinion 2001–2010" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 17, 2020 . Retrieved December 28, 2018 .

^ "Washington Times: February Snow Storms "Undermin[e] The Case For Global Warming One Flake At A Time" " .

The Huffington Post . April 11, 2010.

Archived from the original on October 2, 2019.

^ a b Corneliussen, Steven T. (July 1, 2014). "News dispatches from the climate wars".

Physics Today (7): 11671.

Bibcode : 2014PhT..2014g1671C .

doi : 10.1063/PT.5.8054 .

^ Greenberg, Jon (June 25, 2014).

"Fox's Doocy: NASA fudged data to make the case for global warming" .

PolitiFact .

Archived from the original on January 4, 2019 . Retrieved April 29, 2020 .

^ Leber, Rebecca (August 10, 2014).

"The Right-Wing Press' New Climate Change Lie" .

The New Republic .

Archived from the original on April 29, 2020 . Retrieved May 22, 2018 .

^ Porterfield, Carlie (November 2, 2021).

"Breitbart Leads Climate Change Misinformation On Facebook, Study Says" .

Forbes . Retrieved November 3, 2021 .

^ Waldman, Scott (February 23, 2022).

"Climate denial still flourishes on Facebook — report" .

E&E News . Retrieved April 15, 2022 .

^ "The Toxic Ten: How ten fringe publishers fuel 69% of digital climate change denial" .

Center for Countering Digital Hate . November 2, 2021 . Retrieved November 3, 2021 .

^ Oreskes, Naomi ; Conway, Erik M.

(2010). "Constructing a Counternarrative: The Fight over the Ozone Hole".

Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of Scientists Obscured the Truth on Issues from Tobacco Smoke to Global Warming . Bloomsbury Press. pp.

130– 135.

ISBN 9781608192939 .

LCCN 2009043183 .

Archived from the original on May 16, 2020 . Retrieved December 29, 2018 .

^ Brysse, Keynyn; Oreskes, Naomi ; o'Reilly, Jessica; Oppenheimer, Michael (February 2013).

"Climate change prediction: Erring on the side of least drama?" (PDF) .

Global Environmental Change .

23 (1): 327– 337.

Bibcode : 2013GEC....23..327B .

doi : 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2012.10.008 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 9, 2017 – via the University of Rhode Island .

^ Singer, Fred (1995).

"Anthology of 1995's Environmental Myths" .

The Washington Times . Archived from the original on December 29, 2018 – via the Independent Institute .

^ Powell, James Lawrence (2011). "Tobacco Tactics: The Scientist-Deniers".

The Inquisition of Climate Science . Columbia University Press. pp. 57, 198.

ISBN 9780231527842 .

LCCN 2011018611 .

Archived from the original on May 25, 2019 . Retrieved December 29, 2018 .

^ Landman, Anne; Glantz, Stanton A.

(January 2009).

"Tobacco Industry Efforts to Undermine Policy-Relevant Research" .

American Journal of Public Health .

99 (1): 45– 58.

doi : 10.2105/AJPH.2007.130740 .

PMC 2600597 .

PMID 19008508 .

^ "How not to spend science dollars" .

The Washington Times . May 28, 1995. p. B2.

Archived from the original on October 28, 2016 . Retrieved December 29, 2018 – via the University of California, San Francisco .

^ BBC Monitoring (January 30, 2020).

"China coronavirus: Misinformation spreads online" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on February 21, 2020 . Retrieved February 25, 2020 .

^ Neiwert, David (2009). "The Transmitters".

The Eliminationists: How Hate Talk Radicalized the American Right (2016 Routledge ed.). Paradigm Publishers. p. 80.

ISBN 9781317260615 .

Archived from the original on August 19, 2020 . Retrieved December 30, 2018 .

^ Tkacik, Moe (November 5, 2010).

"Just Like Old Times at The Washington Times ?" .

Washington City Paper .

Archived from the original on April 15, 2020.

^ Euan Hague (January 25, 2010).

"The Neo-Confederate Movement" .

Southern Poverty Law Center .

^ a b Berich, Heidi; Hicks, Kevin (2009). "White Nationalism in America". In Perry, Barbara; Levin, Brian (eds.).

Hate Crimes . Vol. 1: Understanding and Defining Hate Crime. Praeger Publishing. pp.

112– 113.

ISBN 9780275995690 .

LCCN 2008052727 .

Archived from the original on December 16, 2019 . Retrieved October 30, 2018 .

^ a b Shenk, Timothy (August 16, 2016).

"The dark history of Donald Trump's rightwing revolt" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on April 14, 2019.

^ Griffin, Roger ; Feldman, Matthew, eds. (2004). "Post-War Fascisms".

Fascism . Critical Concepts in Political Science. Routledge. p. 155.

ISBN 9780415290159 .

LCCN 2003047269 .

^ Potok, Mark (2003). "The American Radical Right: The 1990s and Beyond". In Eatwell, Roger ; Mudde, Cas (eds.).

Western Democracies and the New Extreme Right Challenge . Routledge. p. 59.

doi : 10.4324/9780203402191 .

ISBN 9780203402191 .

LCCN 2003010829 .

^ MacMullan, Terrance (2009). "Contemporary Debates on Whiteness".

Habits of Whiteness: A Pragmatist Reconstruction . Indiana University Press. p. 147.

ISBN 9780253002884 .

LCCN 2008050145 .

Archived from the original on August 19, 2020 . Retrieved December 30, 2018 .

^ Murphy, Paul V. (September 2001).

The Rebuke of History: The Southern Agrarians and American Conservative Thought . University of North Carolina Press. p. 247.

ISBN 9780807849606 .

LCCN 2001027128 .

Archived from the original on December 26, 2018 . Retrieved December 25, 2018 .

^ a b c d e f Kurtz, Howard (October 19, 1995).

"Washington Times Clips its Right Wing" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on April 29, 2020 . Retrieved December 24, 2018 .

^ Frantz, Douglas ; Janofsky, Michael (February 23, 1996).

"Politics: On the Move; Buchanan Drawing Extremist Support, and Problems, Too" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 25, 2018.

^ Rockwell, Llewellyn H., ed. (August 18, 2014).

Murray Rothbard, In Memoriam (PDF) . Auburn, AL: von Mises Institute. pp. 64, 127.

^ Timothy Stanley, The Crusader: The Life and Tumultuous Times of Pat Buchanan ( New York City : St. Martin's Press , 2012), p. 358; ISBN 978-0-312-58174-9 ^ Samuel T. Francis, "All those things to apologize for," The Washington Times , June 27, 1995.

^ Dinesh D'Souza , "Racism: It's a White (and Black) Thing", The Washington Post , September 24, 1995.

^ a b "Shots Fired, Book Delayed" .

Adweek . August 28, 2006.

Archived from the original on April 9, 2019.

^ a b Mastio, David (February 22, 2005).

"Francis re-fought immoral battles of 1964" .

Washington Examiner . Archived from the original on December 26, 2018 . Retrieved December 26, 2018 .

^ a b Beirich, Heidi; Potok, Mark (April 28, 2005).

"Washington Times Editor and Wife Promote Radical Right Agenda" .

Intelligence Report . Southern Poverty Law Center.

Archived from the original on February 12, 2020.

^ Courtney-Guy, Sam (August 10, 2017).

"How white nationalism in America is changing under Donald Trump" .

The World Weekly . Archived from the original on July 9, 2018.

^ Southern Poverty Law Center: Occidental Quarterly Linked July 7, 2013 ^ Taylor, Tony (2008).

Denial:History Betrayed . Melbourne University Press. p. 275.

ISBN 978-0522854824 .

^ Bacon, Perry Jr. (November 29, 2007).

"Foes Use Obama's Muslim Ties to Fuel Rumors About Him" .

The Washington Post .

^ a b "Anatomy of an anonymous political smear" .

International Herald Tribune . January 29, 2007 . Retrieved February 18, 2008 .

^ "CNN debunks false report about Obama" .

CNN . January 22, 2007 . Retrieved January 26, 2007 .

^ Higgins, Andrew (August 19, 2010).

"Indonesia Catholic School Promotes Ties to Obama" .

CBS News . Archived from the original on November 16, 2010 . Retrieved August 19, 2010 .

^ Barker, Kim (March 25, 2007).

"Obama madrassa myth debunked" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved September 4, 2010 .

^ "Obama attended an Indonesian public school" .

PolitiFact.com . December 20, 2007 . Retrieved March 8, 2010 .

^ Pickler, Nedra (January 24, 2007).

"Obama challenges allegation about Islamic school" .

The San Diego Union-Tribune . Archived from the original on May 17, 2008 . Retrieved February 10, 2008 .

^ * Swan, Betsy (December 15, 2015).

"Cruz's Cozy Ties To DC's Most Prominent, Paranoid Islamophobe" .

The Daily Beast .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2020 . Retrieved May 22, 2018 .

Bump, Philip (November 16, 2016).

"Meet Frank Gaffney, the anti-Muslim gadfly reportedly advising Donald Trump's transition team" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on July 23, 2016 . Retrieved May 22, 2018 .

Clifton, Eli (December 8, 2015).

"Meet Donald Trump's Islamophobia Expert" .

Foreign Policy .

Archived from the original on March 15, 2016 . Retrieved May 22, 2018 .

Schlesinger, Robert (June 9, 2009).

"The Nutty 'Obama Is a Muslim' Charge Is Back (Now With a Hitler Comparison!)" .

U.S. News & World Report .

Archived from the original on July 19, 2014.

Nyhan, Brendan (August 24, 2010).

"Pundits Blame the Victims on Obama Muslim Myth" .

The Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on September 14, 2013.

^ a b LaCapria, Kim (October 28, 2016).

"FALSE: Obama Golf Outing with Tiger Woods Cost Nearly $4 Million" .

Snopes .

Archived from the original on April 29, 2020 . Retrieved May 22, 2018 .

^ Holland, Steve (February 17, 2013). "In A First, Obama Plays Golf With Tiger Woods".

Reuters .

^ Irwin, Neil (October 31, 2013). "Congratulations, America! Your Deficit Fell 37 Percent In 2013".

The Washington Post .

^ Calmes, Jackie (February 17, 2013). "Back In A Swing State, This Time For Sport".

The New York Times .

^ Government Accountability Office (October 2016).

"Presidential Travel: Estimated Costs for a Specific Presidential Trip to Illinois and Florida" . GAO-17-24. United States Congress . Retrieved May 19, 2021 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Clifton, Eli (December 8, 2015).

"Meet Donald Trump's Islamophobia Expert" .

Foreign Policy .

Archived from the original on March 15, 2016 . Retrieved December 25, 2018 .

^ Beinart, Peter (March 19, 2017).

"Frank Gaffney's Campaign to Denationalize American Muslims" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on March 19, 2017 . Retrieved December 25, 2018 .

^ Esposito, John L.

(2010).

"The Many Faces of Islam and Muslims" .

The Future of Islam . Oxford University Press. p. 19.

ISBN 9780199975778 .

LCCN 2009018732 .

^ Bail, Christopher A. (2015).

Terrified: How Anti-Muslim Fringe Organizations Became Mainstream . Princeton University Press. pp.

49– 51, 99.

ISBN 9780691159423 .

LCCN 2014947502 .

^ Terkel, Amanda (August 1, 2012).

"Frank Gaffney Plotting To Take Down Grover Norquist With Muslim Brotherhood Accusations" .

The Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on August 21, 2014 . Retrieved December 25, 2018 .

^ Swan, Betsy (December 15, 2015).

"Cruz's Cozy Ties To DC's Most Prominent, Paranoid Islamophobe" .

The Daily Beast .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2020 . Retrieved December 25, 2018 .

^ Stuster, J. Dana (December 14, 2015).

"The paranoid style in Islamophobic politics" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on February 25, 2017 . Retrieved December 29, 2018 .

^ Stableford, Dylan (December 15, 2016).

"Monica Crowley, latest addition to Trump's national security team, believes in fighting Islam 'the way we fought the Nazis' " .

Yahoo! News .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2017 . Retrieved December 29, 2018 .

^ Winston, Kimberly (June 20, 2016).

"Report says list of 'Islamophobic groups' reaches new high" .

Deseret News .

Religion News Service . Archived from the original on April 18, 2020 . Retrieved December 25, 2018 .

^ Nafie, Ibrahim (November 12–18, 1998).

"The same old game" .

Al-Ahram . No. 403. Archived from the original on February 15, 2009.

^ "Times Says Goodbye To Pruden, Coombs" .

Adweek . January 28, 2008.

Archived from the original on December 9, 2018.

^ Cathy Gaynor at The Washington Times ^ Kurtz, Howard (November 17, 2009).

"Washington Times editor Richard Miniter files discrimination claim" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 26, 2017 . Retrieved September 16, 2017 .

^ "Charles Hurt rejoins The Washington Times as new opinion editor" .

The Washington Times . December 18, 2016.

Archived from the original on May 5, 2017 . Retrieved May 3, 2017 .

^ Washington Times Commentary, retrieved March 9, 2024 ^ "Sen. Rand Paul: Trust but verify on immigration reform" .

The Washington Times . February 8, 2013.

Archived from the original on June 25, 2013 . Retrieved July 1, 2013 .

^ "Washington Times ends Sen. Rand Paul column amid plagiarism allegations" .

The Washington Times . November 5, 2013.

Archived from the original on November 6, 2013 . Retrieved November 5, 2013 .

^ "Closing time at Cafe Clinton?" .

The Washington Times . April 11, 2008. Archived from the original on April 11, 2008 . Retrieved June 21, 2016 .

^ "About The Washington Times (Washington [D.C.]) 1902–1939" .

Chronicling America . Washington, D.C.: Library of Congress.

Archived from the original on January 30, 2016.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to The Washington Times .

Official website v t e Current White House James S. Brady Press Briefing Room seating chart # Podium 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 NBC News The Wall Street Journal Politico CNBC / MSNBC / Telemundo Bloomberg Government Washington Examiner The Boston Globe / Washington Blade Fox News CBS News Radio PBS / AP Radio Voice of America Time Gray TV / Scripps News EWTN / The Daily Caller CBS News Bloomberg News McClatchy New York Post / TheGrio The Washington Times CBN / Salem Radio Hearst Television Associated Press NPR Foreign pool The Hill Regional media Newsmax Spectrum News ABC News The Washington Post Agence France-Presse Fox News Radio / Fox Business Roll Call / The Christian Science Monitor Al Jazeera NewsNation Reuters The New York Times Los Angeles Times AURN / Univision RealClearPolitics The Daily Beast / The Independent BBC News / Newsweek CNN USA Today ABC News Radio Daily Mail National Journal HuffPost Financial Times / The Guardian White House Correspondents' Association v t e Unification Church Doctrines and ceremonies Divine Principle Blessing ceremony of the Unification Church Unification Church funeral Organizations and projects Chungnam Ilhwa Chunma Clube Atlético Sorocaba Clube Esportivo Nova Esperança Family Peace Association Global Peace Foundation Inchon Insight magazine International Conference on the Unity of the Sciences Little Angels Children's Folk Ballet of Korea Manhattan Center News World Communications Nicaragua Was Our Home Peace Cup Pyeonghwa Motors Rod of Iron Ministries Segye Ilbo Seongnam Ilhwa Chunma Sun Myung Moon University Tongil Group Unification Church of the United States World Scripture Wyndham New Yorker Hotel Unification Theological Seminary United Press International Universal Ballet The Washington Times History and controversy Criticism of Unification Church in Japan Assassination of Shinzo Abe "Crazy for God" " Heavenly deception " " Love bombing " Million Family March " Moonie (nickname) " Subcommittee on International Organizations of the Committee on International Relations United States of America v. Sun Myung Moon The Unification Church and politics Books As a Peace-Loving Global Citizen Doomsday Cult: A Study of Conversion, Proselytization, and Maintenance of Faith Gifts of Deceit Inquisition: The Persecution and Prosecution of the Reverend Sun Myung Moon The Making of a Moonie Sun Myung Moon and the Unification Church Lists People Related organizations Related topics Conservatism in South Korea Republican Party (United States of America) Korean reunification NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐cjppk
Cached time: 20250817043652
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.737 seconds
Real time usage: 1.960 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11875/1000000
Revision size: 124713/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 461287/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7180/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 657217/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.086/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10221765/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1601.940      1 -total
 65.24% 1045.115      1 Template:Reflist
 29.84%  478.091     97 Template:Cite_news
 13.33%  213.484     32 Template:Cite_web
  8.66%  138.710     21 Template:Cite_book
  6.91%  110.614      1 Template:Conservatism_US
  6.66%  106.682      1 Template:Infobox_newspaper
  6.44%  103.143      1 Template:Infobox
  4.04%   64.733      1 Template:Short_description
  3.08%   49.386      1 Template:White_House_James_S._Brady_Press_Briefing_Room_Seating_Chart Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:31399:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043652 and revision id 1305375881. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Washington_Times&oldid=1305375881 " Categories : 1982 establishments in Washington, D.C.

Climate change denial Conservative media in the United States National newspapers published in the United States Newspapers established in 1982 Newspapers published in Washington, D.C.

Podcasting companies Unification Church affiliated organizations Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template other archives Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2020 CS1: long volume value CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from September 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from September 2023 Incomplete literature lists Incomplete lists from October 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 18:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Washington Times 29 languages Add topic

