Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 2.1 Experimental method 2.2 Motion 2.3 Space and time 2.4 Psychology 3 Works 4 Legacy 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Sources 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Ibn Malka al-Baghdadi 19 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Español فارسی Français हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית Қазақша مصرى پنجابی Polski Português Русский کوردی Тоҷикӣ Türkçe اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Hibat Allah Abu'l-Barakat al-Baghdaadi ) 12th century Iraqi Islamic philosopher, physicist and physician Not to be confused with Judah ben Nissim ibn Malkah (fl c. 1260) .

Abu'l-Barakāt Hibat Allah ibn Malkā al-Baghdādī Title Awḥad al-Zamān (Unique One of his Time) Personal life Born c. 1080 CE Balad (near Mosul , present-day Iraq) Died 1164 or 1165 CE Baghdad , present-day Iraq Era Islamic Golden Age Region Islamic civilization Main interest(s) Islamic philosophy , medicine Notable idea(s) Physics of motion , concept of time Religious life Religion Islam Creed Alarsttalih Muslim leader Influenced by Ibn Sina Abu’l Hasan Sa’id ibn Hibat Allah (teacher) Influenced Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Samauʼal Al-Maghribī Isaac son of Abraham Ibn Ezra Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi Ibn Kammuna Jean Buridan Albert of Saxony Abu'l-Barakāt Hibat Allah ibn Malkā al-Baghdādī ( Arabic : أبو البركات هبة الله بن ملكا البغدادي ; c. 1080 – 1164 or 1165 CE) was an Islamic philosopher , physician and physicist of Jewish descent from Baghdad, Iraq . Abu'l-Barakāt, an older contemporary of Maimonides , was originally known by his Hebrew birth name Baruch ben Malka and was given the name of Nathanel by his pupil Isaac ben Ezra before his conversion from Judaism to Islam later in his life.

[ 1 ] His writings include the anti-Aristotelian philosophical work Kitāb al-Muʿtabar ("The Book of What Has Been Established by Personal Reflection"); a philosophical commentary on the Kohelet ; and the treatise "On the Reason Why the Stars Are Visible at Night and Hidden in Daytime". Abu'l-Barakāt was an Aristotelian philosopher who in many respects followed Ibn Sina , but also developed his own ideas.

[ 2 ] He proposed an explanation of the acceleration of falling bodies by the accumulation of successive increments of power with successive increments of velocity.

His thought influenced the Illuminationist school of classical Islamic philosophy , the medieval Jewish philosopher Ibn Kammuna , [ 3 ] and the medieval Christian philosophers Jean Buridan and Albert of Saxony .

[ 4 ] Life [ edit ] Abu'l-Barakāt, famed as Awḥad al-Zamān (Unique One of his Time), was born in Balad, a town on the Tigris above Mosul in modern-day Iraq. As a renowned physician, he served at the courts of the caliphs of Baghdad and the Seljuk sultans.

[ 5 ] He converted to Islam later in his life. Abu'l Barakat does not refer to his conversion in his writings, and the historical sources give contradictory episodes of his conversion. According to the various reports, he converted either out of "wounded pride", fear of the personal consequences of the death of Sultan Mahmud 's wife while under his care as a physician or fear of execution when he was taken prisoner in a battle between the armies of the caliph and that of the sultan. Ayala Eliyahu argues that the conversion was "probably motivated by convenience reasons".

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Isaac, the son of the Abraham Ibn Ezra and the son-in-law of Judah Halevi , [ 9 ] was one of his pupils, [ 6 ] to whom Abu'l-Barakāt, Jewish at the time, dictated a long philosophical commentary on Ecclesiastes , written in Arabic using the Hebrew alphabet . Isaac wrote a poem in his honour as introduction to this work.

[ 5 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Experimental method [ edit ] Al-Baghdadi described an early scientific method emphasizing repeated experimentation , influenced by Ibn Sina , as follows: [ 10 ] "Because of the frequency of the experience, these judgements may be regarded as certain, even without our knowing the reason [for the phenomenon]. For there is certain knowledge that the effect in question is not due to chance. It must accordingly be supposed that it is due to nature or to some modality thereof. Thus the cause qua cause, though not its species or mode of operation, is known. For experimental science is also constituted by a knowledge of the cause and by an induction based on all the data of sensation; whereby a general science is reached. ... But in the cases in which an experiment has not been completed, because of its not having been repeated in such a way that the persons, the time and the circumstances varied in everything that did not cause the determining cause, whereas this cause [remained invariable], the experiment does not prove certain knowledge, but only probably opinion." Motion [ edit ] Al-Baghdadi was a follower of the scientific and philosophical teachings of Ibn Sina . According to Alistair Cameron Crombie , al-Baghdadi proposed an explanation of the acceleration of falling bodies by the accumulation of successive increments of power with successive increments of velocity.

[ 11 ] According to Shlomo Pines , al-Baghdadi's theory of motion was thus the oldest negation of Aristotle 's fundamental dynamic law [namely, that a constant force produces a uniform motion], [and is thus an] anticipation in a vague fashion of the fundamental law of classical mechanics [namely, that a force applied continuously produces acceleration].

[ 12 ] Al-Baghdadi's theory of motion distinguished between velocity and acceleration and showed that force is proportional to acceleration rather than velocity.

[ 4 ] [ 13 ] Abu'l-Barakat also developed Philoponus' theory of impetus, stating that the mover imparts a violent inclination ( mayl qasri ) on the moved and that this diminishes as the moving object distances itself from the mover.

[ 4 ] Al-Baghdadi also suggested that motion is relative, writing that "there is motion only if the relative positions of the bodies in question change." He also stated that "each type of body has a characteristic velocity that reaches its maximum when its motion encounters no resistance ." [ 3 ] Space and time [ edit ] Al-Baghdadi criticized Aristotle's concept of time as "the measure of motion" and instead redefines the concept with his own definition of time as "the measure of being", thus distinguishing between space and time, and reclassifying time as a metaphysical concept rather than a physical one. The scholar Y.

Tzvi Langermann writes: [ 3 ] Dissatisfied with the regnant approach, which treated time as an accident of the cosmos, al-Baghdadi drew the conclusion that time is an entity whose conception ( ma'qul al-zaman ) is a priori and almost as general as that of being, encompassing the sensible and the non-sensible, that which moves and that which is at rest. Our idea of time results not from abstraction, stripping accidents from perceived objects, but from a mental representation based on an innate idea. Al-Baghdadi stops short of offering a precise definition of time, stating only that 'were it to be said that time is the measure of being ( miqdar al-wujud ), that would be better than saying [as Aristotle does] that it is the measure of motion'. His reclassification of time as a subject for metaphysics rather than for physics represents a major conceptual shift, not a mere formalistic correction. It also breaks the traditional linkage between time and space. Concerning space, al-Baghdadi held unconventional views as well, but he did not remove its investigation from the domain of physics.

In his view, there is just one time which is similar for all beings, including God. Abu'l-Barakāt also regarded space as three-dimensional and infinite.

[ 14 ] Psychology [ edit ] He upheld the unity of the soul, denying that there is a distinction between it and the intellect.

[ 14 ] For him, the soul's awareness of itself is the definitive proof that the soul is independent of the body and will not perish with it.

[ 2 ] On his contributions to Islamic psychology , Langermann writes: [ 3 ] Al-Baghdadi's most significant departure in psychology concerns human self-awareness. Ibn Sina had raised the issue of our consciousness of our own psychic activities, but he had not fully pursued the implications for Aristotelian psychology of his approach. Al-Baghdadi took the matter much further, dispensing with the traditional psychological faculties and pressing his investigations in the direction of what we would call the unconscious.

Works [ edit ] He wrote a critique of Aristotelian philosophy and Aristotelian physics entitled Kitab al-Mu'tabar (the title may be translated as "The Book of What Has Been Established by Personal Reflection"). According to Abu'l-Barakāt, Kitāb al-Muʿtabar consists in the main of critical remarks jotted down by him over the years while reading philosophical text, and published at the insistence of his friends, in the form of a philosophical work. The work "presented a serious philosophical alternative to, and criticism of, Ibn Sina ".

[ 15 ] He also developed concepts which resemble several modern theories in physics .

[ 3 ] Abu'l-Barakāt also wrote a short treatise on the intellect , Kitāb Ṣaḥiḥ adillat al-naql fī māhiyyat al-ʻaql ( صحيح أدلة النقل في ماهية العقل ), which has been edited by Ahmad El-Tayeb .

[ 16 ] All that we possess in the way of medical writing by Abu'l-Barakāt are a few prescriptions for remedies. These remain in manuscript and are as yet unstudied.

[ 17 ] Legacy [ edit ] Abu'l-Barakāt's thought had an influence on some Islamic philosophers but little on Jewish thought. His works were not translated into Hebrew, [ 14 ] and he is seldom cited in Jewish philosophy, probably because of his conversion to Islam.

[ 7 ] Ibn Taymiyyah heavily ripped off the arguments of Ibn Malka and augmented them by propositions later made by Maimonides .

[ 18 ] The famous theologian and philosopher Fakhr al-Din al-Razi was one of Abu'l-Barakāt's eminent disciples. The influence of Al-Baghdadi's views appears especially in Al-Razi's chief work Al-Mabāḥith al-Mashriqiyyah ( Oriental Discourses ). Abu'l-Barakāt influenced certain conceptions of Suhrawardi .

[ 19 ] See also [ edit ] Physics in medieval Islam Ibn Bajjah Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Shahab al-Din Suhrawardi References [ edit ] ^ Norman A. Stillman; Shlomo Pines. "Abū ʾl-Barakāt al-Baghdādī." Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World. Executive Editor Norman A. Stillman. Brill Online, 2013 ^ a b Stroumsa, Sarah; A. Baumgarten; et al. (1998). "Twelfth Century Concepts of Soul and Body: The Maimonidean Controversy in Baghdad".

Self, Soul and Body in Religious Experience (PDF) . Brill. p. 318.

^ a b c d e Langermann, Y. Tzvi (1998), "al-Baghdadi, Abu 'l-Barakat (fl. c.1200-50)", Islamic Philosophy , Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy , archived from the original on 28 February 2008 , retrieved 2008-02-03 ^ a b c Gutman, Oliver (2003), Pseudo-Avicenna, Liber Celi Et Mundi: A Critical Edition , Brill Publishers , p. 193, ISBN 90-04-13228-7 ^ a b Sirat 1996 , p. 131.

^ a b Kraemer, Joel L. (2010).

Maimonides: The Life and World of One of Civilization's Greatest Minds . Random House of Canada. p. 485.

ISBN 978-0-385-51200-8 .

^ a b Sirat 1996 , p. 132.

^ Eliyahu, Ayala.

"Taking Turns: New Perspectives on Jews & Conversion" . Penn Libraries . Retrieved 27 September 2011 .

^ a b Lewis, Bernard (2002).

Jews of Islam . Greenwood Publishing Group. pp.

98– 99.

ISBN 1-4008-1023-X .

^ Pines, Shlomo (1986), Studies in Arabic versions of Greek texts and in mediaeval science , vol. 2, Brill Publishers , p. 339, ISBN 965-223-626-8 ^ Crombie, Alistair Cameron , Augustine to Galileo 2 , p. 67.

^ Pines, Shlomo (1970). "Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī, Hibat Allah".

Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Vol. 1. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. pp.

26– 28.

ISBN 0-684-10114-9 .

( cf.

Abel B. Franco (October 2003). "Avempace, Projectile Motion, and Impetus Theory", Journal of the History of Ideas 64 (4), p. 521-546 [528].) ^ Pines, Shlomo (1986), Studies in Arabic versions of Greek texts and in mediaeval science , vol. 2, Brill Publishers , p. 203, ISBN 965-223-626-8 ^ a b c Marenbon, John (2003).

Medieval philosophy (Reprint ed.). London: Routledge. p. 76.

ISBN 0-415-30875-5 .

^ Shihadeh, Ayman (1 March 2005).

"From al-Ghazali to al-Razi: 6th/12th Century Developments in Muslim Philosophical Theology" .

Arabic Sciences and Philosophy .

15 (1): 141– 179.

doi : 10.1017/S0957423905000159 .

^ Al-Tayyib, Aḥmad (1980). "Un traité d'Abū l-Barakāt al-Baġdādī sur l'intellect".

Annales Islamologiques (in French) (16): 127– 147.

doi : 10.3406/anisl.1980.1021 .

^ Selin, Helaine , ed. (1997).

Encyclopaedia of the history of science, technology, and medicine in non-western cultures . Springer. p. 7.

ISBN 0-7923-4066-3 .

^ al‑Kawthari, Zahid (1947).

من عبر التاريخ في الكيد للإسلام (Examples from History in the Conspiracy Against Islam) . pp.

11– 13.

وقد وسع الشيخ الحراني رأي إبن ملكا في العلم والإرادة إلى أن جعله يشمل الصور والحرف...

^ Frank, Daniel H.; Leaman, Oliver (1997).

History of Jewish philosophy . Routledge. p.

78 .

ISBN 0-415-08064-9 .

Sources [ edit ] Marcotte, Roxanne D. (2004) La conversion tardive d'un philosophe: Abu al-Barakat al-Baghdidi (mort vers 545/1150) sur "L'Intellect et sa quiddite" (al-'Aql wa mahiyyatu-hu). Documenti e studi sulla tradizione filosofica medievale, 15 1: 201–226.

Pavlov, Moshe (2003).

Abu'l-Barakat al-Baghdadi : an introduction to his metaphysics in the conception of existent being and its nexus to the notion of God . Jerusalem. pp. (see F. Griffel's review https://yale.academia.edu/FrankGriffel/Book-Reviews ).

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Pines, Shlomo (1979).

Studies in Abu'l-Barakāt Al-Baghdādī : physics and metaphysics . Jerusalem: Magnes Press.

ISBN 965-223-332-3 .

Pines, Shlomo (1955).

Nouvelles études sur Awḥad al-Zamân Abu-l-Barakât al-Baghdâdî (in French). Paris: Durlacher.

Sirat, Colette (1996). "Judah Halevi and Abu-l-Barakāt".

A History of Jewish Philosophy in the Middle Ages (Reprinted ed.).

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 0-521-39727-8 .

Further reading [ edit ] Abū Rayyān, Muḥammad ʻAlī (1973). "Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī".

Tārīkh al-fikr al-falsafī fī al-Islām (تاريخ الفكر الفلسفي في الاسلام) (in Arabic). Alexandria: Dār al-Jāmiʻāt al-Miṣrīyah.

Abū Saʻdah, Muḥammad (1993).

Al-Wujūd wa-al-khulūd fī falsafat Abī al-Barakāt al-Baghdādī (الوجود والخلود في فلسفة أبي البركات البغدادي) (in Arabic). Cairo.

ISBN 977-00-5604-9 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Al-Baghdadi, Abu al-Barakat (1939). S. Yaltkaya (ed.).

Al-Mu'tabar fi al-Hikmah (3 vols) (in Arabic). Haydarabad: Jam‘iyyat Da’irat al-Ma‘arif al-‘Uthmaniyya.

Hasan, Sabri 'Uthman Muhammad (1982).

الفلسفة الطبيعية والالهية عند ابى البركات البغدادى (in Arabic). Cairo.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Huwaydī, Yaḥyá.

نقد أبي البركات البغدادي لنظرية (ابن سينا في النفس والعقل) .

Luṭf, Sāmī Naṣr (1977). "Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī".

Namādhij min falsafat al-Islāmīyīn (نماذج من فلسفة الإسلاميين) (in Arabic). Cairo: Maktabat Saʻīd Raʼfat.

Salim, Ahmad ibn Ahmad (2005).

مشكلة قدم العالم وحدوثة عند ابى البركات البغدادى وفخر الدين الرازى (in Arabic). Asyut, Egypt: Assiut University.

Sharaf, Muḥammad Jalāl Abū al-Futūḥ (1972).

al-Madhhab al-ishrāqī bayna al-falsafah wa-al-dīn fī al-fikr al-Islāmī (المذهب الاشراقي بين الفلسفة والدين في الفكر الاسلامي) (in Arabic). Egypt: Dār al-Maʻārif.

Sīdbī, Jamāl Rajab (1996).

Abū al-Barakāt al-Baghdādī wa-falsafatuhu al-Ilāhīyah : dirāsah li-mawqifihi al-naqdī min falsafat Ibn Sīnā (أبو البركات البغدادي وفلسفته الإلهية : دراسة لموقفه النقدي من فلسفة ابن سينا) (in Arabic). Cairo: Maktabat Wahbah.

Ṭayyib, Aḥmad (2004).

Al-Jānib al-naqdī fī falsafat Abī al-Barakāt al-Baghdādī (الجانب النقدي في فلسفة أبي البركات البغدادي) (in Arabic). Cairo: Dār al-Shurūq.

External links [ edit ] ABU’L-BARAKĀT BAḠDĀDĪ entry in Encyclopædia Iranica .

Abu ‘l-Barakat al-Baghdadi: Outline of a Non-Aristotelian Natural Philosophy .

"Abu’l-Barakāt Al-Baghdādī, Hibat Allah." Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography. 2008. Retrieved October 7, 2011 from Encyclopedia.com Ibn Sina and Abu al-Barakat al-Baghdadi on the origination of the soul and the invalidation of its transmigration .

v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah v t e Medieval philosophers Christian Early " Church Fathers " Augustine of Hippo Boethius Cassiodorus Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Isidore of Seville John Scotus Eriugena Alcuin 11–12th century " Scholasticism " Anselm of Canterbury Peter Abelard Anselm of Laon Hugh of Saint Victor Richard of Saint Victor Roscelin Peter Lombard Alexander of Hales Bernard of Chartres Dominicus Gundissalinus Gilbert de la Porrée Alain de Lille 13–14th century Robert Grosseteste Michael Scot Albertus Magnus Henry of Ghent Roger Bacon Bonaventure Thomas Aquinas Vitello John Peckham Ramon Llull Siger of Brabant Boetius of Dacia Petrus Peregrinus de Maricourt Meister Eckhart Giles of Rome Godfrey of Fontaines Duns Scotus Durandus Petrus Aureolus William of Ockham Late Jean Buridan Marsilius of Inghen Nicole Oresme Albert of Saxony Francesc Eiximenis Nicholas of Cusa Vincent Ferrer Paul of Venice Lambertus de Monte John Hennon Jewish Medieval Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Saadia Gaon Solomon ibn Gabirol Judah Halevi Abraham ibn Daud Maimonides Nachmanides Gersonides Hasdai Crescas Joseph Albo Islamic Early Jabir ibn Hayyan (Geber) al-Nazzam Al-Kindi (Alkindus) Abu Bakr al-Razi (Rhazes) Ikhwan al-Safa' (Brethren of Purity) Matta ibn Yunus Al-Farabi (Alpharabius) Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani Ibn Masarra Abd al-Jabbar Al-Amiri Abu Sulayman al-Sijistani Miskawayh Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) al-Biruni al-Kirmani High Ibn Sina (Avicenna) Ibn Hazm Al-Ghazali (Algazel) Abu l-Barakat al-Baghdadi Ibn Bajjah (Avempace) Ayn al-Quzat Hamadani Ibn Tufayl Ibn Rushd (Averroes) Late Ibn Sab'in Shahab al-Din Yahya ibn Habash Suhrawardi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Rashid al-Din Ibn Arabi al-Qazwini Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Athir al-Din al-Abhari Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Ibn al-Nafis Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Ibn Taymiyya Ibn Khaldun See also Renaissance philosophy v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States Czech Republic Netherlands Sweden Israel Academics CiNii zbMATH People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐847s2
Cached time: 20250817062729
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.813 seconds
Real time usage: 0.991 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4722/1000000
Revision size: 21486/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 192841/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6537/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 122057/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.534/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20883711/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  843.561      1 -total
 24.23%  204.394      1 Template:Reflist
 24.16%  203.804     21 Template:Cite_book
 14.72%  124.147      1 Template:Langx
 12.25%  103.310      1 Template:Infobox_religious_biography
 11.23%   94.733      1 Template:Islamic_philosophy
 10.92%   92.094      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  9.78%   82.526      1 Template:Infobox
  8.48%   71.496      1 Template:Short_description
  7.01%   59.133      8 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1253591:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817062729 and revision id 1300051870. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ibn_Malka_al-Baghdadi&oldid=1300051870 " Categories : 1080s births 1160s deaths Medieval Islamic philosophers Medieval Jewish philosophers Natural philosophers Aristotelian philosophers 12th-century philosophers Physicians from the Abbasid Caliphate Medieval Jewish physicians Jews from the Abbasid Caliphate 12th-century physicians Court physicians Converts to Islam from Judaism People from Baghdad 12th-century people from the Abbasid Caliphate Scholars from the Seljuk Empire 12th-century Jews from the Abbasid Caliphate Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) CS1 uses Arabic-language script (ar) This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 01:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ibn Malka al-Baghdadi 19 languages Add topic

