Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mass organizations 2 Naming 3 Membership 4 Views 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Communist party 51 languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Galego 贛語 गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili Lietuvių Македонски मराठी مصرى 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political party that promotes communist philosophy and values This article is about an analysis of communist parties. For a list of parties using this name, see Communist Party (disambiguation) . For a list of communist parties of the past and present, see List of communist parties .

"Marxist–Leninist party" redirects here. For a list of parties using this name, see Marxist–Leninist Party (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Communist parties Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Egypt Eswatini Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Libya Madagascar Namibia Morocco Réunion Senegal South Africa EFF SACP South Sudan Sudan Togo Tunisia Americas Argentina PCA PCCE PCRA Bolivia Brazil PCdoB PCB PCR Canada CPC CPC-ML Chile PCCh PC(AP) Colombia PCC PC de C (M–L) Cuba Dominican Republic Ecuador PCE PCMLE Mexico PC PPS PPSM PCMML Panama MLN-29 PPP Paraguay Peru PCP PCP-SL MPCP PCdelP–PR Uruguay United States ACP CPUSA FRSO FSP PSL PLP RCPUSA SEP SL/US WWP WSPUS Venezuela Asia Bahrain Bangladesh CPB WPB RWPB Bhutan Burma China India CPI CPI(M) CPI-ML(L) CPI(Maoist) SUCI(C) Iran CPI Tudeh Toufan Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Nepal CPN (UML) CPN (MC) CPN (US) NWPP North Korea Pakistan Palestine Philippines CPP PKP-1930 Sri Lanka CPSL JVP FLSP Syria SCP (Bakdash) SCP (Unified) Tajikistan Vietnam Former parties Cambodia KPRP CPK Indonesia Korea Malaya and Singapore CPM CPM/ML CPM/RF Saudi Arabia Sarawak Taiwan Thailand Europe Albania Armenia Austria KPÖ PdA Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium KP PC Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria KPB SKB Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark DKP KP APK Estonia Finland France PCF PCOF PRCF PCRF Georgia Germany KPD DKP MLPD Greece ΚΚΕ ΚΟΕ Anasintaxi Hungary Munkáspárt Munkáspárt 2006 Ireland CPI WPI Italy PC PRC Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal PCP PCTP Romania Russia KR CPRF PDP RCWP-CPSU Serbia Slovakia Spain PCE FO CC PCPE PCE (M–L) PCTE Sweden KP SKP Switzerland Communist Party PdA Turkey DHKP/C EMEP HTKP KDH/L KKP TKP MKP MLKP TDKP TKEP TKEP/L TKIP TKP/ML Ukraine KPU SKU United Kingdom CPB CPB-ML CPGB-ML CPGB-PCC CPS NCPB RCG RCP RCPB-ML Former parties Albania Czechoslovakia East Germany Italy Netherlands Poland Romania San Marino Soviet Union Turkey United Kingdom West Germany Yugoslavia Oceania Australia CPA CPA(ML) Socialist Alliance Socialist Alternative Victorian Socialists New Zealand CL OMU SPA Former parties Australia Communist Alliance CPA DSP RSP Victorian Socialist Party New Zealand CPNZ SUP CL International organizations IMCWP Comintern Cominform INITIATIVE ICS ILPS ICP FI Trotskyist internationals Related topics Central committee Communism history Criticism of rule Democratic centralism General Secretary List of communist parties Politburo Secretariat Communism portal v t e Part of a series on Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related  topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e A communist party is a political party that seeks to realize the socio-economic goals of communism . The term "communist party" was popularized by the title of The Manifesto of the Communist Party (1848) by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels . As a vanguard party , the communist party guides the political education and development of the working class (proletariat). As a ruling party, the communist party exercises power through the dictatorship of the proletariat .

Vladimir Lenin developed the idea of the communist party as the revolutionary vanguard, when the socialist movement in Imperial Russia was divided into ideologically opposed factions, the Bolshevik faction ("of the majority") and the Menshevik faction ("of the minority"). To be politically effective, Lenin proposed a small vanguard party managed with democratic centralism which allowed the centralized command of a disciplined cadre of professional revolutionaries . Once a policy was agreed upon, realizing political goals required every Bolshevik's total commitment to the agreed-upon policy.

In contrast, the Menshevik faction, which initially included Leon Trotsky , emphasized that the party should not neglect the importance of mass populations in realizing a communist revolution . In the course of the revolution, the Bolshevik party which became the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) assumed government power in Russia after the October Revolution in 1917. With the creation of the Communist International (Comintern) in 1919, the concept of communist party leadership was adopted by many revolutionary parties, worldwide. In an effort to standardize the international communist movement ideologically and maintain central control of the member parties, the Comintern required that its members use the term "communist party" in their names.

Under the leadership of the CPSU, the interpretations of orthodox Marxism were applied to Russia and led to the emergence of Leninist and Marxist–Leninist political parties throughout the world. After the death of Lenin, the Comintern's official interpretation of Leninism was the book Foundations of Leninism (1924) by Joseph Stalin .

Mass organizations [ edit ] See also: Communist front and Front organization As the membership of a communist party was to be limited to 
active cadres in Lenin's theory, there was a need for networks of separate organizations to mobilize mass support for the party. Typically, communist parties built up various front organizations whose membership was often open to non-communists. In many countries, the single most important front organization of the communist parties was its youth wing . During the time of the Communist International , the youth leagues were explicit communist organizations, using the name ' Young Communist League '. Later the youth league concept was broadened in many countries, and names like 'Democratic Youth League' were adopted.

Some trade unions and students', women's, peasants', and cultural organizations have been connected to communist parties. Traditionally, these mass organizations were often politically subordinated to the political leadership of the party. After the fall of communist party regimes in the 1990s, mass organizations sometimes outlived their communist party founders.

A propaganda poster of the Communist Party of Vietnam in Hanoi At the international level, the Communist International organized various international front organizations (linking national mass organizations with each other), such as the Young Communist International , Profintern , Krestintern , International Red Aid , Sportintern , etc. Many of these organizations were disbanded after the dissolution of the Communist International. After the Second World War new international coordination bodies were created, such as the World Federation of Democratic Youth , International Union of Students , World Federation of Trade Unions , Women's International Democratic Federation and the World Peace Council . The Soviet Union unified many of the Comintern's original goals in the Eastern Bloc under the aegis of a new organization, the Cominform .

Historically, in countries where communist parties were struggling to attain state power, the formation of wartime alliances with non-communist parties and wartime groups was enacted (such as the National Liberation Front of Albania ). Upon attaining state power these Fronts were often transformed into nominal (and usually electoral) "National" or "Fatherland" Fronts in which non-communist parties and organizations were given token representation (a practice known as Blockpartei ), the most popular examples of these being the National Front of East Germany (as a historical example) and the North Korean Reunification Front (as a modern-day example). Other times the formation of such Fronts was undertaken without the participation of other parties, such as the Socialist Alliance of Working People of Yugoslavia and the National Front of Afghanistan , though the purpose was the same: to promote the communist party line to generally non-communist audiences and to mobilize them to carry out tasks within the country under the aegis of the Front.

[ citation needed ] Recent scholarship has developed the comparative political study of global communist parties by examining similarities and differences across historical geographies. In particular, the rise of revolutionary parties, their spread internationally, the appearance of charismatic revolutionary leaders and their ultimate demise during the decline and fall of communist parties worldwide have all been the subject of investigation.

[ 1 ] Naming [ edit ] A uniform naming scheme for communist parties was adopted by the Communist International. All parties were required to use the name 'Communist Party of ( name of the country )', resulting in separate communist parties in some countries operating using (largely) homonymous party names (e.g.

in India ). Today, there are a few cases where the original sections of the Communist International have retained those names. But throughout the twentieth century, many parties changed their names. For example, following their ascension to power, the Bolshevik Party changed their name to the All-Russian Communist Party.

[ citation needed ] Causes for these shifts in naming were either moves to avoid state repression or as measures to generate greater acceptance by local populations.

An important example of the latter was the renaming of many East European communist parties after the Second World War, sometimes as a result of mergers with the local social democratic and democratic socialist parties. New names in the post-war era included " Socialist Party ", " Socialist Unity Party ", " People's (or Popular) Party ", " Workers' Party " and " Party of Labour ".

The naming conventions of communist parties became more diverse as the international communist movement was fragmented due to the Sino-Soviet split in the 1960s. Those who sided with China and Albania in their criticism of the Soviet leadership, often added words like 'Revolutionary' or ' Marxist–Leninist ' to distinguish themselves from the pro-Soviet parties.

Membership [ edit ] In 1985, approximately 38 percent of the world's population lived under "communist" governments (1.67 billion out of 4.4 billion). The CPSU's International Department officially recognized 95 ruling and nonruling communist parties. Overall, if one includes the 107 parties with significant memberships, there were approximately 82 million communist party members worldwide.

[ 2 ] Given its worldwide representation, the communist party may be counted as the principal challenger to the influence of liberal-democratic , catch-all parties in the twentieth century.

[ 3 ] Following the collapse of the Eastern Bloc between 1989–1992, most of these parties either disappeared or were renamed and adopted different goals than their predecessors. In the 21st century, only five ruling parties on the national level still described themselves as Marxist–Leninist parties: the Chinese Communist Party , the Communist Party of Cuba , the Communist Party of Vietnam , the Workers' Party of Korea [ 4 ] and the Lao People's Revolutionary Party .

[ 5 ] : 438 As of 2023, the Chinese Communist Party was the world's second largest political party , having over 99 million members.

[ 6 ] Views [ edit ] Although the historical importance of communist parties is widely accepted, their activities and functions have been interpreted in different ways. One approach, sometimes known as the totalitarian school of communist studies, has implicitly treated all communist parties as the same types of organizations. Scholars such as Zbigniew Brzezinski and Francois Furet have relied upon conceptions of the party emphasizing centralized control, a top-down hierarchical structure, ideological rigidity , and strict party discipline .

[ 7 ] In contrast, other studies have emphasized the differences among communist parties. Multi-party studies, such as those by Robert C. Tucker and A. James McAdams, have emphasized the differences in both these parties' organizational structure and their use of Marxist and Leninist ideas to justify their policies.

[ 8 ] Another important question is why communist parties were able to rule for as long as they did. Some scholars have depicted these parties as fatally flawed from their inception and argue they only remained in power because their leaders were willing to use their monopoly of power and the state monopoly to crush all forms of opposition .

[ 9 ] In contrast, other studies have emphasized these parties' ability to adapt their policies to changing times and circumstances.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Criticism of communist party rule References [ edit ] ^ McAdams, A. James. Vanguard of the Revolution: The Global Idea of the Communist Party. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2017.

^ These calculations are based on parties for which sufficient data is available. See Starr, Richard (March–April 1986). "Checklist of Communist Parties in 1985".

Problems of Communism . Vol. 35. pp.

62– 66.

, and the V-Dem (Varieties of Democracy) Dataset at https://v-dem.net/en/data/ [ permanent dead link ] .

^ McAdams, A. James (2017).

Vanguard of the Revolution: The Global Idea of the Communist Party . Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press . pp.

3– 4.

^ "[pyo] bughan nodongdang gyuyag juyo gaejeong naeyong" [표] 북한 노동당 규약 주요 개정 내용 [[Table] Major Amendments to the Rules of the Workers' Party of Korea] (in Korean). 1 June 2021. Archived from the original on 2 June 2021.

^ Stuart-Fox, Martin (Autumn 1983). "Marxism and Theravada Buddhism: The Legitimation of Political Authority in Laos".

Pacific Affairs .

56 (3).

University of British Columbia : 428– 454.

doi : 10.2307/2758191 .

JSTOR 2758191 .

^ Zhang, Phoebe (2024-07-01).

"China's Communist Party on track for 100 million members by year's end" .

South China Morning Post . Retrieved 2024-10-01 .

^ See Carl Joachim Friedrich and Zbigniew K. Brzezinski, Totalitarian Dictatorship and Autocracy (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press , 1965); François Furet, et.al., The Passing of an Illusion: The Idea of Communism in the Twentieth Century (Chicago: University of Chicago Press , 1999); Martin Malia, The Soviet Tragedy: A History of Socialism in Russia, 1917–1991 (New York: Free Press, 1995).

^ Franz Borkenau, World Communism (Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press , 1962); Robert C. Tucker, The Marxian Revolutionary Idea (New York: W. W. Norton & Company ), 1969; McAdams, Vanguard of the Revolution ; ^ Zbigniew Brzezinski, The Grand Failure: The Birth and Death of Communism in the Twentieth Century (New York: Charles Scribner's Sons , 1989); Martin Malia, The Soviet Tragedy ; and Andrzej Walicki, Marxism and the Leap to the Kingdom of Freedom: The Rise and Fall of the Communist Utopia (Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press , 1997).

^ See George Breslauer, Five Images of the Soviet Future: A Critical Review and Synthesis (Berkeley, CA: Center for International Studies, 1978); Stephen F. Cohen, Rethinking the Soviet Experience (New York: Oxford University Press , 1986; and Martin K. Dimitrov, ed., Why Communism Did Not Collapse: Understanding Authoritarian Regime Resilience in Asia and Europe (New York: Cambridge University Press , 2013) External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Communist party .

Media related to Communist parties at Wikimedia Commons v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐b499cfbc7‐bv2dk
Cached time: 20250815141339
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.526 seconds
Real time usage: 0.695 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2967/1000000
Revision size: 14817/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 149051/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4224/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 57321/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.304/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7713191/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  537.030      1 -total
 22.72%  122.034      1 Template:Reflist
 19.59%  105.181      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 18.09%   97.134      1 Template:Communist_parties
 14.11%   75.770      1 Template:Cite_magazine
 12.59%   67.636      1 Template:Short_description
  9.16%   49.177      2 Template:Communism
  8.70%   46.748      1 Template:Authority_control
  8.09%   43.447      2 Template:Cn
  7.19%   38.606      3 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:37008:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815141339 and revision id 1276297586. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Communist_party&oldid=1276297586 " Categories : Communist parties Communist organizations Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 uses Korean-language script (ko) CS1 Korean-language sources (ko) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 February 2025, at 01:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Communist party 51 languages Add topic

