Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Phonology Toggle Phonology subsection 2.1 General American 2.2 Phonological features 3 Vocabulary 4 Grammar and orthography 5 Sub-varieties Toggle Sub-varieties subsection 5.1 Regional accents 5.2 Other varieties 6 Nationwide usage and status 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Bibliography 11 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 11.1 History of American English 12 External links Toggle the table of contents American English 70 languages Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaelg 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски مصرى Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Shqip සිංහල Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikifunctions Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Variety of English language "U.S. English" redirects here. For the political organization, see U.S. English (organization) . For the English language throughout North America, see North American English . For other uses, see American English (disambiguation) .

American English Region United States Native speakers 242 million, all varieties of English in the United States (2019) Language family Indo-European Germanic West Germanic North Sea Germanic Anglo–Frisian Anglic English North American English American English Early forms Old English Middle English Early Modern English Dialects Southern African-American Western New England Western Pennsylvania Minnesotan New York City Midland Philadelphia Northern American Indian Pennsylvania Dutch Cajun Chicano Miami New York Latino Californian Writing system Latin ( English alphabet ) Unified English Braille [ 1 ] Official status Official language in United States [ a ] Language codes ISO 639-3 – Glottolog None IETF en-US [ 2 ] [ 3 ] This article contains IPA phonetic symbols.

Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Unicode characters. For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA .

American English , sometimes called United States English or U.S. English , [ c ] is the set of varieties of the English language native to the United States.

[ 4 ] English is the most widely spoken language in the U.S.

and is an official language in 32 of the 50 U.S. states and the de facto common language used in government, education, and commerce in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, and in all territories except Puerto Rico .

[ 5 ] While there is no law designating English as the official language of the U.S., Executive Order 14224 of 2025 declares it to be.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Since the late 20th century, American English has become the most influential form of English worldwide.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Varieties of American English include many patterns of pronunciation, vocabulary, grammar, and particularly spelling that are unified nationwide but distinct from other forms of English around the world.

[ 14 ] Any American or Canadian accent perceived as lacking noticeably local, ethnic, or cultural markers is known in linguistics as General American ; [ 8 ] it covers a fairly uniform accent continuum native to certain regions of the U.S. but especially associated with broadcast mass media and highly educated speech. However, historical and present linguistic evidence does not support the notion of there being one single mainstream American accent .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] The sound of American English continues to evolve, with some local accents disappearing, but several larger regional accents having emerged in the 20th century.

[ 17 ] History [ edit ] The use of English in the United States is a result of British colonization of the Americas . The first wave of English-speaking settlers arrived in North America during the early 17th century, followed by further migrations in the 18th and 19th centuries. During the 17th and 18th centuries, dialects from many different regions of England and the British Isles existed in every American colony, allowing a process of extensive dialect leveling and mixing in which English varieties across the Thirteen Colonies became more homogeneous compared with the varieties in the British Isles.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] English thus predominated in the colonies even by the end of the 17th century's first immigration of non-English speakers from Western Europe and Africa .

Firsthand descriptions of a fairly uniform American English (particularly in contrast to the diverse regional dialects of British English) became common after the mid-18th century, [ 20 ] while at the same time speakers' identification with this new variety increased.

[ 21 ] Since the 18th century, American English has developed into some new varieties, including regional dialects that retain minor influences from waves of immigrant speakers of diverse languages, primarily European languages.

[ 22 ] [ 10 ] Some racial and regional variation in American English reflects these groups' patterns of geographic settlement, segregation, and resettlement. This can be seen, for example, in the influence of 18th-century Protestant Ulster Scots immigrants (known in the U.S. as the Scotch-Irish ) in Appalachia developing Appalachian English and the 20th-century Great Migration bringing African-American Vernacular English to the Great Lakes urban centers.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Phonology [ edit ] Main article: General American See also: American and British English pronunciation differences and Comparison of General American and Received Pronunciation General American [ edit ] Most American English accents fall under an umbrella known as General American . Rather than one particular accent, General American is a spectrum of those American accents that Americans themselves do not associate with some particular region, ethnicity, or socioeconomic group. General American features are used most by Americans in formal contexts or who are highly educated. Regional accents whose native features are perceived as General American include the accents of the North Midland (parts of the Midwest), Western New England, and the West.

The General American sound system's scope of influence and degree of expansion has been debated by linguists since the term was first used roughly a century ago. Many late-20th and early-21st century studies are showing that it is gradually ousting the regional accents in urban areas of the South and the interior North, New York City, Philadelphia, and many other areas. It can generally be said that younger Americans are avoiding their traditional local features in favor of this more nationwide norm. Furthermore, even General American itself appears to be evolving, with linguists identifying new features in speakers born since the last quarter of the 20th century, like a merger of the low-back vowels and a potentially related vowel shift , that are spreading across the nation.

Phonological features [ edit ] Phonological (accent) features that are typical of American dialects—in contrast to British dialects—include features that concern consonants, such as rhoticity (pronunciation of all historical /r/ sounds), T and D flapping (with metal and medal pronounced the same, as [ˈmɛɾɫ̩] ), velarization of L in all contexts (with filling pronounced [ˈfɪɫɪŋ] , not [ˈfɪlɪŋ] ), and yod-dropping after alveolar consonants (with new pronounced /nu/ , not /nju/ ). Like many British accents, T glottalization is the norm in American accents, though only in particular environments (with satin pronounced [ˈsæʔn̩] , not [ˈsætn̩] ).

[ 24 ] American features that concern vowel sounds include various vowel mergers before /r/ (so that Mary , marry , and merry are all commonly pronounced the same ), raising and gliding of pre-nasal /æ/ (with man having a higher and tenser vowel sound than map ), the weak vowel merger (with affecting and effecting often pronounced the same), and at least one of the LOT vowel mergers. Specifically, the LOT – PALM merger is complete among most Americans and the LOT – THOUGHT merger among roughly half. A three-way LOT – PALM – THOUGHT merger is also very common.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Most Americans pronounce the diphthong /aɪ/ before a voiceless consonant different from that same vowel before a voiced consonant : thus, in price and bright versus in prize and bride . For many, outside the South, the first element of the diphthong is a higher and shorter vowel sound when in pre-voiceless position as opposed to pre-voiced position. All of these phenomena are explained in further detail under General American.

Studies on historical usage of English in both the United States and the United Kingdom suggest that, while spoken American English deviated away from period British English in many ways, it is conservative in a few other ways, preserving certain features 20th- and 21st-century British English has since lost: namely, rhoticity. Unlike American accents, the traditional standard accent of (southern) England has evolved a trap–bath split . Moreover, American accents preserve /h/ at the start of syllables, while perhaps a majority of the regional dialects of England participate in /h/ dropping , particularly in informal contexts.

Vocabulary [ edit ] Main articles: American English vocabulary and American English regional vocabulary See also: Comparison of American and British English § Vocabulary The process of coining new lexical items started as soon as English-speaking colonists in North America began borrowing names for unfamiliar flora, fauna, and topography from the Native American languages .

[ 26 ] Examples of such names are opossum , raccoon , squash , moose (from Algonquian ), [ 26 ] wigwam , and moccasin . American English speakers have integrated traditionally non-English terms and expressions into the mainstream cultural lexicon; for instance, en masse , from French ; cookie , from Dutch ; kindergarten from German , [ 27 ] and rodeo from Spanish .

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] Landscape features are often loanwords from French or Spanish, and the word corn , used in England to refer to wheat (or any cereal), came to denote the maize plant, the most important crop in the U.S.

Other common differences between UK and American English include: aerial (UK) vs.

antenna , biscuit (UK) vs.

cookie/cracker , car park (UK) vs.

parking lot , caravan (UK) vs.

trailer , city centre (UK) vs.

downtown , flat (UK) vs.

apartment , fringe (UK; for hair hanging over the forehead) vs.

bangs , and holiday (UK) vs.

vacation .

[ 32 ] Most Mexican Spanish contributions came after the War of 1812 , with the opening of the West, like ranch (now a common house style ). Due to Mexican culinary influence, many Spanish words are incorporated in general use when talking about certain popular dishes: cilantro (instead of coriander), queso, tacos, quesadillas, enchiladas, tostadas, fajitas, burritos, and guacamole. These words usually lack an English equivalent and are found in popular restaurants. New forms of dwelling created new terms ( lot , waterfront) and types of homes like log cabin , adobe in the 18th century; apartment , shanty in the 19th century; project, condominium , townhouse , mobile home in the 20th century; and parts thereof ( driveway , breezeway, backyard ) .

[ citation needed ] Industry and material innovations from the 19th century onwards provide distinctive new words, phrases, and idioms through railroading (see further at rail terminology ) and transportation terminology, ranging from types of roads ( dirt roads , freeways ) to infrastructure ( parking lot , overpass , rest area ), to automotive terminology often now standard in English internationally.

[ 33 ] Already existing English words—such as store , shop , lumber —underwent shifts in meaning; others remained in the U.S. while changing in Britain. Science, urbanization, and democracy have been important factors in bringing about changes in the written and spoken language of the United States.

[ 34 ] From the world of business and finance came new terms ( merger , downsize , bottom line ), from sports and gambling terminology came, specific jargon aside, common everyday American idioms, including many idioms related to baseball . The names of some American inventions remained largely confined to North America ( elevator [except in the aeronautical sense ], gasoline ) as did certain automotive terms ( truck , trunk ).

[ citation needed ] New foreign loanwords came with 19th and early 20th century European immigration to the U.S.; notably, from Yiddish ( chutzpah , schmooze, bupkis, glitch ) and German ( hamburger , wiener ).

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] A large number of English colloquialisms from various periods are American in origin; some have lost their American flavor (from OK and cool to nerd and 24/7 ), while others have not ( have a nice day , for sure); [ 37 ] [ 38 ] many are now distinctly old-fashioned (swell, groovy).

Some English words now in general use, such as hijacking, disc jockey , boost, bulldoze and jazz , originated as American slang.

American English has always shown a marked tendency to use words in different parts of speech and nouns are often used as verbs .

[ 39 ] Examples of nouns that are now also verbs are interview, advocate, vacuum, lobby, pressure, rear-end, transition, feature, profile, hashtag, head, divorce, loan, estimate, X-ray, spearhead, skyrocket, showcase, bad-mouth, vacation , major, and many others.

Compounds coined in the U.S. are for instance foothill , landslide (in all senses), backdrop , teenager , brainstorm , bandwagon , hitchhike , smalltime, and a huge number of others. Other compound words have been founded based on industrialization and the wave of the automobile: five-passenger car, four-door sedan, two-door sedan, and station-wagon (called an estate car in British English).

[ 40 ] Some are euphemistic ( human resources , affirmative action , correctional facility ).

Many compound nouns have the verb-and-preposition combination: stopover, lineup, tryout, spin-off, shootout , holdup, hideout, comeback, makeover , and many more. Some prepositional and phrasal verbs are in fact of American origin ( win out, hold up, back up/off/down/out, face up to and many others).

[ 41 ] Noun endings such as -ee (retiree), -ery (bakery), -ster (gangster) and -cian (beautician) are also particularly productive in the U.S.

[ 39 ] Several verbs ending in -ize are of U.S. origin; for example, fetishize, prioritize, burglarize, accessorize, weatherize , etc.; and so are some back-formations (locate, fine-tune, curate, donate, emote, upholster and enthuse).

Among syntactic constructions that arose are outside of, headed for, meet up with, back of, etc. Americanisms formed by alteration of some existing words include notably pesky, phony, rambunctious, buddy, sundae , skeeter, sashay and kitty-corner.

Adjectives that arose in the U.S. are, for example, lengthy, bossy, cute and cutesy, punk (in all senses), sticky (of the weather), through (as in "finished"), and many colloquial forms such as peppy or wacky .

A number of words and meanings that originated in Middle English or Early Modern English and that have been in everyday use in the United States have since disappeared in most varieties of British English; some of these have cognates in Lowland Scots . Terms such as fall ("autumn"), faucet ("tap"), diaper ("nappy"; itself unused in the U.S.), candy ("sweets"), skillet , eyeglasses , and obligate are often regarded as Americanisms.

Fall , however, came to denote the season in 16th century England, a contraction of Middle English expressions like "fall of the leaf" and "fall of the year".

[ 42 ] [ better source needed ] Gotten ( past participle of get ) is often considered to be largely an Americanism.

[ 10 ] [ 43 ] Other words and meanings were brought back to Britain from the U.S., especially in the second half of the 20th century; these include hire ("to employ"), I guess (famously criticized by H. W. Fowler ), baggage , hit (a place), and the adverbs overly and presently ("currently"). Some of these, for example, monkey wrench and wastebasket , originated in 19th century Britain. The adjectives mad meaning "angry", smart meaning "intelligent", and sick meaning "ill" are also more frequent in American (and Irish) English than British English.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Linguist Bert Vaux created a survey, completed in 2003, polling English speakers across the United States about their specific everyday word choices, hoping to identify regionalisms.

[ 47 ] The study found that most Americans prefer the term sub for a long sandwich, soda (but pop in the Great Lakes region and generic coke in the South) for a sweet and bubbly soft drink , [ 48 ] you or you guys for the plural of you (but y'all in the South), sneakers for athletic shoes (but often tennis shoes outside the Northeast), and shopping cart for a cart used for carrying supermarket goods.

Grammar and orthography [ edit ] Main articles: American and British English grammatical differences and American and British English spelling differences American English and British English (BrE) differ in somewhat minor ways in their grammar and writing conventions. The first large American dictionary, An American Dictionary of the English Language , known as Webster's Dictionary , was written by Noah Webster in 1828, codifying several of these spellings.

Differences in grammar are relatively minor, and do not normally affect mutual intelligibility; these include: typically a lack of differentiation between adjectives and adverbs, employing the equivalent adjectives as adverbs he ran quick / he ran quickly ; different use of some auxiliary verbs ; formal (rather than notional) agreement with collective nouns ; different preferences for the past forms of a few verbs (for example, AmE/BrE: learned / learnt , burned / burnt , snuck/sneaked , dove/dived ) although the purportedly "British" forms can occasionally be seen in American English writing as well; different prepositions and adverbs in certain contexts (for example, AmE in school, BrE at school ); and whether or not a definite article is used, in very few cases (AmE to the hospital , BrE to hospital ; contrast, however, AmE actress Elizabeth Taylor , BrE the actress Elizabeth Taylor ). Often, these differences are a matter of relative preferences rather than absolute rules; and most are not stable since the two varieties are constantly influencing each other, [ 49 ] and American English is not a standardized set of dialects.

Differences in orthography are also minor. The main differences are that American English usually uses spellings such as flavor for British flavour , fiber for fibre , defense for defence , analyze for analyse , license for licence , catalog for catalogue and traveling for travelling . Noah Webster popularized such spellings in America, but he did not invent most of them. Rather, "he chose already existing options on such grounds as simplicity, analogy or etymology." [ 50 ] Other differences are due to the francophile tastes of the 19th century Victorian era Britain (for example they preferred programme for program , manoeuvre for maneuver , cheque for check , etc.).

[ 51 ] AmE almost always uses -ize in words like realize . BrE prefers -ise , but also uses -ize on occasion (see: Oxford spelling ).

There are a few differences in punctuation rules. British English is more tolerant of run-on sentences , called " comma splices " in American English, and American English prefers that periods and commas be placed inside closing quotation marks even in cases in which British rules would place them outside. American English also favors the double quotation mark ("like this") over the single ('as here').

[ 52 ] AmE sometimes favors words that are morphologically more complex, whereas BrE uses clipped forms, such as AmE transportation and BrE transport or where the British form is a back-formation , such as AmE burglarize and BrE burgle (from burglar ). However, while individuals usually use one or the other, both forms will be widely understood and mostly used alongside each other within the two systems.

Sub-varieties [ edit ] ENE WNE NYC PHILA.

INLAND NORTH WPA NORTH CENTRAL WEST MIDLAND SOUTH Texas California Appalachia Boston Pacific Northwest Chesapeake & Outer Banks Maine New Orleans Baltimore The map above shows the major regional dialects of American English (in all caps ) plus smaller and more local dialects, as demarcated primarily by Labov et al.'s The Atlas of North American English , [ 53 ] as well as the related Telsur Project's regional maps.

[ 54 ] Any region may also contain speakers of a "General American" accent that resists the marked features of their region. Furthermore, this map does not account for speakers of ethnic or cultural varieties (such as African-American English , Chicano English , Cajun English , etc.).

While written American English is largely standardized across the country and spoken American English dialects are highly mutually intelligible, there are still several recognizable regional and ethnic accents, alongside mostly minor distinctions in vocabulary, grammatical structures, and other features.

Regional accents [ edit ] Main articles: American English regional vocabulary and North American English regional phonology The regional sounds of present-day American English are reportedly engaged in a complex phenomenon of "both convergence and divergence": some accents are homogenizing and leveling , while others are diversifying and deviating further away from one another.

[ 55 ] In 2010, William Labov noted that Great Lakes, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, and West Coast accents have undergone "vigorous new sound changes" since the mid-nineteenth century onwards, so they "are now more different from each other than they were 50 or 100 years ago", while other accents, like those of New York City and Boston, have remained stable in that same timeframe.

[ 55 ] Having been settled longer than the American West Coast, the East Coast has had more time to develop unique accents, and it currently comprises three or four linguistically significant regions, each of which possesses English varieties both different from each other as well as quite internally diverse: New England , the Mid-Atlantic states (including a New York accent as well as a unique Philadelphia–Baltimore accent ), and the South . As of the 20th century, the middle and eastern Great Lakes area , Chicago being the largest city with these speakers, also ushered in certain unique features, including the fronting of the LOT /ɑ/ vowel in the mouth toward [a] and tensing of the TRAP /æ/ vowel wholesale to [eə] . These sound changes have triggered a series of other vowel shifts in the same region, known by linguists as the " Inland North ".

[ 56 ] The Inland North shares with the Eastern New England dialect (including Boston accents ) a backer tongue positioning of the GOOSE /u/ vowel (to [u] ) and the MOUTH /aʊ/ vowel (to [ɑʊ~äʊ] ) in comparison to the rest of the country.

[ 57 ] Ranging from northern New England across the Great Lakes to Minnesota, another Northern regional marker is the variable fronting of /ɑ/ before /r/ , [ 58 ] for example, appearing four times in the stereotypical Boston shibboleth Park the car in Harvard Yard .

[ 59 ] The red dots show every U.S. metropolitan area where over 50% non-rhotic speech was documented among some of that area's white speakers in the 1990s. Non-rhoticity may be heard among black speakers throughout the whole country.

[ 60 ] Several other phenomena serve to distinguish regional American accents.

Boston , Pittsburgh , Upper Midwestern , and Western U.S. accents have fully completed a merger of the LOT vowel with the THOUGHT vowel ( /ɑ/ and /ɔ/ , respectively): [ 61 ] a cot–caught merger , which is rapidly spreading throughout the whole country. However, the South, Inland North, and a Northeastern coastal corridor passing through Rhode Island, New York City, Philadelphia, and Baltimore typically preserve an older cot–caught distinction.

[ 56 ] For that Northeastern corridor, the realization of the THOUGHT vowel is particularly marked , as depicted in humorous spellings, like in tawk and cawfee ( talk and coffee ), which intend to represent it being tense and diphthongal : [oə] .

[ 62 ] A split of TRAP into two separate phonemes , using different a pronunciations for example in gap [æ] versus gas [eə] , further defines New York City as well as Philadelphia–Baltimore accents.

[ 63 ] Most Americans preserve all historical /r/ sounds, using what is known as a rhotic accent . The only traditional r -dropping (or non-rhoticity) in regional American accents variably appears today in eastern New England , New York City , and some of the former plantation South primarily among older speakers (and, relatedly, some African-American Vernacular English across the country), though the vowel-consonant cluster found in "bird", "work", "hurt", "learn", etc. usually retains its r pronunciation, even in these non-rhotic American accents. Non-rhoticity among such speakers is presumed to have arisen from their upper classes' close historical contact with England, imitating London's r -dropping, a feature that has continued to gain prestige throughout England from the late 18th century onwards, [ 64 ] but which has conversely lost prestige in the U.S. since at least the early 20th century.

[ 65 ] Non-rhoticity makes a word like car sound like cah or source like sauce .

[ 66 ] New York City and Southern accents are the most widely recognized regional accents in the country, as well as the most stigmatized and socially disfavored.

[ 67 ] Southern speech, strongest in southern Appalachia and certain areas of Texas, is often identified by Americans as a "country" accent, [ 68 ] and is defined by the /aɪ/ vowel losing its gliding quality : [aː] , the initiation event for a complicated Southern vowel shift, including a " Southern drawl " that makes short front vowels into distinct-sounding gliding vowels .

[ 69 ] The fronting of the vowels of GOOSE , GOAT , MOUTH , and STRUT tends to also define Southern accents as well as the accents spoken in the " Midland ": a vast band of the country that constitutes an intermediate dialect region between the traditional North and South. Western U.S. accents mostly fall under the General American spectrum.

Below, ten major American English accents are defined by their particular combinations of certain vowel sounds: Accent name Most populous city Strong /aʊ/ fronting Strong /oʊ/ fronting Strong /u/ fronting Strong /ɑr/ fronting Cot–caught merger Pin–pen merger /æ/ raising system General American No No No No Mixed No pre-nasal Inland Northern Chicago No No No Yes No No general Midland Indianapolis Yes Yes Yes No Mixed Mixed pre-nasal New York City New York City Yes No No No No No split North-Central (Upper Midwestern) Minneapolis No No No Yes Mixed No pre-nasal & pre-velar Northeastern New England Boston No No No Yes Yes No pre-nasal Philadelphia/Baltimore Philadelphia Yes Yes Yes No No No split Southern San Antonio Yes Yes Yes No Mixed Yes Southern Western Los Angeles No No Yes No Yes No pre-nasal Western Pennsylvania Pittsburgh Yes Yes Yes No Yes Mixed pre-nasal Other varieties [ edit ] Although no longer region-specific, [ 70 ] African-American Vernacular English , which remains the native variety of most working- and middle-class African Americans , has a close relationship to Southern dialects and has greatly influenced everyday speech of many Americans, including hip hop culture .

Hispanic and Latino Americans have also developed native-speaker varieties of English. The best-studied Latino Englishes are Chicano English , spoken in the West and Midwest, and New York Latino English , spoken in the New York metropolitan area . Additionally, ethnic varieties such as Yeshiva English and " Yinglish " are spoken by some American Orthodox Jews , Cajun Vernacular English by some Cajuns in southern Louisiana , and Pennsylvania Dutch English by some Pennsylvania Dutch people.

American Indian Englishes have been documented among diverse Indian tribes. The island state of Hawaii , though primarily English-speaking, is also home to a creole language known commonly as Hawaiian Pidgin , and some Hawaii residents speak English with a Pidgin-influenced accent. American English also gave rise to some dialects outside the country, for example, Philippine English , beginning during the American occupation of the Philippines and subsequently the Insular Government of the Philippine Islands ; Thomasites first established a variation of American English in these islands.

[ 71 ] Nationwide usage and status [ edit ] Main article: Languages of the United States Percentage of Americans aged 5+ speaking English at home in each Public Usage Microdata Area (PUMA) of the fifty states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico according to the 2016–2021 five-year American Community Survey Map of U.S. official language status by state.

English declared the official language Multiple official languages, including English (Alaska, Hawaii, South Dakota), or languages with special status (New Mexico) No official language specified.

In 2021, about 245 million Americans, aged 5 or above, spoke English at home: a majority of the United States total population of roughly 330 million people.

[ 72 ] Of the 50 states, 32 have adopted legislation granting official (or co-official) status to English within their jurisdictions, in some cases as part of what has been called the English-only movement .

[ 5 ] [ 73 ] Typically only "English" is specified, not a particular variety like American English. (From 1923 to 1969, the state of Illinois recognized its official language as "American", meaning American English.) [ 74 ] [ 75 ] While English has always been the language used at the federal and state levels, no legislation has been passed to designate English as the official language at the federal level. In 2025, Donald Trump issued Executive Order 14224 , declaring English the official language of the U.S., and federal agencies recognize this under the order.

[ 7 ] Puerto Rico is the only United States territory in which another language – Spanish – is the common language at home, in public, and in government.

See also [ edit ] United States portal Language portal American and British English spelling differences Canadian English Dictionary of American Regional English International English Sound correspondences between English accents International Phonetic Alphabet chart for the English Language List of English words from Indigenous languages of the Americas Phonological history of English Regional accents of English Notes [ edit ] ^ Federal agencies ( Executive Order 14224 ), 32 U.S. states, five U.S. territories; see article .

^ en-US is the language code for U.S. English , as defined by ISO standards (see ISO 639-1 and ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 ) and Internet standards (see IETF language tag ).

^ American English is variously abbreviated AmE , AE , AmEng , USEng , and en-US .

[ b ] References [ edit ] ^ "Unified English Braille (UEB)" . Braille Authority of North America (BANA). November 2, 2016. Archived from the original on November 23, 2016 . Retrieved January 2, 2017 .

^ "English" .

IANA language subtag registry . October 16, 2005 . Retrieved January 11, 2019 .

^ "United States" .

IANA language subtag registry . October 16, 2005 . Retrieved January 11, 2019 .

^ Crystal, David (1997).

English as a Global Language . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-53032-3 .

^ a b "U.S. English Efforts Lead West Virginia to Become 32nd State to Recognize English as Official Language" . U.S. English. March 5, 2016. Archived from the original on April 1, 2016 . Retrieved May 13, 2016 .

^ "Designating English as the Official Language of The United States" .

The White House . March 1, 2025 . Retrieved July 10, 2025 .

^ a b "Trump makes English official language of US" .

BBC News . March 2, 2025 . Retrieved April 20, 2025 .

^ a b Engel, Matthew (2017).

That's the Way It Crumbles: The American Conquest of English . London: Profile Books.

ISBN 9781782832621 .

OCLC 989790918 .

^ "Fears of British English's disappearance are overblown" .

The Economist . July 20, 2017.

ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved April 18, 2019 .

^ a b c Harbeck, James (July 15, 2015).

"Why isn't 'American' a language?" . BBC Culture . Retrieved April 18, 2019 .

^ Reddy, C Rammanohar (August 6, 2017).

"The Readers' Editor writes: Why Is American English Becoming Part of Everyday Usage in India?" . Scroll.in . Retrieved April 18, 2019 .

^ "Cookies or biscuits? Data shows use of American English is growing the world over" .

Hindustan Times .

The Guardian . July 17, 2017 . Retrieved September 10, 2020 .

^ Gonçalves, Bruno; Loureiro-Porto, Lucía; Ramasco, José J.; Sánchez, David (May 25, 2018).

"Mapping the Americanization of English in Space and Time" .

PLOS ONE .

13 (5): e0197741.

arXiv : 1707.00781 .

Bibcode : 2018PLoSO..1397741G .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0197741 .

PMC 5969760 .

PMID 29799872 .

^ Kretzchmar 2004 , pp. 262–263.

^ Labov 2012 , pp. 1–2.

^ Kretzchmar 2004 , p. 262.

^ " Do You Speak American?

: What Lies Ahead?" . PBS . Retrieved August 15, 2007 .

^ Kretzchmar 2004 , pp. 258–9.

^ Longmore 2007 , pp. 517, 520.

^ Longmore 2007 , p. 537.

^ Paulsen I (2022).

The emergence of American English as a discursive variety Tracing enregisterment processes in nineteenth-century U.S. newspapers (pdf) . Berlin: Language Science Press.

doi : 10.5281/zenodo.6207627 .

ISBN 9783961103386 .

^ a b Hickey, R. (2014).

Dictionary of varieties of English . Wiley-Blackwell. p. 25.

^ Mufwene, Salikoko S. (1999). "North American Varieties of English as Byproducts of Population Contacts." The Workings of Language: From Prescriptions to Perspectives.

Ed. Rebecca Wheeler Westport, CT: Praeger, 15–37.

^ a b Wells, John C.

(1982).

Accents of English . Vol. 1: An Introduction (pp. i–xx, 1–278). Cambridge University Press. pp. 242-248.

ISBN 0-52129719-2 .

^ Vaux, Bert; Golder, Scott (2003). " Do you pronounce 'cot' and 'çaught' the same?

" The Harvard Dialect Survey. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Linguistics Department.

^ a b Skeat, Walter William (1892).

Principles of English etymology: The native element – Walter William Skeat . At the Clarendon Press. p.

1 . Retrieved June 1, 2015 .

moose etymology.

^ "You Already Know Some German Words!" .

About.com . Archived from the original on June 7, 2011 . Retrieved January 9, 2017 .

^ Montano, Mario (January 1, 1992).

"The history of Mexican folk foodways of South Texas: Street vendors, offal foods" (Thesis). Repository.upenn.edu. pp.

1– 421 . Retrieved June 1, 2015 .

^ Gorrell, Robert M. (2001).

What's in a Word?: Etymological Gossip about Some Interesting English Words – Robert M. Gorrell . University of Nevada Press.

ISBN 9780874173673 . Retrieved June 1, 2015 .

^ Bailey, Vernon (1895).

The Pocket Gophers of the United States . U.S. Department of Agriculture, Division of Ornithology and Mammalogy . Retrieved June 1, 2015 .

^ Mencken, H. L. (January 1, 2010).

The American Language: A Preliminary Inquiry Into the Development of English ... – H. L. Mencken . Cosimo.

ISBN 9781616402594 . Retrieved June 1, 2015 .

^ "British vs. American English – Vocabulary Differences" .

www.studyenglishtoday.net . Retrieved April 18, 2019 .

[ dead link ] ^ A few of these are now chiefly found, or have been more productive, outside the U.S.; for example, jump, "to drive past a traffic signal"; block meaning "building", and center, "central point in a town" or "main area for a particular activity" (cf. Oxford English Dictionary).

^ Elizabeth Ball Carr (August 1954).

Trends in Word Compounding in American Speech (Thesis). Louisiana State University.

^ "The Maven's Word of the Day: gesundheit" .

Random House . Retrieved May 29, 2013 .

^ Trudgill 2004 .

^ "Definition of day noun from the Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary" . Oup.com . Retrieved May 29, 2013 .

^ "Definition of sure adjective from the Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary" . Oup.com . Retrieved May 29, 2013 .

^ a b Trudgill 2004 , p. 69.

^ "The Word » American vs. British Smackdown: Station wagon vs. estate car" . Retrieved April 18, 2019 .

^ British author George Orwell (in English People , 1947, cited in OED s.v.

lose) criticized an alleged "American tendency" to "burden every verb with a preposition that adds nothing to its meaning ( win out , lose out , face up to , etc.)".

^ Harper, Douglas.

"fall" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ A Handbook of Varieties of English , Bernd Kortmann & Edgar W. Schneider, Walter de Gruyter, 2004, p. 115.

^ "angry" . Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary. Archived from the original on March 9, 2013 . Retrieved May 29, 2013 .

^ "intelligent" . Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary. Archived from the original on March 9, 2013 . Retrieved May 29, 2013 .

^ "Definition of ill adjective from the Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary" . Oald8.oxfordlearnersdictionaries.com. Archived from the original on May 27, 2013 . Retrieved May 29, 2013 .

^ Vaux, Bert and Scott Golder. 2003.

The Harvard Dialect Survey Archived April 30, 2016, at the Wayback Machine . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Linguistics Department.

^ Katz, Joshua (2013).

"Beyond 'Soda, Pop, or Coke ' " [ dead link ] . North Carolina State University.

^ Algeo, John (2006).

British or American English?

. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-37993-8 .

^ Algeo, John. "The Effects of the Revolution on Language", in A Companion to the American Revolution . John Wiley & Sons, 2008. p.599 ^ Peters, Pam (2004).

The Cambridge Guide to English Usage . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-62181-X , pp. 34 and 511.

^ "Punctuating Around Quotation Marks" (blog) . Style Guide of the American Psychological Association. 2011 . Retrieved March 21, 2015 .

^ Labov, Ash & Boberg 2006 , p. 148.

^ "Regional Telsur Maps" .

Telsur Project . Linguistics Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania . Retrieved June 20, 2015 .

^ a b Labov 2012 .

^ a b Labov, Ash & Boberg 2006 , p. 190.

^ Labov, Ash & Boberg 2006 , pp. 230.

^ Labov, Ash & Boberg 2006 , p. 111.

^ Vorhees, Mara (2009).

Boston. Con Pianta. Ediz. Inglese . Lonely Planet. p. 52.

ISBN 978-1-74179-178-5 .

^ Labov, p. 48.

[ incomplete short citation ] ^ Labov, Ash & Boberg 2006 , p. 60.

^ Labov, William; Ash, Sharon; Boberg, Charles (January 1, 2005).

"New England" (PDF) .

The Atlas of North American English: Phonetics, Phonology and Sound Change .

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022.

This phonemic and phonetic arrangement of the low back vowels makes Rhode Island more similar to New York City than to the rest of New England ^ Labov, Ash & Boberg (2006) , p. 173.

^ Trudgill 2004 , pp. 46–47.

^ Labov, Ash & Boberg 2006 , pp. 5, 47.

^ Labov, Ash & Boberg 2006 , pp. 137, 141.

^ Hayes, Dean (2013). " The Southern Accent and 'Bad English': A Comparative Perceptual Study of the Conceptual Network between Southern Linguistic Features and Identity ". UNM Digital Repository: Electronic Theses and Dissertations. pp. 5, 51.

Gordon, Matthew J.; Schneider, Edgar W. (2008). " New York, Philadelphia, and other northern cities: Phonology ". Varieties of English 2: 67–86.

Hartley, Laura (1999).

A View from the West: Perceptions of U.S. Dialects from the Point of View of Oregon . Faculty Publications – Department of World Languages, Sociology & Cultural Studies. 17.

Yannuar, N.; Azimova, K.; Nguyen, D. (2014). " Perceptual Dialectology: Northerners and Southerners' View of Different American Dialects ". k@ta, 16(1), pp. 11, 13.

^ Hayes, 2013, p. 51.

^ Labov, Ash & Boberg 2006 , p. 125.

^ Trudgill 2004 , p. 42.

^ Dayag, Danilo (2004). "The English-language media in the Philippines".

World Englishes .

23 : 33– 45.

doi : 10.1111/J.1467-971X.2004.00333.X .

S2CID 145589555 .

^ "ACS B16001" .

ACS B16001 . U.S. Census Bureau . Retrieved April 12, 2024 .

^ " Official English ".

U.S. English , 2022.

^ Crews, Haibert O. (January 23, 1923).

"Talk American, Not English" .

Champaign-Urbana Courier . p. 10 . Retrieved March 23, 2021 – via Newspapers.com.

^ Davis, Robert (September 24, 1969).

"News Briefs: Its Legal—We Speak English" .

Chicago Tribune . sec. 1, p. 3 . Retrieved March 23, 2021 – via Newspapers.com.

Bibliography [ edit ] Baker, Adam; Mielke, Jeff; Archangeli, Diana (2008).

"More velar than /g/: Consonant Coarticulation as a Cause of Diphthongization" (PDF) . In Chang, Charles B.; Haynie, Hannah J. (eds.).

Proceedings of the 26th West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics . Somerville, Massachusetts: Cascadilla Proceedings Project. pp.

60– 68.

ISBN 978-1-57473-423-2 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022.

Boberg, Charles (2008).

"Regional phonetic differentiation in Standard Canadian English" .

Journal of English Linguistics .

36 (2): 129– 154.

doi : 10.1177/0075424208316648 .

S2CID 146478485 .

Boyce, S.; Espy-Wilson, C. (1997).

"Coarticulatory stability in American English /r/" (PDF) .

Journal of the Acoustical Society of America .

101 (6): 3741– 3753.

Bibcode : 1997ASAJ..101.3741B .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.16.4174 .

doi : 10.1121/1.418333 .

PMID 9193061 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022.

Collins, Beverley; Mees, Inger M. (2002).

The Phonetics of Dutch and English (5 ed.).

Leiden / Boston : Brill Publishers .

Delattre, P.; Freeman, D.C. (1968). "A dialect study of American R's by x-ray motion picture".

Linguistics .

44 : 29– 68.

Duncan, Daniel (2016).

" 'Tense' /æ/ is still lax: A phonotactics study" (PDF) . In Hansson, Gunnar Ólafur; Farris-Trimble, Ashley; McMullin, Kevin; Pulleyblank, Douglas (eds.).

Supplemental Proceedings of the 2015 Annual Meeting on Phonology . Proceedings of the Annual Meetings on Phonology. Vol. 3. Washington, D.C.: Linguistic Society of America.

doi : 10.3765/amp.v3i0.3653 .

Hallé, Pierre A.; Best, Catherine T.; Levitt, Andrea (1999). "Phonetic vs. phonological influences on French listeners' perception of American English approximants".

Journal of Phonetics .

27 (3): 281– 306.

doi : 10.1006/jpho.1999.0097 .

Jones, Daniel; Roach, Peter; Hartman, James (2006).

English Pronouncing Dictionary . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-68086-8 . Retrieved February 20, 2021 .

Kortmann, Bernd ; Schneider, Edgar W. (2004).

A Handbook of Varieties of English . Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Company KG.

ISBN 978-3-11-017532-5 . Retrieved February 20, 2021 .

Kretzchmar, William A. (2004), Kortmann, Bernd; Schneider, Edgar W. (eds.), A Handbook of Varieties of English , Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter, ISBN 9783110175325 Labov, William (2012).

Dialect diversity in America: The politics of language change . University of Virginia.

Labov, William (2007).

"Transmission and Diffusion" (PDF) .

Language .

83 (2): 344– 387.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.705.7860 .

doi : 10.1353/lan.2007.0082 .

JSTOR 40070845 .

S2CID 6255506 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022.

Labov, William ; Ash, Sharon; Boberg, Charles (2006).

The Atlas of North American English . Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter .

ISBN 978-3-11-016746-7 .

Longmore, Paul K. (2007).

" 'Good English without Idiom or Tone': The Colonial Origins of American Speech" .

The Journal of Interdisciplinary History .

37 (4). MIT: 513– 542.

doi : 10.1162/jinh.2007.37.4.513 .

JSTOR 4139476 .

S2CID 143910740 .

Trudgill, Peter (2004).

New-Dialect Formation: The Inevitability of Colonial Englishes .

Wells, John (2008).

Longman Pronunciation Dictionary . Pearson.

ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0 . Retrieved February 20, 2021 .

Wells, John C.

(1982).

Accents of English . Vol. 1: An Introduction (pp. i–xx, 1–278), Vol. 2: The British Isles (pp. i–xx, 279–466), Vol. 3: Beyond the British Isles (pp. i–xx, 467–674). Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511611759 , doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511611766 .

ISBN 0-52129719-2 , 0-52128540-2 , 0-52128541-0 .

Zawadzki, P.A.; Kuehn, D.P. (1980). "A cineradiographic study of static and dynamic aspects of American English /r/".

Phonetica .

37 (4): 253– 266.

doi : 10.1159/000259995 .

PMID 7443796 .

S2CID 46760239 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bailey, Richard W.

(2012).

Speaking American: A History of English in the United States 20th–21st-century usage in different cities Bartlett, John R.

(1848).

Dictionary of Americanisms: A Glossary of Words and Phrases Usually Regarded As Peculiar to the United States . New York: Bartlett and Welford.

Garner, Bryan A.

(2003).

Garner's Modern American Usage . New York: Oxford University Press.

Mencken, H. L.

(1977) [1921].

The American Language: An Inquiry into the Development of English in the United States (4th ed.). New York: Knopf.

History of American English [ edit ] Bailey, Richard W. (2004). "American English: Its origins and history". In E. Finegan & J. R. Rickford (Eds.), Language in the USA: Themes for the twenty-first century (pp. 3–17). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Finegan, Edward. (2006). "English in North America". In R. Hogg & D. Denison (Eds.), A history of the English language (pp. 384–419). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

External links [ edit ] Look up American English in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article  " Americanisms ".

Wikiversity has learning resources about American English American English resources [ permanent dead link ] at the U.S. Department of State Do You Speak American : PBS special Dialect Survey of the United States, by Bert Vaux et al.

, Harvard University .

Linguistic Atlas Projects Phonological Atlas of North America at the University of Pennsylvania Speech Accent Archive Dictionary of American Regional English Dialect maps based on pronunciation Articles related to American English v t e Languages of the United States Languages in italics are extinct.

English Dialects of American English African-American English Vernacular American Indian English Appalachian English Baltimore English Boston English Cajun English California English Chicano English General American English Good American Speech High Tider English Inland Northern American English Miami English Maine English Midland American English New England Englishes Eastern Western New Mexican Englishes New Orleans English New York City English New York Latino English Northeastern elite accent Northern American English North-Central American / Upper Midwestern English Pacific Northwest English Pennsylvania Dutch Philadelphia English Puerto Rican Englishes Southern American English Older Texan English Upper Michigan English Utah Mormon English Western American English Western Pennsylvania English Yeshiva English Oral Indigenous languages Families Algic Abenaki Arapaho Blackfoot Cheyenne Cree Fox Malecite-Passamaquoddy Massachusett Menominee Mi'kmaq Munsee Ojibwe Potawatomi Shawnee Etchemin Gros Ventre Loup Nawathinehena Mahican Miami-Illinois Mohegan-Pequot Nanticoke Narragansett Pamlico Powhatan Quiripi Unami Wiyot Yurok Austronesian Chamorro Hawaiian Refaluwasch Samoan Tokelauan Caddoan Arikara Pawnee Caddo Kitsai Wichita Chinookan Kathlamet Tsinúk Upper Chinook Comecrudan Comecrudo Garza Mamulique Chumashan Barbareño Cruzeño Obispeño Purisimeño Ventureño Dené(– Yeniseian?) Ahtna Deg Xinag Dena'ina Gwich’in Hän Hupa Jicarilla Koyukon Lower Tanana Mescalero-Chiricahua Navajo Tanacross Upper Kuskokwim Upper Tanana Western Apache Cahto Eyak Holikachuk Kwalhioqua-Clatskanie Lipan Mattole Plains Apache Tolowa Tsetsaut Tututni Upper Umpqua Wailaki Eskaleut Inuit Inupiat Aleut Alutiiq Central Alaskan Yup'ik Central Siberian Yupik Chevak Cup’ik Iroquoian Cayuga Cherokee Mohawk Oneida Onondaga Seneca Erie Neutral Huron Nottoway Susquehannock Tuscarora Wyandot Wenrohronon Kalapuyan Central Kalapuya Northern Kalapuya Yoncalla Keresan Cochiti Pueblo San Felipe–Santo Domingo Zia–Santa Ana Pueblos Western Keres Acoma Pueblo Laguna Pueblo Maiduan Konkow Chico Maidu Nisenan Muskogean Alabama Chickasaw Choctaw Koasati Mikasuki Muscogee Apalachee Houma Palaihnihan Achumawi Atsugewi Plateau Penutian Nez Perce Sahaptin Klamath Molala Pomoan Kashaya Southeastern Pomo Central Pomo Eastern Pomo Northeastern Pomo Northern Pomo Southern Pomo Salishan Coeur d'Alene Halkomelem North Straits Salish Okanagan Salish Thompson Columbia-Moses Cowlitz Klallam Lower Chehalis Lushootseed Nooksack Quinault Tillamook Twana Upper Chehalis Siouan Assiniboine Crow Dakota Hidatsa Lakota Omaha–Ponca Stoney Winnebago Biloxi Catawba Chiwere Kansa Mandan Mitchigamea Moneton Ofo Osage Quapaw Tutelo-Saponi Woccon Tanoan Jemez Kiowa Picuris Southern Tiwa Taos Tewa Piro Pueblo Tsimshianic Coast Tsimshian Utian Central Sierra Miwok Southern Sierra Miwok Bay Miwok Coast Miwok Lake Miwok Northern Sierra Miwok Plains Miwok Awaswas Chalon Chochenyo Karkin Mutsun Ramaytush Rumsen Tamyen Uto-Aztecan Comanche Hopi Kawaiisu Mono Northern Paiute O'odham Shoshoni Timbisha Ute-Chemehuevi Yaqui Ivilyuat Cupeño Kitanemuk Luiseño Serrano Tongva Tübatulabal Wakashan Makah Wintuan Patwin Nomlaki Wintu Yokuts Valley Yokuts Buena Vista Yokuts Gashowu Yokuts Kings River Yokuts Palewyami Tule-Kaweah Yokuts Yuman– Cochimí Cocopah Havasupai–Hualapai Ipai Kumeyaay Maricopa Mojave Quechan Tiipai Yavapai Halchidhoma Others Isolates Haida Karuk Kutenai Washo Zuni Alsea Atakapa Chimariko Chitimacha Coahuilteco Cotoname Esselen Natchez Salinan Siuslaw Taensa Takelma Tawasa Timucua Tonkawa Tunica Yana Yuchi Mixed or trade Languages Afro-Seminole Creole Chinook Jargon Michif Mohawk Dutch Manual Indigenous languages Hand Talk Anishinaabe Sign Language Blackfoot Sign Language Cheyenne Sign Language Cree Sign Language Navajo Sign Language Plateau Sign Language Ktunaxa Sign Language Isolates Hawai'i Sign Language Creole Hawai'i Sign Language Inuit Sign Language Keresan Pueblo Navajo Family Sign Language Orocovis Sign Language Oral settler languages French Louisiana Métis Missouri Muskrat New England German Pennsylvania Dutch Hutterite Plautdietsch Bernese Alsatian Texas Spanish Caló (Chicano) Isleño New Mexican Puerto Rican Sabine River Creole and mixed languages Gullah Louisiana Creole Spanglish Angloromani Manual settler languages Francosign American Sign Language Black American Sign Language Protactile Puerto Rican Sign Language BANZSL Samoan Sign Language Kentish Martha's Vineyard Sign Language Isolates Sandy River Valley Sign Language Henniker Sign Language Immigrant languages (number of speakers in 2021 in millions) Spanish (41.3) Chinese (3.4) Tagalog (1.7) Vietnamese (1.5) Arabic (1.4) French (1.2) Korean (1.1) Russian (1.0) Portuguese (0.9) Haitian (0.9) Hindi (0.9) German (0.9) Polish (0.5) Italian (0.5) Urdu (0.5) Persian (0.5) Telugu (0.5) Japanese (0.5) Gujarati (0.4) Bengali (0.4) Tamil (0.3) Punjabi (0.3) Serbo-Croatian (0.3) Armenian (0.3) Greek (0.3) Hmong (0.2) Hebrew (0.2) Khmer (0.2) v t e United States History By period 1776–1789 1789–1815 1815–1849 1849–1865 1865–1917 1917–1945 1945–1964 1964–1980 1980–1991 1991–2016 2016–present By event Pre-colonial era Colonial era Stamp Act Congress Thirteen Colonies Continental Congress Continental Association United Colonies military history Founding Fathers Halifax Resolves Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence American Revolution War Treaty of Paris Articles of Confederation Perpetual Union Confederation period American frontier Constitution drafting and ratification Bill of Rights Federalist Era War of 1812 Territorial evolution Mexican–American War Civil War Reconstruction era Indian Wars Native genocide Gilded Age Progressive Era Women's suffrage Civil rights movement 1865–1896 1896–1954 1954–1968 Spanish–American War Imperialism World War I Roaring Twenties Great Depression World War II home front American Century Cold War Korean War Space Race Feminist Movement LGBTQ Movement Vietnam War Post-Cold War (1991–2016) September 11 attacks War on Terror War in Afghanistan Iraq War Great Recession COVID-19 pandemic By topic Outline of U.S. history Demographic Discoveries Economic Inventions Military Postal Technological and industrial Geography Territory Contiguous United States counties federal district federal enclaves Indian reservations insular zones minor outlying islands populated places states Earthquakes Extreme points Islands Mountains peaks ranges Appalachian Rocky Sierra Nevada National Park Service National Parks Regions East Coast West Coast Great Plains Gulf Mid-Atlantic Midwestern New England Pacific Central Eastern Northern Northeastern Northwestern Southern Southeastern Southwestern Western Longest rivers Arkansas Colorado Columbia Mississippi Missouri Red (South) Rio Grande Yukon Time Water supply and sanitation World Heritage Sites Politics Federal Executive President of the United States powers Executive Office Vice President Cabinet Executive departments Independent agencies Intelligence Community Director of National Intelligence Central Intelligence Agency National Security Agency National Reconnaissance Office Law enforcement ATF CBP Diplomatic Security DEA FBI ICE Marshals Secret Service TSA Inspector generals Civil service Public policy Legislative House of Representatives current members Speaker Senate current members President pro tempore President Capitol Police Library of Congress Congressional Budget Office Government Accountability Office Government Publishing Office Judicial Supreme Court Chief Justice Associate Justices list Courts of appeals list of judges District courts / Territorial courts list of courts list of judges Other tribunals U.S. attorney Law Bill of Rights civil liberties Code of Federal Regulations Constitution federalism preemption separation of powers civil rights United States Code Uniformed Armed Forces Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard National Guard NOAA Corps Public Health Service Corps State , Federal District , and Territorial Executive Governor list Lieutenant governor list Secretary of state Attorney general Treasurer Auditor/Comptroller Agriculture commissioner Insurance commissioner Public utilities commission State police list Legislative List of legislatures List of legislators Judicial Supreme courts Chief justices District attorney list Law State constitutions Statutory codes Uniform act Comparison of governments Tribal Tribal sovereignty Native American recognition in the United States Federally recognized tribes Federally recognized Alaska Native tribes State-recognized tribes Indian reservation list Hawaiian home land Local County List of counties and county equivalents County executive Sheriff Clerk Cities Consolidated city-county Independent city Coterminous municipality Charter Mayor–council government Council–manager government City commission government Mayor City manager City council Minor divisions Township Town meeting Special district School district list Corruption Democratic backsliding Elections Electoral College Red states and blue states Foreign relations foreign policy Imperial presidency Ideologies Anti-Americanism exceptionalism nationalism Parties Democratic Republican Third parties Scandals Economy By sector Agriculture Banking Communications Companies Energy Insurance Manufacturing Mining Science and technology Tourism Trade by state Currency Exports Federal budget Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States Federal Reserve System Financial position Labor unions Public debt Social welfare programs Taxation Unemployment Wall Street Transport Aviation Driving Public transportation Rail transportation Transportation policy Transportation safety Trucking industry Society Culture Americana Architecture Cinema Crime Cuisine Dance Demographics Economic issues affluence eviction homeownership household income income inequality middle class personal income poverty standard of living wealth working class Education attainment literacy Family Fashion Flag list Folklore Holidays Federal holidays Homelessness Housing Human rights Languages American English Indigenous languages ASL Literature Media journalism internet newspapers radio television Music Names National anthem National symbols Columbia Mount Rushmore Statue of Liberty Uncle Sam People Philosophy Political ideologies Race Religion Sexuality Social class Society Sports history Theater Transportation Video games Visual art Social class Affluence American Dream Educational attainment Homelessness Homeownership Household income Income inequality Middle class Personal income Poverty Standard of living Health Aging Healthcare Abortion Birth control Prenatal care Hospice care Immigrant health care Rationing Health care finance Health insurance costs Health care prices Prescription drug prices Disability Health insurance Food safety Physician shortage Poverty and health Race and health Obesity Medical deserts Women's reproductive health Life expectancy Issues Capital punishment Crime incarceration Criticism of government Discrimination affirmative action antisemitism intersex rights Islamophobia LGBTQ rights racism Native American African American Energy policy Environmental issues Environmental movement Climate change Gun politics Mass shootings Hunger Smoking Human rights Immigration illegal National security Terrorism Opioid epidemic Separation of church and state Xenophobia Outline Index Category v t e Dialects and accents of Modern English by continent Europe Great Britain England North Cheshire Cumbria Barrow Lancashire Liverpool/Scouse Manchester Northumbria Pitmatic Sunderland Tyneside/Geordie Teesside Yorkshire Midlands East Midlands West Midlands Birmingham Black Country Stoke-on-Trent South East Anglia London & Thames Estuary Cockney Multicultural Received Pronunciation West Country Cornwall Dorset Scotland Glasgow Highlands Wales Abercraf Cardiff Gower Port Talbot Ireland Dublin South-West Ulster Channel Islands Gibraltar Isle of Man Malta Americas North America Canada Aboriginal Atlantic Lunenburg Newfoundland Multicultural Toronto Ottawa Valley Quebec Standard Canadian United States Midland New England Boston East Maine West New York City accent North Inland North North-Central Philadelphia Baltimore South accent Appalachia Chesapeake/Outer Banks New Orleans Older South Texas West California Pacific Northwest Western Pennsylvania Social and ethno-cultural African-American Vernacular American Indian Cajun Chicano General American Good American Speech Miami Latino New York Latino Northeastern elite Pennsylvania Dutch Caribbean Antigua and Barbuda The Bahamas Barbados Bequia Cayman Islands Bay Islands Jamaica Saba Samaná Trinidad and Tobago Bermuda Falkland Islands Oceania Australia variation accent Aboriginal South Torres Strait West Fiji New Zealand accent Palau Solomon Islands Africa Cameroon The Gambia Ghana Kenya Liberia Malawi Namibia Nigeria Sierra Leone South Africa accent Cape Flats South Atlantic Uganda Zimbabwe Asia East Asia Hong Kong South Asia Bangladesh India regional and occupational Maldives Nepal Pakistan Sri Lanka Southeast Asia Brunei Cambodia Malaysia Myanmar Philippines Singapore Thailand Antarctica Antarctica Related English language Basic Broad and general accents Commonwealth Comparison of American and British English E-Prime Engrish English as a lingua franca English-based creole languages Englishisation Globish Gogate Nerrière International Jewish English ( Yeshiva English ) Learning Linguistic purism in English List of English-based pidgins Non-native pronunciations of English Plain Standard v t e English-speaking world English speaking countries Further links Articles English-speaking world History of the English language British Empire English in the Commonwealth of Nations Anglosphere Lists List of countries by English-speaking population List of countries where English is an official language Countries and territories where English is the national language or the native language of the majority Africa Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Americas Anguilla Antigua and Barbuda The Bahamas Barbados Belize Bermuda British Virgin Islands Canada Cayman Islands Dominica Falkland Islands Grenada Guyana Jamaica Montserrat Saba Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Trinidad and Tobago Turks and Caicos Islands United States United States Virgin Islands Europe Guernsey Ireland Isle of Man Jersey United Kingdom Oceania Australia New Zealand Norfolk Island Pitcairn Islands Countries and territories where English is an official language, but not the majority first language Africa Botswana Cameroon Eswatini The Gambia Ghana Kenya Lesotho Liberia Malawi Mauritius Namibia Nigeria Rwanda Sierra Leone Somaliland South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Americas Puerto Rico Asia Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong India Pakistan Philippines Singapore Europe Gibraltar Akrotiri and Dhekelia Malta Oceania American Samoa Cook Islands Fiji Guam Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru Niue Northern Mariana Islands Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tokelau Tuvalu Vanuatu Dependencies shown in italics .

Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐n8rv6
Cached time: 20250817184012
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.328 seconds
Real time usage: 1.613 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14684/1000000
Revision size: 61020/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 723264/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 188129/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 25/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 271939/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.691/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10961082/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1228.452      1 -total
 23.21%  285.099      2 Template:Reflist
 16.77%  205.968      1 Template:Navboxes
 13.78%  169.253      1 Template:Infobox_language
 12.41%  152.479      1 Template:Infobox
 11.42%  140.305     13 Template:Navbox
  9.49%  116.597     20 Template:Cite_book
  6.79%   83.411      1 Template:Languages_of_the_United_States
  6.70%   82.336     19 Template:Cite_web
  6.64%   81.589     22 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1890:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817184012 and revision id 1306025891. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=American_English&oldid=1306025891 " Categories : American English Dialects of English North American English Languages attested from the 17th century 17th-century establishments in North America English language in the United States Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2025 Webarchive template wayback links All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from March 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from March 2017 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from August 2024 Languages without Glottolog code Language articles with IETF language tag Dialects of languages with ISO 639-3 code Language articles without reference field Pages with plain IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2019 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from August 2020 Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 13:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents American English 70 languages Add topic

