Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work 3 Natural law 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Hippias 39 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Latina Magyar مصرى Mirandés Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 5th century BC Greek sophist For other uses, see Hippias (disambiguation) .

Hippias of Elis ( / ˈ h ɪ p i ə s / ; Greek : Ἱππίας ὁ Ἠλεῖος ; late 5th century BC) was a Greek sophist , and a contemporary of Socrates . With an assurance characteristic of the later sophists, he claimed to be regarded as an authority on all subjects, and lectured on poetry , grammar , history , politics , mathematics , and much else.

[ 1 ] Most current knowledge of him is derived from Plato , who characterizes him as vain and arrogant.

Life [ edit ] Hippias was born at Elis in the mid 5th-century BC (c. 460 BC) and was thus a younger contemporary of Protagoras and Socrates . He lived at least as late as Socrates (399 BC). He was a disciple of Hegesidamus.

[ 2 ] Owing to his talent and skill, his fellow-citizens availed themselves of his services in political matters, and in a diplomatic mission to Sparta .

[ 3 ] But he was in every respect like the other sophists of the time: he travelled about in various towns and districts of Greece for the purpose of teaching and public speaking. The two dialogues of Plato , the Hippias major and the Hippias minor characterize him as vain and arrogant. The Hippias major (the authorship of this work by Plato is sometimes doubted) concerns the question about the beautiful , and purposely puts the knowledge and presumption of Hippias in a ludicrous light. The Hippias minor discusses the deficiency of human knowledge , and characterizes Hippias as ridiculously vain.

[ 1 ] Work [ edit ] Hippias was a man of very extensive knowledge, and he occupied himself not only with rhetorical , philosophical , and political studies, but was also well versed in poetry , music , mathematics , painting and sculpture , and he claimed some practical skill in the ordinary arts of life, for he used to boast of wearing on his body nothing that he had not made himself with his own hands, such as his seal-ring , his cloak , and shoes .

[ 4 ] He was credited with a lost work known as the Olympionikō̂n Anagraphḗ ( Ὀλυμπιονικῶν Ἀναγραφή ) which computed Coroebus 's victory as occurring in 776 BC and became the basis of all later lists of the Olympiads and their victors.

[ 5 ] On the other hand, his knowledge always appears superficial, he does not enter into the details of any particular art or science, and is satisfied with certain generalities, which enabled him to speak on everything without a thorough knowledge of any. This arrogance, combined with ignorance, is the main cause which provoked Plato to his severe criticism of Hippias, as the sophist enjoyed a very extensive reputation, and thus had a large influence upon the education of the youths of the higher classes.

Plutarch also criticized Hippias in The Life of Numa in Parallel Lives when writing about the chronology of Numa's relationship with Pythagoras , mentioning that the chronology was based on the Olympionikō̂n Anagraphḗ and stating that Hippias had no authoritative basis on his work.

[ 6 ] A mathematical discovery ascribed to Hippias is sometimes called the quadratrix of Hippias.

His great skill seems to have consisted in delivering grand show speeches; and Plato has him arrogantly declaring that he would travel to Olympia , and there deliver before the assembled Greeks an oration on any subject that might be proposed to him; [ 7 ] and Philostratus in fact speaks of several such orations delivered at Olympia, and which created great sensation. If such speeches were published by Hippias, then no specimen has come down to us. Plato claims he wrote epic poetry , tragedies , dithyrambs , and various orations, [ 8 ] as well as works on grammar , music , rhythm , harmony , and a variety of other subjects.

[ 9 ] He seems to have been especially fond of choosing antiquarian and mythical subjects for his show speeches.

Athenaeus mentions a work of Hippias under the title Synagoge which is otherwise unknown.

[ 10 ] An epigram of his is preserved in Pausanias .

[ 11 ] Natural law [ edit ] Hippias is credited with originating the idea of natural law . This ideal began at first during the 5th century BC. According to Hippias, natural law was never to be superseded as it was universal.

[ 12 ] Hippias saw natural law as a habitual entity that humans take part in without pre-meditation. He regarded the elite in states as indistinguishable from one another and thus they should perceive each other as so. Because of this, he reasons, they should consider and treat each other as a society of a unanimous state. These ideas were passed on through Cynicism and Stoicism , later being the foundation for turning Roman law in legislation.

[ 13 ] Along with natural law, Hippias also wrote about self-sufficiency as a binding principle. He used this principle in his teachings as he gathered knowledge in numerous subjects, so as to be never outwitted or have his reputation questioned.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Cynicism (philosophy) Natural Law Quadratrix of Hippias Roman Law Self-sufficiency Stoicism Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Chisholm 1911 .

^ Suda, Hippias ^ Plato, Hippias major , 281a, 286a; Philostratus, Vit. Soph.

i. 11.

^ Plato, Hippias major , 285c, Hippias minor , 368b, Protagoras , 315c; Philostratus, Vit. Soph.

i. 11.; Themistius, Orat.

xxix. p. 345. d.

^ Christesen, Paul (2012), "Imagining Olympia: Hippias of Elis and the First Olympic Victor List" , A Tall Order: Writing the Social History of the Ancient World , Berlin: B.G. Teubner, pp.

319– 356, doi : 10.1515/9783110931419.319 .

^ "Plutarch • Life of Numa" .

penelope.uchicago.edu . Retrieved 2023-11-25 .

^ Plat.

Hippias minor , 363 ^ Plato Hippias minor , 368 ^ Plato, Hippias major , 285ff; comp. Philostratus, Vit. Soph.

i. 11.; Plutarch, Num.

1, 23; Dio Chrysostom, Orat.

lxxi.

^ Athenaeus, xiii. 609 ^ Pausanias, v. 25 ^ Kainz, Howard P. (2004).

Natural Law: An Introduction and Re-examination . Chicago: Open Court.

ISBN 0812694546 .

^ "Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" . Retrieved 17 February 2014 .

^ Diels, Hermann; Sprague, Rosamond Kent (1972).

The Older Sophists: A Complete Translation by Several Hands of the Fragments in Die Fragmente Der Vorsokratiker . Columbia: University of South Carolina.

ISBN 0872205568 .

References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1870). "Hippias".

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology . p. 479.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Hippias of Elis ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 13 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 517.

External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Hippias" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Hippias' Attempt to Trisect an Angle at Convergence v t e Sophists of the 5th century BC Antiphon Callicles Critias Damon Dionysodorus Euthydemus Gorgias Hippias Lycophron Prodicus Protagoras Thrasymachus v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 FAST WorldCat 2 3 4 National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Greece Poland Israel Catalonia Academics zbMATH People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hippias&oldid=1299745274 " Categories : 5th-century BC births 4th-century BC deaths Ancient Eleans Ancient Greek geometers Sophists 5th-century BC Greek mathematicians 5th-century BC Greek philosophers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 04:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hippias 39 languages Add topic

