Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Irredentism in the Balkans and the Great Powers 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Powder keg of Europe 7 languages العربية Français Македонски Polski Српски / srpski Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Metaphor for the political state of the Balkans in the early 20th century This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Powder keg of Europe" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A diagrammatic illustration of European political alliances just before World War I.

The powder keg of Europe or Balkan powder keg was the Balkans in the early part of the 20th century preceding World War I . There were many overlapping claims to territories and spheres of influence between the major European powers such as the Russian Empire , the Austro-Hungarian Empire , the German Empire and, to a lesser degree, the Ottoman Empire , the United Kingdom and the Kingdom of Italy .

In addition to the imperialistic ambitions and interests in this region, there was a growth in nationalism with the indigenous peoples of this region leading to the formation of the independent states of Greece , Serbia , Montenegro , Bulgaria , Romania and Albania .

These tensions had boiled over during the decades long diplomatic crisis in the Balkans: starting with the Macedonian Struggle , the Balkan Wars , and then the 1914 Greco-Turkish war scare , though the Great Powers ruled out military intervention with the region until the assassination of Franz Ferdinand .

Background [ edit ] See also: History of the Balkans and Rise of nationalism in the Ottoman Empire Irredentism in the Balkans and the Great Powers [ edit ] Within these nations, there were movements to create "greater" nations, which is to enlarge the boundaries of the state beyond those areas where the national ethnic group was in the majority ( irredentism ).  This led to conflict between the newly independent nations and the empire from which they split, the Ottoman Empire . Additionally, it led to differences between the Balkan nations who wished to gain territory at the expense of their neighbors.  Both the conflict with the Ottoman Empire and between the Balkan nations led to the Balkan Wars in 1912–13.

In a different vein, the ideology of Pan-Slavism in Balkans gained popularity; the movement built around it in the region sought to unite all of the Slavs of the Balkans into one nation, Yugoslavia .  This, however, would require the union of several Balkan states and territory which was part of Austria-Hungary.  For this reason, Pan-Slavism was strongly opposed by Austria-Hungary, while it was supported by Russia which viewed itself as leader of all Slavic nations.

[ 1 ] To complicate matters, in the years preceding World War I , there existed a tangle of Great Power alliances, both formal and informal, public and secret.  Following the Napoleonic Wars there had existed a "balance of power" to, in theory, prevent major wars.  This theory held that opposing combinations of powers in Europe would be evenly matched entailing that any general war would be far too costly for any nation to risk entering.  This system began to fall apart as the Ottoman Empire which had been seen as a check on Russian power began to crumble, and as Germany, which had been a loose confederation of minor states, was united into a major power.  Not only did these changes lead to a realignment of power, but of interests as well.

All these factors, and many others, conspired to bring about the First World War.  As is insinuated by the name "the powder keg of Europe," the Balkans were not the major issue at stake in the war, but were merely the catalyst that led to the conflagration.  The Chancellor of Germany in the late 19th century, Otto von Bismarck , correctly predicted it would be the source of major conflict in Europe .

The powder keg "exploded" causing the First World War , which began with a conflict between imperial Austria-Hungary and Pan-Slavic Serbia.

Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria , a member of the Austrian royal family, was assassinated by a Bosnian of Serb extraction, a member of the Young Bosnia movement.  Austria-Hungary then issued an ultimatum to Serbia intended to provoke it to war through extreme demands.  The Serbian government reservedly accepted all of the conditions of the ultimatum, except for condition number six which demanded the inclusion of Austria-Hungary in Serbia's judicial inquiry into the assassination.

Serbia indicated this would be unconstitutional and a violation of its sovereignty and Austria-Hungary used it as a casus belli to invade Serbia.  With Germany fully supporting them, the Austro-Hungarians partially mobilized their army against Serbia, which had already begun mobilizing before replying to the Austro-Hungarian July Ultimatum .  Russia then began mobilizing in support of Serbia, though not bound by treaty to do so.  Due to the system of European alliances, this led to a series of escalating Austrian and Russian mobilizations and eventually Britain and France were also obliged to mobilize and declare war.

See also [ edit ] Causes of World War I The Guns of August , a nonfiction work detailing the leadup to World War I References [ edit ] ^ Castellan, Georges (1999).

Histoire des Balkans: XIVe-XXe siècle [ History of the Balkans: 14th-20th century ] (in French). Paris: Fayard.

ISBN 978-2-7028-3492-3 .

Further reading [ edit ] Jelavich, Barbara (1999).

History of the Balkans. Vol. 1: Eighteenth and nineteenth centuries . The Joint Committee on Eastern Europe publication series. Vol. 1 (Repr. [der Ausg. 1983] ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Pr.

ISBN 978-0-521-27458-6 .

v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Powder_keg_of_Europe&oldid=1285360852 " Categories : World War I Historiography of World War I History of the Balkans Kingdom of Bulgaria Kingdom of Serbia Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2023 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 13 April 2025, at 07:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Powder keg of Europe 7 languages Add topic

