Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation 2 Position 3 Conflict with the PCE and PSUC 4 International links 5 Transition era 6 Cultural references 7 See also 8 Footnotes 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents POUM 34 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Italiano עברית Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Far-left political party in Spain from 1935 to 1980 This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "POUM" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Workers' Party of Marxist Unification Partido Obrero de Unificación Marxista Catalan name Partit Obrer d'Unificació Marxista Abbreviation POUM Leader Joaquín Maurín (1935–1936) Andreu Nin (1936–1937) Julián Gorkin (1937–1939) Wilebaldo Solano (1947–1980) Founder Joaquín Maurín Andreu Nin Founded 1935 Dissolved 1980 (unofficially) Merger of Communist Left of Spain Workers' and Peasants' Bloc Headquarters Hotel Rivoli Rambla, Barcelona Newspaper La Batalla Youth wing Iberian Communist Youth Membership (1936) ~30,000–70,000 [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Ideology Communism Socialism Marxism Centrist Marxism Impossibilism Anti-Stalinism Factions: Libertarian socialism Trotskyism Political position Far-left National affiliation Popular Front Left Bloc for National Liberation International affiliation International Revolutionary Marxist Centre Colors Red Party flag Politics of Spain Political parties Elections The Workers' Party of Marxist Unification ( Spanish : Partido Obrero de Unificación Marxista , POUM ; Catalan : Partit Obrer d'Unificació Marxista , POUM) was a Spanish communist party formed during the Second Republic and mainly active around the Spanish Civil War . It was formed by the fusion of the Trotskyist Communist Left of Spain ( Izquierda Comunista de España, ICE ) and the Workers and Peasants' Bloc (BOC, affiliated with the Right Opposition ) against the will of Leon Trotsky , with whom the former broke.

Formation [ edit ] In 1935, POUM was formed as a communist opposition to the Stalinist form of communism promoted by the Soviet Union , by the revolutionaries Andreu Nin and Joaquín Maurín . Nin was profoundly influenced by the thinking of Leon Trotsky , particularly his permanent revolution thesis. It resulted from the merging of the Communist Party's Left Opposition (the Trotskyist Communist Left of Spain ) and the Right Opposition (the Workers and Peasants' Bloc ). This alliance was against the wishes of Trotsky, with whom the Communist Left of Spain broke.

In his writings on the Spanish Revolution , Trotsky would elaborate on his criticisms of the POUM such as their abandonment of the Left Opposition program in favour of reformism to retain tactical advantage among other political tendencies.

[ 3 ] Position [ edit ] A c. 1936 POUM poster appeals to workers: "Obreros ¡A la victoria!" ("Workers: to Victory!").

The party grew larger than the official Communist Party of Spain (PCE) nationally and in the communist hotbeds of Catalonia and the Valencian Country , where the Unified Socialist Party of Catalonia (PSUC) represented the PCE. The POUM was highly critical of the popular front strategy advocated by Joseph Stalin and the Communist International (Comintern) but it participated in the Spanish Popular Front initiated by Manuel Azaña , leader of Acción Republicana . The POUM attempted to implement some of its radical policies as part of the Popular Front government but they were resisted by the more centrist factions.

George Orwell , fought in the POUM in the civil war and reported that its membership was roughly 10,000 in July 1936, 70,000 in December 1936 and 40,000 in June 1937, although he notes that the numbers are from POUM sources and are probably exaggerated.

[ 2 ] Conflict with the PCE and PSUC [ edit ] The POUM's independent communist position, including opposition to Stalin, caused huge ruptures with the PCE, which remained fiercely loyal to the Comintern. Moreover, these divisions, which included accusations of Trotskyism (and even fascism ) by the communists, resulted in actual fighting between their supporters; most notably, in 1937, a primarily communist coalition of government forces attacked the POUM during the Barcelona May Days . While the larger Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (National Confederation of Labour, CNT) supported the POUM at first, the moderate leadership of the CNT dropped its support after it joined the government. Radical elements within the anarchist movement however fought side by side in the streets of Barcelona during the May Days and were isolated as well, like the Friends of Durruti . The POUM, along with the purely Trotskyist Seccion Bolshevik-Leninista, became isolated, and both organizations were driven underground. Nin was detained and presumably tortured to death by NKVD agents in Alcalá de Henares , Nin and his party were consistently labeled as provocateurs in Stalinist propaganda .

International links [ edit ] The POUM was a member of the London Bureau of socialist and centrist Marxist parties that rejected both the reformism of the Second International and the pro-Moscow orientation of the Comintern. Other members included the Independent Labour Party in Britain, the Workers and Peasants' Socialist Party (PSOP) in France, and Poale Zion . Its youth wing was affiliated to the International Bureau of Revolutionary Youth Organizations , through which it recruited the ILP Contingent in the Civil War. Foreign supporters of POUM during the Civil War included Lois Orr .

Transition era [ edit ] POUM demonstration on the 19th anniversary of the October Revolution , 1936 During the Spanish transition to democracy , the POUM was legalized in 1977. This led to a split in the party, with one faction opposing formal legalization, calling for a boycott of the 1977 general election and demanding the immediate restoration of the republic. The legalized party participated in the election as part of the Front for Workers' Unity (FUT), a coalition of parties and organisations to the left of the PCE which won 0.22% of the nationwide vote. The election result led to a crisis for the POUM as well as for most parties to the left of the PCE, from which it was not able to recover.

[ 4 ] The POUM continued to exist as a small party with an office in Barcelona and a monthly newspaper, La Batalla , calling for cooperation among the various far-left parties, but an attempted merger with Communist Action and the Collective for Marxist Unification failed during a "Unification Congress" in 1978. After this setback, the POUM decided not to participate in the 1979 elections . POUM branches in several cities became part of local coalitions and unification attempts with various far-left groups. In 1980, the POUM made its last electoral efforts, supporting Herri Batasuna in the Basque country and participating in the Left Bloc for National Liberation (BEAN - Unitat Popular) coalition in the Catalan parliamentary election, but the party was disintegrating.

La Batalla ceased publication in May 1980, marking the end of the POUM as an organized party, though it was never officially dissolved. As a last remnant, the Valencia branch remained active until 1981. Former members of the POUM formed the Fundación Andreu Nin (Andreu Nin Foundation) to preserve the heritage of their party and ideological current.

Cultural references [ edit ] British author George Orwell fought alongside members of the Independent Labour Party as part of POUM militias; [ 5 ] he recounted the experience in his book Homage to Catalonia .

[ 6 ] Likewise, the film Land and Freedom , directed by Ken Loach , tells of a group of POUM soldiers fighting in the war from the perspective of a member of the Communist Party of Great Britain who initially fought for the POUM before he later joined his CPGB comrades in the International Brigades . In particular, the film goes on to deal with his disillusionment with the Soviet Union 's policies in the war while he was fighting with the International Brigades, after which he decided to return to his POUM comrades shortly before the POUM's June 1937 suppression.

The POUM is briefly mentioned in Joe Haldeman 's science fiction novel The Forever War as a militia where "(y)ou obeyed an order only after it had been explained in detail; you could refuse if it didn't make sense." [ 7 ] Victor Serge dedicates Midnight in the Century to Andreu Nin and other slain leaders of the POUM.

Discussion of POUM in Hemingway's For Whom the Bell Tolls (Collier edition, p. 247).

In William Herrick 's novel "Hermanos!", the American communist protagonist comes to Spain in order to fight Fascism, but gets diverted into hunting down members of POUM. The POUM activists which the protagonist tortures and executes are depicted very sympathetically, shown bravely defiant and sticking to their positions to the bitter end - eventually causing the protagonist to undergo a crisis of conscience, break with the Party and become a dissident himself.

Ian Fleming's From Russia with Love (Signet edition, p. 50) states that Rosa Klebb infiltrated the POUM and may have murdered Andrés Nin Pérez.

In Margaret Atwood 's prize-winning novel, The Blind Assassin , a fictional newspaper account details the actual battles between the POUM and the Stalin-backed communists in Barcelona; the title of the newspaper article is Red Vendetta in Barcelona and mentions the purges against the POUM by Stalinist communists "well armed by Russia".

See also [ edit ] Iberian Communist Youth Iberian Anarchist Federation Homage to Catalonia - George Orwell 's book about his time with the POUM Pilar Santiago Revolutionary Workers' Party (Spain) Land and Freedom - Ken Loach 's movie about a story of POUM's militants The Man Who Loved Dogs - Leonardo Padura Fuentes ' novel about Trotsky's murderer Footnotes [ edit ] ^ John Simkin.

"The Workers Party of Marxist Unification (POUM)" . Retrieved 12 August 2014 .

^ a b Orwell, George (1980). "V".

Homage to Catalonia . introd. by Lionel Trilling .

New York , New York : Harcourt Brace & Company . p.

60 .

ISBN 978-0-15-642117-1 .

OCLC 9517765 .

The figure for P.O.U.M. membership are given as: July 1936, 10,000; December 1936, 70,000; June 1937, 40,000.

^ Trotsky, Leon (1973).

The Spanish Revolution, 1931−1939 . Pathfinder Press. pp.

17– 52.

ISBN 978-0-87348-273-8 .

^ Pelai Pagès, El POUM durant la transició democràtica (1974–1981) Archived 2023-06-09 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 15 January 2016 ^ Crain, Caleb (2016-04-11).

"The American Soldiers of the Spanish Civil War" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X . Retrieved 2019-11-27 .

^ "Soviet Union and the Spanish Civil War" .

Spartacus Educational . Retrieved 2019-11-27 .

^ Haldeman, Joe (1974).

The Forever War (First Avon Books Printing: May, 1991. ed.). New York: Avon Books. p. 209.

ISBN 0-380-70821-3 .

Further reading [ edit ] J. R. Campbell, Spain's 'Left' Critics . London: Communist Party of Great Britain, 1937.

Jesús Hernández , How the NKVD Framed the POUM .

Archived 2017-11-08 at the Wayback Machine Excerpt from Yo Fui un Ministro de Stalin . Mexico City: G. del Toro, Mexico, 1974.

Low, Mary Stanley ; Breá, Juan.

Red Spanish Notebook: The First Six Months of the Revolution and the Civil War , 1937.

Alan Sennett, Revolutionary Marxism in Spain, 1930–1937 . [2014] Chicago: Haymarket Books, 2015.

Wilebaldo Solano , The Spanish Revolution: The Life of Andreu Nin . Leeds: Independent Labour Party, 1974.

Víctor Alba , Stephen Schwarz.

Spanish Marxism and Soviet Communism, A History of the POUM in the Spanish Civil War , 2009.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Partit Obrer d'Unificació Marxista .

Fundación Andreu Nin website , (Spanish) Documents on POUM from "Trabajadores: The Spanish Civil War Through the Eyes of Organised Labour," Modern Records Centre, University of Warwick .

—Collection of more than 13,000 pages of documents from the archives of the British Trades Union Congress .

POUM Archive at marxists.org POUM texts at libcom POUM texts at "La Bataille socialiste" Victor Alba "La Revolución Española en la Práctica" (Introduction) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Norway Poland Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=POUM&oldid=1293047597 " Categories : POUM 1935 establishments in Spain Defunct communist parties in Spain Political parties established in 1935 Political parties of the Spanish Civil War Right Opposition Trotskyist organisations in Spain Socialist parties in Spain Anti-fascist organisations in Spain Political parties disestablished in 1980 Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2013 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 May 2025, at 10:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents POUM 34 languages Add topic

