Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 When negative and positive rights conflict Toggle When negative and positive rights conflict subsection 1.1 In medicine 2 Criticism 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Negative and positive rights 15 languages العربية Español فارسی Hausa Bahasa Indonesia ქართული Kiswahili Bahasa Melayu پښتو کوردی Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rights that oblige either inaction or action Not to be confused with Negative liberty or Positive liberty .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( December 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( December 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: <manual of style compliance>.

Please help improve this article if you can.

( February 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Rights Theoretical distinctions Claim rights and liberty Individual and group Natural rights and legal Negative and positive Human rights Civil and political Economic, social and cultural Three generations Rights by beneficiary Accused Animals Autistic Children Consumers Creditors Deaf Disabled Elders Family Fetus Farmers Humans Indigenous Intersex Kings LGBTQ Transgender Life Men Minorities Parents Fathers Mothers Patients Peasants Plants Prisoners Robots States Students Victims Effective remedy Women Workers Youth Other groups of rights Assembly Association Asylum Civil liberties Clothing Development Digital Education Environment Fair trial Food Free migration Guns Health Housing Linguistic Movement Property Public participation Repair Resist Rest and leisure Revolution Security Sexual and Reproductive Abortion Reproductive Sexuality Self defense Self-determination Speech Water and sanitation v t e Part of a series on Communitarianism Ideas Civil society Common good Community Consensus decision-making Diversity Political particularism Positive rights Social capital Solidarity Social responsibility Value pluralism Workplace democracy Intellectuals Aristotle Barber Barzilai Bellah Seyla Benhabib Blond Etzioni Galston Hauerwas Jean Bethke Elshtain Hegel Kuczewski MacIntyre Marglin Adán Preve Putnam Rousseau Reich Sandel Taylor Tönnies Walzer Related topics Catholic social teaching Christian democracy Libertarian socialism Progressivism Radical centrism Republicanism Social democracy Utopian socialism Politics portal v t e Negative and positive rights are rights that oblige either inaction ( negative rights ) or action ( positive rights ). These obligations may be of either a legal or moral character. The notion of positive and negative rights may also be applied to liberty rights .

To take an example involving two parties in a court of law : Adrian has a negative right to x against Clay, if and only if Clay is prohibited to act upon Adrian in some way regarding x . In contrast, Adrian has a positive right to x against Clay, if and only if Clay is obliged to act upon Adrian in some way regarding x . A case in point, if Adrian has a negative right to life against Clay, then Clay is required to refrain from killing Adrian; while if Adrian has a positive right to life against Clay, then Clay is required to act as necessary to preserve the life of Adrian.

Negative rights may include civil and political rights such as freedom of speech , life, private property , freedom from violent crime , protection against being defrauded , freedom of religion , habeas corpus , a fair trial , and the right not to be enslaved by another .

Positive rights , as initially proposed in 1979 by the Czech jurist Karel Vašák , may include other civil and political rights such as the right to counsel and police protection of person and property. Additionally, they may include economic, social and cultural rights such as food , housing , public education , employment , national security , military , health care , social security , internet access , and a minimum standard of living . In the "three generations" account of human rights, negative rights are often associated with the first generation of rights, while positive rights are associated with the second and third generations.

Some philosophers (see criticisms) disagree that the negative–positive rights distinction is useful or valid.

Under the theory of positive and negative rights, a negative right is a right not to be subjected to an action of another person or group such as a government, usually occurring in the form of abuse or coercion . Negative rights exist unless someone acts to negate them. A positive right is a right to be subjected to an action of another person or group. In the framework of the Kantian categorical imperative , negative rights can be associated with perfect duties , while positive rights can be connected to imperfect duties .

[ citation needed ] The belief in a distinction between positive and negative rights is generally maintained, or emphasized, by libertarians , who believe that positive rights do not exist until they are created by a contract. The United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights lists both positive and negative rights (but does not identify them as such). The constitutions of most liberal democracies guarantee negative rights, but not all include positive rights. Positive rights are often guaranteed by other laws, and the majority of liberal democracies provide their citizens with publicly funded education, health care, social security and unemployment benefits .

When negative and positive rights conflict [ edit ] This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Negative and positive rights" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Rights are deemed to be inalienable . However, in practice this is often taken as graded absolutism , as rights are ranked by their degree of importance, and violations of less important rights are accepted in the course of preventing violations of more important ones. Even if the right to not be killed is inalienable, the corresponding obligation on others to refrain from killing generally has at least one exception: self-defense . Certain widely accepted negative obligations (such as the obligations to refrain from theft, murder, etc.) are often considered prima facie , meaning that the legitimacy of the obligation is accepted "on its face"; but even if not questioned, such obligations may still be ranked for ethical analysis. Most modern societies insist that other ethical questions need to come into play before stealing can justify killing. Due to being universally regarded as one of the highest obligations, the obligation not to kill is significantly greater than the obligation not to steal. This is why a breach of the latter does not justify a breach of the former act.

Positive obligations confer duty. In ethics, positive obligations are almost never considered prima facie . The greatest negative obligation may have just one exception—one higher obligation of self-defense. However, even the greatest positive obligations generally require more complex ethical analysis. For example, one could easily justify failing to help, not just one, but several injured children quite ethically, in the case of triage after a disaster. This consideration has led ethicists to agree in a general way that positive obligations are usually junior to negative obligations, as they are not reliably prima facie . Some critics of positive rights implicitly suggest that because positive obligations are not reliably prima facie, they must always be agreed to through contract.

[ 1 ] Nineteenth-century philosopher Frédéric Bastiat summarized the conflict between these negative and positive rights by saying: M. de Lamartine wrote me one day: "Your doctrine is only the half of my program; you have stopped at liberty; I go on to fraternity." I answered him: "The second half of your program will destroy the first half." And, in fact, it is quite impossible for me to separate the word "fraternity" from the word "voluntary." It is quite impossible for me to conceive of fraternity as legally enforced, without liberty being legally destroyed, and justice being legally trampled underfoot.

[ 2 ] Jan Narveson argues that the claim suggesting there is no distinction between negative and positive rights because negative rights require police and courts for enforcement is "mistaken." He says that the question between what one has a right to do and if anybody enforces it, are separate issues. If rights are only negative, then it means that no one has a duty to enforce them, however, individuals have a right to use any non-forcible means to gain the cooperation of others in protecting those rights. He says "the distinction between negative and positive is quite robust." [ 3 ] Libertarians hold that positive rights, which would include a right to be protected, do not exist until they are created by a contract. However, those with this view do not mean that police, for example, are not obligated to protect the rights of citizens. Since they contract with their employers to defend citizens from violence, then they have created that obligation to their employer. A negative right to life may allow an individual to defend his life from others trying to kill him, or obtain voluntary assistance from others to defend his life.

Other advocates of the view that there is a distinction between negative and positive rights argue that the presence of a police force or army is not due to any positive right to these services that citizens claim, but rather because they are natural monopolies or public goods . These are features of any human society that arise naturally, even while adhering to the concept of negative rights only.

Robert Nozick discusses this idea at length in his book Anarchy, State, and Utopia .

[1] The Soviet Union criticized the Universal Declaration of Human Rights according to Marxism–Leninism for prioritizing negative rights over positive rights.

[ 4 ] In medicine [ edit ] In the field of medicine , positive rights of patients often conflict with negative rights of physicians .  In controversial areas such as abortion and assisted suicide , medical professionals may not wish to offer certain services for moral or philosophical reasons. If enough practitioners opt out as a result of conscience, a right granted by the conscience clause statutes in many jurisdictions (see Conscientious objection to abortion and Conscience clause in medicine in the United States ), patients may not have any means of having their own positive rights fulfilled.

[ 5 ] This was the case of Janet Murdock , a Montana woman who could not find any physician to assist her suicide in 2009.

[ 6 ] This controversy over positive and negative rights in medicine has seen an ongoing public debate between conservative ethicist Wesley J. Smith and bioethicist Jacob M. Appel .

[ 7 ] In discussing Baxter v. Montana , Appel has written: Medical licenses are a limited commodity, reflecting an artificial shortage created by a partnership between Congress and organizations representing physicians—with medical school seats and residency positions effectively allotted by the government, much like radio frequencies. Physicians benefit from this arrangement in that a smaller number of physicians inevitably leads to increased rates of reimbursement. There's nothing inherently wrong with this arrangement. However, it belies any claim that doctors should have the same right to choose their customers as barbers or babysitters. Much as the government has been willing to impose duties on radio stations (e.g., indecency codes, equal time rules) that would be impermissible if applied to newspapers, Montana might reasonably consider requiring physicians, in return for the privilege of a medical license, to prescribe medication to the dying without regard to the patient's intent.

[ 6 ] Smith replies that this is "taking the duty to die and transforming it into a duty to kill", which he argues "reflects a profound misunderstanding of the government's role".

[ 7 ] Criticism [ edit ] A right to adequate nutrition requires duties to avoid stealing, but also duties to act in ways that protect or repair the delivery of the supplies. The right cannot be guaranteed by only positive duties, nor only negative duties; it needs both.

If an individual has positive rights, it implies that other people have positive duties (to take certain actions); whereas negative rights imply that others have negative duties (to avoid certain other actions). Philosopher Henry Shue believes that all rights (regardless of whether they seem more "negative" or "positive") requires both kinds of duties at once. Shue says that honouring a right will require avoidance (a "negative" duty), but also protective or reparative actions ("positive" duties). The negative positive distinction may be a matter of emphasis; so a right will not be described as though it requires only one of the two types of duties.

[ 8 ] To Shue, rights can always be understood as confronting "standard threats" against humanity. Dealing with standard threats requires duties, which may be divided across time (e.g., "if avoiding the harmful behavior fails, begin to repair the damages"), but also divided across people. Every right provokes all three types of behavior (avoidance, protection, repair) to some degree. Dealing with a threat like murder, for instance, will require one individual to practice avoidance (e.g., the potential murderer must stay calm), others to protect (e.g., the police officer, who must stop the attack, or the bystander, who may be obligated to call the police), and others to repair (e.g., the doctor who must resuscitate a person who has been attacked). He implies that even the negative right not to be killed can only be guaranteed with the help of some positive duties. Shue further maintains that the negative and positive rights distinction can be harmful because it may result in the neglect of necessary duties.

[ 8 ] James P. Sterba makes similar criticisms. He holds that any right can be made to appear either positive or negative depending on the language used to define it. He writes: What is at stake is the liberty of the poor not to be interfered with in taking from the surplus possessions of the rich [emphasis added] what is necessary to satisfy their basic needs. Needless to say, libertarians would want to deny that the poor have this liberty. But how could they justify such a denial? As this liberty of the poor has been specified, it is not a positive right to receive something, but a negative right of non-interference.

[2] Sterba has rephrased the traditional "positive right" to provisions, and put it in the form of a sort of "negative right" not to be prevented from taking the resources on their own. All rights may not only require both "positive" and "negative" duties, but rights that do not involve forced labor may be phrased positively or negatively at will.

[3] See also [ edit ] Claim rights and liberty rights – a different distinction, orthogonal to that between positive and negative rights Constitutional economics Constitutionalism Freedom versus license Rule according to higher law Second Bill of Rights Three generations of human rights Two Concepts of Liberty – a lecture by Isaiah Berlin , which distinguished between positive and negative liberty Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action Notes [ edit ] ^ "Individual rights" , Ayn Rand Lexicon .

^ Bastiat, Frédéric (1995) [1848]. "The Law".

The Law. Chapter 2 in Selected Essays on Political Economy . Irvington-on-Hudson, NY: The Foundation for Economic Education, Inc.

^ Narveson, Jan.

"Jan Narveson – Libertarianism: A Philosophical Introduction" .

Against Politics . Archived from the original on February 10, 2006.

^ Lukina, Anna (2017).

"Soviet Union and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights" .

SSRN Electronic Journal . Elsevier BV.

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.2952292 .

ISSN 1556-5068 .

^ Appel, Jacob M. (24 April 2009).

"Do We Need a Pro-Choice Litmus Test for Obstetricians?" .

Huffington Post . Retrieved 9 June 2018 .

^ a b Appel, Jacob M. (18 October 2009).

"Big Sky Dilemma: Must Doctors Help Their Patients Die?" .

Huffington Post . Retrieved 9 June 2018 .

^ a b Smith, Wesley J. (3 September 2009).

"The 'Right to Die' Means a Physician Duty to Kill?" .

First Things . Retrieved 9 June 2018 .

^ a b Shue, Henry (1980). Chapters 1–2 of Basic Rights: Subsistence, Affluence, and U.S. Foreign Policy . Princeton University Press.

References [ edit ] Publishers Weekly review of Stephen Holmes and Cass R. Sunstein, The Cost of Rights: Why Liberty Depends on Taxes , ISBN 0-393-32033-2 .

Nozick, Robert (1975).

Anarchy, State, and Utopia . Oxford : Blackwell.

ISBN 0-631-15680-1 Sterba, J.P., "From Liberty to Welfare" in Ethics: The Big Questions . Malden, MA : Blackwell, 1998. p. 238 Hodgson, D. (1998).

The Human Right to Education . Aldershot, England: Ashgate Publishing v t e Rights theory Natural rights and legal rights Claim rights and liberty rights Negative and positive rights Individual and group rights Natural law Positive law Sovereign states Universal jurisdiction Equality before the law Social contract v t e Human rights Humans Children Intersex people Women Fundamental concepts and philosophies Natural law Positive law Sovereignty Universal jurisdiction Distinctions Claim rights and liberty rights Individual and group rights Natural rights and legal rights Negative and positive rights Aspects Corporal punishment Organizations List of human rights organisations National human rights institutions By continent Africa Middle East Asia Europe North America South America Oceania Human rights abuses Atrocity crime Crime of apartheid Crimes against humanity Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Enforced disappearances Forced migration Genocide Human rights abuses against Palestinians by Israel at Guantánamo Bay detention camp during the Battle of Mosul (2016–2017) during the Gaddafi regime during the Libyan civil war (2011) in Afghanistan in Algeria in Angola in Argentina in Armenia in Australia in Austria in Azad Kashmir in Azerbaijan in Bahrain in Balochistan in Bangladesh in Belarus in Bolivia in Botswana in Brazil in Burkina Faso in Burundi in Cambodia in Canada in Chile in Chile under Augusto Pinochet in China in Cuba in Egypt in El Salvador in Ethiopia in France in Gabon in Ghana in Germany in Guatemala in Hong Kong in Egypt in Haiti in India in Indonesia in Iran in Iraq in Ireland in Israel in Italy in Jammu and Kashmir in Japan in Kashmir in Kazakhstan in Kenya in Kuwait in Kyrgyzstan‎ in Lebanon in Libya in Lithuania in Malawi in Malaysia in Manipur in Mexico in Morocco in Myanmar in Nepal in New Zealand in Nigeria in North Korea in Pakistan in Palestine in Panama in Papua New Guinea in Peru in Poland in Punjab, India in Romania in the Russia in Saudi Arabia in Sierra Leone in Sindh in South Africa in South Korea in Sri Lanka in Sudan in Switzerland in Syria in Taiwan in Thailand in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the Dominican Republic in the Philippines in the Soviet Union in the United Arab Emirates in the United States in Turkey in Uganda in Ukraine in Uzbekistan in Venezuela in Vietnam in Yemen in Zimbabwe of the Marcos dictatorship of the military dictatorship in Brazil (1964–1985) Incitement to genocide List of human rights abuses by country Murder Persecution Rape Slavery Torture Victims War crimes Related History of human rights List of global issues List of human rights awards Three generations Universal Declaration of Human Rights United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐mh55s
Cached time: 20250818101823
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.703 seconds
Real time usage: 0.877 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2939/1000000
Revision size: 17153/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 164048/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 18159/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 81442/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.417/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19551477/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  676.543      1 -total
 23.16%  156.709      1 Template:Political_philosophy
 16.52%  111.788      2 Template:Lang
 15.28%  103.397      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 12.04%   81.445      1 Template:Rights
 11.74%   79.406      1 Template:Sidebar
 11.49%   77.721      1 Template:Cite_book
 10.01%   67.730      1 Template:Short_description
  9.85%   66.669      4 Template:Ambox
  8.09%   54.718      4 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3558732:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818101823 and revision id 1306548001. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Negative_and_positive_rights&oldid=1306548001 " Categories : Rights Human rights concepts Political concepts Affirmative action Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from December 2018 All articles with style issues Articles that may contain original research from December 2018 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing cleanup from February 2022 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from February 2022 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from February 2022 Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2008 Articles needing additional references from October 2008 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 10:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Negative and positive rights 15 languages Add topic

