Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Function 3 Organisation Toggle Organisation subsection 3.1 Regular funding 3.2 Special committees 4 International profile 5 Examples of projects supported 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Research Foundation – Flanders (FWO) 1 language Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Research Foundation – Flanders (FWO) Fonds voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek – Vlaanderen Abbreviation FWO Predecessor National Fund for Scientific Research (NFWO/FNRS) Formation 2006 [1928] Purpose Research funding Headquarters Brussels Location Egmontstraat 5, 1000 Brussel, Belgium Region served Flanders Official language Dutch, English President Bruno Blondé [ 1 ] Secretary General Hans Willems [ 1 ] Website FWO The Research Foundation – Flanders ( FWO ; Dutch : Fonds voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek – Vlaanderen ) is a Belgian public research council , based in Brussels. The Flemish research council aims to sponsor ground-breaking research and innovation. Much of this work involves supporting researchers and undertakings in association with the universities and institutes of Flanders , including Ghent University , University of Leuven , University of Antwerp and Free University of Brussels , among others.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] The FWO is a successor to the Belgian National Fund for Scientific Research (NFWO / FNRS), which had been founded in 1928, after the call from King Albert I of Belgium for the promotion of research and innovation.

In 2006, the National Fund for Scientific Research (NFWO / FNRS) divided into two organisations: the FWO, for the Flemish community , and the F.R.S.-FNRS ( French : Fonds de la Recherche Scientifique – FNRS ) for the French-speaking region.

[ 3 ] A self-governing organization, the Research Foundation – Flanders is located in Brussels and financed by the Flemish government , the federal government , and the national lottery, with further support coming from partner institutes and companies.

Function [ edit ] The FWO supports research in science , engineering , and the humanities through a variety of frameworks.

[ 4 ] It offers competitive funding for doctoral and postdoctoral fellowships as well as for research grants, specific projects, and infrastructure. Moreover, the FWO funds international mobility and collaboration. Together with a number of partners, it also bestows scientific prizes.

[ 5 ] Organisation [ edit ] Regular funding [ edit ] The FWO organises a total of 31 expert panels, 30 specialist and one interdisciplinary. These panels advise the Senate and the Board of Trustees on matters of funding.

Biological sciences Molecular and cellular biology Functional biology Biodiversity and ecology Applied biological sciences Humanities Languages Art, art history, and literature History and archaeology Theology and religious studies Philosophy and ethics Social sciences Sciences of law and criminology Economics, business economics and management Psychology, pedagogy, didactics, and social work Social, political, and communication sciences Medical sciences Pharmaceutical sciences and medical biochemistry Genetics, functional genome research, bio-informatics science, developmental biology Microbiology and immunology Cancer research Neuroscience, clinical neurology, psychiatry, musculoskeletal research, rheumatology, orthopaedics, and dermatology Gastroenterology, hepatology, endocrinology, metabolism and nutrition, reproduction, and urogenital system Health sciences Science and technology Mathematical sciences Physics Condensed matter and physical chemistry Chemistry Informatics and knowledge technology Chemical engineering, material sciences Energy, electrical engineering, electronics, and mechanics Sciences of the earth and space Science and technology of construction and the build environment Interdisciplinary Special committees [ edit ] The FWO also organises special committees to advise on support for international collaboration, research infrastructure, and other special mandates.

International profile [ edit ] The FWO is a member of Science Europe and collaborates in many European research organisations.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] In addition, it has created partnerships with numerous counterparts across the globe, such as the French Centre national de la recherche scientifique (CNRS), Dutch Netherlands Organisation for Scientific Research (NWO), Japan Society for the Promotion of Science , Polish Academy of Sciences , and National Natural Science Foundation of China .

[ 8 ] Examples of projects supported [ edit ] Excavations in Sagalassos , started in 1990 The 1931 FNRS-1, a balloon that set an altitude record, designed by Auguste Piccard Participation in the IceCube Neutrino Observatory , starting in 2000 See also [ edit ] Funding of science National Fund for Scientific Research References [ edit ] ^ a b "Organisation" .

FWO . Retrieved 2024-05-28 .

^ "Research Foundation - Flanders" .

AcademiaNet .

^ "Organisation profile" .

academicpositions.eu .

^ "Funding frameworks" .

FWO .

^ "Overview of scientific prizes" .

FWO .

^ "Member Organisations" .

Science Europe .

^ "Profile at European Commission, Research & Innovation" .

^ "International collaborations" .

FWO .

External links [ edit ] Official website History of the FWO Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Research_Foundation_–_Flanders_(FWO)&oldid=1254621642 " Categories : Research and development organizations Science and technology in Belgium Research institutes in Belgium Research and development in Europe Research funding agencies Hidden categories: Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing French-language text Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 31 October 2024, at 22:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Research Foundation – Flanders (FWO) 1 language Add topic

