Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name and interpretation 2 Historical representations Toggle Historical representations subsection 2.1 Ancient Egypt 2.2 Gnosticism and alchemy 2.3 World serpent in mythology 2.4 Connection to Indian thought 3 Modern references Toggle Modern references subsection 3.1 Jungian psychology 3.2 Kekulé's dream 3.3 Cosmos 3.4 Cybernetics 3.5 Armadillo girdled lizard 3.6 In Iberian culture 3.7 Dragon Gate Pro-Wrestling 3.8 In fiction 3.8.1 Literature 3.8.2 Film and television 3.8.3 Gaming 3.8.4 Music 3.8.5 Sculpture 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Notes 5.2 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Ouroboros 49 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Banjar Bikol Central Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Symbolic serpent with its tail in its mouth For other uses, see Ouroboros (disambiguation) .

An ouroboros in a 1478 drawing in an alchemical tract [ 1 ] The ouroboros or uroboros ( / ˌ j ʊər ə ˈ b ɒr ə s / ; [ 2 ] / ˌ ʊər ə ˈ b ɒr ə s / [ 3 ] ) is an ancient symbol depicting a snake or dragon [ 4 ] eating its own tail . The ouroboros entered Western tradition via ancient Egyptian iconography and the Greek magical tradition . It was adopted as a symbol in Gnosticism and Hermeticism and, most notably, in alchemy . Some snakes, such as rat snakes , have been known to consume themselves.

[ 5 ] Name and interpretation [ edit ] The term derives from Ancient Greek οὐροβόρος , [ 6 ] from οὐρά oura 'tail' plus -βορός -boros '-eating'.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The ouroboros is often interpreted as a symbol for eternal cyclic renewal or a cycle of life, death and rebirth ; the snake's skin sloughing symbolises the transmigration of souls . The snake biting its own tail is a fertility symbol in some religions: the tail is a phallic symbol and the mouth is a yonic or womb-like symbol.

[ 9 ] Historical representations [ edit ] First known representation of the ouroboros, on one of the shrines enclosing the sarcophagus of Tutankhamun Ancient Egypt [ edit ] One of the earliest known ouroboros motifs is found in the Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld , an ancient Egyptian funerary text in KV62 , the tomb of Tutankhamun , in the 14th century BCE. The text concerns the actions of Ra and his union with Osiris in the underworld . The ouroboros is depicted twice on the figure: holding their tails in their mouths, one encircling the head and upper chest, the other surrounding the feet of a large figure, which may represent the unified Ra-Osiris (Osiris born again as Ra). Both serpents are manifestations of the deity Mehen , who in other funerary texts protects Ra in his underworld journey. The whole divine figure represents the beginning and the end of time.

[ 10 ] The ouroboros appears elsewhere in Egyptian sources, where, like many Egyptian serpent deities, it represents the formless disorder that surrounds the orderly world and is involved in that world's periodic renewal.

[ 11 ] The symbol persisted from Egyptian into Roman times , when it frequently appeared on magical talismans , sometimes in combination with other magical emblems.

[ 12 ] The 4th-century CE Latin commentator Servius was aware of the Egyptian use of the symbol, noting that the image of a snake biting its tail represents the cyclical nature of the year.

[ 13 ] Gnosticism and alchemy [ edit ] Early alchemical ouroboros illustration with the words ἓν τὸ πᾶν ("The All is One ") from the work of Cleopatra the Alchemist in MS Marciana gr. Z. 299. (10th century) In Gnosticism , a serpent biting its tail symbolised eternity and the soul of the world.

[ 14 ] The Gnostic Pistis Sophia (c. 400 CE) describes the ouroboros as a twelve-part dragon surrounding the world with its tail in its mouth.

[ 15 ] The famous ouroboros drawing from the early alchemical text, The Chrysopoeia of Cleopatra ( Κλεοπάτρας χρυσοποιία ), probably originally dating to the 3rd century Alexandria , but first known in a 10th-century copy, encloses the words hen to pan ( ἓν τὸ πᾶν ), "the all is one ". Its black and white halves may perhaps represent a Gnostic duality of existence, analogous to the Taoist yin and yang symbol.

[ 16 ] The chrysopoeia ouroboros of Cleopatra the Alchemist is one of the oldest images of the ouroboros to be linked with the legendary opus of the alchemists, the philosopher's stone .

[ citation needed ] A 15th-century alchemical manuscript, The Aurora Consurgens , features the ouroboros, where it is used among symbols of the sun, moon, and mercury.

[ 17 ] A highly stylised ouroboros from The Book of Kells , an illuminated Gospel Book (c. 800 CE) Engraving of a wyvern -type ouroboros by Lucas Jennis , in the 1625 alchemical tract De Lapide Philosophico . The figure serves as a symbol for mercury .

[ 18 ] An engraving of a woman holding an ouroboros in Michael Ranft 's 1734 treatise on vampires Transylvanian Thaler of Gabriel Bethlen showing his portrait and coat of arms including an ouroboros in the center of the shield (1621) Seal of the Theosophical Society , founded 1875 Flag of the short-lived Italian Regency of Carnaro at Fiume , bearing the snake Ouroborus World serpent in mythology [ edit ] In Norse mythology , the ouroboros appears as the serpent Jörmungandr , one of the three children of Loki and Angrboda , which grew so large that it could encircle the world and grasp its tail in its teeth. In the legends of Ragnar Lodbrok , such as Ragnarssona þáttr , the Geatish king Herraud gives a small lindworm as a gift to his daughter Þóra Town-Hart after which it grows into a large serpent which encircles the girl's bower and bites itself in the tail. The serpent is slain by Ragnar Lodbrok who marries Þóra. Ragnar later has a son with another woman named Kráka and this son is born with the image of a white snake in one eye. This snake encircled the iris and bit itself in the tail, and the son was named Sigurd Snake-in-the-Eye .

[ 19 ] It is a common belief among indigenous people of the tropical lowlands of South America that waters at the edge of the world-disc are encircled by a snake, often an anaconda, biting its own tail.

[ 20 ] The ouroboros has certain features in common with the Biblical Leviathan . According to the Zohar , the Leviathan is a singular creature with no mate, "its tail is placed in its mouth", while Rashi on Baba Batra 74b describes it as "twisting around and encompassing the entire world". The identification appears to go back as far as the poems of Kalir in the 6th–7th centuries.

[ citation needed ] Connection to Indian thought [ edit ] In the Aitareya Brahmana , a Vedic text of the early 1st millennium BCE, the nature of the Vedic rituals is compared to "a snake biting its own tail." [ 21 ] Ouroboros symbolism has been used to describe the Kundalini .

[ 22 ] According to the medieval Yoga-kundalini Upanishad : "The divine power, Kundalini, shines like the stem of a young lotus; like a snake, coiled round upon herself she holds her tail in her mouth and lies resting half asleep as the base of the body" (1.82).

[ 23 ] Storl (2004) also refers to the ouroboros image in reference to the "cycle of samsara ".

[ 24 ] Modern references [ edit ] Jungian psychology [ edit ] Swiss psychiatrist Carl Jung saw the ouroboros as an archetype and the basic mandala of alchemy. Jung also defined the relationship of the ouroboros to alchemy: Carl Jung, Collected Works , Vol. 14 para. 513.

The alchemists, who in their own way knew more about the nature of the individuation process than we moderns do, expressed this paradox through the symbol of the Ouroboros, the snake that eats its own tail. The Ouroboros has been said to have a meaning of infinity or wholeness. In the age-old image of the Ouroboros lies the thought of devouring oneself and turning oneself into a circulatory process, for it was clear to the more astute alchemists that the prima materia of the art was man himself. The Ouroboros is a dramatic symbol for the integration and assimilation of the opposite, i.e. of the shadow. This 'feedback' process is at the same time a symbol of immortality since it is said of the Ouroboros that he slays himself and brings himself to life, fertilizes himself, and gives birth to himself. He symbolizes the One, who proceeds from the clash of opposites, and he, therefore, constitutes the secret of the prima materia which ... unquestionably stems from man's unconscious.

The Jungian psychologist Erich Neumann writes of it as a representation of the pre-ego "dawn state", depicting the undifferentiated infancy experience of both humankind and the individual child.

[ 25 ] Kekulé's dream [ edit ] The ouroboros, Kekulé 's inspiration for the structure of benzene Kekulé's proposal for the structure of benzene (1872) The German organic chemist August Kekulé described the eureka moment when he realised the structure of benzene , after he saw a vision of Ouroboros: [ 26 ] I was sitting, writing at my text-book; but the work did not progress; my thoughts were elsewhere. I turned my chair to the fire and dozed. Again the atoms were gamboling before my eyes. This time the smaller groups kept modestly in the background. My mental eye, rendered more acute by the repeated visions of the kind, could now distinguish larger structures of manifold conformation: long rows, sometimes more closely fitted together; all twining and twisting in snake-like motion. But look! What was that? One of the snakes had seized hold of its own tail, and the form whirled mockingly before my eyes. As if by a flash of lightning I awoke; and this time also I spent the rest of the night in working out the consequences of the hypothesis.

Cosmos [ edit ] Martin Rees used the ouroboros to illustrate the various scales of the universe, ranging from 10 −20 cm (subatomic) at the tail, up to 10 25 cm (supragalactic) at the head.

[ 27 ] Rees stressed "the intimate links between the microworld and the cosmos, symbolised by the ouraborus ", as tail and head meet to complete the circle.

[ 28 ] Cybernetics [ edit ] W. Ross Ashby applied ideas from biology to his own work as a psychiatrist in "Design for a Brain" (1952): that living things maintain essential variables of the body within critical limits with the brain as a regulator of the necessary feedback loops. Parmar contextualises his practices as an artist in applying the cybernetic Ouroboros principle to musical improvisation.

[ 29 ] Hence the snake eating its tail is an accepted image or metaphor in the autopoietic calculus for self-reference, [ 30 ] or self-indication, the logical processual notation for analysing and explaining self-producing autonomous systems and "the riddle of the living", developed by Francisco Varela . Reichel describes this as: an abstract concept of a system whose structure is maintained through the self-production of and through that structure. In the words of
Kauffman, is "the ancient mythological symbol of the worm ouroboros embedded in a mathematical, non-numerical calculus".

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] The calculus derives from the confluence of the cybernetic logic of feedback, the sub-disciplines of autopoiesis developed by Varela and Humberto Maturana , and calculus of indications of George Spencer Brown . In another related biological application: It is remarkable, that Rosen's insight, that metabolism is just a mapping ..., which may be too cursory for a biologist, turns out to show us the way to construct recursively , by a limiting process, solutions of the self-referential Ouroborus equation f(f) = f, for an unknown function f, a way that mathematicians had not imagined before Rosen.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Second-order cybernetics , or the cybernetics of cybernetics, applies the principle of self-referentiality, or the participation of the observer in the observed, to explore observer involvement.

[ 35 ] including D. J. Stewart's domain of "observer valued imparities".

[ 36 ] In its defensive position, the armadillo girdled lizard resembles an Ouroboros.

Armadillo girdled lizard [ edit ] The scientific name of the armadillo girdled lizard ( Ouroborus cataphractus ) is derived from the animal's defensive posture: curling into a ball and holding its tail in its mouth.

[ 37 ] Pescadillas are often presented biting their tails.

In Iberian culture [ edit ] A medium-sized European hake , known in Spanish as pescadilla and in Portuguese as pescada , is often presented with its mouth biting its tail. In Spanish it receives the name of pescadilla de rosca (" torus hake").

[ 38 ] Both expressions Uma pescadinha de rabo na boca "tail-in mouth little hake" and La pescadilla que se muerde la cola , "the hake that bites its tail", are proverbial Portuguese and Spanish expressions for circular reasoning and vicious circles .

[ 39 ] Dragon Gate Pro-Wrestling [ edit ] The Kobe , Japan-based Dragon Gate Pro-Wrestling promotion used a stylised ouroboros as their logo for the first 20 years of the company's existence. The logo is a silhouetted dragon twisted into the shape of an infinity symbol, devouring its own tail. In 2019, the promotion dropped the infinity dragon logo in favour of a shield logo.

In fiction [ edit ] Literature [ edit ] A variation of the Ouroboros motif is an important symbol in the fantasy novel The Neverending Story by Michael Ende : featuring two snakes, one black and one white, biting the other's tail, this symbol represents the powerful AURYN and the infinite nature of the story. The symbol is also featured prominently on the cover of both the fictional book and the novel.

The Worm Ouroboros is a high-fantasy novel written by E. R. Eddison . Much like the cyclical symbol of the ouroboros eating its own tail, the novel ends as it begins. The main villain has a ring in the form of Ouroboros.

In Mexican Gothic the symbol is used throughout the story, portraying the immortality of the home and the family, as well as the persistence of outdated ideologies.

[ 40 ] In The Wheel of Time and its 2021 television adaption , the Aes Sedai wear a "Great Serpent" ring, described as a snake consuming its own tail.

[ 41 ] In the science fiction short story " All You Zombies " (1958) by American writer Robert A. Heinlein , the character Jane wears an Ouroboros ring, "the worm Ouroboros, the world snake".

[ 42 ] The short story later inspired the movie Predestination (2014).

In the SCP Foundation universe, the proposal tale "The Ouroboros Cycle" [ 43 ] spans the story of the SCP Foundation from its creation to its ending.

In the A Discovery of Witches novels and television adaptation, the crest of the de Clermont family is an ouroboros. The symbol plays a significant role in the alchemical plot of the story.

In The Witcher , the Ouroboros and the "snake biting its own tail" is a recurring theme.

Film and television [ edit ] The Ouroboros is the adopted symbol of the End Times -obsessed Millennium Group in the TV series Millennium .

[ 44 ] It also briefly appears when Dana Scully gets a tattoo of it in The X-Files Season 4 episode " Never Again " (1997).

[ 45 ] " Ouroboros " is an episode of the British science-fiction sitcom Red Dwarf , in which Dave Lister learns that he is his own father through time travel.

[ 46 ] The word is used in the film Adaptation (2002) where Nicolas Cage , in the role of screenwriter Charlie Kaufman , realizes that he has written himself into the screenplay of the very film the audience is watching.

In Ninjago (2012), the Lost City of Ouroboros (also referred to as the Ancient City of Ouroboros) serves as a pivotal location in the Serpentine's plan for vengeance against Ninjago.

In Hemlock Grove (2013-2015), the ouroboros plays an important part throughout the series.

In Season 1 (2018) of the cyberpunk Netflix series Altered Carbon , the protagonist Takeshi Kovacs gets an ouroboros tattoo in shape of an infinity symbol , and it features in the show's title sequence, tying in to the themes of rebirth and the twisting of the natural cycle of life and death.

[ 47 ] In the season 2 premiere of the television series Loki , a character named Ouroboros (played by Ke Huy Quan ) is introduced. He is an employee of the Time Variance Authority . In the fourth episode, he also references a snake biting its own tail.

[ 48 ] In the anime Fullmetal Alchemist: Brotherhood , members of the homunculi race are identified by having the symbol carved/tattooed/branded/marked on them.

[ 49 ] The Abiranariba in The Dark Crystal: Age of Resistance is based on the ouroboros.

Gaming [ edit ] Splatoon 3 has a serpent-like Salmonid creature named after it, the Horrorboros.

[ 50 ] Ace Combat 3: Electrosphere ' s main antagonist group is a terrorist organization called Ouroboros, whose intention is to cripple Strangereal's megacorporations in the continent of Usea.

The Legend of Heroes: Trails features the enigmatic Society of Ouroboros, whose members serve as recurring antagonists in the series.

In Xenoblade Chronicles 3 , the main six characters wield a power named after Ouroboros, which is subversively used to oppose the cycle of death and rebirth in Aionios rather than representing it.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] In The Witcher 3: Wild Hunt , an ouroboros spins on loading screens as an indication for the game loading.

A three-headed ouroboros is the logo of Elder Scrolls Online , with a lion, a dragon, and an eagle that represent the three main factions of the game.

In Inscryption , Ouroboros is a playable card that has the ability to return to the player's hand as a stronger version of itself after it has been killed.

Music [ edit ] In King Woman 's album Celestial Blues (2021), Ourobouros is alluded to in the song "Golgotha": "The snake eats its tail, we return again to this hell".

[ 53 ] Sculpture [ edit ] Ouroboros, Canberra Ouroboros , a large public sculpture by Australian artist Lindy Lee at the National Gallery of Australia forecourt.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Members of the public are free to enter its 4 m "mouth".

[ 56 ] See also [ edit ] Amphisbaena Cyclic model Dragon (M. C. Escher) Endless knot Ensō Eternal return (Eliade) Eternalism (philosophy of time) Historic recurrence Hoop snake Infinite loop Kulshedra Möbius strip Quine (computing) Self-fulfilling prophecy Self-licking ice cream cone Self-reference Social cycle theory Strange loop Three hares Valknut The Worm Ouroboros References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Theodoros Pelecanos 's manuscript of an alchemical tract attributed to Synesius , in Codex Parisinus graecus 2327 in the Bibliothèque Nationale, France, mentioned s.v.

'alchemy', The Oxford Classical Dictionary , Oxford University Press, 2012, ISBN 0199545561 ^ "uroboros" .

Lexico UK English Dictionary .

Oxford University Press . Archived from the original on 19 December 2019.

^ "ouroboros" .

Dictionary.com .

Random House .

^ "Salvador Dalí: Alchimie des Philosophes | The Ouroboros" .

Academic Commons . Willamette University.

^ Mattison, Chris (2007).

The New Encyclopedia of Snakes . Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. p. 105.

ISBN 978-0-691-13295-2 .

^ Liddell & Scott (1940) , οὐροβόρος ^ Liddell & Scott (1940) , οὐρά ^ Liddell & Scott (1940) , βορά ^ Arien Mack (1999).

Humans and Other Animals . Ohio State University Press. p. 359.

^ Hornung, Erik.

The Ancient Egyptian Books of the Afterlife .

Cornell University Press , 1999. pp. 38, 77–78 ^ Hornung, Erik (1982).

Conceptions of God in Egypt: The One and the Many . Cornell University Press. pp.

163– 64.

^ Hornung 2002 , p. 58.

^ Servius , note to Aeneid 5.85: "according to the Egyptians, before the invention of the alphabet the year was symbolized by a picture, a serpent biting its own tail because it recurs on itself" (annus secundum Aegyptios indicabatur ante inventas litteras picto dracone caudam suam mordente, quia in se recurrit) , as cited by Danuta Shanzer, A Philosophical and Literary Commentary on Martianus Capella's De Nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii Book 1 (University of California Press, 1986), p. 159.

^ Origen, Contra Celsum 6.25.

^ Hornung 2002 , p. 76.

^ Eliade, Mircea (1976).

Occultism, Witchcraft, and Cultural Fashions . Chicago and London: U of Chicago Press. pp. 55, 93– 113.

^ Bekhrad, Joobin.

"The ancient symbol that spanned millennia" . BBC . Retrieved 24 July 2021 .

^ Lambsprinck : De Lapide Philosophico . E Germanico versu Latine redditus, per Nicolaum Barnaudum Delphinatem .... Sumptibus LUCAE JENNISSI, Frankfurt 1625, p. 17 .

^ Jurich, Marilyn (1998).

Scheherazade's Sisters: Trickster Heroines and Their Stories in World Literature . Greenwood Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0-313-29724-3 .

^ Roe, Peter (1986), The Cosmic Zygote , Rutgers University Press ^ Witzel, M., " The Development of the Vedic Canon and its Schools: The Social and Political Milieu " in Witzel, Michael (ed.) (1997), Inside the Texts, Beyond the Texts. New Approaches to the Study of the Vedas , Harvard Oriental Series, Opera Minora vol. 2, Cambridge: Harvard University Press. p. 325 footnote 346 ^ Henneberg, Maciej; Saniotis, Arthur (24 March 2016).

The Dynamic Human . Bentham Science Publishers. p. 137.

ISBN 978-1-68108-235-6 .

^ Mahony, William K. (1 January 1998).

The Artful Universe: An Introduction to the Vedic Religious Imagination . SUNY Press. p. 191.

ISBN 978-0-7914-3579-3 .

^ "When Shakti is united with Shiva, she is a radiant, gentle goddess; but when she is separated from him, she turns into a terrible, destructive fury. She is the endless Ouroboros, the dragon biting its own tail, symbolizing the cycle of samsara." Storl, Wolf-Dieter (2004).

Shiva: The Wild God of Power and Ecstasy . Inner Traditions / Bear & Co. p. 219.

ISBN 978-1-59477-780-6 .

^ Neumann, Erich. (1995).

The Origins and History of Consciousness.

Bollington series XLII: Princeton University Press . Originally published in German in 1949.

^ Read, John (1957).

From Alchemy to Chemistry . Courier Corporation. pp.

179– 180.

ISBN 978-0-486-28690-7 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ M Rees Just Six Numbers (London 1999) pp. 7–8 ^ M Rees Just Six Numbers (London 1999) p. 161 ^ Parmar, Robin. "No Input Software: Cybernetics, Improvisation, and the Machinic Phylum." ISSTA 2011 (2014). He further discusses the cybernetics in elementary actions (like picking up a drum stick), the evolution of cybernetic science from Norbert Wiener to Gordon Pask , Heinz von Foerster , and Autopoiesis, and in related fields such as Autocatalysis , the philosophical system of Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari , and Manuel DeLanda .

^ Varela, Francisco J. "A Calculus for Self-reference." International Journal of General Systems 2 (1975): 5–24.

^ Kauffman sub-reference: Kauffman L. H. 2002. Laws of form and form dynamics. Cybernetics & Human Knowing 9(2): 49–63, pp. 57–58.

^ Reichel, André (2011).

"Snakes all the Way Down: Varela's Calculus for Self-Reference and the Praxis of Paradis" (PDF) .

Systems Research and Behavioral Science .

28 (6): 646– 662.

doi : 10.1002/sres.1105 .

S2CID 16051196 .

^ Gutiérrez, Claudio, Sebastián Jaramillo, and Jorge Soto-Andrade. "Some Thoughts on A. H. Louie's More Than Life Itself: A Reflection on Formal Systems and Biology ." Axiomathes 21, no. 3 (2011): 439–454, p. 448.

^ Soto-Andrade, Jorge, Sebastia Jaramillo, Claudio Gutierrez, and Juan-Carlos Letelier. " Ouroboros Avatars: A Mathematical Exploration of Self-reference and Metabolic Closure ". "One of the most important characteristics observed in metabolic networks is that they produce themselves. This intuition, already advanced by the theories of Autopoiesis and (M,R)-systems, can be mathematically framed in a weird-looking equation, full of implications and potentialities: f(f) = f. This equation (here referred to as Ouroboros equation), arises in apparently dissimilar contexts, like Robert Rosen's synthetic view of metabolism, hyper set theory and, importantly, untyped lambda calculus. ... We envision that the ideas behind this equation, a unique kind of mathematical concept, initially found in biology, would play an important role in the development of a true systemic theoretical biology." MIT Press online.

^ Müller, K. H.

Second-order Science: The Revolution of Scientific Structures. Complexity, design, society.

Edition Echoraum, 2016.

^ Scott, Bernard. "The Cybernetics of Systems of Belief". Kybernetes: The International Journal of Systems & Cybernetics 29, nos. 7–8 (2000): 995–998.

^ Stanley, Edward L.; Bauer, Aaron M.; Jackman, Todd R.; Branch, William R.; Mouton, P. Le Fras N. (2011). "Between a rock and a hard polytomy: Rapid radiation in the rupicolous girdled lizards (Squamata: Cordylidae)".

Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 58 (1): 53–70. ( Ouroborus cataphractus , new combination).

^ Spínola Bruzón, Carlos.

"Pescadilla; entre pijota y pescada.- Grupo Gastronómico Gaditano" .

grupogastronomicogaditano.com (in European Spanish). Grupo Gastronómico Gaditano . Retrieved 28 October 2021 .

La pescadilla se fríe en forma de rosca, de modo que la cola esté cogida por los dientes del pez.

^ "pescadilla".

Diccionario de la lengua española (in Spanish) (24th ed.). RAE-ASALE. 2014 . Retrieved 28 October 2021 .

^ "LitCharts" .

LitCharts . Retrieved 23 August 2024 .

^ Jacobs, Mira.

"The Wheel of Time Star Hints at What to Look For in Aes Sedai Rings" .

Comic Book Resources .

^ Gomel, Elena (2010).

Postmodern Science Fiction and Temporal Imagination . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 55.

^ "The Ouroboros Cycle Proposal" . Retrieved 19 December 2023 .

^ Black, A. J. (2020).

Myth-Building in Modern Media The Role of the Mytharc in Imagined Worlds . McFarland. p. 43.

^ Delasara, Jan (2015).

PopLit, PopCult and The X-Files A Critical Exploration . McFarland. p. 9.

^ "Ouroboros" .

Red Dwarf: The Official Site . Grant Naylor Productions . Retrieved 10 October 2022 .

^ "Why Takeshi's Tattoo In Altered Carbon Means More Than You Think" .

Looper .

^ Owens, Lucy (18 November 2023).

"Loki Season 2: There's A Secret Meaning Behind A Fan Favorite Character's Name" .

Game Rant .

^ Kemner, Louis; Aravind, Ajay; Turner, Lauren (5 October 2019).

"The Symbols & Logos In Fullmetal Alchemist: Brotherhood, Explained" .

CBR . Retrieved 27 March 2024 .

^ Rochlin, Jason (5 March 2023).

"Splatoon 3: Big Run's King Salmonid Continue a Clever Boss Pattern" .

Game Rant .

^ Northup, Travis (26 July 2022).

"Xenoblade Chronicles 3 Review" .

IGN . Retrieved 1 August 2025 .

While the foundation of combining auto-attacks, super-powered Arts, and attack combos remains largely intact, a plethora of options have been added that successfully staves off stagnation for over 100 hours – and that's no small feat! It's accomplished with (among other things) six playable characters plus a guest NPC that can be swapped out, new transformations that combine two characters into their Ouroburos form making them almost impossible to take down for a limited period of time, and returning chain attacks, which let you deal a ton of damage by playing a simple minigame.

^ O'Reilly, PJ (26 July 2022).

"Review: Xenoblade Chronicles 3 (Switch) - An Epic, Emotionally-Charged Masterpiece" .

Nintendo Life . Retrieved 1 August 2025 .

The action kicks off by introducing the auto-attack and rhythmic deployment of Arts and specials that fans will know well from the rest of the series before unleashing the fantastical power of Ouroboros, giving our heroes the ability to Interlink, combining in pairs into great big Transformer-like beings with a variety of screen-shaking attacks that you'll need to make good use of as you go toe to toe with a rogue's gallery of gloriously hammy Moebius monsters.

^ "King Woman – Golgotha Lyrics" .

Metal Kingdom . Retrieved 16 March 2025 .

^ Jefferson, Dee (23 October 2024).

"National Gallery of Australia's $14m behemoth artwork unveiled – and it's a showstopper" .

TheGuardian.com .

^ "Lindy Lee: Ouroboros" .

National Gallery of Australia .

^ Lottie Twyford.

"Thirteen tonne $14 million Ouroboros sculpture unveiled at National Gallery of Australia" . Australian Broadcasting Corporation.

Bibliography [ edit ] Bayley, Harold S (1909).

New Light on the Renaissance . Kessinger. Reference pages hosted by the University of Pennsylvania {{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: postscript ( link ) Hornung, Erik (2002).

The Secret Lore of Egypt: Its Impact on the West . Cornell University Press.

Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert (1940).

A Greek-English Lexicon . Oxford: Clarendon Press – via perseus.tufts.edu.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ouroboros .

BBC Culture – The ancient symbol that spanned millennia v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles v t e Ancient Greek religion and mythology Religion and religious practice Main beliefs Ages of Man Golden Age Heroic Age Ancient accounts of Homer Apotheosis Arete Daemon Destiny Eudaimonia Euhemerism Eunoia Eusebeia Golden mean Golden Rule Greek words for love Hemitheos Hero cult Hubris Interpretatio graeca Katabasis Kleos Know thyself Metamorphosis Metempsychosis Nympholepsy Paradoxography Patron gods Pederasty Phronesis Polytheism Sophrosyne Soter Theia mania Xenia Texts / odes / epic poems Epic Cycle Aethiopis Cypria Iliad Iliupersis Little Iliad Nostoi Odyssey Telegony Theban Cycle Oedipodea Thebaid Epigoni Alcmeonis Others Aesop's Fables Aretalogy Argonautica Bibliotheca Catalogue of Women Cyranides Delphic maxims Derveni papyrus Dionysiaca Golden Verses of Pythagoras Greek Magical Papyri Homerica Homeric Hymns Interpretation of Dreams Oneirocritica Orphic Hymns Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Sibylline Books Sortes Astrampsychi Stories from Plato Atlantis Myth of Er Ring of Gyges Theogony Works and Days Religions Antecedents Minoan religion Mycenaean religion List of Mycenaean deities Paleo-Balkan mythology Proto-Indo-European mythology Religions of the ancient Near East Expressions Atheism Henotheism Monotheism Polytheism Hellenistic religions Early Christianity Christianization Relationship with Greek philosophy Esoteric systems Early alchemy Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Hellenistic Judaism God-fearers Syncretic religions Alexander Ptolemaic cult Etruscan religion Greco-Buddhism Roman religion Imperial cult Religious views of emperor Julian Mystery religions and sacred mysteries Arcadian Mysteries Delos Mysteries Dionysian Mysteries Eleusinian Mysteries Imbrian Mysteries Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Orphism Samothracian Mysteries New religious movements Discordianism Feraferia Gaianism Hellenism Religious practice Worship / rituals Amphidromia Arotoi Hieroi Astragalomancy Baptes Cult of Artemis at Brauron Daduchos Divination Funeral and burial practices Funeral oration Greco-Roman mysteries Hero cult Heroön Hierophany Hieros gamos Hymns Incubation Komos Nekyia Omophagia Orgia Panegyris Prayer Sacrifice Animal sacrifice Hecatomb Holocaust Libation Pharmakos Votive offering Theatre Religious offices Amphictyonic league Archon basileus Basilinna Gerarai Hiereia Hierophant Hierophylakes Iatromantis Kanephoros Mystagogue Oracle Sibyl Thiasus Religious objects Baetyl Cult image Chryselephantine sculpture Xoanon Greek terracotta figurines Kernos Kykeon Loutrophoros Omphalos Panathenaic amphora Rhyton Sacrificial tripod Sceptre Thymiaterion Magic Apotropaic magic Curse tablet Divination Greek Magical Papyri Hermeticism Hermetica Necromancy Philia Events Festivals / feasts Actia Adonia Agrionia Amphidromia Anthesteria Apellai Apaturia Aphrodisia Arrhephoria Ascolia Bendidia Boedromia Brauronia Buphonia Chalceia Diasia Delia Delphinia Dionysia Ecdysia Elaphebolia Gamelia Halieia Haloa Heracleia Hermaea Hieromenia Iolaia Kronia Lenaia Leucophryna Lykaia Metageitnia Munichia Oschophoria Pamboeotia Pandia Plynteria Ptolemaieia Pyanopsia Skira Synoikia Soteria Tauropolia Thargelia Theseia Thesmophoria Games Agon Panathenaic Games Rhieia Panhellenic Games Olympic Games Heraean Games Pythian Games Nemean Games Isthmian Games Actia Sacred places Temples / sanctuaries Asclepieion Delphinion Mithraeum Necromanteion of Acheron Nymphaeum Panionium Parthenon Ploutonion Telesterion Temenos Temple of Artemis, Ephesus Temple of Zeus, Olympia Oracles Amphiareion of Oropos Aornum Claros Delphi Didyma Dodona Oracle of Apollo Thyrxeus at Cyaneae Oracle of Apollo at Ptoion Oracle of Artemis at Ikaros Oracle of Menestheus Sanctuary of the Great Gods Tegyra Mountains Cretea Mount Ida (Crete) Mount Ida (Turkey) Mount Lykaion Olympus Caves Cave of Zeus, Aydın Caves of Pan Psychro Cave Vari Cave Islands Island of Achilles Delos Islands of Diomedes Springs Castalian Spring Hippocrene Pierian Spring Others Athenian sacred ships Paralus Salaminia Eleusis Hiera Orgas Kanathos Olympia Sacred Way Theatre of Dionysus Myths and mythology Deities ( Family tree ) Primordial deities Aether Ananke Chaos Chronos Erebus Eros Gaia Hemera Nyx Phanes Pontus Thalassa Tartarus Uranus Titans First generation Coeus Crius Cronus Hyperion Iapetus Mnemosyne Oceanus Phoebe Rhea Tethys Theia Themis Second generation Asteria Astraeus Atlas Eos Epimetheus Helios Leto Menoetius Metis Pallas Perses Prometheus Selene Third generation Hecate Hesperus Phosphorus Twelve Olympians Aphrodite Apollo Ares Artemis Athena Demeter Dionysus Hephaestus Hera Hermes Hestia Poseidon Zeus Water deities Amphitrite Alpheus Ceto Glaucus Naiads Nereids Nereus Oceanids Phorcys Poseidon Proteus River gods Scamander Thaumas Thetis Triton Love deities Erotes Anteros Eros Hedylogos Hermaphroditus Himeros Hymen/Hymenaeus Pothos Aphrodite Aphroditus Philotes Peitho War deities Adrestia Alala Alke Amphillogiai Androktasiai Ares Athena Bia Deimos Enyalius Enyo Eris Gynaecothoenas Homados Hysminai Ioke Keres Kratos Kydoimos Ma Machai Nike Palioxis Pallas Perses Phobos Phonoi Polemos Proioxis Chthonic deities Psychopomps Charon Hermes Hermanubis Thanatos Angelos Cabeiri The Erinyes (Furies) Hades / Pluto Hecate Hypnos Keres Lampad Melinoë Persephone Zagreus Health deities Aceso Aegle Artemis Apollo Asclepius Chiron Darrhon Eileithyia Epione Hebe Hygieia Iaso Paean Panacea Telesphorus Sleep deities Empusa Epiales Hypnos Pasithea Oneiroi Messenger deities Angelia Arke Hermes Iris Trickster deities Apate Hermes Momus Magic deities Circe Hecate Hermes Trismegistus Pasiphaë Art and beauty deities Aphrodite Apollo The Charites (Graces) Aglaea Euphrosyne Thalia Dionysus The Muses Calliope Clio Polyhymnia Euterpe Terpsichore Erato Melpomene Thalia Urania Other major deities The Anemoi (Winds) Boreas Eurus Notus Zephyrus Azone Chrysaor Cybele Eileithyia Glycon Harmonia Nemesis Pan Pegasus Zelus Heroes / heroines Individuals Abderus Achilles Actaeon Adonis Aeneas Ajax the Great Ajax the Lesser Akademos Amphiaraus Amphitryon Antilochus Atalanta Autolycus Bellerophon Bouzyges Cadmus Chrysippus Cyamites Daedalus Diomedes Dioscuri (Castor and Polydeuces) Echetlus Eleusis Erechtheus Eunostus Ganymede Hector Heracles Icarus Iolaus Jason Meleager Menelaus Narcissus Nestor Odysseus Oedipus Orpheus Otrera Pandion Peleus Pelops Penthesilea Perseus Theseus Triptolemus Groups Argonauts Calydonian hunters Epigoni Seven against Thebes Oracles / seers Aesacus Aleuas Amphiaraus Amphilochus Ampyx Anius Asbolus Bakis Branchus Calchas Carnus Carya Cassandra Elatus Ennomus Epimenides Halitherses Helenus Iamus Idmon Manto Melampus Mopsus Munichus Phineus Polyeidos Polypheides Pythia Sibyls Cimmerian Cumaean Delphic Erythraean Hellespontine Libyan Persian Phrygian Samian Telemus Theiodamas Theoclymenus Tiresias Other mortals Aegeus Aegisthus Agamemnon Andromache Andromeda Antigone Augeas Briseis Cassiopeia Creon of Thebes Chryseis Chrysothemis Clytemnestra Damocles Deidamia Deucalion Electra Eteocles Europa Gordias Hecuba Helen of Troy Hellen The Heracleidae Hermione Hippolyta Io Iphigenia Ismene Jocasta Laius Lycian peasants Lycaon The Maenads Memnon Messapian shepherds Midas Minos Myrrha Neoptolemus Niobe Orestes Paris Patroclus Penelope Philomela Phoenix Polybus of Corinth Polynices Priam Procne Pylades Pyrrha Telemachus Troilus Underworld Entrances to the underworld Rivers Acheron Cocytus Eridanos Lethe Phlegethon Styx Lakes/swamps Acherusia Avernus Lake Lerna Lake Caves Cave at Cape Matapan Cave at Lake Avernus Cave at Heraclea Pontica Charoniums Charonium at Aornum Charonium at Acharaca Ploutonion Ploutonion at Acharaca Ploutonion at Eleusis Ploutonion at Hierapolis Necromanteion (necromancy temple) Necromanteion of Acheron Places Elysium Erebus Fields of Asphodel Isles of the Blessed Mourning Fields Tartarus Judges Aeacus Minos Rhadamanthus Guards Campe Cerberus Residents Anticlea Danaïdes Eurydice Ixion Ocnus Salmoneus The Shades Sisyphus Tantalus Tiresias Titans Tityos Visitors Dionysus Heracles Hermes Odysseus Orpheus Pirithous Psyche Theseus Symbols/objects Bident Cap of invisibility Charon's obol Animals, daemons, and spirits Ascalaphus Ceuthonymus Eurynomos Menoetius Mythical Beings Lists Deities Mythological creatures Mortals Minor figures Trojan War characters Minor spirits Daemon Agathodaemon Cacodaemon Eudaemon Nymph Satyr Beasts / creatures Centaur Centaurides Ichthyocentaur Cyclops Dragon Drakaina Echidna Giant Gorgon Harpy Hecatonchires Hippocampus Horses of Helios Lamia Phoenix Python Siren Scylla and Charybdis Sphinx Typhon Captured / slain by heroes Calydonian boar Cerberus Cerynian Hind Chimera Cretan Bull Crommyonian Sow Erymanthian boar Khalkotauroi Lernaean Hydra Mares of Diomedes Medusa Minotaur Nemean lion Orthrus Polyphemus Stymphalian birds Talos Teumessian fox Tribes Achaeans Amazons Anthropophagi Bebryces Cicones Curetes Dactyls Gargareans Halizones Korybantes Laestrygonians Lapiths Lotus-eaters Myrmidons Pygmies Spartoi Telchines Places / Realms Aethiopia Ara Colchis Erytheia Hyperborea Ismarus Ithaca Libya Nysa Ogygia Panchaia Phlegra Scheria Scythia Symplegades Tartessos Themiscyra Thrinacia Troy Events Apollo and Daphne Calydonian boar hunt Eros and Psyche Judgment of Paris Labours of Heracles Orpheus and Eurydice Returns from Troy Odyssey Wars Amazonomachy Attic War Centauromachy Gigantomachy Indian War Theomachy Titanomachy Trojan War Objects Adamant Aegis Ambrosia Apple of Discord Argo Dragon's teeth Diipetes Eidolon Galatea Girdle of Aphrodite Golden apple Golden Fleece Gordian knot Harpe Ichor Labyrinth Lotus tree Milk of Hera Moly Necklace of Harmonia Orichalcum Palladium Panacea Pandora's box Petasos ( Winged helmet ) Phaeacian ships Philosopher's stone Shield of Achilles Shirt of Nessus Sword of Damocles Talaria Thunderbolt Thyrsus Trident of Poseidon Trojan Horse Winnowing Oar Wheel of fire Symbols Bowl of Hygieia Caduceus Cornucopia Gorgoneion Kantharos Labrys Orphic egg Ouroboros Owl of Athena Phallus Rod of Asclepius Swan song Wind East West North South Modern treatments Classical mythology in western art and literature Classicism Classics Greek mythology in popular culture Modern understanding of Greek mythology v t e Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Creation myths Isfet Maa Kheru Maat Mythology Numerology Osiris myth Philosophy Soul Practices Canopic jars Embalming ritual Funerals Mortuary temples Offering formula Opening of the mouth Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities ( list ) Ogdoad Amun and Amunet Heh and Hauhet Kek and Kauket Nu and Naunet Ennead Atum Geb Isis Nephthys Nut Osiris Set Shu Tefnut Triads Elephantine Triad Theban Triad A Aani Aati Abaset Abtu Ahmose-Nefertari Aker Akhty Amenhotep, son of Hapu Amesemi Am-heh Ammit Amu-Aa Anat Andjety Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apesh Apis Apophis Aqen Arensnuphis Arsinoe II Ash Assessors of Maat Astarte Aten B Baal Baalat Gebal Babi Banebdjedet Ba-Pef Bastet Bat Bata Bennu Bes Beset Buchis C Cavern deities of the underworld Celestial Ferryman D Dedun Dionysus-Osiris Djedefhor Duamutef Duau G Gate deities of the underworld Gengen-Wer H Ha Hapi Hapy Harmachis Harpocrates Harsomtus Hathor Hatmehit Hauron Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Henkhisesui Heqaib Heqet Hermanubis Hermes Trismegistus Heru-ur Heryshaf Hery-maat Hesat Horus Hu Hutchai I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemu-sek Imentet Imhotep Imsety Ipy Irer Ishtar Iunit Iusaaset J Jupiter Ammon K Kagemni I Kebechet Khensit Khenti-Amentiu Khenti-kheti Khepri Khereduankh Kherty Khnum Khonsu Kneph Kolanthes Kothar-wa-Khasis M Maahes Maat Mafdet Mandulis Medjed Mehen Mehet-Weret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nebnerou Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nekhbet Nemty Neper Nepit O Onuris P Pakhet Panebtawy Perit Petbe Peteese Pihor Ptah Ptahhotep Q Qebehsenuef Qebui Qed-her Qetesh R Ra Raet-Tawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph Ruty S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sedjem Sekhmet Sepa Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shehbui Shemanefer Shepsy Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sokar Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Ta-Bitjet Tatenen Taweret Tayt Teka-her Thoth Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadj-wer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Y Yam Creatures Akhekh Apshait Criosphinx Griffin Hieracosphinx Medjed Serpopard Sha Sphinx Uraeus Characters Djadjaemankh Djedi Rededjet Ubaoner Locations Aaru Akhet Benben Duat Lake of fire Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Ankh Anra scarab Atef Cartouche Corn mummy Cowroid Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Modius Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Was-sceptre Winged sun Writings Amduat Books of Breathing Book of Caverns Book of the Dead Book of the Earth Book of Gates Book of the Heavenly Cow Book of Traversing Eternity Coffin Texts Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld Festival Songs of Isis and Nephthys Great Hymn to the Aten Litany of the Eye of Horus Litany of Re Pyramid Texts Spell of the Twelve Caves The Contendings of Horus and Seth Festivals Beautiful Festival of the Valley Cattle count Coronation of the pharaoh Min festival Mysteries of Osiris Opet Festival Sed festival Related religions Atenism Church of the Most High Goddess Gnosticism Hermeticism Kemetic Orthodoxy Kemetism Kushite religion Mysteries of Isis Temple of Set Thelema Ancient Egypt portal v t e Heraldry Authorities Grant of arms History Law of arms Officers of arms King of Arms herald pursuivant private Types National dominion civic Ecclesiastical papal Burgher Women Attributed Topics Armiger Augmentation abatement Ancient and modern Alliance courtesy Blazon Cadency distinction Canting Debased Field divisions variations Fraud Marshalling quartering impalement National traditions Societies Achievement Coat of arms Crowns and coronets Crest Compartment Escutcheon Helmet Mantling pavilion Motto slogan Supporter Torse Charges Attitudes Erasure Fimbriation Lines Ordinaries Annulet Bar Bend Bordure Canton Chevron ( Łękawica ) Componée Cross Crozier head Chief Fess Flaunch Goutte Gyron Hamade Inescutcheon Label Lozenge Orle Pale Pall Pile Roundel Bezant Saltire Beasts Bear Boar Bull/ox Dog/hound Camelopard Hind/stag Kangaroo Leopard Lion Wolf Birds Alerion Black swan Cock Crow Dove Eagle Double-headed Triple-headed Szaszor Martlet Pelican Other Bee Crapaudy Dolphin Emmet Ged Lucy Mill Portcullis Reremouse Scallop Serpent Wolfsangel Legendary Allocamelus Alphyn Amphiptere Basilisk Biscione Chollima Cockatrice Dragon Chinese Enfield Garuda Griffin/Keythong Harpy Hippocampus Hippogriff Lampago Lindworm Manticore Mermaid Musimon Ouroboros Pantheon Panther Pegasus Phoenix Salamander Sea-griffin Sea-lion Tyger Unicorn Winged lion Woodwose Wyvern Yale Plants Fleur-de-lis Laurel wreath Oak Quatrefoil Rose Shamrock Trefoil Thistle Turnip Waterlily/Seeblatt Knots Bourchier Bowen Cavendish/Savoy Dacre Harrington Hastings/Hungerford Heneage Hinckaert Hungerford knot Lacy Ormonde/Wake Savoy Stafford Tristram/Bowen Wake Tinctures Rule of tincture Tricking Hatching Metals Argent (white) Or (gold) Colours Gules (red) Sable (black) Azure (blue) Vert (green) Purpure (purple) 1 Furs Ermine Ermines Erminois Erminites Pean Vair Potent Stains Murrey (mulberry) Sanguine (blood red) Tenné Rare metals 1 Copper Buff (metal in the United States) Rare colours 1 Bleu celeste Brunâtre (brown) Buff (colour in Canada) Cendrée Ochre Orange Rose Realistic Proper Carnation Applications Bookplate Hatchment Flag banner of arms Badge Roll of arms Illyrian Seal equestrian Tabard Trophy of arms Related Mon Emblem socialist Logotype Phaleristics Vexillology Sigillography 1 Non-traditional, regional, or rarely used (sometimes considered unheraldic) List of oldest heraldry Heraldry portal resources Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐67cc48b65d‐mplcv
Cached time: 20250818100941
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.093 seconds
Real time usage: 1.374 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5992/1000000
Revision size: 36325/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 559304/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10033/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 184331/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.570/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20374664/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  943.483      1 -total
 41.29%  389.552     29 Template:Navbox
 27.48%  259.297      1 Template:Reflist
 10.50%   99.100     13 Template:Lang
  8.30%   78.304      1 Template:Alchemy
  7.48%   70.615     16 Template:Cite_book
  7.01%   66.114      1 Template:Greek_religion
  6.96%   65.712      1 Template:Short_description
  6.73%   63.530      1 Template:Heraldry_footer
  6.40%   60.410     13 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:235876:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818100941 and revision id 1305994988. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ouroboros&oldid=1305994988 " Categories : Ancient Egyptian symbols Egyptian mythology Dragons Dragons in Greek mythology European legendary creatures Greek mythology Greek alchemy Legendary serpents Mythological archetypes Pictograms Heraldic beasts Visual motifs Magic symbols Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 European Spanish-language sources (es-es) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from January 2023 Use dmy dates from January 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text CS1 maint: postscript Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 08:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ouroboros 49 languages Add topic

