Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Degrees of language endangerment Toggle Degrees of language endangerment subsection 1.1 UNESCO's Language Vitality and Endangerment Framework 1.2 Other scales 2 Theory Toggle Theory subsection 2.1 Steps in reversing language shift 2.2 Factors in successful language revitalization 2.3 Revival linguistics 2.3.1 Compromise 2.3.2 Traditionalist 3 Specific examples Toggle Specific examples subsection 3.1 Africa 3.2 Americas 3.2.1 North America 3.2.1.1 Tlingit 3.2.2 South America 3.3 Asia 3.3.1 Hebrew 3.3.2 Sanskrit 3.3.3 Soyot 3.3.4 Ainu 3.3.5 Manchu 3.3.6 Spanish 3.3.7 Western Armenian 3.3.8 Other Asian 3.4 Europe 3.4.1 Basque 3.4.2 Irish 3.4.3 Scottish Gaelic 3.4.4 Manx 3.4.5 Cornish 3.4.6 Breton 3.4.7 Caló 3.4.8 Livonian 3.4.9 Old Prussian 3.4.10 Yola 3.5 Oceania 3.5.1 Australia 3.5.2 New Zealand 3.5.3 Hawaiian 4 Current revitalization efforts Toggle Current revitalization efforts subsection 4.1 Mexico 4.2 Canada 4.3 Chile 5 Health benefits of language revitalization 6 Criticism 7 See also Toggle See also subsection 7.1 Digital projects and repositories 7.2 Organizations 7.3 Lists 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Language revitalization 42 languages Afrikaans Anarâškielâ العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Чӑвашла Davvisámegiella Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano עברית Magyar Македонски Nederlands Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça Українська اردو 粵語 中文 Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Language revival ) Effort to promote an endangered language or revive a dead language Hebrew translation of the "Are at this hour asleep!" monologue from Henry IV, Part 2 by Solomon Löwisohn , 1816. The revitalization of Hebrew is the only successful example of language revival.

[ 1 ] Language revitalization , also referred to as language revival or reversing language shift , is an attempt to halt or reverse the decline of a language or to revive an extinct one.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Those involved can include linguists, cultural or community groups, or governments. Some argue for a distinction between language revival (the resurrection of an extinct language with no existing native speakers) and language revitalization (the rescue of a "dying" language).

Languages targeted for language revitalization include those whose use and prominence is severely limited . Sometimes various tactics of language revitalization can even be used to try to revive extinct languages . Though the goals of language revitalization vary greatly from case to case, they typically involve attempting to expand the number of speakers and use of a language, or trying to maintain the current level of use to protect the language from extinction or language death .

Reasons for revitalization vary: they can include physical danger affecting those whose language is dying, economic danger such as the exploitation of indigenous natural resources, political danger such as genocide, or cultural danger/assimilation.

[ 4 ] In recent times [ when?

] alone, it is estimated that more than 2000 languages have already become extinct.

[ citation needed ] The UN estimates that more than half of the languages spoken today have fewer than 10,000 speakers and that a quarter have fewer than 1,000 speakers; and that, unless there are some efforts to maintain them, over the next hundred years most of these will become extinct.

[ 5 ] These figures are often cited as reasons why language revitalization is necessary to preserve linguistic diversity. Culture and identity are also frequently cited reasons for language revitalization, when a language is perceived as a unique "cultural treasure".

[ 6 ] A community often sees language as a unique part of its culture, connecting it with its ancestors or with the land, making up an essential part of its history and self-image.

[ 7 ] Language revitalization is also closely tied to the linguistic field of language documentation . In this field, linguists try to create a complete record of a language's grammar, vocabulary, and linguistic features. This practice can often lead to more concern for the revitalization of a specific language on study. Furthermore, the task of documentation is often taken on with the goal of revitalization in mind.

[ 8 ] Degrees of language endangerment [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Language revitalization" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) UNESCO's Language Vitality and Endangerment Framework [ edit ] Uses a six-point scale is as follows: [ 9 ] Safe: All generations use language in variety of settings Stable: Multilingualism in the native language and one or more dominant language(s) has usurped certain important communication context.

Definitively Endangered: spoken by older people; not fully used by younger generations.

Severely Endangered: Only a few adult speakers remain; no longer used as native language by children.

Critically Endangered: The language is spoken only by grandparents and older generations.

Extinct: There is no one who can speak or remember the language.

Other scales [ edit ] Another scale for identifying degrees of language endangerment is used in a 2003 paper ("Language Vitality and Endangerment") commissioned by UNESCO from an international group of linguists. The linguists, among other goals and priorities, create a scale with six degrees for language vitality and endangerment.

[ 10 ] They also propose nine factors or criteria (six of which use the six-degree scale) to "characterize a language's overall sociolinguistic situation".

[ 10 ] The nine factors with their respective scales are: Intergenerational language transmission safe: all generations use the language unsafe: some children use the language in all settings, all children use the language in some settings definitively endangered: few children speak the language; predominantly spoken by the parental generation and older severely endangered: spoken by older generations; not used by the parental generation and younger critically endangered: few speakers remain and are mainly from the great grandparental generation extinct: no living speakers Absolute number of speakers Proportion of speakers within the total population safe: the language is spoken by approximately 100% of the population unsafe: the language is spoken by nearly but visibly less than 100% of the population definitively endangered: the language is spoken by a majority of the population severely endangered: the language is spoken by less than 50% of the population critically endangered: the language has very few speakers extinct: no living speakers Trends in existing language domains universal use (safe): spoken in all domains; for all functions multilingual parity (unsafe): multiple languages (2+) are spoken in most social domains; for most functions dwindling domains (definitively endangered): mainly spoken in home domains and is in competition with the dominant language; for many functions limited or formal domains (severely endangered): spoken in limited social domains; for several functions highly limited domains (critically endangered): spoken in highly restricted domains; for minimal functions extinct: no domains; no functions Response to new domains and media dynamic (safe): spoken in all new domains robust/active (unsafe): spoken in most new domains receptive (definitively endangered): spoken in many new domains coping (severely endangered): spoken in some new domains minimal (critically endangered): spoken in minimal new domains inactive (extinct): spoken in no new domains Materials for language education and literacy safe: established orthography and extensive access to educational materials unsafe: access to educational materials; children developing literacy; not used by administration definitively endangered: access to educational materials exist at school; literacy in language is not promoted severely endangered: literacy materials exist however are not present in school curriculum critically endangered: orthography is known and some written materials exist extinct: no orthography is known Governmental and institutional language attitudes and policies (including official status and use) equal support (safe): all languages are equally protected differentiated support (unsafe): primarily protected for private domains passive assimilation (definitively endangered): no explicit protective policy; language use dwindles in public domain active assimilation (severely endangered): government discourages use of language; no governmental protection of language in any domain forced assimilation (critically endangered): language is not recognized or protected; government recognized another official language prohibition (extinct): use of language is banned Community members' attitudes towards their own language safe: language is revered, valued, and promoted by whole community unsafe: language maintenance is supported by most of the community definitively endangered: language maintenance is supported by much of the community; the rest are indifferent or support language loss severely endangered: language maintenance is supported by some of the community; the rest are indifferent or support language loss critically endangered: language maintenance is supported by only a few members of the community; the rest are indifferent or support language loss extinct: complete apathy towards language maintenance; prefer dominant language Amount and quality of documentation.

superlative (safe): extensive audio, video, media, and written documentation of the language good (unsafe): audio, video, media, and written documentation all exist; a handful of each fair (definitively endangered): some audio and video documentation exists; adequate written documentation fragmentary (severely endangered): limited audio and video documentation exists at low quality; minimal written documentation inadequate (critically endangered): only a handful of written documentation exists undocumented (extinct): no documentation exists Theory [ edit ] One of the most important preliminary steps in language revitalization/recovering involves establishing the degree to which a particular language has been "dislocated". This helps involved parties find the best way to assist or revive the language.

[ 11 ] Steps in reversing language shift [ edit ] There are many different theories or models that attempt to lay out a plan for language revitalization. One of these is provided by celebrated linguist Joshua Fishman .
Fishman's model for reviving threatened (or sleeping) languages, or for making them sustainable, [ 12 ] [ 13 ] consists of an eight-stage process. Efforts should be concentrated on the earlier stages of restoration until they have been consolidated before proceeding to the later stages. The eight stages are: Acquisition of the language by adults, who in effect act as language apprentices (recommended where most of the remaining speakers of the language are elderly and socially isolated from other speakers of the language).

Create a socially integrated population of active speakers (or users) of the language (at this stage it is usually best to concentrate mainly on the spoken language rather than the written language).

In localities where there are a reasonable number of people habitually using the language, encourage the informal use of the language among people of all age groups and within families and bolster its daily use through the establishment of local neighbourhood institutions in which the language is encouraged, protected and (in certain contexts at least) used exclusively.

In areas where oral competence in the language has been achieved in all age groups, encourage literacy in the language, but in a way that does not depend upon assistance from (or goodwill of) the state education system.

Where the state permits it, and where numbers warrant, encourage the use of the language in compulsory state education.

Where the above stages have been achieved and consolidated, encourage the use of the language in the workplace.

Where the above stages have been achieved and consolidated, encourage the use of the language in local government services and mass media.

Where the above stages have been achieved and consolidated, encourage use of the language in higher education, government, etc.

This model of language revival is intended to direct efforts to where they are most effective and to avoid wasting energy trying to achieve the later stages of recovery when the earlier stages have not been achieved. For instance, it is probably wasteful to campaign for the use of a language on television or in government services if hardly any families are in the habit of using the language.

Additionally, Tasaku Tsunoda describes a range of different techniques or methods that speakers can use to try to revitalize a language, including techniques to revive extinct languages and maintain weak ones. The techniques he lists are often limited to the current vitality of the language.

He claims that the immersion method cannot be used to revitalize an extinct or moribund language. In contrast, the master-apprentice method of one-on-one transmission on language proficiency can be used with moribund languages. Several other methods of revitalization, including those that rely on technology such as recordings or media, can be used for languages in any state of viability.

[ 14 ] A method's effectiveness depends on the language's viability.

[ 14 ] Method Degree of endangerment Weakening Moribund Dead/extinct Immersion effective ineffective ineffective Neighborhood effective ineffective ineffective Bilingual effective ineffective ineffective Master-apprentice effective effective ineffective Total physical response effective effective ineffective Telephone effective effective ineffective Radio effective effective effective Multimedia effective effective effective Two-way effective effective effective Formulaic effective effective effective Artificial pidgin effective effective effective Place name effective effective effective Reclamation effective effective effective Adoption effective effective effective Factors in successful language revitalization [ edit ] David Crystal , in his book Language Death , proposes that language revitalization is more likely to be successful if its speakers: increase the language's prestige within the dominant community; increase their wealth and income; increase their legitimate power in the eyes of the dominant community; have a strong presence in the education system; can write down the language; can use electronic technology.

[ 15 ] In her book, Endangered Languages: An Introduction, Sarah Thomason notes the success of revival efforts for modern Hebrew and the relative success of revitalizing Maori in New Zealand (see Specific examples below). One notable factor these two examples share is that the children were raised in fully immersive environments.

[ 16 ] In the case of Hebrew, it was on early collective-communities called kibbutzim .

[ 17 ] For the Maori language In New Zealand, this was done through a language nest .

[ 18 ] Revival linguistics [ edit ] Ghil'ad Zuckermann proposes "Revival Linguistics" as a new linguistic discipline and paradigm.

Zuckermann's term "Revival Linguistics" is modelled upon "Contact Linguistics". Revival linguistics inter alia explores the universal constraints and mechanisms involved in language reclamation, renewal and revitalization. It draws perspicacious comparative insights from one revival attempt to another, thus acting as an epistemological bridge between parallel discourses in various local attempts to revive sleeping tongues all over the globe.

[ 19 ] According to Zuckermann, "revival linguistics combines scientific studies of native language acquisition and foreign language learning. After all, language reclamation is the most extreme case of second-language learning. Revival linguistics complements the established area of documentary linguistics , which records endangered languages before they fall asleep." [ 20 ] Zuckermann proposes that "revival linguistics changes the field of historical linguistics by, for instance, weakening the family tree model , which implies that a language has only one parent." [ 20 ] There are disagreements in the field of language revitalization as to the degree that revival should concentrate on maintaining the traditional language, versus allowing simplification or widespread borrowing from the majority language .

Compromise [ edit ] Zuckermann acknowledges the presence of "local peculiarities and idiosyncrasies" [ 20 ] but suggests that "there are linguistic constraints applicable to all revival attempts. Mastering them would help revivalists and first nations' leaders to work more efficiently. For example, it is easier to resurrect basic vocabulary and verbal conjugations than sounds and word order. Revivalists should be realistic and abandon discouraging, counter-productive slogans such as "Give us authenticity or give us death!" [ 20 ] Nancy Dorian has pointed out that conservative attitudes toward loanwords and grammatical changes often hamper efforts to revitalize endangered languages (as with Tiwi in Australia), and that a division can exist between educated revitalizers, interested in historicity, and remaining speakers interested in locally authentic idiom (as has sometimes occurred with Irish ). Some have argued that structural compromise may, in fact, enhance the prospects of survival, as may have been the case with English in the post- Norman period .

[ 21 ] Traditionalist [ edit ] Other linguists have argued that when language revitalization borrows heavily from the majority language, the result is a new language, perhaps a creole or pidgin .

[ 22 ] For example, the existence of "Neo-Hawaiian" as a separate language from "Traditional Hawaiian" has been proposed, due to the heavy influence of English on every aspect of the revived Hawaiian language.

[ 23 ] This has also been proposed for Irish, with a sharp division between "Urban Irish" (spoken by second-language speakers) and traditional Irish (as spoken as a first language in Gaeltacht areas). Ó Béarra stated: "[to] follow the syntax and idiomatic conventions of English, [would be] producing what amounts to little more than English in Irish drag." [ 24 ] With regard to the then-moribund Manx language , the scholar T. F. O'Rahilly stated, "When a language surrenders itself to foreign idiom, and when all its speakers become bilingual, the penalty is death." [ 25 ] Neil McRae has stated that the uses of Scottish Gaelic are becoming increasingly tokenistic, and native Gaelic idiom is being lost in favor of artificial terms created by second-language speakers.

[ 26 ] Specific examples [ edit ] The total revival of a dead language (in the sense of having no native speakers ) to become the shared means of communication of a self-sustaining community of several million first language speakers has happened only once, in the case of Hebrew , resulting in Modern Hebrew – now the national language of Israel . In this case, there was a unique set of historical and cultural characteristics that facilitated the revival. (See Revival of the Hebrew language .) Hebrew, once largely a liturgical language , was re-established as a means of everyday communication by Jews, some of whom had lived in what is now the State of Israel, starting in the nineteenth century. It is the world's most famous and successful example of language revitalization.

In a related development, literary languages without native speakers enjoyed great prestige and practical utility as lingua francas , often counting millions of fluent speakers at a time. In many such cases, a decline in the use of the literary language, sometimes precipitous, was later accompanied by a strong renewal. This happened, for example, in the revival of Classical Latin in the Renaissance , and the revival of Sanskrit in the early centuries AD. An analogous phenomenon in contemporary Arabic -speaking areas is the expanded use of the literary language ( Modern Standard Arabic , a form of the Classical Arabic of the 6th century AD). This is taught to all educated speakers and is used in radio broadcasts, formal discussions, etc.

[ 27 ] In addition, literary languages have sometimes risen to the level of becoming first languages of very large language communities. An example is standard Italian , which originated as a literary language based on the language of 13th-century Florence , especially as used by such important Florentine writers as Dante , Petrarch and Boccaccio . This language existed for several centuries primarily as a literary vehicle, with few native speakers; even as late as 1861, on the eve of Italian unification , the language only counted about 500,000 speakers (many non-native), out of a total population of c.

22,000,000 . The subsequent success of the language has been through conscious development, where speakers of any of the numerous Italian languages were taught standard Italian as a second language and subsequently imparted it to their children, who learned it as a first language.

[ citation needed ] Of course this came at the expense of local Italian languages, most of which are now endangered . Success was enjoyed in similar circumstances by High German , standard Czech , Castilian Spanish and other languages.

Africa [ edit ] The Coptic language began its decline when Arabic became the predominant language in Egypt.

Pope Shenouda III established the Coptic Language Institute in December 1976 in Saint Mark's Coptic Orthodox Cathedral in Cairo for the purpose of reviving the Coptic language.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Ge’ez , or Classical Ethiopic, is largely used within a liturgical context by the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church and the Eritrean Orthodox Tewahedo Church . Once the principal language of the Axumite Empire , the language was often used as a lingua franca until the 16th century where spoken languages such as Amharic began to take its place. There are modern revivalist movements to revive the use of Ge’ez as a literary and spoken language.

Americas [ edit ] North America [ edit ] In recent years, a growing number of Native American tribes have been trying to revitalize their languages.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] For example, there are apps (including phrases, word lists and dictionaries) in many Native languages including Cree , Cherokee , Chickasaw , Lakota , Ojibwe , Oneida , Massachusett , Navajo , Halq'emeylem , Gwych'in , and Lushootseed .

Wampanoag , a language spoken by the people of the same name in Massachusetts, underwent a language revival project led by Jessie Little Doe Baird , a trained linguist. Members of the tribe use the extensive written records that exist in their language, including a translation of the Bible and legal documents, in order to learn and teach Wampanoag. The project has seen children speaking the language fluently for the first time in over 100 years.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] In addition, there are currently attempts at reviving the Chochenyo language of California, which had become extinct.

Efforts are being made by the Confederated Tribes of the Grand Ronde Community and others to keep Chinook Jargon , also known as Chinuk Wawa , alive. This is helped by the corpus of songs and stories collected from Victoria Howard and published by Melville Jacobs .

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] The open-source platform FirstVoices hosts community-managed websites for 85 language revitalization projects, covering multiple varieties of 33 Indigenous languages in British Columbia as well as over a dozen languages from "elsewhere in Canada and around the globe", along with 17 dictionary apps.

[ 36 ] Tlingit [ edit ] Similar to other indigenous languages, Tlingit is critically endangered.

[ 37 ] Fewer than 100 fluent Elders existed as of 2017.

[ 37 ] From 2013 to 2014, the language activist, author, and teacher, Sʔímlaʔxw Michele K. Johnson from the Syilx Nation, attempted to teach two hopeful learners of Tlingit in the Yukon.

[ 37 ] Her methods included textbook creation, sequenced immersion curriculum, and film assessment.

[ 37 ] The aim was to assist in the creation of adult speakers that are of parent-age, so that they too can begin teaching the language. In 2020, X̱ʼunei Lance Twitchell led a Tlingit online class with Outer Coast College . Dozens of students participated.

[ 38 ] He is an associate professor of Alaska Native Languages in the School of Arts and Sciences at the University of Alaska Southeast which offers a minor in Tlingit language and an emphasis on Alaska Native Languages and Studies within a Bachelorʼs degree in Liberal Arts.

[ 39 ] South America [ edit ] Kichwa is the variety of the Quechua language spoken in Ecuador and is one of the most widely spoken indigenous languages in South America with approximately 7 million speakers. Despite this fact, Kichwa is a threatened language, mainly because of the expansion of Spanish in South America. One community of original Kichwa speakers, Lagunas, was one of the first indigenous communities to switch to the Spanish language.

[ 40 ] According to King, this was because of the increase of trade and business with the large Spanish-speaking town nearby. The Lagunas people assert that it was not for cultural assimilation purposes, as they value their cultural identity highly.

[ 40 ] However, once this contact was made, language for the Lagunas people shifted through generations, to Kichwa and Spanish bilingualism and now is essentially Spanish monolingualism. The feelings of the Lagunas people present a dichotomy with language use, as most of the Lagunas members speak Spanish exclusively and only know a few words in Kichwa.

The prospects for Kichwa language revitalization are not promising, as parents depend on schooling for this purpose, which is not nearly as effective as continual language exposure in the home.

[ 41 ] Schooling in the Lagunas community, although having a conscious focus on teaching Kichwa, consists of mainly passive interaction, reading, and writing in Kichwa.

[ 42 ] In addition to grassroots efforts, national language revitalization organizations, like CONAIE , focus attention on non-Spanish speaking indigenous children, who represent a large minority in the country. Another national initiative, Bilingual Intercultural Education Project (PEBI), was ineffective in language revitalization because instruction was given in Kichwa and Spanish was taught as a second language to children who were almost exclusively Spanish monolinguals.
Although some techniques seem ineffective, Kendall A. King provides several suggestions: Exposure to and acquisition of the language at a young age.

Extreme immersion techniques.

Multiple and diverse efforts to reach adults.

Flexibility and coordination in planning and implementation Directly addressing different varieties of the language.

Planners stressing that language revitalization is a long process Involving as many people as possible Parents using the language with their children Planners and advocates approaching the problem from all directions.

Specific suggestions include imparting an elevated perception of the language in schools, focusing on grassroots efforts both in school and the home, and maintaining national and regional attention.

[ 41 ] Asia [ edit ] Hebrew [ edit ] Further information: Revival of the Hebrew language The revival of the Hebrew language is the only successful example of a revived dead language.

[ 1 ] The Hebrew language survived into the medieval period as the language of Jewish liturgy and rabbinic literature . With the rise of Zionism in the 19th century, it was revived as a spoken and literary language, becoming primarily a spoken lingua franca among the early Jewish immigrants to Ottoman Palestine and received the official status in the 1922 constitution of the British Mandate for Palestine and subsequently of the State of Israel .

[ 43 ] Sanskrit [ edit ] Further information: Sanskrit revival There have been recent attempts at reviving Sanskrit in India.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] However, despite these attempts, there are no first language speakers of Sanskrit in India.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] In each of India's recent decennial censuses, several thousand citizens [ a ] have reported Sanskrit to be their mother tongue. However, these reports are thought to signify a wish to be aligned with the prestige of the language, rather than being genuinely indicative of the presence of thousands of L1 Sanskrit speakers in India. There has also been a rise of so-called "Sanskrit villages", [ 46 ] [ 50 ] but experts have cast doubt on the extent to which Sanskrit is really spoken in such villages.

[ 47 ] [ 51 ] Soyot [ edit ] Main article: Soyot language The Soyot language of the small-numbered Soyots in Buryatia , Russia , one of the Siberian Turkic languages , has been reconstructed and a Soyot- Buryat - Russian dictionary was published in 2002. The language is currently taught in some elementary schools.

[ 52 ] Ainu [ edit ] Main article: Ainu language The Ainu language of the indigenous Ainu people of northern Japan is currently moribund, but efforts are underway to revive it. A 2006 survey of the Hokkaido Ainu indicated that only 4.6% of Ainu surveyed were able to converse in or "speak a little" Ainu.

[ 53 ] As of 2001, Ainu was not taught in any elementary or secondary schools in Japan, but was offered at numerous language centres and universities in Hokkaido, as well as at Tokyo's Chiba University .

[ 54 ] Manchu [ edit ] Main article: Manchu language In China, the Manchu language is one of the most endangered languages, with speakers only in three small areas of Manchuria remaining.

[ 55 ] Some enthusiasts are trying to revive the language of their ancestors using available dictionaries and textbooks, and even occasional visits to Qapqal Xibe Autonomous County in Xinjiang , where the related Xibe language is still spoken natively.

[ 56 ] Spanish [ edit ] Main articles: Spanish language in the Philippines and Philippine Spanish In the Philippines, a local variety of Spanish that was primarily based on Mexican Spanish was the lingua franca of the country since Spanish colonization in 1565 and was an official language alongside Filipino (standardized Tagalog ) and English until 1987, following the ratification of a new constitution, where it was re-designated as a voluntary language.

As a result of its loss as an official language and years of marginalization at the official level during and after American colonization, the use of Spanish amongst the overall populace decreased dramatically and became moribund, with the remaining native speakers left being mostly elderly people.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] [ 59 ] The language has seen a gradual revival, however, due to official promotion under the administration of former President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo .

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] Schools were encouraged to offer Spanish, French, and Japanese as foreign language electives.

[ 62 ] Results were immediate as the job demand for Spanish speakers had increased since 2008.

[ 63 ] As of 2010, the Instituto Cervantes in Manila reported the number of Spanish-speakers in the country with native or non-native knowledge at approximately 3 million, the figure albeit including those who speak the Spanish-based creole Chavacano .

[ 64 ] Complementing government efforts is a notable surge of exposure through the mainstream media and, more recently, music-streaming services.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] Western Armenian [ edit ] Main article: Armenian language The Western Armenian language has been classified as a definitely endangered language in the Atlas of the World's Languages in Danger (2010), [ 67 ] as most speakers of the dialect remain in diasporic communities away from their homeland in Anatolia, following the Armenian genocide . In spite of this, there have been various efforts [ 68 ] to revitalize the language, especially within the Los Angeles community where the majority of Western Armenians reside.

Within her dissertation, Shushan Karapetian discusses at length the decline of the Armenian language in the United States, and new means for keeping and reviving Western Armenian, such as the creation of the Saroyan Committee or the Armenian Language Preservation Committee, launched in 2013.

[ 69 ] Other attempts at language revitalization can be seen within the University of California in Irvine .

[ 70 ] Armenian is also one of the languages Los Angeles County is required to provide voting information in.

[ 71 ] The DPSS (California Department of Social Services) also identifies Armenian as one of its "threshold languages".

[ 72 ] Other Asian [ edit ] In Thailand, there exists a Chong language revitalization project, headed by Suwilai Premsrirat.

[ 73 ] Europe [ edit ] In Europe , in the 19th and early 20th centuries, the use of both local and learned languages declined as the central governments of the different states imposed their vernacular language as the standard throughout education and official use (this was the case in the United Kingdom , France , Spain , Italy and Greece , and to some extent, in Germany and Austria-Hungary ).

[ citation needed ] In the last few decades, [ when?

] local nationalism and human rights movements have made a more multicultural policy standard in European states; sharp condemnation of the earlier practices of suppressing regional languages was expressed in the use of such terms as " linguicide ".

Basque [ edit ] In Francoist Spain , Basque language use was discouraged by the government's repressive policies . In the Basque Country, "Francoist repression was not only political, but also linguistic and cultural." [ 74 ] Franco's regime suppressed Basque from official discourse, education, and publishing, [ 75 ] making it illegal to register newborn babies under Basque names, [ 76 ] and even requiring tombstone engravings in Basque to be removed.

[ 77 ] In some provinces the public use of Basque was suppressed, with people fined for speaking it.

[ 78 ] Public use of Basque was frowned upon by supporters of the regime, often regarded as a sign of anti-Francoism or separatism .

[ 79 ] in the late 1960s.

Since 1968, Basque has been immersed in a revitalisation process, facing formidable obstacles. However, significant progress has been made in numerous areas. Six main factors have been identified to explain its relative success: implementation and acceptance of Unified, or Standard Basque (Euskara Batua) , which was developed by the Euskaltzaindia integration of Basque in the education system creation of media in Basque (radio, newspapers, and television) the established new legal framework collaboration between public institutions and people's organisations, and campaigns for Basque language literacy.

[ 80 ] While those six factors influenced the revitalisation process, the extensive development and use of language technologies is also considered a significant additional factor.

[ 81 ] Overall, in the 1960s and later, the trend reversed and education and publishing in Basque began to flourish.

[ 82 ] A sociolinguistic survey shows that there has been a steady increase in Basque speakers since the 1990s, and the percentage of young speakers exceeds that of the old.

[ 83 ] Irish [ edit ] Main article: Status of the Irish language One of the best known European attempts at language revitalization concerns the Irish language . While English is dominant through most of Ireland, Irish, a Celtic language , is still spoken in certain areas called Gaeltachta í , [ 84 ] but there it is in serious decline.

[ 85 ] The challenges faced by the language over the last few centuries have included exclusion from important domains, social denigration, the death or emigration of many Irish speakers during the Irish famine of the 1840s, and continued emigration since. Efforts to revitalise Irish were being made, however, from the mid-1800s, and were associated with a desire for Irish political independence.

[ 84 ] Contemporary Irish language revitalization has chiefly involved teaching Irish as a compulsory language in mainstream English-speaking schools. But the failure to teach it in an effective and engaging way means (as linguist Andrew Carnie notes) that students do not acquire the fluency needed for the lasting viability of the language, and this leads to boredom and resentment. Carnie also noted a lack of media in Irish (2006), [ 84 ] though this is no longer the case.

The decline of the Gaeltachtaí and the failure of state-directed revitalisation have been countered by an urban revival movement. This is largely based on an independent community-based school system, known generally as Gaelscoileanna . These schools teach entirely through Irish and their number is growing, with over thirty such schools in Dublin alone.

[ 86 ] They are an important element in the creation of a network of urban Irish speakers (known as Gaeilgeoirí), who tend to be young, well-educated and middle-class. It is now likely that this group has acquired critical mass, a fact reflected in the expansion of Irish-language media.

[ 87 ] Irish language television has enjoyed particular success.

[ 88 ] It has been argued that they tend to be better educated than monolingual English speakers and enjoy higher social status.

[ 89 ] They represent the transition of Irish to a modern urban world, with an accompanying rise in prestige.

Scottish Gaelic [ edit ] There are also current attempts to revive the related language of Scottish Gaelic , which was suppressed following the formation of the United Kingdom, and entered further decline due to the Highland clearances . Currently, [ when?

] Gaelic is only spoken widely in the Western Isles and some relatively small areas of the Highlands and Islands . The decline in fluent Gaelic speakers has slowed; however, the population center has shifted to L2 speakers in urban areas, especially Glasgow.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] Manx [ edit ] Main article: Manx language revival Another Celtic language, Manx , lost its last native speaker in 1974 and was declared extinct by UNESCO in 2009, but never completely fell from use.

[ 92 ] The language is now taught in primary and secondary schools, including as a teaching medium at the Bunscoill Ghaelgagh , used in some public events and spoken as a second language by approximately 1,800 people.

[ 93 ] Revitalization efforts include radio shows in Manx Gaelic and social media and online resources. The Manx government has also been involved in the effort by creating organizations such as the Manx Heritage Foundation ( Culture Vannin ) and the position of Manx Language Officer.

[ 94 ] The government has released an official Manx Language Strategy for 2017–2021.

[ 95 ] Cornish [ edit ] There have been a number of attempts to revive the Cornish language , both privately and some under the Cornish Language Partnership . Some of the activities have included translation of the Christian scriptures, [ 96 ] a guild of bards, [ 97 ] and the promotion of Cornish literature in modern Cornish, including novels and poetry.

Breton [ edit ] Main article: Breton language § Revival efforts Caló [ edit ] The Romani arriving in the Iberian Peninsula developed an Iberian Romani dialect.
As time passed, Romani ceased to be a full language and became Caló , a cant mixing Iberian Romance grammar and Romani vocabulary.
With sedentarization and obligatory instruction in the official languages, Caló is used less and less.
As Iberian Romani proper is extinct and as Caló is endangered, some people are trying to revitalise the language. The Spanish politician Juan de Dios Ramírez Heredia promotes Romanò-Kalò , a variant of International Romani , enriched by Caló words.

[ 98 ] His goal is to reunify the Caló and Romani roots.

Livonian [ edit ] Main article: Livonian language revival The Livonian language, a Finnic language, once spoken on about a third of modern-day Latvian territory, [ 99 ] died in the 21st century with the death of the last native speaker Grizelda Kristiņa on 2 June 2013.

[ 100 ] Today there are about 210 people mainly living in Latvia who identify themselves as Livonian and speak the language on the A1-A2 level according to the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages and between 20 and 40 people who speak the language on level B1 and up.

[ 101 ] Today all speakers learn Livonian as a second language. There are different programs educating Latvians on the cultural and linguistic heritage of Livonians and the fact that most Latvians have common Livonian descent.

[ 102 ] Programs worth mentioning include: Livones.net [ 103 ] with extensive information about language, history and culture The Livonian Institute of the University of Latvia [ 104 ] doing research on the Livonian language, other Finnic languages in Latvia and providing an extensive Livonian-Latvian-Estonian dictionary with declinations/conjugations [ 105 ] Virtual Livonia [ 106 ] providing information on the Livonian language and especially its grammar Mierlinkizt: [ 107 ] An annual summer camp for children to teach children about the Livonian language, culture etc.

Līvõd Īt (Livonian Union) [ 108 ] The Livonian linguistic and cultural heritage is included in the Latvian cultural canon [ 109 ] and the protection, revitalization and development of Livonian as an indigenous language is guaranteed by Latvian law [ 110 ] Old Prussian [ edit ] A few linguists and philologists are involved in reviving a reconstructed form of the extinct Old Prussian language from Luther's catechisms, the Elbing Vocabulary, place names, and Prussian loanwords in the Low Prussian dialect of Low German . Several dozen people use the language in Lithuania , Kaliningrad , and Poland , including a few children who are natively bilingual.

[ 111 ] The Prusaspirā Society has published its translation of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry 's The Little Prince . The book was translated by Piotr Szatkowski (Pīteris Šātkis) and released in 2015.

[ 112 ] The other efforts of Baltic Prussian societies include the development of online dictionaries, learning apps and games. There also have been several attempts to produce music with lyrics written in the revived Baltic Prussian language, most notably in the Kaliningrad Oblast by Romowe Rikoito , [ 113 ] Kellan and Āustras Laīwan, but also in Lithuania by Kūlgrinda in their 2005 album Prūsų Giesmės (Prussian Hymns), [ 114 ] and in Latvia by Rasa Ensemble in 1988 [ 115 ] and Valdis Muktupāvels in his 2005 oratorio "Pārcēlātājs Pontifex" featuring several parts sung in Prussian.

[ 116 ] Important in this revival was Vytautas Mažiulis , who died on 11 April 2009, and his pupil Letas Palmaitis , leader of the experiment and author of the website Prussian Reconstructions .

[ 117 ] Two late contributors were Prāncis Arellis ( Pranciškus Erelis ), Lithuania, and Dailūns Russinis ( Dailonis Rusiņš ), Latvia. After them, Twankstas Glabbis from Kaliningrad oblast and Nērtiks Pamedīns from East-Prussia, now Polish Warmia-Masuria actively joined.

[ citation needed ] Yola [ edit ] The Yola language revival movement has cultivated in Wexford in recent years, and the “Gabble Ing Yola” resource center for Yola materials claims there are around 140 speakers of the Yola language today.

[ 118 ] Oceania [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] The European colonization of Australia, and the consequent damage sustained by Aboriginal communities, had a catastrophic effect on indigenous languages, especially in the southeast and south of the country, leaving some with no living traditional native speakers. A number of Aboriginal communities in Victoria and elsewhere are now trying to revive some of the Aboriginal Australian languages . The work is typically directed by a group of Aboriginal elders and other knowledgeable people, with community language workers doing most of the research and teaching. They analyze the data, develop spelling systems and vocabulary and prepare resources. Decisions are made in collaboration. Some communities employ linguists, and there are also linguists who have worked independently, [ 119 ] such as Luise Hercus and Peter K. Austin .

In the state of Queensland , an effort is being made to teach some Indigenous languages in schools and to develop workshops for adults. More than 150 languages were once spoken within the state, but today fewer than 20 are spoken as a first language, and less than two per cent of schools teach any Indigenous language. The Gunggari language is one language which is being revived, with only three native speakers left.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] In the Northern Territory , the Pertame Project is an example in Central Australia .

Pertame , from the country south of Alice Springs , along the Finke River , is a dialect in the Arrernte group of languages . With only 20 fluent speakers left by 2018, [ 122 ] the Pertame Project is seeking to retain and revive the language, headed by Pertame elder Christobel Swan.

[ 123 ] In the far north of South Australia , the Diyari language has an active programme under way, with materials available for teaching in schools and the wider community.

[ 124 ] Also in South Australia, there is a unit at the University of Adelaide which teaches and promotes the use of the Kaurna language , headed by Rob Amery , who has produced many books and course materials.

[ 125 ] The Victorian Department of Education and Training reported 1,867 student enrollments in 14 schools offering an Aboriginal Languages Program in the state of Victoria in 2018.

[ 126 ] New Zealand [ edit ] Further information: Māori language revival One of the best cases of relative success in language revitalization is the case of Maori , also known as te reo Māori . It is the ancestral tongue of the indigenous Maori people of New Zealand and a vehicle for prose narrative, sung poetry, and genealogical recital.

[ 127 ] The history of the Maori people is taught in Maori in sacred learning houses through oral transmission. Even after Maori became a written language, the oral tradition was preserved.

[ 127 ] Once European colonization began, many laws were enacted in order to promote the use of English over Maori among indigenous people.

[ 127 ] The Education Ordinance Act of 1847 mandated school instruction in English and established boarding schools to speed up assimilation of Maori youths into European culture. The Native School Act of 1858 forbade Māori from being spoken in schools.

During the 1970s, a group of young Maori people, the Ngā Tamatoa , successfully campaigned for Maori to be taught in schools.

[ 127 ] Also, Kōhanga Reo, Māori language preschools, called language nests, were established.

[ 128 ] The emphasis was on teaching children the language at a young age, a very effective strategy for language learning. The Maori Language Commission was formed in 1987, leading to a number of national reforms aimed at revitalizing Maori.

[ 127 ] They include media programmes broadcast in Maori, undergraduate college programmes taught in Maori, and an annual Maori language week. Each iwi (tribe) created a language planning programme catering to its specific circumstances. These efforts have resulted in a steady increase in children being taught in Maori in schools since 1996.

[ 127 ] Hawaiian [ edit ] Main article: Hawaiian language On six of the seven inhabited islands of Hawaii , Hawaiian was displaced by English and is no longer used as the daily language of communication. The one exception is Niʻihau , where Hawaiian has never been displaced, has never been endangered, and is still used almost exclusively. Efforts to revive the language have increased in recent decades. Hawaiian language immersion schools are now open to children whose families want to retain (or introduce) Hawaiian language into the next generation. The local National Public Radio station features a short segment titled "Hawaiian word of the day". Additionally, the Sunday editions of the Honolulu Star-Bulletin and its successor, the Honolulu Star-Advertiser , feature a brief article called Kauakūkalahale , written entirely in Hawaiian by a student.

[ 129 ] Current revitalization efforts [ edit ] Language revitalization efforts are ongoing around the world. Revitalization teams are utilizing modern technologies to increase contact with indigenous languages and to record traditional knowledge .

Mexico [ edit ] In Mexico, the Mixtec people's language heavily revolves around the interaction between climate, nature, and what it means for their livelihood.

[ citation needed ] UNESCO 's LINKS (Local and Indigenous Knowledge) program recently underwent a project to create a glossary of Mixtec terms and phrases related to climate. UNESCO believes that the traditional knowledge of the Mixtec people via their deep connection with weather phenomena can provide insight on ways to address climate change . Their intention in creating the glossary is to "facilitate discussions between experts and the holders of traditional knowledge".

[ 130 ] Canada [ edit ] In Canada, the Wapikoni Mobile project travels to indigenous communities and provides lessons in film making. Program leaders travel across Canada with mobile audiovisual production units, and aim to provide indigenous youth with a way to connect with their culture through a film topic of their choosing. The Wapikona project submits its films to events around the world as an attempt to spread knowledge of indigenous culture and language.

[ 131 ] Chile [ edit ] Of the youth in Rapa Nui ( Easter Island ), ten percent learn their mother language. The rest of the community has adopted Spanish in order to communicate with the outside world and support its tourism industry. Through a collaboration between UNESCO and the Chilean Corporación Nacional de Desarrollo Indigena , the Department of Rapa Nui Language and Culture at the Lorenzo Baeza Vega School was created. Since 1990, the department has created primary education texts in the Rapa Nui language . In 2017, the Nid Rapa Nui, a non-governmental organization was also created with the goal of establishing a school that teaches courses entirely in Rapa Nui.

[ 132 ] Health benefits of language revitalization [ edit ] Language revitalisation has been linked to increased health outcomes for Indigenous Australian communities involved in reclaiming traditional language. Benefits range from improved mental health for community members, increasing connectedness to culture, identity, and a sense of wholeness. Indigenous languages are a core element in the formation of identity, providing pathways for cultural expression, agency, spiritual and ancestral connection.

[ 133 ] Connection to culture is considered to play an important role in childhood development, [ 134 ] and is a UN convention right.

[ 135 ] Colonisation and subsequent linguicide carried out through policies such as those that created Australia's Stolen Generations have damaged this connection. It has been proposed that  language revitalization may play an important role in countering intergenerational trauma that has been caused.

[ 136 ] Researchers at the University of Adelaide and South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute have found that language revitalisation of Aboriginal languages is linked to better mental health.

[ 137 ] One study in the Barngarla Community in South Australia has been looking holistically at the positive benefits of language reclamation, healing mental and emotional scars, and building connections to community and country that underpin wellness and wholeness. The study identified the Barngarla peoples' connection to their language as a strong component of developing a strong cultural and personal identity; the people are as connected to language as they are to culture, and culture is key to their identity.

[ 133 ] Some proponents claim that language reclamation is a form of empowerment and builds strong connections with community and wholeness.

[ 138 ] Criticism [ edit ] John McWhorter has argued that programs to revive indigenous languages will almost never be very effective because of the practical difficulties involved. He also argues that the death of a language does not necessarily mean the death of a culture. Indigenous expression is still possible even when the original language has disappeared, as with Native American groups and as evidenced by the vitality of black American culture in the United States, among people who speak not Yoruba but English. He argues that language death is, ironically, a sign of hitherto isolated peoples migrating and sharing space: "To maintain distinct languages across generations happens only amidst unusually tenacious self-isolation—such as that of the Amish —or brutal segregation".

[ 139 ] Kenan Malik has also argued that it is "irrational" to try to preserve all the world's languages, as language death is natural and in many cases inevitable, even with intervention. He proposes that language death improves communication by ensuring more people speak the same language. This may benefit the economy and reduce conflict.

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] The protection of minority languages from extinction is often not a concern for speakers of the dominant language. There is often prejudice and deliberate persecution of minority languages, in order to appropriate the cultural and economic capital of minority groups.

[ 142 ] At other times governments deem that the cost of revitalization programs and creating linguistically diverse materials is too great to take on.

[ 143 ] See also [ edit ] Category:Language activists Contemporary Latin Directorate of Language Planning and Implementation Endangered languages Language documentation Language nest Language planning Language policy Official language English-only movement Linguistic purism Minority language Regional language Rosetta Project Sacred language Second-language acquisition Treasure language Languages in censuses Digital projects and repositories [ edit ] Lingua Libre − a libre online tool used to record words and phrases of any language (thousands of recordings have already been done in endangered languages like Atikamekw , Occitan , Basque , Catalan , and are all available on Wikimedia Commons ) Tatoeba contains example sentences with translations in dozens of endangered languages, including Belarusian , Breton , Basque and Cornish .

[ 144 ] The Living Archive of Aboriginal Languages − contains works in endangered languages of the Northern Territory , Australia FirstVoices - contains community-managed dictionaries, songs, stories, and multimedia for Indigenous languages in British Columbia Organizations [ edit ] Foundation for Endangered Languages The Language Conservancy Pūnana Leo , Hawaiian language schools Resource Network for Linguistic Diversity Culture Vannin , Manx Gaelic language organization SIL International First Peoples' Cultural Council , Indigenous language, arts, and heritage revitalization in British Columbia Lists [ edit ] Lists of endangered languages List of endangered languages with mobile apps Lists of extinct languages List of language regulators List of revived languages Notes [ edit ] ^ 6,106 Indians in 1981, 49,736 in 1991, 14,135 in 2001, and 24,821 in 2011, have reported Sanskrit to be their mother tongue.

[ 47 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Grenoble, Leonore A.; Whaley, Lindsay J. (2005).

Saving Languages: An Introduction to Language Revitalization . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. p. 63.

ISBN 978-0521016520 .

Hebrew is cited by Paulston et al. (1993:276) as 'the only true example of language revival.' ^ Tsunoda, Tasaku. Language Endangerment and Language Revitalization. Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter, 2005. p. 169. Print.

^ Pine, Aidan; Turin, Mark (29 March 2017).

"Language Revitalization" .

Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Linguistics . Vol. 1. Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199384655.013.8 .

ISBN 9780199384655 .

^ Crystal, David (2010). "Language Planning". In Crystal, David (ed.).

The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language (Third ed.). New York, NY: Cambridge University Press . pp.

382– 387.

^ "Endangered Languages" . Archived from the original on 9 April 2014 . Retrieved 20 April 2014 .

^ Grenoble, Leonore A.; Whaley, Lindsay J. (2005).

Saving Languages: An Introduction to Language Revitalization . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. p. 20.

ISBN 978-0521016520 .

^ Tsunoda, Tasaku. Language Endangerment and Language Revitalization. Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter, 2005. Print.

^ New Perspectives on Endangered Languages. Ed. José A.F. Farfán and Fernando F. Ramallo. Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 2010. pp. 1-7. Print.

^ Language Vitality and Endangerment (PDF) . International Expert Meeting on UNESCO Programme Safeguarding of Endangered Languages. UNESCO Ad Hoc Expert Group on Endangered Languages. 2003. p. 8 . Retrieved 26 September 2024 .

^ a b "Language Vitality and Endangerment" (PDF) . UNESCO Ad Hoc Expert Group on Endangered Languages. March 2003.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 February 2016 . Retrieved 14 December 2020 .

^ Tsunoda, Tasaku (2005).

Language Endangerment and Language Revitalization . Berlin: Mounton de Gruyter. p. 170.

^ Fishman, J. A. (1991).

Reversing language Shift: Theory and Practice of Assistance to Threatened Languages . Clevedon : Multilingual Matters.

^ Fishman, J. A. (ed.) (2001).

Can Threatened Languages Be Saved? Reversing Language Shift, Revisited: A 21st Century Perspective . Clevedon : Multilingual Matters.

^ a b Tsunoda, Tasaku (2005).

Language Endangerment and Language Revitalization . Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter . p. 201.

^ Crystal, D. (2000).

Language Death . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . pp.

130– 141.

ISBN 0-521-65321-5 .

^ Thomason, Sarah (2015).

Endangered Languages: An Introduction . United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press . p. 6.

ISBN 978-0-521-68453-8 .

^ Thomason, Sarah (2015).

Endangered Languages: An Introduction . United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press . pp.

156– 159.

ISBN 978-0-521-68453-8 .

^ Thomason, Sarah (2015).

Endangered Languages: An Introduction . United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press . p. 165.

ISBN 978-0-521-68453-8 .

^ Zuckermann, Ghil'ad and Walsh, Michael 2011.

'Stop, Revive, Survive: Lessons from the Hebrew Revival Applicable to the Reclamation, Maintenance and Empowerment of Aboriginal Languages and Cultures' Archived 15 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine , Australian Journal of Linguistics Vol. 31, No. 1, pp. 111-127.

^ a b c d Ghil'ad Zuckermann, "Stop, revive and survive" , The Australian, Higher Education , June 6, 2012.

^ Nancy C. Dorian, ‘Purism v. compromise in language revitalisation and language revival’ in Language in Society 23, pp. 479-494.

^ Jones, Mari C. (1998).

Language Obsolescence and Revitalization: Linguistic Change in Two Sociolinguistically Contrasting Welsh Communities .

Clarendon Press .

ISBN 9780198237112 . Retrieved 6 April 2017 – via Google Books .

^ NeSmith, R. Keao (2005).

"Tūtū's Hawaiian and the Emergence of a Neo Hawaiian Language" (PDF) .

'Ōiwi Journal3—A Native Hawaiian Journal . Retrieved 6 April 2017 .

^ Ó Béarra, Feargal (18 July 2008) [2007].

"Modern Period: Late Modern Irish and the Dynamics of Language Change and Language Death" (PDF) . In Tristram, Hildegard L. C. (ed.).

The Celtic Languages in Contact . Thirteenth International Congress of Celtic Studies, Bonn, 26–27 July 2007.

University of Potsdam Press. pp.

260– 269.

ISBN 978-3-940793-07-2 . Retrieved 6 April 2017 .

^ O'Rahilly, Thomas Francis (1932).

Irish Dialects Past and Present: With Chapters on Scottish and Manx . Dublin: Dublin Institute for Advanced Studies. p. 121.

ISBN 9780901282552 . Retrieved 6 April 2017 – via Google Books .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ McRae, Neil.

"Dìlseachd, Lughad agus Saor-thoileachas: moladh airson iomairt Gàidhlig a dh'fhaodadh obrachadh" [Loyalty, Language and Volunteerism: a proposal for a Gaelic initiative that could work] (PDF) (in Scottish Gaelic) . Retrieved 6 April 2017 .

^ Kaye, Alan S. "Arabic." Morphologies of Asia and Africa. Winona Lake, IN: Eisenbrauns, 2007. 560-77. Print.

^ "Coptic: Ancient language still spoken today" .

EgyptToday . 8 August 2017.

^ Valentino, Andrea.

"The alphabets at risk of extinction" .

BBC .

^ "American Indian tribes turn to technology in race to save endangered languages" .

The Washington Post . 17 April 2013 . Retrieved 19 April 2013 .

[ dead link ] ^ Cohen, Patricia (6 April 2010).

"Indian Tribes Go in Search Of Their Lost Languages" .

The New York Times . p. 1.

^ "Jessie Little Doe Baird CV" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 August 2013 . Retrieved 20 November 2014 .

^ "The Long-Dead Native Language Wopânâak is Revived" . 9 October 2012.

^ "Tribes strive to save native tongues".

Christian Science Monitor .

^ Howard, Victoria; Mason, Catharine; Jacobs, Melville (2021).

Clackamas Chinook performance art: verse form interpretations . Studies in the anthropology of North American Indians series. Lincoln Bloomington: University of Nebraska Press American Indian Research Institute, Indiana University.

ISBN 978-1-4962-2411-8 .

^ "FirstVoices celebrates International Mother Language Day with the launch of a new version of its free, open-source, Indigenous" .

Canadian Press . 21 February 2024 . Retrieved 21 February 2024 .

^ a b c d Johnson, S?ímla?xw Michele K. (May 2017). "Breathing Life into New Speakers: Nsyilxcn and Tlingit Sequenced Curriculum, Direct Acquisition, and Assessments".

Canadian Modern Language Review .

73 (2): 109– 132.

doi : 10.3138/cmlr.3549 .

S2CID 151866033 .

^ Smith, Corinne (11 August 2020).

"Free online Tlingit language class sees widespread interest during pandemic" .

KFSK . KTOO FM . Retrieved 25 March 2021 .

^ "UAS ceremony honors 670 grads" .

Juneau Empire . 3 May 2016 . Retrieved 25 March 2021 .

^ a b King, Kendall (2001).

Language Revitalization Processes and Prospects: Quichua in the Ecuadorian Andes . New York: Multilingual Matters LTD. pp.

71– 83.

ISBN 1-85359-494-6 .

^ a b King, Kendall (2001).

Language Revitalization Processes and Prospects: Quichua in the Ecuadorian Andes . New York: Multilingual Matters LTD. pp.

187– 218.

ISBN 1-85359-494-6 .

^ King, Kendall (2001).

Language Revitalization Processes and Prospects: Quichua in the Ecuadorian Andes . New York: Multilingual Matters LTD. p. 140.

ISBN 1-85359-494-6 .

^ Bar-Adon, Aaron (1975).

The Rise and Decline of a Dialect: A Study in the Revival of Modern Hebrew . Mouton.

ISBN 9783111803661 .

^ "10000-plus growth in Sanskrit speakers" .

www.telegraphindia.com .

^ "Latest census figure reveals increase in Sanskrit speakers in India" . 15 July 2018. Archived from the original on 7 January 2022 . Retrieved 30 January 2019 .

^ a b "Indian village where people speak in Sanskrit" .

BBC News . 22 December 2014 . Retrieved 30 September 2020 .

^ a b c Sreevastan, Ajai (10 August 2014).

"Where are the Sanskrit speakers?" .

The Hindu . Chennai . Retrieved 11 October 2020 .

Sanskrit is also the only scheduled language that shows wide fluctuations — rising from 6,106 speakers in 1981 to 49,736 in 1991 and then falling dramatically to 14,135 speakers in 2001. "This fluctuation is not necessarily an error of the Census method. People often switch language loyalties depending on the immediate political climate," says Prof. Ganesh Devy of the People's Linguistic Survey of India. ... Because some people "fictitiously" indicate Sanskrit as their mother tongue owing to its high prestige and Constitutional mandate, the Census captures the persisting memory of an ancient language that is no longer anyone's real mother tongue, says B. Mallikarjun of the Center for Classical Language. Hence, the numbers fluctuate in each Census. ... "Sanskrit has influence without presence," says Devy. "We all feel in some corner of the country, Sanskrit is spoken." But even in Karnataka's Mattur, which is often referred to as India's Sanskrit village, hardly a handful indicated Sanskrit as their mother tongue.

^ Ruppel, A. M. (2017).

The Cambridge Introduction to Sanskrit . Cambridge University Press. p. 2.

ISBN 978-1-107-08828-3 .

The study of any ancient (or dead) language is faced with one main challenge: ancient languages have no native speakers who could provide us with examples of simple everyday speech ^ Annamalai, E. (2008).

"Contexts of multilingualism" . In Braj B. Kachru; Yamuna Kachru; S. N. Sridhar (eds.).

Language in South Asia . Cambridge University Press. pp. 223–.

ISBN 978-1-139-46550-2 .

Some of the migrated languages ... such as Sanskrit and English, remained primarily as a second language, even though their native speakers were lost. Some native languages like the language of the Indus valley were lost with their speakers, while some linguistic communities shifted their language to one or other of the migrants' languages.

^ "Five Indian villages where sanskrit is spoken" . 4 August 2024.

^ "Seven Indian villages where people speak in Sanskrit" .

Detechter . 24 September 2017.

^ Rassadin, V.I.

"The Soyot Language" .

Endangered Languages of Indigenous Peoples of Siberia .

UNESCO . Retrieved 18 July 2021 .

^ Langfield, Michele; Logan, William; Craith, Mairead Nic (27 November 2009).

Cultural Diversity, Heritage and Human Rights: Intersections in Theory and Practice .

Taylor & Francis .

ISBN 9780203863015 – via Google Books .

^ Fishman, Joshua A. (1 January 2001).

Can Threatened Languages be Saved?: Reversing Language Shift, Revisited : a 21st Century Perspective . Multilingual Matters.

ISBN 9781853594922 – via Google Books .

^ Tsunoda, Tasaku. Language Endangerment and Language Revitalization. Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter, 2005. 28. Print.

^ Johnson, Ian (5 October 2009).

"In China, the Forgotten Manchu Seek to Rekindle Their Glory" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 5 October 2009 .

^ "La Guirnalda Polar - Artículo por Guillermo Gómez Rivera [Educadores y sabios adredemente olvidados]" .

www.webcitation.org . Archived from the original on 4 June 2011.

^ Liñán, José Manuel Abad (9 May 2016).

"Los últimos del español" [The last of the Spanish].

El País (in Spanish) – via elpais.com.

^ "PHILIPPINES: Torn Between Two Colonisers -- Spain and America" . 9 October 1999. Archived from the original on 9 October 1999.

^ "Republic Act No.9187" (PDF) .

congress.gov.ph . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 June 2011.

^ "Union of Local Authorities of the Philippines Website" . 2 September 2007. Archived from the original on 2 September 2007.

^ "June 4, 2009 DO 55, s. 2009 – Guidelines On Offering Foreign Languages Like Spanish, French, And Nihongo (Japanese) As Elective Subjects in the Third and Fourth Year Levels of High School | Department of Education" . Retrieved 12 May 2025 .

^ "Demand for Spanish speakers growing - INQUIRER.net, Philippine News for Filipinos" .

www.webcitation.org . Archived from the original on 5 September 2012.

^ "El Castellano: Noticias - el retorno triunfal del español a las Filipinas" . Archived from the original on 29 June 2010 . Retrieved 17 January 2018 .

^ "Spanish on comeback trail in Philippines - INQUIRER.net, Philippine News for Filipinos" .

www.webcitation.org . Archived from the original on 19 June 2011.

^ "Inicio" .

^ Moseley, Christopher; Nicolas, Alexandre (2010).

Atlas of the world's languages in danger / editor-in-Chief, Christopher Moseley ; cartographer, Alexandre Nicolas . Memory of peoples series (3rd ed. entirely revised, enlarged and updated. ed.). Paris: UNESCO, Intangible Cultural Heritage Section.

ISBN 978-92-3-104095-5 .

^ Ohanesian, Liz (20 April 2023).

"Western Armenian Is An Endangered Language. A New Generation In LA Is Learning It" .

LAist . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ Karapetian, Shushan (2014).

" "How Do I Teach My Kids My Broken Armenian?": A Study of Eastern Armenian Heritage Language Speakers in Los Angeles" (PDF) .

Doctor of Philosophy in Near Eastern Languages and Cultures, University of California .

^ "Keeping a language alive" .

UCI News . 3 December 2018 . Retrieved 29 May 2023 .

^ "Multilingual Services Program" .

www.lavote.gov . Retrieved 12 May 2025 .

^ "Language Access Services" .

my.dpss.lacounty.gov . Retrieved 12 May 2025 .

^ Premsrirat, Suwilai.

"Chong Language Revitalization Project" (PDF) .

Mekong Watch . Mahidol University . Retrieved 22 June 2019 .

^ Santiago de Pablo, "Lengua e identidad nacional en el País Vasco: Del franquismo a la democracia". In 'Le discours sur les langues d'Espagne : Edition français-espagnol', Christian Lagarde ed, Perpignan: Presses Universitaires de Perpignan, 2009, pp. 53-64, p. 53 ^ See Jose Carlos Herreras, Actas XVI Congreso AIH. José Carlos HERRERAS. Políticas de normalización lingüística en la España democrática", 2007, p. 2. Reproduced in https://cvc.cervantes.es/literatura/aih/pdf/16/aih_16_2_021.pdf ^ See "Articulo 1, Orden Ministerial Sobre el Registro Civil, 18 de mayo de 1938". Reproduced in Jordi Busquets, "Casi Tres Siglos de Imposicion", 'El Pais' online, 29 April 2001.

https://elpais.com/diario/2001/04/29/cultura/988495201_850215.html .

^ See Communicacion No. 2486, Negociado 4, Excelentisimo Gobierno Civil de Vizcaya, 27 Octubre de 1949". A letter of acknowledgement from the archive of the Alcaldia de Guernica y Lumo, 2 November 2941, is reproduced in https://radiorecuperandomemoria.com/2017/05/31/la-prohibicion-del-euskera-en-el-franquismo/ Archived 20 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine ^ See for example the letter from the Military Commander of Las Arenas, Biscay, dated 21 October 1938, acknowledging a fine for the public use of a Basque first name on the streets of Las Arenas, reproduced in https://radiorecuperandomemoria.com/2017/05/31/la-prohibicion-del-euskera-en-el-franquismo/ Archived 20 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Francisco Franco" .

HISTORY . A&E Television Networks. 9 November 2009.

^ Agirrezabal, Lore (2010).

The basque experience : some keys to language and identity recovery . Eskoriatza, Gipuzkoa: Garabide Elkartea.

ISBN 978-84-613-6835-8 . Retrieved 15 July 2021 .

^ Alegria, Iñaki; Sarasola, Kepa (2017).

Language technology for language communities: An overview based on our experience. In: FEL XXI : communities in control : learning tools and strategies for multilingual endangered language communities : proceedings of the 21st FEL Conference, 19-21 October 2017 . Hungerford, England: Foundation for Endangered Languages.

ISBN 978-0-9560210-9-0 .

^ Clark, Robert (1979).

The Basques: the Franco years and beyond . Reno: University of Nevada Press. p. 149.

ISBN 0-874-17057-5 .

^ "The Basque Language Gains Speakers, but No Surge in Usage – Basque Tribune" .

^ a b c Carnie, Andrew. "Modern Irish: Modern Irish: A Case Study in Language Revival Failure." (1995).

^ This decline was noted in 2002.

"Report of the Gaeltacht Commission" (PDF) . 2002. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 October 2013 . Retrieved 20 June 2014 .

^ Gaelscoileanna Teo – Statistics: http://www.gaelscoileanna.ie/en/about/statistics/ ^ http://www.gaelport.com/default.aspx?treeid=37&NewsItemID=3726 : ‘Schism fears for Gaeilgeoirí,’ Brian Ó Broin, 16 January 2010, The Irish Times .

^ See the website of TG4: http://www.tg4.ie/ .

^ ‘Language and Occupational Status: Linguistic Elitism in the Irish Labour Market,’ The Economic and Social Review, Vol. 40, No. 4, Winter, 2009, pp. 435–460: https://ideas.repec.org/a/eso/journl/v40y2009i4p435-460.html ^ "Census shows decline in Gaelic speakers 'slowed' " .

BBC News Online . 26 September 2013 . Retrieved 23 June 2014 .

^ Campsie, Alison.

"Gaelic speakers map: Where in Scotland is Gaelic thriving?" .

The Scotsman . Retrieved 6 April 2017 .

^ "UN declares Manx Gaelic 'extinct' " . 20 February 2009 . Retrieved 5 January 2018 .

^ Whitehead, Sarah (2 April 2015).

"How the Manx language came back from the dead" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 5 January 2018 .

^ Wilson, Gary N.; Johnson, Henry; Sallabank, Julia (3 July 2015).

" 'I'm not dead yet': a comparative study of indigenous language revitalization in the Isle of Man, Jersey and Guernsey" (PDF) .

Current Issues in Language Planning .

16 (3): 259– 278.

doi : 10.1080/14664208.2014.972535 .

ISSN 1466-4208 .

S2CID 145626745 .

^ "Lifelines for indigenous languages | The World Weekly" .

www.theworldweekly.com . Archived from the original on 7 January 2018 . Retrieved 6 January 2018 .

^ "The New Testament in Cornish" .

www.evertype.com .

^ "Guild of Bards" .

Gorseth Kernow . Archived from the original on 6 July 2009.

^ "Unión Romaní imparte el primer curso de romanò-kalò" Archived 22 December 2018 at the Wayback Machine (in Spanish) , Union Romani, 29 December 2006 ^ "Lecture by Valts Ernštreits "Chasing the heritage of Livonians - Latvia's indigenous people" " . 6 October 2020 – via www.youtube.com.

^ Charter, David.

"Death of a language: last ever speaker of Livonian passes away aged 103" .

The Times .

^ "livones.net" . 2 February 2014. Archived from the original on 2 February 2014.

^ "Lībiešu tradicionālā kultūra Latvijas kultūras kanonā. Stāsta Valts Ernštreits" [Livonian traditional culture in the cultural canon of Latvia. Narrated by Walt Ernstreit.] (in Latvian). 23 October 2019 – via YouTube .

^ "Livones.net" .

www.livones.net .

^ "Livones.net" .

www.livones.net . 20 November 2022.

^ "Livones.net" .

www.livones.net .

^ "Virtual Livonia ∙ Līvõmō Internets ∙ Līvzeme Internetā" .

Virtual Livonia .

^ "Livones.net - Lībiešu vasaras skola "Mierlinkizt" " [Livonian summer school "Mierlinkizt"].

www.livones.net (in Latvian).

^ "Livones.net - Līvõd Īt (Livonian Union)" .

www.livones.net .

^ "Lībiešu tradicionālā kultūra | Latvijas kultūras kanons" [Livonian traditional culture | Latvian cultural canon] (in Latvian).

^ "Valsts valodas likums" [State Language Law].

LIKUMI.LV (in Latvian).

^ Szatkowski, Piotr (2021). "Language practices in a family of Prussian language revivalists: Conclusions based on short-term participants observation".

Pismo Humanistów .

18 (2626).

doi : 10.11649/a.0000 (inactive 12 July 2025).

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ "Little Prince Published in Prussian" , Culture.PL, 2015/02/17 ^ "ROMOWE RIKOITO - Undēina" . Dangus . Retrieved 29 August 2014 .

^ "Senoji prūsų kalba atgimsta naujausioje grupės KŪLGRINDA plokštelėje" [The old Prussian language is revived in the latest album of the group KŪLGRINDA] (in Lithuanian). Dangus . Retrieved 29 August 2014 .

^ Smidchens, Guntis (2014).

The Power of Song: Nonviolent National Culture in the Baltic Singing Revolution .

University of Washington Press . p. 12.

ISBN 978-0-295-99310-2 – via Google Books .

^ "Oratorio" . Retrieved 29 August 2014 .

^ Prussian Reconstructions ^ "How many speakers of Yola are there now?" .

google . Retrieved 19 January 2022 .

^ Dr Christina Eira, community linguist with the Victorian Aboriginal Corporation for Languages (VACL), Aboriginal Revival Languages , Lingua Franca, 27 June 2009, Radio National: . Retrieved 21 June 2014.

^ Hosier, Phoebe (26 May 2021).

"An outback Queensland school leads the way to keep endangered Indigenous language alive" .

ABC News .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 13 February 2022 .

^ Moodie, Anthea (27 November 2021).

"Indigenous language workshops connecting Gunggari people to culture" .

ABC News .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 13 February 2022 .

^ "To save a dying language" . Alice Springs News Online. 23 May 2019. Archived from the original on 9 June 2019 . Retrieved 9 June 2019 .

^ "Pertame Project" .

Call for Australian languages and linguistics . Archived from the original on 1 April 2020 . Retrieved 9 June 2019 .

^ "Ngayana Diyari Yawarra Yathayilha: Supporting the Dieri language" . 28 February 2013. Archived from the original on 23 April 2021 . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

^ "Associate Professor Rob Amery" .

University of Adelaide Staff Directory . Retrieved 14 December 2023 .

^ "Languages Provision in Victorian Government Schools, 2018" (PDF) . State of Victoria (Department of Education and Training). 19 June 2019. Archived from the original (PDF) on 23 April 2021 . Retrieved 23 April 2021 .

^ a b c d e f Senft, Gunter (2010).

Endangered Austronesian and Australian Aboriginal Languages . Canberra: Pacific Linguistics. pp.

185– 192.

ISBN 9780858836235 .

^ Hinton, Leanne; Hale, Kenneth (2001).

The Green Book of Language Revitalization in Practice . San Diego: Academic Press . p. 119.

ISBN 0-12-349353-6 .

^ Wilson, W. H.; Kamanä, K. (2001). Mai loko mai o ka 'i'ini: Proceeding from a dream: The Aha Pûnana Leo connection in Hawaiian language revitalization. In L. Hinton & K. Hale (eds.).

The green book of language revitalization in practice . San Diego, CA: Academic Press. pp. 147–177.

^ Morales, Aracely Torres (January–March 2019).

"Ndejama cuia chi ini zaza: Mexico's Mixtec people know how to speak the language of nature" (PDF) .

The UNESCO Courier : 9.

doi : 10.18356/885fb3d6-en .

^ Gomez, Saturnin (January–March 2019).

"Manon Barbeau: A Camera in Her Heart" (PDF) .

The UNESCO Courier .

UNESCO : 10– 12 – via UNESCO.org.

^ Sopova, Jasmina; Ortega, Carolina (January–March 2019).

"Rapa Nui: Back from the Brink" (PDF) .

The UNESCO Courier .

UNESCO : 13– 15 – via UNESCO.org.

^ a b Sivak, L. et al. (2019) ‘“Language Breathes Life”-Barngarla Community Perspectives on the Wellbeing Impacts of Reclaiming a Dormant Australian Aboriginal Language’, International journal of environmental research and public health, 16(20). doi: 10.3390/ijerph16203918.

^ "A positive sense of Identity and Culture" (PDF) .

ARACY . 26 August 2021. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 March 2022 . Retrieved 26 August 2021 .

^ "United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Children" .

UNICEF . Archived from the original on 17 August 2021 . Retrieved 26 August 2021 .

^ Zuckermann, Ghil'ad (18 June 2020).

"9. Our ancestors are happy: language revival and mental health" .

Revivalistics: From the Genesis of Israeli to Language Reclamation in Australia and Beyond .

Oxford University Press . pp.

266– 280.

doi : 10.1093/oso/9780199812776.003.0009 .

ISBN 978-0-19-981277-6 . Retrieved 26 August 2021 .

Abstract only available to non-subscribers.

^ Richards, Stephanie (25 October 2019).

" "Dreadful" decline in Kaurna language teaching" .

InDaily . Retrieved 14 December 2023 .

^ "Living languages" .

AIATSIS . Retrieved 24 August 2021 .

^ McWhorter, John (2009).

"The Cosmopolitan Tongue: The Universality of English" .

World Affairs .

172 (2). Sage Publications, Inc.: 61– 68.

doi : 10.3200/WAFS.172.2.61-68 .

ISSN 0043-8200 .

JSTOR 20671445 . Retrieved 11 February 2024 .

^ "Are dying languages worth saving?" .

BBC News . 15 September 2010.

^ Malik, Kenan (20 November 2000).

"Let Them Die" .

Prospect . Archived from the original on 4 December 2002.

^ Ellis, Peter Berresford. 1985. The Celtic Revolution: A Study in Anti-imperialism. Talybont: Y Lolfa.

^ Tsunoda, Tasaku. Language Endangerment and Language Revitalization. Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter, 2005. 158-159. Print.

^ "Number of sentences per language - Tatoeba" .

tatoeba.org . Retrieved 14 November 2022 .

Further reading [ edit ] Grenoble, L. A. and Whaley, L. J. (1998).

Endangered Languages: Language Loss and Community Response . Cambridge University Press. ( ISBN 0-521-59712-9 ) Nettle, D. and Romaine, S. (2000).

Vanishing Voices . Oxford University Press. ( ISBN 0-19-515246-8 ) Reyhner, J. (ed.) (1999).

Revitalizing indigenous languages . Flagstaff, AZ : Northern Arizona University, Center for Excellence in Education. ( ISBN 0-9670554-0-7 ) Bastardas-Boada, A. (2019).

From language shift to language revitalization and sustainability. A complexity approach to linguistic ecology . Barcelona: Edicions de la Universitat de Barcelona. ( ISBN 978-84-9168-316-2 ) James Griffiths (2021).

Speak Not: Empire, Identity and the Politics of Language . Bloomsbury. ( ISBN 9781786999665 ) External links [ edit ] First Languages Australia Documenting Endangered Languages , Documenting Endangered Languages (DEL) (Archived program) National Science Foundation Advocates for Indigenous California Language Survival Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐p2vmq
Cached time: 20250817131926
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.335 seconds
Real time usage: 1.451 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8720/1000000
Revision size: 101231/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 246930/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7662/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 25/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 447017/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.856/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18028966/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1266.095      1 -total
 62.29%  788.610      2 Template:Reflist
 21.52%  272.496     56 Template:Cite_web
 17.54%  222.061     28 Template:Cite_book
  8.61%  109.019     20 Template:Cite_news
  6.40%   81.032      9 Template:Fix
  6.13%   77.646      1 Template:Lang
  5.76%   72.908      1 Template:Authority_control
  4.54%   57.518      9 Template:Cite_journal
  4.48%   56.764      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:577320:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817131926 and revision id 1306388534. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Language_revitalization&oldid=1306388534 " Categories : Language revival Linguistic purism Linguistic rights Endangered languages Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 Scottish Gaelic-language sources (gd) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2021 CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1: unfit URL Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 Latvian-language sources (lv) CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 CS1 Lithuanian-language sources (lt) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2024 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from January 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles needing additional references from October 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from March 2013 Vague or ambiguous time from April 2025 Vague or ambiguous time from November 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2015 Articles containing Māori-language text Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 13:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Language revitalization 42 languages Add topic

