Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Application of xeer 2 Principles of xeer 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Xeer 11 languages العربية Català Dansk Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Piemontèis Русский Soomaaliga Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Somali customary legal system Xeer (pronounced [ħeːr] ) is the traditional legal system used by Somalis in Somalia , Djibouti , Somali Region of Ethiopia, and the North Eastern Province in Kenya. It is one of the three systems from which formal Somali law draws its inspiration, the others being civil law and Islamic law .

[ 1 ] It is believed to pre-date Islam . However, Islam influenced it, with Xeer incorporating many Islamic legal principles.

[ clarification needed ] Under this system, the elders , known as the xeer begti , serve as mediator judges and help settle court cases , taking precedent and custom into account.

[ 2 ] Xeer is polycentric in that different groups within Somali society have different interpretations of xeer.

Application of xeer [ edit ] Somali society is traditionally structured around a patriarchal clan based system, subdivided into sub-clans , then lineages , and finally mag groupings. These groups are bound together either by family ties or contract .

Xeer justice usually revolves around the latter groups, as these are the smallest. In these groups, each member is responsible aiding in the payment for the crimes of another and must accordingly bear some fraction of any decided punishment if the accused cannot afford to do so themselves. Within this system, only the victim or immediate family of a victim can bring criminal proceedings to xeer mediation. If the victim is a man, his father, brothers, or uncles can bring complaints. If the victim is a woman, complaints can be brought forward by the men in her family or the men in her husband's family.

[ 3 ] In xeer , crimes are transgressions against property rights . Justice is directed in the form of material compensation to the victim. If the accused is found guilty, some material restitution must be paid. If restitution cannot be given, mag retribution is due, measured in terms of livestock (usually healthy female camels ), to be paid to the victim or the victim's family. There is no concept of imprisonment under xeer . In some cases, elders may advise that neither side seeks restitution or retribution. The verdict is enforced by the victim's family or else by all able-bodied clansmen within the area wherein the verdict is to be executed.

[ 3 ] Xeer judges are made up of the heads of extended families . These family heads are chosen for their knowledge of the law and wisdom , but otherwise, there is no formal training, and each judge is allowed to formulate their own doctrines and legal principles . Multiple judges are chosen to preside over each case by the involved parties, with this delegation being called an "ergo".

[ 4 ] The number of judges involved in a case is usually around ten, though it can be as few as two.

[ 2 ] In each case, the goal is to reach consensus between the parties.

Arbitration traditionally takes place under a large tree, and the mediators ask each party to submit to the judge's ruling. In modern times, meeting halls are often used instead of sitting under a tree.

[ 2 ] Each party has the right to appoint a representative to speak on its behalf while a recorder loudly repeats any important points that are made. If a fact is disputed, its veracity must be obtained by the testimony of three witnesses. If this cannot be done, an oath must be sworn. Should proceedings become heated, the presiding judge may order a recess, wherein both parties discuss issues relating to the case in small informal groups. Once the mediation has been decided, an appeal may be requested, although all parties must agree.

[ 3 ] Principles of xeer [ edit ] Different groups within Somali society undertake oral agreements with each other to define xeer law.

[ 2 ] Despite this informal nature, there is a series of generally accepted principles , agreements, and ideas that constitute xeer , referred to collectively as " xissi adkaaday ". These are: the payment of mag by the collective group (clan, sub-clan, lineage, or mag group) from which an offender originates as compensation for the crimes of murder , bodily assault , theft , rape , and defamation of character , given to the victim or victim's family; the protection of vulnerable or respected members of society such as older adults, women, children, poets, guests and religious people obligations to the family such as the payment of a dowry to a bride the rights of a widower to marry the dead wife's sister and the inheritance of a widow by the dead man's brother the punishments for elopement and the division and use of natural resources like water and land.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Adat ( Malays of Nusantara ) Anglo-Saxon law ( England ) Gadaa ( Oromo ) Aqsaqal ( Central Asia ) Coutume ( France ) Customary Aboriginal law ( Australia ) Customary law Early Germanic law Early Irish law ( Ireland ) Frith-borh Kanun (Albania) Kritarchy Laws of the Brets and Scots ( Scotland ) Medieval Scandinavian laws Pashtunwali and Jirga ( Pashtuns of Pakistan and Afghanistan ) Smriti and Ācāra ( India ) Urf – Arabic Islamic term meaning societal custom or knowledge Vlach law ( Romanians ) Welsh Law ( Wales ) References [ edit ] ^ "CIA The World Factbook - Somalia" . 14 November 2022.

^ a b c d "Legal Affairs" . Archived from the original on 2017-10-19 . Retrieved 2008-07-12 .

^ a b c Somalia: A Tradition of Law, by Nicola Gladitz.

^ a b Wojkowska, Ewa (December 2006).

"Doing Justice: How informal justice systems can contribute" (PDF) . Retrieved 23 February 2017 .

Sources [ edit ] Abdile, Mahdi (2012). Customary Dispute Resolution in Somalia.

African Conflict & Peacebuilding Review , Volume 2 , Number 1: 87–110.

Gladitz, Nicola.

Somalia: A Tradition of Law Notten, Michael van (2005).

The Law of the Somalis: A Stable Foundation for Economic Development in the Horn of Africa .

External links [ edit ] Spencer Heath MacCallum (4 September 2007).

"The Rule of Law without the State" .

Mises Daily . Mises Institute.

v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e Law of Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) v t e Conformity Enforcement Proscription Damnatio memoriae Dissident / Dissenter Exile Émigré Homo sacer Ostracism Blacklisting Cancel culture Censorship Deplatforming Outcast Outlaw Civil death Vogelfrei Persona non grata Public enemy Enemy of the people Enemy of the state Scapegoating Shunning Governmental pressure Authoritarianism Harmonisation of law Nationalism Left-wing nationalism National conservatism Totalitarianism Tyranny of the majority Group pressure Bandwagon effect Brainwashing Closure (sociology) Collectivism Consensus reality Culture shock Dogma Echo chamber False consensus effect Fear of missing out Groupthink Hazing Herd mentality Identification (psychology) Indoctrination Invented tradition Memory conformity Mere-exposure effect Milieu control Mobbing Normalization Normative social influence Passing (sociology) Patriotism Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Propaganda Psychosocial issue Purity spiral Operant conditioning Rally 'round the flag effect Social construction of gender Social contagion Addiction Behavioral Crime Hysterical Suicide Emotional Social influence Social integration Socialization Spiral of silence Teasing Toxic positivity Untouchability Individual pressure Authoritarian personality Authoritarian leadership style Right-wing authoritarianism Control freak Obsessive–compulsive personality disorder Conformity Compliance Communal reinforcement Countersignaling Creeping normality Herd behavior Internalization Normalization of deviance Obedience Preference falsification Social proof Social reality Experiments Asch conformity experiments Breaching experiment Milgram experiment Stanford prison experiment Anticonformity Alternative media Anti-authoritarianism Anti-social behaviour Self-segregation Civil disobedience Cosmopolitanism Counterculture Culture jamming Deviance Devil's advocate Dissent / Defection Political Eccentricity Eclecticism Hermit Idiosyncrasy Individualism Insubordination Pueblo clown Rebellion Red team Satire Shock value v t e Somaliland articles History Chronology Laas Geel Dhambalin Land of Punt Malao Sultanate of Ifat Adal Sultanate Isaaq migrations Isaaq Sultanate Battle of Berbera Habr Yunis Sultanate British Somaliland Postage stamps and postal history of British Somaliland Somaliland campaign Somaliland campaign (1920) 1922 Burao Tax Revolt Italian invasion of British Somaliland Somaliland Camel Corps Somaliland Scouts 1945 Sheikh Bashir Rebellion List of colonial governors of British Somaliland State of Somaliland War of Independence Isaaq genocide National Movement Declaration of Independence Border dispute 2022 Waheen Market fire Outline of Somaliland By topic Maritime Military Postal Geography Cities Climate Geology Wildlife Greater Somalia Waterfalls Lamadaya Mountain ranges Golis Mountains Cal Madow Ogo Mountains Buur Dhaab Mountains Shimbiris Golis Cal Madow Buur Dhaab Dul Madoba Islands Sa'ad ad-Din Islands Caves Regions Awdal Maroodi Jeex Saaxil Sanaag Sool Togdheer Politics Cabinet Constitution Elections Foreign relations Diplomatic missions Government Embassies Human rights LGBT Judiciary Law ( Xeer ) Military Somaliland Police Parliament House of Elders House of Representatives Political parties President List Palace Vice-President List Ministers Mayors Visa policy Economy Agriculture Central Bank Airports Companies EEZ Energy Ports Shilling (currency) Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Anthem National emblem Demographics Education Flag Library Public holidays Independence Day Calling code Supreme Court Culture Architecture Art Cuisine Literature Media Music Religion Sports Team Games Languages Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Xeer&oldid=1301139821 " Categories : Law of Somalia Courts by type Customary legal systems Ancient Somalia Collectivism Culture of Somalia Somali inventions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with Somali IPA Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2023 Articles containing Somali-language text This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 08:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Xeer 11 languages Add topic

