Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Value Toggle Value subsection 2.1 Evaluative terms 2.2 Types 2.2.1 Intrinsic and instrumental 2.2.2 Absolute and relative 2.2.3 Other distinctions 3 Schools of thought Toggle Schools of thought subsection 3.1 Realism and anti-realism 3.2 Sources of value 3.3 Monism and pluralism 3.4 Others 4 Methods 5 In various fields Toggle In various fields subsection 5.1 Ethics 5.2 Economics 5.3 Sociology 5.4 Anthropology 5.5 Psychology 6 History 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Notes 7.2 Citations 7.3 Sources Toggle the table of contents Value theory 15 languages العربية Español Esperanto فارسی Galego Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Bahasa Melayu Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Axiological ) Systematic study of values Not to be confused with Theory of value (economics) or Valuation theory .

Value theory , also called axiology , studies the nature, sources, and types of values . It is a branch of philosophy and an interdisciplinary field closely associated with social sciences such as economics , sociology , anthropology , and psychology .

Value is the worth of something, usually understood as covering both positive and negative degrees corresponding to the terms good and bad . Values influence many human endeavors related to emotion , decision-making , and action . Value theorists distinguish various types of values, like the contrast between intrinsic and instrumental value . An entity has intrinsic value if it is good in itself, independent of external factors. An entity has instrumental value if it is useful as a means leading to other good things. Other classifications focus on the type of benefit, including economic, moral, political, aesthetic, and religious values. Further categorizations distinguish absolute values from values that are relative to something else.

Diverse schools of thought debate the nature and origins of values. Value realists state that values exist as objective features of reality. Anti-realists reject this, with some seeing values as subjective human creations and others viewing value statements as meaningless. Regarding the sources of value, hedonists argue that only pleasure has intrinsic value, whereas desire theorists discuss desires as the ultimate source of value.

Perfectionism , another approach, emphasizes the cultivation of characteristic human abilities. Value pluralism identifies diverse sources of intrinsic value, raising the issue of whether values belonging to different types are comparable. Value theorists employ various methods of inquiry , ranging from reliance on intuitions and thought experiments to the analysis of language, description of first-person experience , observation of behavior, and surveys .

Value theory is related to various fields.

Ethics focuses primarily on normative concepts of right behavior, whereas value theory explores evaluative concepts about what is good. In economics, theories of value are frameworks to assess and explain the economic value of commodities . Sociology and anthropology examine values as aspects of societies and cultures, reflecting dominant preferences and beliefs. In psychology, values are typically understood as abstract motivational goals that shape an individual's personality . The roots of value theory lie in antiquity as reflections on the highest good that humans should pursue. Diverse traditions contributed to this area of thought during the medieval and early modern periods , but it was only established as a distinct discipline in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.

Definition [ edit ] Even though early contributions to value theory were made in antiquity by philosophers such as Socrates , this area of thought was only conceived as a distinct discipline in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.

[ 1 ] Value theory, also known as axiology and theory of values , is the systematic study of values . As a branch of philosophy , it examines which things are good and what it means for something to be good. It distinguishes different types of values and explores how they can be measured and compared. This field also studies whether values are a fundamental aspect of reality and how they influence phenomena such as emotion , desire , decision, and action .

[ 2 ] Value theory is relevant to many human endeavors because values are guiding principles that underlie the political, economic, scientific, and personal spheres.

[ 3 ] It analyzes and evaluates phenomena such as well-being , utility , beauty , human life, knowledge , wisdom , freedom , love , and justice .

[ 4 ] The precise definition of value theory is debated and some theorists rely on alternative characterizations. In a broad sense, value theory is a catch-all label that encompasses all philosophical disciplines studying evaluative and normative topics. According to this view, value theory is one of the main branches of philosophy and includes ethics , aesthetics , social philosophy , political philosophy , and philosophy of religion .

[ 5 ] A similar broad characterization sees value theory as a multidisciplinary area of inquiry that integrates research from fields like sociology , anthropology , psychology , and economics alongside philosophy.

[ 6 ] In a narrow sense, value theory is a subdiscipline of ethics that is particularly relevant to the school of consequentialism since it determines how to assess the value of consequences.

[ 7 ] The word axiology has its origin in the ancient Greek terms ἄξιος ( axios , meaning ' worthy ' or ' of value ' ) and λόγος ( logos , meaning ' study ' or ' theory of ' ).

[ 8 ] Even though the roots of value theory reach back to the ancient period , this area of thought was only conceived as a distinct discipline in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, when the term axiology was coined.

[ 9 ] The terms value theory and axiology are usually used as synonyms, but some philosophers distinguish between them. According to one characterization, axiology is a subfield of value theory that limits itself to theories about which things are valuable and how valuable they are.

[ 10 ] [ a ] The term timology is an older and less common synonym.

[ 12 ] Value [ edit ] Main article: Value (ethics) Value is the worth, usefulness, or merit of something.

[ b ] Value theorists examine the expressions used to describe and compare values, called evaluative terms .

[ 15 ] They are further interested in the types or categories of values. The proposed classifications overlap and are based on factors like the source, beneficiary, and function of the value.

[ 16 ] Evaluative terms [ edit ] Values are expressed through evaluative terms. For example, the words good , best , great , and excellent convey positive values, whereas words like bad and terrible indicate negative values.

[ 15 ] Value theorists distinguish between thin and thick evaluative terms . Thin evaluative terms, like good and bad , express pure evaluations without any additional descriptive content.

[ c ] They contrast with thick evaluative terms, like courageous and cruel , which provide more information by expressing other qualities, such as character traits , in addition to the evaluation.

[ 18 ] Values are often understood as degrees that cover positive and negative magnitudes corresponding to good and bad. The term value is sometimes restricted to positive degrees to contrast with the term disvalue for negative degrees. The words better and worse are used to compare degrees, but it is controversial whether a quantitative comparison is always possible.

[ 19 ] Evaluation is the assessment or measurement of value, often employed to compare the benefits of different options to find the most advantageous choice.

[ 20 ] Evaluative terms are sometimes distinguished from normative or deontic terms. Normative or deontic terms, like right , wrong , and obligation , prescribe actions or other states by expressing what ought to be done or what is required.

[ 21 ] Evaluative terms have a wider scope because they are not limited to what people can control or are responsible for. For instance, involuntary events like digestion and earthquakes can have a positive or negative value even if they are not right or wrong in a strict sense.

[ 22 ] Despite the distinction, evaluative and normative concepts are closely related. For example, the value of the consequences of an action may influence its normative status—whether the action is right or wrong.

[ 23 ] Types [ edit ] Intrinsic and instrumental [ edit ] Main article: Instrumental and intrinsic value An entity has intrinsic value if it is good in itself. An entity has instrumental value if it leads to other good things.

[ 24 ] Instrumental values can form chains with intrinsic values as their endpoints.

[ 25 ] A thing has intrinsic or final value if it is good in itself or good for its own sake, independent of external factors or outcomes. A thing has extrinsic or instrumental value if it is useful or leads to other good things, serving as a means to bring about a desirable end. For example, tools like microwaves or money have instrumental value due to the useful functions they perform.

[ 24 ] In some cases, the thing produced this way has itself instrumental value, like when using money to buy a microwave. This can result in a chain of instrumentally valuable things in which each link gets its value by causing the following link. Intrinsically valuable things stand at the endpoint of these chains and ground the value of all the preceding links.

[ 25 ] One suggestion to distinguish between intrinsic and instrumental value, proposed by G. E. Moore , relies on a thought experiment that imagines the valuable thing in isolation from everything else. In such a situation, purely instrumentally valuable things lose their value since they serve no purpose while purely intrinsically valuable things remain valuable.

[ 26 ] [ d ] According to a common view, pleasure is one of the sources of intrinsic value. Other suggested sources include desire satisfaction, virtue , life , health , beauty , freedom , and knowledge .

[ 28 ] A thing can have both intrinsic and instrumental value if it is good in itself and leads to other good things.

[ 29 ] A thing can have both positive and negative consequences. Its total instrumental value is the value balance of all its consequences.

[ 30 ] Intrinsic and instrumental value are not exclusive categories. As a result, a thing can have both intrinsic and instrumental value if it is both good in itself while also leading to other good things.

[ 29 ] In a similar sense, a thing can have different instrumental values at the same time, both positive and negative ones. This is the case if some of its consequences are good while others are bad. The total instrumental value of a thing is the value balance of all its consequences.

[ 30 ] Because instrumental value depends on other values, it is an open question whether it should be understood as a value in a strict sense. For example, the overall value of a chain of causes leading to an intrinsically valuable thing remains the same if instrumentally valuable links are added or removed without affecting the intrinsically valuable thing. The observation that the overall value does not change is sometimes used as an argument that the things added or removed do not have value.

[ 31 ] Traditionally, value theorists have used the terms intrinsic value and final value interchangeably, just like the terms extrinsic value and instrumental value . This practice has been questioned in the 20th century based on the idea that they are similar but not identical concepts. According to this view, a thing has intrinsic value if the source of its value is an intrinsic property , meaning that the value does not depend on how the thing is related to other objects. Extrinsic value, by contrast, depends on external relations . This view sees instrumental value as one type of extrinsic value based on external causal relations . At the same time, it allows that there are other types of non-instrumental extrinsic value that result from external non-causal relations. Final value is understood as what is valued for its own sake, independent of whether intrinsic or extrinsic properties are responsible.

[ 32 ] [ e ] Absolute and relative [ edit ] Another distinction relies on the contrast between absolute and relative value. Absolute value, also called value simpliciter , is a form of unconditional value. A thing has relative value if its value is relative to other things or limited to certain considerations or viewpoints.

[ 34 ] One form of relative value is restricted to the type of an entity, expressed in sentences like "That is a good knife" or "Jack is a good thief". This form is known as attributive goodness since the word "good" modifies the meaning of another term. To be attributively good as a certain type means to possess qualities characteristic of that type. For instance, a good knife is sharp and a good thief has the skill of stealing without getting caught. Attributive goodness contrasts with predicative goodness. The sentence "Pleasure is good" is an example since the word good is used as a predicate to talk about the unqualified value of pleasure.

[ 35 ] Attributive and predicative goodness can accompany each other, but this is not always the case. For instance, being a good thief is not necessarily a good thing.

[ 36 ] Another type of relative value restricts goodness to a specific person. Known as personal value , [ f ] it expresses what benefits a particular person, promotes their welfare , or is in their interest. For example, a poem written by a child may have personal value for the parents even if the poem lacks value for others. Impersonal value, by contrast, is good in general without restriction to any specific person or viewpoint.

[ 38 ] Some philosophers, like Moore, reject the existence of personal values, holding that all values are impersonal. Others have proposed theories about the relation between personal and impersonal value. The agglomerative theory says that impersonal value is nothing but the sum of all personal values. Another view understands impersonal value as a specific type of personal value taken from the perspective of the universe as a whole.

[ 39 ] Agent-relative value is sometimes contrasted with personal value as another person-specific limitation of the evaluative outlook. Agent-relative values affect moral considerations about what a person is responsible for or guilty of. For example, if Mei promises to pick Pedro up from the airport then an agent-relative value obligates Mei to drive to the airport. This obligation is in place even if it does not benefit Mei, in which case there is an agent-relative value without a personal value. In consequentialism , [ g ] agent-relative values are often discussed in relation to ethical dilemmas . One dilemma revolves around the question of whether an individual should murder an innocent person if this prevents the murder of two innocent people by a different perpetrator. The agent-neutral perspective tends to affirm this idea since one murder is preferable to two. The agent-relative perspective tends to reject this conclusion, arguing that the initial murder should be avoided since it negatively impacts the agent-relative value of the individual committing it.

[ 41 ] Traditionally, most value theorists see absolute value as the main topic of value theory and focus their attention on this type. Nonetheless, some philosophers, like Peter Geach and Philippa Foot , have argued that the concept of absolute value by itself is meaningless and should be understood as one form of relative value.

[ 42 ] Other distinctions [ edit ] Other categorizations of values have been proposed following diverse classification principles without a single approach widely accepted by all theorists.

[ 43 ] Some focus on the types of entities that have value. They include distinct categories for entities like individuals, groups, society, the environment, and inert things. Another subdivision pays attention to the type of benefit involved and encompasses material, economic, moral, social, political, aesthetic, and religious values. Classifications by the beneficiary of the value distinguish between self- and other-oriented values.

[ 44 ] A historically influential approach identifies three spheres of value: truth , goodness, and beauty.

[ h ] For example, the neo-Kantian philosopher Wilhelm Windelband characterizes them as the highest goals of consciousness , with thought aiming at truth, will aiming at goodness, and emotion aiming at beauty. A similar view, proposed by the Chinese philosopher Zhang Dainian, says that the value of truth belongs to knowledge, the value of goodness belongs to behavior, and the value of beauty belongs to art.

[ 46 ] This three-fold distinction also plays a central role in the philosophies of Franz Brentano and Jürgen Habermas .

[ 47 ] Other suggested types of values include objective, subjective, potential, actual, contingent, necessary, inherent, and constitutive values.

[ 48 ] Schools of thought [ edit ] Realism and anti-realism [ edit ] Value realism is the view that values have mind-independent existence.

[ 49 ] [ i ] This means that objective facts determine what has value, irrespective of subjective beliefs and preferences.

[ 50 ] According to this view, the evaluative statement "That act is bad" is as objectively true or false as the empirical statement "That act causes distress".

[ 51 ] Realists often analyze values as properties of valuable things.

[ 52 ] For example, stating that kindness is good asserts that kindness possesses the property of goodness. Value realists disagree about what type of property is involved.

Naturalists say that value is a natural property. Natural properties, like size and shape, can be known through empirical observation and are studied by the natural sciences.

Non-naturalists reject this view but agree that values are real. They say that values differ significantly from empirical properties and belong to another domain of reality. According to one view, they are known through rational or emotional intuition rather than empirical observation.

[ 53 ] Another disagreement among realists is about whether the entity carrying the value is a concrete individual or a state of affairs .

[ 54 ] For instance, the name "Bill" refers to an individual while the sentence "Bill is pleased" refers to a state of affairs, which combines the individual "Bill" with the property "pleased". Some value theorists hold that the value is a property directly of Bill while others contend that it is a property of the state of affairs that Bill is pleased.

[ 55 ] This distinction affects various disputes in value theory. In some cases, a value is intrinsic according to one view and extrinsic according to the other.

[ 56 ] Value realism contrasts with anti-realism , which comes in various forms. In its strongest version, anti-realism rejects the existence of values in any form, claiming that value statements are meaningless.

[ 57 ] [ j ] There are various intermediate views between this position and realism. Some anti-realists accept that value claims have meaning but deny that they have a truth value , [ k ] a position known as non-cognitivism . For example, emotivists say that value claims express emotional attitudes, similar to how exclamations like "Yay!" or "Boo!" express emotions rather than stating facts.

[ 60 ] [ l ] Cognitivists contend that value statements have a truth value, meaning that sentences like "knowledge is intrinsically good" are either true or false. Following this view, error theorists defend anti-realism by stating that all value statements are false because there are no values.

[ 62 ] Another view accepts the existence of values but denies that they are mind-independent. According to this view, the mental states of individuals determine whether an object has value, for instance, because individuals desire it.

[ 63 ] A similar view is defended by existentialists like Jean-Paul Sartre , who argued that values are human creations that endow the world with meaning.

[ 64 ] Subjectivist theories say that values are relative to each subject, whereas more objectivist outlooks hold that values depend on mind in general rather than on the individual mind.

[ 65 ] A different position accepts that values are mind-independent but holds that they are reducible to other facts, meaning that they are not a fundamental part of reality. One form of reductionism maintains that a thing is good if it is fitting to favor this thing, regardless of whether people actually favor it, a position known as the fitting-attitude theory of value . The buck-passing account, a closely related reductive view, argues that a thing is valuable if people have reasons to treat the thing in certain ways. These reasons come from other features of the valuable thing. According to some views, reductionism is a form of realism, but the strongest form of realism says that value is a fundamental part of reality and cannot be reduced to other aspects.

[ 66 ] Sources of value [ edit ] Various theories about the sources of value have been proposed. They aim to clarify what kinds of things are intrinsically good.

[ 67 ] The historically influential theory of hedonism [ m ] states that how people feel is the only source of value. More specifically, it says that pleasure is the only intrinsic good and pain is the only intrinsic evil.

[ 69 ] According to this view, everything else only has instrumental value to the extent that it leads to pleasure or pain, including knowledge, health, and justice. Hedonists usually understand the term pleasure in a broad sense that covers all kinds of enjoyable experiences, including bodily pleasures of food and sex as well as more intellectual or abstract pleasures, like the joy of reading a book or happiness about a friend's promotion. Pleasurable experiences come in degrees, and hedonists usually associate their intensity and duration with the magnitude of value they have.

[ 70 ] [ n ] Many hedonists identify pleasure and pain as symmetric opposites, meaning that the value of pleasure balances out the disvalue of pain if they have the same intensity. However, some hedonists reject this symmetry and give more weight to avoiding pain than to experiencing pleasure.

[ 72 ] Although it is widely accepted that pleasure is valuable, the hedonist claim that it is the only source of value is controversial.

[ 73 ] Welfarism , a closely related theory, understands well-being as the only source of value. Well-being is what is ultimately good for a person, which can include other aspects besides pleasure, such as health, personal growth , meaningful relationships , and a sense of purpose in life.

[ 74 ] Desire theories offer a slightly different account, stating that desire satisfaction [ o ] is the only source of value.

[ p ] This theory overlaps with hedonism because many people desire pleasure and because desire satisfaction is often accompanied by pleasure. Nonetheless, there are important differences: people desire a variety of other things as well, like knowledge, achievement, and respect; additionally, desire satisfaction may not always result in pleasure.

[ 77 ] Some desire theorists hold that value is a property of desire satisfaction itself, while others say that it is a property of the objects that satisfy a desire.

[ 78 ] One debate in desire theory concerns whether every desire is a source of value. For example, if a person has a false belief that money makes them happy, it is questionable whether the satisfaction of their desire for money is a source of value. To address this consideration, some desire theorists say that a desire can only provide value if a fully informed and rational person would have it, thereby excluding misguided desires from being a source of value.

[ 79 ] Perfectionism identifies the realization of human nature and the cultivation of characteristic human abilities as the source of intrinsic goodness. It covers capacities and character traits belonging to the bodily, emotional, volitional, cognitive, social, artistic, and religious fields. Perfectionists disagree about which human excellences are the most important. Many are pluralistic in recognizing a diverse array of human excellences, such as knowledge, creativity, health, beauty, free agency, and moral virtues like benevolence and courage.

[ 80 ] According to one suggestion, there are two main fields of human goods: theoretical abilities responsible for understanding the world and practical abilities responsible for interacting with it.

[ 81 ] Some perfectionists provide an ideal characterization of human nature as the goal of human flourishing, holding that human excellences are those aspects that promote the realization of this goal. This view is exemplified in Aristotle 's focus on rationality as the nature and ideal state of human beings.

[ 82 ] Non-humanistic versions extend perfectionism to the natural world in general, arguing that excellence as a source of intrinsic value is not limited to the human realm.

[ 83 ] Monism and pluralism [ edit ] Monist theories of value assert that there is only a single source of intrinsic value. They agree that various things have value but maintain that all fundamentally good things belong to the same type. For example, hedonists hold that nothing but pleasure has intrinsic value, while desire theorists argue that desire satisfaction is the only source of fundamental goodness.

Pluralists reject this view, contending that a simple single-value system is too crude to capture the complexity of the sphere of values. They say that diverse sources of value exist independently of one another, each contributing to the overall value of the world.

[ 84 ] One motivation for value pluralism is the observation that people value diverse types of things, including happiness, friendship, success, and knowledge.

[ 85 ] This diversity becomes particularly prominent when people face difficult decisions between competing values, such as choosing between friendship and career success.

[ 86 ] In such cases, value pluralists can argue that the different items have different types of values. Since monists accept only one source of intrinsic value, they may provide a different explanation by proposing that some of the valuable items only have instrumental value but lack intrinsic value.

[ 87 ] Isaiah Berlin argued that conflicts between different types of values, like liberty and equality , cannot always be resolved.

[ 88 ] Pluralists have proposed various accounts of how their view affects practical decisions. Rational decisions often rely on value comparisons to determine which course of action should be pursued.

[ 89 ] Some pluralists discuss a hierarchy of values reflecting the relative importance and weight of different value types to help people promote higher values when faced with difficult choices.

[ 90 ] For example, philosopher Max Scheler ranks values based on how enduring and fulfilling they are into the levels of pleasure, utility, vitality, culture, and holiness. He asserts that people should not promote lower values, like pleasure, if this comes at the expense of higher values.

[ 91 ] [ q ] Radical pluralists reject this approach, putting more emphasis on diversity by holding that different types of values are not comparable with each other. This means that each value type is unique, making it impossible to determine which one is superior.

[ 93 ] [ r ] Some value theorists use radical pluralism to argue that value conflicts are inevitable, that the gain of one value cannot always compensate for the loss of another, and that some ethical dilemmas are irresolvable.

[ 95 ] For example, philosopher Isaiah Berlin applied this idea to the values of liberty and equality , arguing that a gain in one cannot make up for a loss in the other. Similarly, philosopher Joseph Raz said that it is often impossible to compare the values of career paths, like when choosing between becoming a lawyer or a clarinetist .

[ 96 ] The terms incomparability and incommensurability are often used as synonyms in this context. However, philosophers like Ruth Chang distinguish them. According to this view, incommensurability means that there is no common measure to quantify values of different types. Incommensurable values may or may not be comparable. If they are, it is possible to say that one value is better than another, but it is not possible to quantify how much better it is.

[ 97 ] Others [ edit ] Several controversies surround the question of how the intrinsic value of a whole is determined by the intrinsic values of its parts. According to the additivity principle, the intrinsic value of a whole is simply the sum of the intrinsic values of its parts. For example, if a virtuous person becomes happy then the intrinsic value of the happiness is simply added to the intrinsic value of the virtue, thereby increasing the overall value.

[ 98 ] G. E. Moore introduced the idea of organic unities to describe entities whose total intrinsic value is not the sum of the intrinsic values of their parts.

[ 99 ] Various counterexamples to the additivity principle have been proposed, suggesting that the relation between parts and wholes is more complex. For instance, Immanuel Kant argued that if a vicious person becomes happy, this happiness, though good in itself, does not increase the overall value. On the contrary, it makes things worse, according to Kant, since viciousness should not be rewarded with happiness. This situation is known as an organic unity —a whole whose intrinsic value differs from the sum of the intrinsic values of its parts.

[ 100 ] Another perspective, called holism about value , asserts that the intrinsic value of a thing depends on its context. Holists can argue that happiness has positive intrinsic value in the context of virtue and negative intrinsic value in the context of vice. Atomists reject this view, saying that intrinsic value is context-independent.

[ 101 ] Theories of value aggregation provide concrete principles for calculating the overall value of an outcome based on how positively or negatively each individual is affected by it. For example, if a government implements a new policy that affects some people positively and others negatively, theories of value aggregation can be used to determine whether the overall value of the policy is positive or negative. Axiological utilitarianism accepts the additivity principle, saying that the total value is simply the sum of all individual values.

[ 102 ] Axiological egalitarians are not only interested in the sum total of value but also in how the values are distributed. They argue that an outcome with a balanced advantage distribution is better than an outcome where some benefit a lot while others benefit little, even if the two outcomes have the same sum total.

[ 103 ] Axiological prioritarians are particularly concerned with the benefits of individuals who are worse off. They say that providing advantages to people in need has more value than providing the same advantages to others.

[ 103 ] Another debate addresses the meaning of life , investigating whether life or existence as a whole has a higher meaning or purpose.

[ 104 ] Naturalist views argue that the meaning of life is found within the physical world, either as objective values that are true for everyone or as subjective values that vary according to individual preferences. Suggested fields where humans find meaning include exercising freedom , committing oneself to a cause, practicing altruism , engaging in positive social relationships , or pursuing personal happiness .

[ 105 ] Supernaturalists , by contrast, propose that meaning lies beyond the natural world. For example, various religions teach that God created the world for a higher purpose, imbuing existence with meaning. A related outlook argues that immortal souls serve as sources of meaning by being connected to a transcendent reality and evolving spiritually .

[ 106 ] Existential nihilists reject both naturalist and supernaturalist explanations by asserting that there is no higher purpose. They suggest that life is meaningless, with the consequence that there is no higher reason to continue living and that all efforts, achievements, happiness, and suffering are ultimately pointless.

[ 107 ] Formal axiology is a theory of value initially developed by philosopher Robert S. Hartman . This approach treats axiology as a formal science , akin to logic and mathematics . It uses axioms to give an abstract definition of value, understanding it not as a property of things but as a property of concepts. Value measures the extent to which an entity fulfills its concept. For example, a good car has all the desirable qualities of cars, like a reliable engine and effective brakes, whereas a bad car lacks many. Formal axiology distinguishes between three fundamental value types: intrinsic values apply to people; extrinsic values apply to things, actions, and social roles; systemic values apply to conceptual constructs. Formal axiology examines how these value types form a hierarchy and how they can be measured.

[ 108 ] Methods [ edit ] Value theorists employ various methods to conduct their inquiries, justify theories, and measure values.

Intuitionists rely on intuitions to assess evaluative claims. In this context, an intuition is an immediate apprehension or understanding of a self-evident claim, meaning that its truth can be assessed without inferring it from another observation.

[ 109 ] Value theorists often rely on thought experiments to gain this type of understanding. Thought experiments are imagined scenarios that exemplify philosophical problems. Philosophers use counterfactual reasoning to evaluate possible consequences and gain insight into underlying problems.

[ 110 ] For example, philosopher Robert Nozick imagines an experience machine that can virtually simulate an ideal life. Based on his contention that people would not want to spend the rest of their lives in this pleasurable simulation, Nozick argues against the hedonist claim that pleasure is the only source of intrinsic value. According to him, the thought experiment shows that the value of an authentic connection to reality is not reducible to pleasure.

[ 111 ] [ s ] Phenomenologists provide a detailed first-person description of the experience of values. They closely examine emotional experiences, ranging from desire, interest, and preference to feelings in the form of love and hate. However, they do not limit their inquiry to these phenomena, asserting that values permeate experience at large.

[ 112 ] A key aspect of the phenomenological method is to suspend preconceived ideas and judgments to understand the essence of experiences as they present themselves to consciousness.

[ 113 ] The analysis of concepts and ordinary language is another method of inquiry. By examining terms and sentences used to talk about values, value theorists aim to clarify their meanings, uncover crucial distinctions, and formulate arguments for and against axiological theories.

[ 114 ] For instance, a prominent dispute between naturalists and non-naturalists hinges on the conceptual analysis of the term good , in particular, whether its meaning can be analyzed through natural terms, like pleasure .

[ 115 ] [ t ] The Schwartz theory of basic human values is an instrument to measure value priorities. It arranges different values in a circle, using angular distance between values to indicate how compatible they are.

[ 116 ] In the social sciences , value theorists face the challenge of measuring the evaluative outlook of individuals and groups. Specifically, they aim to determine personal value hierarchies, for example, whether a person gives more weight to truth than to moral goodness or beauty.

[ 117 ] They distinguish between direct and indirect measurement methods. Direct methods involve asking people straightforward questions about what things they value and which value priorities they have. This approach assumes that people are aware of their evaluative outlook and able to articulate it accurately. Indirect methods do not share this assumption, asserting instead that values guide behavior and choices on an unconscious level. Consequently, they observe how people decide and act, seeking to infer the underlying value attitudes responsible for picking one course of action rather than another.

[ 118 ] Various catalogs or scales of values have been proposed in psychology and related social sciences to measure value priorities. The Rokeach Value Survey considers a total of 36 values divided into two groups: instrumental values, like honesty and capability, which serve as means to promote terminal values, such as freedom and family security. It asks participants to rank the values based on their impact on the participants' lives, aiming to understand the relative importance assigned to each of them. The Schwartz theory of basic human values is a modification of the Rokeach Value Survey that seeks to provide a more cross-cultural and universal assessment. It arranges the values in a circular manner to reflect that neighboring values are compatible with each other, such as openness to change and self-enhancement, while values on opposing sides may conflict with each other, such as openness to change and conservation.

[ 119 ] In various fields [ edit ] Ethics [ edit ] Main article: Ethics Ethics and value theory are overlapping fields of inquiry. Ethics studies moral phenomena, focusing on how people should act or which behaviors are morally right.

[ 120 ] Value theory investigates the nature, sources, and types of values in general.

[ 2 ] Some philosophers understand value theory as a subdiscipline of ethics. This is based on the idea that what people should do is affected by value considerations but not necessarily limited to them.

[ 7 ] Another view sees ethics as a subdiscipline of value theory. This outlook follows the idea that ethics is concerned with moral values affecting what people can control, whereas value theory examines a broader range of values, including those beyond anyone's control.

[ 121 ] Some perspectives contrast ethics and value theory, asserting that the normative concepts examined by ethics are distinct from the evaluative concepts examined by value theory.

[ 23 ] Axiological ethics is a subfield of ethics examining the nature and role of values from a moral perspective, with particular interest in determining which ends are worth pursuing.

[ 122 ] The ethical theory of consequentialism combines the perspectives of ethics and value theory, asserting that the rightness of an action depends on the value of its consequences. Consequentialists compare possible courses of action, saying that people should follow the one leading to the best overall consequences.

[ 123 ] The overall consequences of an action are the totality of its effects, or how it impacts the world by starting a causal chain of events that would not have occurred otherwise.

[ 124 ] Distinct versions of consequentialism rely on different theories of the sources of value.

Classical utilitarianism , a prominent form of consequentialism, says that moral actions produce the greatest amount of pleasure for the greatest number of people. It combines a consequentialist outlook on right action with a hedonist outlook on pleasure as the only source of intrinsic value.

[ 125 ] Economics [ edit ] Main article: Economics Economics is a social science studying how goods and services are produced, distributed, and consumed, both from the perspective of individual agents and societal systems.

[ 126 ] Economists view evaluations as a driving force underlying economic activity. They use the notion of economic value and related evaluative concepts to understand decision-making processes, resource allocation, and the impact of policies. The economic value or benefit of a commodity is the advantage it provides to an economic agent , often measured in terms of what people are willing to pay for it.

[ 127 ] Economic theories of value are frameworks to explain how economic value arises and which factors influence it. Prominent frameworks include the classical labor theory of value and the neo-classical marginal theory of value .

[ 128 ] The labor theory, initially developed by the economists Adam Smith and David Ricardo , distinguishes between use value —the utility or satisfaction a commodity provides—and exchange value —the proportion at which one commodity can be exchanged with another.

[ 129 ] It focuses on exchange value, which it says is determined by the amount of labor required to produce the commodity . In its simplest form, it directly correlates exchange value to labor time. For example, if the time needed to hunt a deer is twice the time needed to hunt a beaver then one deer is worth two beavers.

[ 130 ] The philosopher Karl Marx extended the labor theory of value in various ways. He introduced the concept of surplus value , which goes beyond the time and resources invested to explain how capitalists can profit from the labor of their employees.

[ 131 ] The marginal theory of value focuses on consumption rather than production. It says that the utility of a commodity is the source of its value. Specifically, it is interested in marginal utility , the additional satisfaction gained from consuming one more unit of the commodity. Marginal utility often diminishes if many units have already been consumed, leading to a decrease in the exchange value of commodities that are abundantly available.

[ 132 ] Both the labor theory and the marginal theory were later challenged by the Sraffian theory of value , which considers diverse forms of production costs, including but not limited to the quantity of labor.

[ 133 ] Sociology [ edit ] Main article: Sociology Sociology studies social behavior, relationships, institutions, and society at large.

[ 134 ] In their analyses and explanations of these phenomena, some sociologists use the concept of values to understand issues like social cohesion and conflict , the norms and practices people follow, and collective action . They usually understand values as subjective attitudes possessed by individuals and shared in social groups. According to this view, values are beliefs or priorities about goals worth pursuing that guide people to act in certain ways. For example, societies that value education may invest substantial resources to ensure high-quality schooling. This subjective conception of values as aspects of individuals and social groups contrasts with the objective conceptions of values more prominent in economics, which understand values as aspects of commodities.

[ 135 ] Shared values can help unite people in the pursuit of a common cause, fostering social cohesion. Value differences, by contrast, may divide people into antagonistic groups that promote conflicting projects. Some sociologists employ value research to predict how people will behave. Given the observation that someone values the environment, they may conclude that this person is more likely to recycle or support pro-environmental legislation.

[ 136 ] One approach to this type of research uses value scales , such as the Rokeach Value Survey and the Schwartz theory of basic human values , to measure the value outlook of individuals and groups.

[ 137 ] Anthropology [ edit ] Main article: Anthropology Anthropology also studies human behavior and societies but does not limit itself to contemporary social structures, extending its focus to humanity both past and present.

[ 138 ] Similar to sociologists, many anthropologists understand values as social representations of goals worth pursuing. For them, values are embedded in mental structures associated with culture and ideology about what is desirable. A slightly different approach in anthropology focuses on the practical side of values, holding that values are constantly created through human activity.

[ 139 ] Anthropological value theorists use values to compare cultures.

[ 140 ] They can be employed to examine similarities as universal concerns present in every society. For example, anthropologist Clyde Kluckhohn and sociologist Fred Strodtbeck proposed a set of value orientations found in every culture. These orientations are centered on the topics of human nature, human activity, social organization, relation to nature, and a focus on past, present, or future.

[ 141 ] Values can also be used to analyze differences between cultures and value changes within a culture. Anthropologist Louis Dumont followed this idea, suggesting that the cultural meaning systems in distinct societies differ in their value priorities. He argued that values are ordered hierarchically around a set of paramount values that trump all other values. For example, Dumont analyzed the traditional Indian caste system as a cultural hierarchy based on the value of purity, extending from the pure Brahmins to the " untouchable " Dalits .

[ 142 ] The contrast between individualism and collectivism is an influential topic in cross-cultural value research. Individualism promotes values associated with the autonomy of individuals, such as self-directedness , independence, and the fulfillment of personal goals. Collectivism gives priority to group-related values, like cooperation, conformity , and foregoing personal advantages for the sake of collective benefits. As a rough simplification, it is often suggested that individualism is more prominent in Western cultures , whereas collectivism is more commonly observed in Eastern cultures .

[ 143 ] Psychology [ edit ] Main article: Psychology As the study of mental phenomena and behavior, psychology contrasts with sociology and anthropology by focusing more on the perspective of individuals than the broader social and cultural contexts.

[ 144 ] Psychologists tend to understand values as abstract motivational goals or general principles about what matters.

[ 145 ] From this perspective, values differ from specific plans and intentions since they are stable evaluative tendencies not bound to concrete situations.

[ 146 ] Various psychological theories of values establish a close link between an individual's evaluative outlook and their personality .

[ 147 ] An early theory, formulated by psychologists Philip E. Vernon and Gordon Allport , understands personality as a collection of aspects unified by a coherent value system . It distinguishes between six personality types corresponding to the value spheres of theory, economy, aesthetics, society, politics, and religion. For example, people with theoretical personalities place special importance on the value of knowledge and the discovery of truth .

[ 148 ] Influenced by Vernon and Allport, psychologist Milton Rokeach conceptualized values as enduring beliefs about what goals and conduct are preferable. He divided values into the categories of instrumental and terminal values. He thought that a central aspect of personality lies in how people prioritize the values within each category.

[ 149 ] Psychologist Shalom Schwartz refined this approach by linking values to emotion and motivation. He explored how value rankings affect decisions in which the values of different options conflict.

[ 150 ] History [ edit ] The origin of value theory lies in the ancient period , with early reflections on the good life and the ends worth pursuing.

[ 151 ] Socrates ( c.

469–399 BCE ) [ 152 ] identified the highest good as the right combination of knowledge , pleasure , and virtue , holding that active inquiry is associated with pleasure while knowledge of the Good leads to virtuous action.

[ 153 ] Plato ( c.

428–347 BCE ) [ 154 ] conceived the Good as a universal and changeless idea. It is the highest form in his theory of forms , acting as the source of all other forms and the foundation of reality and knowledge.

[ 155 ] Aristotle (384–322 BCE) [ 156 ] saw eudaimonia as the highest good and ultimate goal of human life. He understood eudaimonia as a form of happiness or flourishing achieved through the exercise of virtues in accordance with reason , leading to the full realization of human potential.

[ 157 ] Epicurus ( c.

341–271 BCE ) proposed a nuanced egoistic hedonism, stating that personal pleasure is the greatest good while recommending moderation to avoid the negative effects of excessive desires and anxiety about the future.

[ 158 ] According to the Stoics , a virtuous life following nature and reason is the highest good. They thought that self-mastery and rationality lead to a pleasant equanimity independent of external circumstances.

[ 159 ] Influenced by Plato, Plotinus ( c.

204/5–270 CE ) held that the Good is the ultimate principle of reality from which everything emanates. For him, evil is not a distinct opposing principle but merely a deficiency or absence of being resulting from a missing connection to the Good.

[ 160 ] Confucius viewed general benevolence towards humanity as the supreme virtue.

[ 161 ] In ancient Indian philosophy , the idea that people are trapped in a cycle of rebirths arose around 600 BCE.

[ 162 ] Many traditions adopted it, arguing that liberation from this cycle is the highest good.

[ 163 ] Hindu philosophy distinguishes the four fundamental values of duty , economic wealth , sensory pleasure , and liberation .

[ 164 ] Many Hindu schools of thought prioritize the value of liberation.

[ 165 ] A similar outlook is found in ancient Buddhist philosophy , starting between the sixth and the fifth centuries BCE, where the cessation of suffering through the attainment of Nirvana is considered the ultimate goal.

[ 166 ] In ancient China , Confucius ( c.

551–479 BCE ) [ 167 ] explored the role of self-cultivation in leading a virtuous life, viewing general benevolence towards humanity as the supreme virtue.

[ 161 ] In comparing the highest virtue to water, Laozi (6th century BCE) [ u ] emphasized the importance of living in harmony with the natural order of the universe .

[ 169 ] Religious teachings influenced value theory in the medieval period . Early Christian thinkers , such as Augustine of Hippo (354–430 CE), [ 170 ] adapted the theories of Plato and Plotinus into a religious framework. They identified God as the ultimate source of existence and goodness, seeing evil as a mere lack or privation of good.

[ 171 ] Drawing on Aristotelianism , Christian philosopher Thomas Aquinas (1224–1274 CE) [ 172 ] said that communion with the divine, achieved through a beatific vision of God, is the highest end of humans.

[ 173 ] In Arabic–Persian philosophy , Avicenna (980–1037 CE) [ 174 ] regarded the intellect as the highest human faculty. He thought that a contemplative life prepares humans for the greatest good, which is only attained in the afterlife when humans are free from bodily distractions.

[ 175 ] In Chinese thought, the early neo-Confucian philosopher Han Yu (768–824 CE) identified the sage as an ideal role model who, through self-cultivation, achieves personal integrity expressed in harmony between theory and action in daily life.

[ 176 ] In the early modern period , Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679) [ 177 ] understood values as subjective phenomena that depend on a person's interests and examined mutual interests and benefits as a key principle of political decisions.

[ 178 ] David Hume (1711–1776) [ 179 ] agreed with Hobbes's subjectivism, exploring how values differ from objective facts .

[ 180 ] Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) [ 181 ] asserted that the highest good is happiness in proportion to moral virtue. He emphasized the primacy of virtue by respecting the moral law and the inherent value of people, adding that moral virtue is ideally, but not always, accompanied by personal happiness.

[ 182 ] Jeremy Bentham (1748–1832) [ 183 ] and John Stuart Mill (1806–1873) [ 184 ] formulated classical utilitarianism , combining a hedonist theory about value with a consequentialist theory about right action.

[ 185 ] Hermann Lotze (1817–1881) [ 186 ] developed a philosophy of values, holding that values make the world meaningful as an ordered whole centered around goodness.

[ 187 ] Influenced by Lotze, the neo-Kantian philosopher Wilhelm Windelband (1848–1915) [ 188 ] understood philosophy as a theory of values, claiming that universal values determine the principles that all subjects should follow, including the norms of knowledge and action.

[ 189 ] Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900) [ 190 ] held that values are human creations. He criticized traditional values in general and Christian values in particular, calling for a revaluation of all values centered on life-affirmation, power, and excellence.

[ 191 ] G. H. von Wright analyzed and compared diverse types of goodness.

[ 192 ] In the early 20th century, Pragmatist philosopher John Dewey (1859–1952) [ 193 ] defended axiological naturalism . He distinguished values from value judgments, adding that the skill of correct value assessment must be learned through experience.

[ 194 ] [ v ] G. E. Moore (1873–1958) [ 196 ] developed and refined various axiological concepts, such as organic unity and the contrast between intrinsic and extrinsic value. He defended non-naturalism about the nature of values and intuitionism about the knowledge of values.

[ 197 ] W. D. Ross (1877–1971) [ 198 ] accepted and further elaborated on Moore's intuitionism, using it to formulate an axiological pluralism.

[ 199 ] [ w ] R. B. Perry (1876–1957) [ 201 ] and D. W. Prall (1886–1940) [ 202 ] articulated systematic theories of value based on the idea that values originate in affective states such as interest and liking.

[ 203 ] Robert S. Hartman (1910–1973) [ 204 ] developed formal axiology, saying that values measure the level to which a thing embodies its ideal concept.

[ 205 ] A. J. Ayer (1910–1989) [ 206 ] proposed anti-realism about values, arguing that value statements merely express the speaker's approval or disapproval.

[ 207 ] A different type of anti-realism, introduced by J. L. Mackie (1917–1981), [ 208 ] suggests that all value assertions are false since no values exist.

[ 209 ] G. H. von Wright (1916–2003) [ 210 ] provided a conceptual analysis of the term good by distinguishing different meanings or varieties of goodness, such as the technical goodness of a good driver and the hedonic goodness of a good meal.

[ 211 ] In continental philosophy , Franz Brentano (1838–1917) [ 212 ] formulated an early version of the fitting-attitude theory of value, saying that a thing is good if it is fitting to have a positive attitude towards it, such as love.

[ 213 ] In the 1890s, his students Alexius Meinong (1853–1920) [ 214 ] and Christian von Ehrenfels (1859–1932) [ 215 ] conceived the idea of a general theory of values.

[ 216 ] Edmund Husserl (1859–1938), [ 214 ] another of Brentano's students, developed phenomenology and applied this approach to the study of values.

[ 217 ] Following Husserl's approach, Max Scheler (1874–1928) and Nicolai Hartmann (1882–1950) each proposed a comprehensive system of axiological ethics .

[ 218 ] Asserting that values have objective reality, they explored how different value types form a hierarchy and examined the problems of value conflicts and right decisions from this hierarchical perspective.

[ 219 ] Martin Heidegger (1889–1976) [ 220 ] criticized value theory, claiming that it rests on a mistaken metaphysical perspective by understanding values as aspects of things.

[ 221 ] Existentialist philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980) [ 222 ] suggested that values do not exist by themselves but are actively created, emphasizing the role of human freedom , responsibility, and authenticity in the process.

[ 223 ] References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Another view sees axiology as the wider field and restricts value theory to questions concerning the nature of value.

[ 11 ] ^ The term value has other meanings as well, such as the value of a mathematical variable expressing the information or quantity that this variable carries.

[ 13 ] Value theory is only interested in the evaluative sense of the term about being good or bad in a certain respect.

[ 14 ] ^ Some philosophers, such as G. E. M. Anscombe , Philippa Foot , and Iris Murdoch , have argued that there are no pure thin evaluative terms.

[ 17 ] ^ Critics of this thought experiment argue that it depends on controversial assumptions about the nature of intrinsic value and is not applicable to all cases.

[ 27 ] ^ In the social sciences , some works rely on the concept of relational value to understand the value of the relationship between humans and nature. According to this view, relational value is a unique type of value that is neither intrinsic nor instrumental.

[ 33 ] ^ Prudential value is a closely related concept signifying what is good for a person.

[ 37 ] ^ Consequentialism is a theory in normative ethics . It says that whether an act is right depends on its consequences.

[ 40 ] ^ In scholastic philosophy , they are known as transcendentals and considered fundamental aspects of being.

[ 45 ] ^ If this position limits itself to the moral realm, it is known as moral realism , an influential position in ethics .

[ 49 ] ^ This view is sometimes called radical nihilism .

[ 58 ] ^ This means that value statements are neither true nor false.

[ 59 ] ^ Projectivism is a closely related view holding that values are projections of emotions onto the world.

[ 61 ] ^ This view is sometimes called axiological hedonism to distinguish it from related theories under this label.

[ 68 ] ^ Qualitative hedonists argue that the quality of pleasure is an additional factor influencing its value besides intensity and duration. Some distinguish higher pleasures of the mind, like enjoying fine art and philosophy, from lower pleasures of the body, like enjoying food and drink.

[ 71 ] ^ Some theorists use the terms desire satisfaction and desire fulfillment as synonyms while others distinguish between them. According to the latter view, desire satisfaction is a subjective state involving a possibly false belief that a desire is satisfied. Desire fulfillment is an objective state present if the desired outcome actually exists, even if the person does not know about it.

[ 75 ] ^ Some desire theories aim to explain goodness in general while others restrict themselves to goodness for a person.

[ 76 ] ^ In some places, Scheler talks about four levels instead of five: sensory, vital, spiritual, and holy.

[ 92 ] ^ More specifically, this implies that one value is not better than the other, not worse than the other, and not as good as the other.

[ 94 ] ^ Moore's isolation test is another influential thought experiment about intrinsic value.

[ 26 ] ^ This problem is the main topic of Moore's controversial open-question argument .

[ 115 ] ^ This period is given in traditional sources. Some contemporary scholars have suggested later dates or questioned whether there was a single person by that name.

[ 168 ] ^ Clarence Irving Lewis (1883–1964) accepted and further elaborated many of Dewey's insights.

[ 195 ] ^ Ross is primarily known for his deontological pluralism about different types of prima facie duties , which is related but not identical to his axiological pluralism about different types of values.

[ 200 ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Grünberg 2000 , pp.

11–12 Hart 1971 , p. 29 Heathwood 2015 , pp.

136–137 ^ a b Smith & Thomas 1998 , Lead section Hirose & Olson 2015 , pp.

1–2 Schroeder 2021 , Lead section ^ Bahm 1993 , pp.

1, 4–6 Li 2014 , pp.

67–68 ^ Hiles 2008 , pp.

52–53 Li 2014 , pp.

67–68 Bahm 1993 , pp.

4–5 ^ Schroeder 2021 , Lead section Orsi 2015 , pp.

6–7 Bahm 1993 , p.

4 Cowan 2020 , p.

4 ^ Steinert 2023 , p.

1 Hirose & Olson 2015 , pp.

1–2 Bahm 1993 , pp.

4–5 ^ a b Schroeder 2021 , Lead section Orsi 2015 , pp.

6–7 Hurka 2006 , p.

357 ^ Taliaferro 2010 , p.

24 Arneson 2009 , pp.

69–70 ^ Grünberg 2000 , pp.

11–12 Hart 1971 , p. 29 ^ Schroeder 2021 , Lead section Orsi 2015 , pp.

6–7 ^ Grenz, Guretzki & Nordling 2010 , p.

18 ^ Grünberg 2000 , pp.

11–12 ^ HarperCollins 2022 ^ Schroeder 2021 , § 1. Basic Questions ^ a b Orsi 2015 , p.

1 Rescher 1969 , p. 1 ^ Li 2014 , p.

70 Schroeder 2021 , § 1.1 Varieties of Goodness Orsi 2015 , pp.

22–23 Rescher 1969 , pp. 13–14, 18 ^ Wiland & Driver 2022 , § 2. Moral and Political Philosophy Chappell 2013 , pp. 188–189 ^ Orsi 2015 , pp.

2–3 Hirose & Olson 2015 , p.

3 ^ Schroeder 2021 , § 1.2 Good, Better, Bad, § 2.3 Incommensurability/Incomparability Orsi 2015 , pp.

122–123 Tappolet 2015 , p.

82 Frankena 2006 , pp. 636–637 ^ Rescher 1969 , pp. 61–62 Frankena 2006 , pp. 636–637 ^ Orsi 2015 , pp.

8–9 Schroeder 2021 , § 3. Relation to the Deontic ^ Hurka 2006 , pp.

357–358 ^ a b Orsi 2015 , pp.

8–9 Schroeder 2021 , § 3. Relation to the Deontic Hurka 2006 , pp.

357–358 ^ a b Hurka 2006a , pp. 719–720 Schroeder 2021 , § 2.1 Intrinsic Value Rønnow-Rasmussen 2015 , pp.

29–30 Zimmerman & Bradley 2019 , Lead section ^ a b Hurka 2006a , pp. 719–720 Zimmerman & Bradley 2019 , § 6. What Is Extrinsic Value?

^ a b Zimmerman & Bradley 2019 , § 2. What Is Intrinsic Value?

Rønnow-Rasmussen 2015 , pp.

30–31 ^ Orsi 2015 , pp.

31–32 ^ Zimmerman & Bradley 2019 , § 1. What Has Intrinsic Value?

Schroeder 2021 , § 2.1 Intrinsic Value Heathwood 2015 , p.

140 ^ a b Schellekens 2010 , p.

38 Vilkka 2021 , p.

32 ^ a b Zimmerman & Bradley 2019 , § 6. What Is Extrinsic Value?

Zimmerman 2001 , p.

253 ^ Zimmerman & Bradley 2019 , § 6. What Is Extrinsic Value?

Zimmerman 2001 , p.

252 ^ Schroeder 2021 , § 2.1 Intrinsic Value Zimmerman & Bradley 2019 , § 3. Is There Such a Thing As Intrinsic Value At All?, § 6. What Is Extrinsic Value?

Rønnow-Rasmussen 2015 , pp.

29–30 ^ Chan, Gould & Pascual 2018 , pp. A1–A2 Jax 2023 , pp.

59–60 Gupta 2024 , p.

11 ^ Orsi 2015 , pp.

45–46 Schroeder 2021 , § 1. Basic Questions ^ Orsi 2015 , pp.

3–4 Schroeder 2021 , § 1. Basic Questions Zimmerman 2015 , pp. 13–14 ^ Silverstein 2016 , p.

227 ^ Tiberius 2015 , p.

158 ^ Orsi 2015 , pp.

63–64 Schroeder 2021 , § 1. Basic Questions Rønnow-Rasmussen 2011 , pp.

1–2 ^ Schroeder 2021 , § 1.1.1 Good Simpliciter and Good For Orsi 2015 , pp.

63–65 ^ Sinnott-Armstrong 2023 , Lead section Haines , Lead section Hooker 2023 , § 1. Utilitarianism ^ Orsi 2015 , pp.

73–74 Schroeder 2021 , § 3.3 Agent-Relative Value?

Cullity 2015 , pp.

96–97 ^ Orsi 2015 , pp.

45–46, 61 Schroeder 2021 , § 1.1.2 Attributive Good ^ Rescher 1969 , pp. 13–14 ^ Rescher 1969 , pp. 15–16, 18 Pradhan 2024 , p.

142 Hartman 2011 , p.

306 ^ De Haan 2020 , p.

302 ^ Li 2014 , pp.

80–81 Ollig 1998 , Lead section Martin 2016 , pp. 3–5, 42–43 ^ Martin 2016 , pp. 4–5 Kriegel 2018 , pp.

96–97, 149, 253, 288 ^ Orsi 2015 , p.

44 Bahm 1993 , pp.

60–63 Schroeder 2021 , § 2.1.1 What is Intrinsic Value?

Rønnow-Rasmussen 2015 , pp.

39–40 ^ a b Zagzebski 2004 , p.

11 Oddie 2013 , Lead section ^ Frankena 2006 , pp. 639–640 Oddie 2013 , Lead section ^ Zagzebski 2004 , pp.

11–12 ^ Frankena 2006 , pp. 639–640 Oddie 2013 , Lead section, § Do Value Claims Have Truth Makers?

Oliver 1998 ^ Frankena 2006 , pp. 639–640 Lutz 2023 , Lead section, § 1. What Is Moral Naturalism?

DeLapp , § 4a. Moral Realisms FitzPatrick 2011 , pp.

7–8 Ridge 2019 , Lead section Oliver 1998 ^ Orsi 2015 , p.

35 Oddie 2013 , Lead section Bradley 2006 , pp. 111–112 Oliveira 2016 , § 1. Introduction ^ Orsi 2015 , p.

35 Oddie 2013 , Lead section Bradley 2006 , pp. 111–112, 115 Oliveira 2016 , § 1. Introduction ^ Orsi 2015 , pp.

35–36, 130–131 Bradley 2006 , pp. 111–112 ^ Oddie 2013 , Lead section, § Are Value Claims Truth Evaluable?, § Value Realism by Degrees: a Flow Chart ^ Oddie 2013 , § Are Value Claims Truth Evaluable?, § Quasi-Realism and Creeping Minimalism ^ HarperCollins 2022a ^ Oddie 2013 , § Are Value Claims Truth Evaluable?

Tappolet 2015 , p.

80 DeNicola 2019 , p.

267 Oliver 1998 ^ Tappolet 2015 , p.

80 Oddie 2013 , § Quasi-Realism and Creeping Minimalism Oliver 1998 ^ Oddie 2013 , § Do Value Claims Have Truth Makers?

Sayre-McCord 1988 , p.

10 Zagzebski 2004 , p.

14 Oliver 1998 ^ Oddie 2013 , § Are the Value Facts Mind Independent?

Oddie 2015 , pp.

60–62 Mander 2016 , § 2.3 An Overview ^ Onof , §6c. An Ethical Dimension Landau 2012 , pp. 1–2 ^ Oddie 2013 , § Are the Value Facts Mind Independent?

Oddie 2015 , pp.

60–62 ^ Oddie 2013 , Lead section, § Are the Value Facts Irreducible?, § Value Realism by Degrees: a Flow Chart Oddie 2015 , pp.

67–68 Oliver 1998 Howard 2023 , Lead section, § 1.5 Buck Passing Suikkanen 2009 , pp. 768–769 ^ Hurka 2006 , p.

357 Oliveira 2016 , § 1. Introduction Kershnar 2010 , p.

37 Heathwood 2015 , p.

140 ^ de Bres 2014 , pp.

336–338 ^ Hurka 2006 , p.

359 Heathwood 2015 , p.

140 ^ Hurka 2006 , pp.

359–360 Moore 2019 , § 2. Ethical Hedonism ^ Tilley 2012 , § III. Axiological Hedonism Heathwood 2013 , § What Determines the Intrinsic Value of a Pleasure or a Pain?

^ Hurka 2006 , p.

360 ^ Hurka 2006 , p.

361 Moore 2019 , § 2.3 Other Arguments Against Ethical Hedonism ^ Crisp 2021 , Lead section, § 5.1 Welfarism Hall & Tiberius 2015 , pp.

175–176 Nebel 2024 , § Introduction Hooker 2015 , pp. 15–16 ^ Oddie 2017 , p.

49 ^ Hurka 2006 , pp.

362–363 Scanlon 1993 , pp. 186–187 ^ Hurka 2006 , pp.

361–362, 364 Heathwood 2015 , p.

140 ^ Hurka 2006 , pp.

362–363 ^ Hurka 2006 , pp.

362–363 Heathwood 2016 , pp. 138–140 Schroeder 2021 , § 3.2 Fitting Attitudes Scanlon 1993 , pp. 186–187 ^ Shea & Kintz 2022 , p. 461 Hurka 2006 , pp.

364–366 Wall 2021 , Lead section Heathwood 2015 , p.

140 ^ Hurka 2006 , p.

364 ^ Hurka 2006 , pp.

365–366 Wall 2021 , § 1. Perfectionism and Value Theory ^ Wall 2021 , § 1. Perfectionism and Value Theory Gill 2024 , p.

85 ^ Heathwood 2015 , pp.

136–137, 139–140 Mason 2023 , Lead section Schroeder 2021 , § 2.2 Monism/Pluralism Hurka 2006 , pp.

358–359 ^ Mason 2023 , Lead section Schroeder 2021 , § 2.2 Monism/Pluralism Heathwood 2015 , pp.

145–146 ^ Mason 2023 , § 2. The Attraction of Pluralism Schroeder 2021 , § 2.2 Monism/Pluralism ^ Schroeder 2021 , § 2.2.2 Revisionary Commitments?

^ Mason 2023 , § 4.4 Accepting Incomparability ^ Mason 2023 , § 4. Pluralism and Rational Choice Hsieh & Andersson 2021 , Lead section, § 4. Deliberation and Choice ^ Kinneging 2011 , pp.

206–207 Perrin 1991 , pp.

69, 73–74, 76 ^ Perrin 1991 , pp.

69, 73–74, 76–80 Davis & Steinbock 2024 , § 3. Value Personalism ^ Perrin 1991 , pp.

76–80 ^ Heathwood 2015 , pp.

142–143 Hsieh & Andersson 2021 , § 1.2 Incommensurable or Incomparable?

^ Hsieh & Andersson 2021 , § 1.2 Incommensurable or Incomparable?

^ Mason 2023 , § 4.4 Accepting Incomparability Hsieh & Andersson 2021 , § 3.2 Moral Dilemmas?

Heathwood 2015 , pp.

142–143 ^ Mason 2023 , § 4.4 Accepting Incomparability Hsieh & Andersson 2021 , § 1.2 Incommensurable or Incomparable?

Cherniss & Hardy 2023 , § 4.1 Berlin's Definition of Value Pluralism ^ Mason 2023 , § 4. Pluralism and Rational Choice Hsieh & Andersson 2021 , § 1.2 Incommensurable or Incomparable?

^ Oddie 2001 , pp. 313, 318 Dancy 2004 , p.

188 ^ Hurka 2021 , § 4. The Ideal ^ Oddie 2001 , pp. 313, 318 Dancy 2004 , pp.

176–177 ^ Orsi 2015 , pp.

98–100 Schroeder 2021a Dancy 2004 , pp.

176–177 ^ Holtug 2015 , pp.

267–268 Peterson 2013 , p.

147 Hirose 2015 , pp.

25–27 ^ a b Holtug 2015 , p.

273 Peterson 2013 , p.

147 Hirose 2015 , pp.

25–27 ^ Metz 2023 , Lead section Cowan 2020 , pp.

25–26 Groothuis 2020 , pp.

160–162 ^ Metz 2023 , § 3. Naturalism Cowan 2020 , pp.

25–26 Yalom 2020 , pp. 431–435 ^ Metz 2023 , § 2. Supernaturalism Groothuis 2020 , pp.

162–164 Seachris , § 3. Theories of Meaning in Life ^ Metz 2023 , 4. Nihilism Pratt , § 3. Existential Nihilism Crosby 1998 , § Existential Nihilism Groothuis 2020 , pp.

165–169 Crosby 1988 , pp.

30–32 ^ Edwards 2021 , pp. 2–4 Hartman 2011 , pp.

104–105, 305–306 ^ Stratton-Lake 2020 , § 1.1 Intuition Audi 2004 , pp.

2, 5 Martin 2002 , p.

166 Li 2014 , pp. 4–5 Dabbagh 2022 , p.

53 ^ Martin 2002 , p.

166 Zaibert 2018 , pp.

37–38 Brown & Fehige 2019 , Lead Section Goffi & Roux 2011 , pp. 165, 168–169 ^ Heathwood 2015 , pp.

146–147 Tiberius 2015 , pp.

163–164 ^ Davis & Steinbock 2024 , § 3. Value Personalism Direk 2014 , pp. 371–372 Grünberg 1990 , pp. 199–201 Hart 1997 , pp. 1–2, 6–7 ^ Smith , § b. Phenomenological Reduction Staiti 2020 , pp.

368–369 ^ Moritz 1972 , pp.

33–46 Schroeder 2021 , § Basic Questions ^ a b Laskowski & Finlay 2017 , pp. 537–539 Chrisman 2016 , p.

79 ^ Schwartz & Cieciuch 2016 , pp. 109–113 Schwartz et al. 2012 , p. 669 ^ Schwartz & Cieciuch 2016 , pp. 106, 108 Hiles 2008 , p. 53 Karp 2000 , Lead section ^ Schwartz & Cieciuch 2016 , pp. 106–107 Powe 2007 , p.

123 ^ Schwartz & Cieciuch 2016 , pp. 109–113 Karp 2000 , § The Rokeach tradition, § The Schwartz Scale of Values ^ Norman 2005 , p. 622 Nagel 2006 , Lead section Crisp 2011 , § 1. Ethics and Metaethics ^ Schroeder 2021 , Lead section Orsi 2015 , pp.

6–7 Bahm 1993 , p.

4 Cowan 2020 , p.

4 Hurka 2006 , pp.

357–358 ^ Findlay 1970 , pp. 1–2, 4 Kupperman 2005 , pp. 73–74 ^ Sinnott-Armstrong 2023 , Lead section Crisp 2005 , pp. 200–201 Alexander & Moore 2021 , § 1. Deontology's Foil: Consequentialism ^ Dorsey 2020 , pp.

97–98 ^ Sinnott-Armstrong 2023 , § 1. Classic Utilitarianism Chenneville 2017 , p.

5 Hearn 1971 , p.

2 ^ Pape 2000 , p.

7 Welch & Welch 2009 , p.

4 Mukherjee, Mukherjee & Ghose 2013 , p.

17 ^ Pirgmaier 2021 , p. 1 Young & Loomis 2014 , p.

289 Turner et al. 2004 , p.

50 ^ Pirgmaier 2021 , pp. 1, 8–9 Ayres 2023 , p.

104 ^ Pirgmaier 2021 , p. 2 Fraser 2009 Rogers, Castree & Kitchin 2013 ^ Pirgmaier 2021 , pp. 2–3 Ayres 2023 , p.

104 ^ Moseley 2023 , p.

48 Pirgmaier 2021 , pp. 7–8 ^ Pirgmaier 2021 , p. 3 Black, Hashimzade & Myles 2009 ^ Ayres 2023 , p.

104 Oka 2017 , pp.

77–78 ^ Bhushan & Sachdeva 2012 , p.

4 Sharma 1996 , p.

10 ^ Karp 2000 , Lead section Steinert 2023 , pp. 33–34, 37, 39–40 Tormos 2019 , p.

11 ^ Karp 2000 , Lead section, § Social Values Steinert 2023 , pp. 39–40, 47 ^ Karp 2000 , Lead section, § The Rokeach Tradition, § The Schwartz Scale of Values Tormos 2019 , pp.

13–15 ^ Sutton 2021 , p.

5 Fluehr-Lobban 2013 , p.

158 ^ Robbins 2023 , § Foundations of Value Theory, § A Third Approach to Value Steinert 2023 , pp. 53–54, 56, 58 ^ Steinert 2023 , pp. 3, 55 Robbins 2023 , § Foundations of Value Theory Sykes 2016 , § Introduction ^ Steinert 2023 , p. 54 Robbins 2023 , § Foundations of Value Theory ^ Robbins 2023 , § Foundations of Value Theory Sykes 2016 , § Introduction, § General Overviews Steinert 2023 , pp. 3, 61–62 ^ Karp 2000 , § Individualism and Collectivism Fatehi, Priestley & Taasoobshirazi 2020 , pp. 7–9 Kim 2002 , p.

22 Serna & Martínez 2022 , p.

423 ^ Steinert 2023 , p. 4 Woodworth & Marquis 2014 , p.

5 ^ Steinert 2023 , pp. 7–8 Schwartz & Cieciuch 2016 , pp. 106–107 ^ Steinert 2023 , pp. 14, 19–20 ^ Steinert 2023 , pp. 4, 11–12 Schwartz & Cieciuch 2016 , p. 106 ^ Steinert 2023 , pp. 11–12 Schwartz & Cieciuch 2016 , p. 106 ^ Steinert 2023 , pp. 12–13 Schwartz & Cieciuch 2016 , pp. 106–107 ^ Steinert 2023 , pp. 13–15 Schwartz & Cieciuch 2016 , pp. 107–108 ^ Frankena 2006 , pp. 636–637 Li 2014 , p. 3 Chang 2001 , pp. 68–69 ^ Dehsen 2013 , p. 178 ^ Sharma 1991 , pp.

27–28 Devettere 2002 , pp.

33–34 Heinaman 2016 , pp.

123–124 Heathwood 2015 , p. 153 ^ Dehsen 2013 , p. 156 ^ Honderich 2005 , p. 349 Bahm 1993 , p.

112 ^ Dehsen 2013 , p. 13 ^ Hiles 2008 , pp. 52–53 Frankena 2006 , p. 639 Crisp 2005a , p. 349 ^ O'Keefe , § 5. Ethics Gaskin 2005 , p. 258 Frankena 2006 , p. 639 ^ Durand, Shogry & Baltzly 2023 , § 4. Ethics Pigliucci , § 3. The Third Topos: Ethics, § 4. Apatheia and the Stoic Treatment of Emotions McDonald 2021 , p.

38 ^ Bahm 1993 , p.

103 Darr 2023 , p.

108 Emilsson 1998 , Lead section ^ a b Ebrey 2010 , p.

43 Sim 2015 , pp.

64, 74 Richey , § 6. Self-cultivation Littlejohn , § 1b. Confucius (551-479 B.C.E.) of the Analects ^ Borgolte 2019 , p.

97 ^ Sharma 1999 , p. 230 Bartley 2020 , pp.

37–38, 136 ^ Ranganathan , § 1a.iii. Puruṣārthas : dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa Sharma 1999 , pp. 223–225, 230 Bailey 2011 ^ Sharma 1999 , p. 230 ^ Wilson 2010 Lougheed 2020 , pp. 243–244 Prasad 2007 , pp.

xiii–xiv, 21, 23 ^ Littlejohn , § 1b. Confucius (551-479 B.C.E.) of the Analects ^ Chan 2018 , Lead section, § 2. Date and Authorship of the Laozi ^ Assandri 2021 , pp.

70–71 Slingerland 2007 , p.

77 Chan 2018 , Lead section Lobel 2017 , p. 297 ^ Dehsen 2013 , p. 16 ^ Bahm 1993 , p.

112 Frankena 2006 , p. 639 Darr 2023 , p.

108 ^ Dehsen 2013 , p. 185 ^ Wieland 2002 , p.

59 Zagzebski 2004a , p.

350 Peterson 2008 , p.

235 ^ Dehsen 2013 , p. 19 ^ McGinnis 2010 , pp.

209–210 ^ Berthrong , § 3. The Emergence of Neo-Confucianism Hartman 1998 ^ Dehsen 2013 , p. 88 ^ Hardin 2009 , pp. 6–7, 12, 16, 173, 177–179 Abelson & Nielsen 2006 , § Hobbes Cowan 2020 , pp.

197, 210–211, 220 ^ Dehsen 2013 , p. 91 ^ Hardin 2009 , pp. 29, 51, 173, 177 Li 2014 , p. 3 ^ Dehsen 2013 , p. 105 ^ Engstrom 1992 , p. 747 Johnson & Cureton 2024 , § 1. Aims and Methods of Moral Philosophy, § 2. Good Will, Moral Worth and Duty Direk 2014 , pp. 373–374 ^ Dehsen 2013 , p. 25 ^ Dehsen 2013 , p. 132 ^ Frankena 2006 , p. 639 Sinnott-Armstrong 2023 , § 1. Classic Utilitarianism Chenneville 2017 , p.

5 Hearn 1971 , p.

2 ^ Woodward 2015 , p.

i ^ Sullivan 2023 , § 5.3 Value Theory Li 2014 , p. 3 Sullivan 1998 , § 4. Metaphysics Milkov , § 3a. Ethics Frankena 2006 , p. 636 ^ Dafermos 2018 , p.

20 ^ Heis 2018 , § 3.1 Conception of Philosophy: Philosophy as Theory of Value Kinzel 2024 , § 2. From Kant to the Philosophy of Values Hiles 2008 , p. 52 ^ Dehsen 2013 , p. 144 ^ Frankena 2006 , pp. 636, 639 Li 2014 , p. 4 Anderson 2024 , § 3. Value Creation Hiles 2008 , p. 52 Direk 2014 , pp. 374, 378 ^ Frankena 2006 , pp. 637–638 Ylirisku & Arvola 2018 , p.

53 ^ Dehsen 2013 , p. 52 ^ Hart 1971 , pp. 36–38 Marcum 2008 , p.

192 ^ Hart 1971 , pp. 37–38 ^ Bunnin & Yu 2009 , p. 443 ^ Findlay 1970 , pp. 2, 37–38, 41 Dancy 2004 , p.

165 Hart 1971 , p. 33 ^ Kunnan 2020 , p.

86 ^ Mason 2023 , § 1.1 Foundational and Non-foundational Pluralism Simpson , Lead section, § 6. Ross's Ethical Theory: Main Components and Principles Findlay 1970 , p. 2 ^ Mason 2023 , § 1.1 Foundational and Non-foundational Pluralism ^ Anderson 2013 , p.

222 ^ Townsend 2006 , p.

xvi ^ Hart 1971 , p. 31 Frankena 2006 , p. 637 ^ Edwards & Hartman 2023 , p.

173 ^ Edwards 2021 , pp. 3–4 Hartman 2011 , pp.

105–106 ^ Tuboly 2021 , p.

2 ^ Hart 1971 , pp. 34–35 ^ Bunnin & Yu 2009 , p. 406 ^ Sayre-McCord 1988 , pp.

11–12 ^ Rosenkrantz & Hoffman 2011 , p.

332 ^ Frankena 2006 , pp. 637–638 Ylirisku & Arvola 2018 , p.

53 ^ Kriegel 2018 , p.

2 ^ Kriegel 2018 , pp.

10–11, 218, 221–222 Kriegel 2017 , p.

12 ^ a b Kuijper 2022 , p.

298 ^ Zimmer 2017 , p.

135 ^ Frankena 2006 , p. 637 Hart 1971 , pp. 30–31 ^ Frankena 2006 , p. 637 Direk 2014 , pp. 371–372 ^ Frankena 2006 , p. 637 Findlay 1970 , p. 2 Hart 1971 , p. 32 Direk 2014 , pp. 371–372 Løgstrup 2020 , p.

105 ^ Frankena 2006 , pp. 637–639 Findlay 1970 , p. 2 Hart 1971 , p. 32 ^ Dehsen 2013 , p. 83 ^ Direk 2014 , pp. 372–373, 384–386 Findlay 1970 , pp. 2–3 Sullivan 2023 , § 5.3 Value Theory ^ Dehsen 2013 , p. 168 ^ Abelson & Nielsen 2006 , pp. 426–428 Direk 2014 , pp. 384–385 Sources [ edit ] Abelson, Raziel; Nielsen, Kai (2006). "Ethics, History of". In Borchert, Donald M. (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Vol. 3 (2nd ed.). Macmillan. pp.

394– 433.

ISBN 978-0-02-866072-1 .

Alexander, Larry; Moore, Michael (2021).

"Deontological Ethics" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on June 20, 2023 . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

Anderson, Douglas R. (2013).

"Peirce: Pragmatism and Nature after Hegel" . In Schrift, Alan D. (ed.).

The History of Continental Philosophy . Vol. 2. University of Chicago Press. pp.

217– 238.

ISBN 978-0-226-74049-2 .

Anderson, R. Lanier (2024).

"Friedrich Nietzsche" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 4 September 2018 . Retrieved 18 September 2024 .

Arneson, Pat (2009). "Axiology". In Littlejohn, Stephen W.; Foss, Karen A. (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Communication Theory . Sage. pp.

69– 73.

ISBN 978-1-4129-5937-7 .

Assandri, Friederike (2021).

The Daode Jing Commentary of Cheng Xuanying: Daoism, Buddhism, and the Laozi in the Tang Dynasty . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-087645-6 .

Audi, Robert (2004).

The Good in the Right: A Theory of Intuition and Intrinsic Value . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4008-2607-0 .

Ayres, Robert U. (2023).

The History and Future of Economics . Springer.

ISBN 978-3-031-26208-1 .

Bahm, Archie J. (1993).

Axiology: The Science of Values . Rodopi.

ISBN 978-90-5183-519-9 .

Bailey, Greg (2011).

"Puruṣārthas" .

Oxford Bibliographies . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/obo/9780195399318-0044 .

Archived from the original on 22 September 2024 . Retrieved 20 September 2024 .

Bartley, Christopher (2020).

Indian Philosophy A–Z . Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 978-0-7486-8084-9 .

Berthrong, John H.

"Neo-Confucian Philosophy" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 6 February 2024 . Retrieved 17 September 2024 .

Bhushan, Vidya; Sachdeva, D. R. (2012).

Fundamentals of Sociology . Pearson Education India.

ISBN 978-81-317-9967-3 .

Black, John; Hashimzade, Nigar; Myles, Gareth (2009). "Marginal Utility".

A Dictionary of Economics . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-923704-3 .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-12 . Retrieved 2024-09-14 .

Borgolte, Michael (2019).

World History as the History of Foundations, 3000 BCE to 1500 CE . Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-41508-9 .

Bradley, Ben (2006). "Two Concepts of Intrinsic Value".

Ethical Theory and Moral Practice .

9 (2): 111– 130.

doi : 10.1007/s10677-006-9009-7 .

Brown, James Robert; Fehige, Yiftach (2019).

"Thought Experiments" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 21 November 2017 . Retrieved 29 October 2021 .

Bunnin, Nicholas; Yu, Jiyuan (2009).

The Blackwell Dictionary of Western Philosophy . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-1-4051-9112-8 . Retrieved January 3, 2024 .

Chan, Alan (2018).

"Laozi" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 23 May 2023 . Retrieved 20 September 2024 .

Chan, Kai MA; Gould, Rachelle K; Pascual, Unai (2018). "Editorial overview: Relational Values: What Are They, and What's the Fuss about?".

Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability .

35 : A1 – A7 .

Bibcode : 2018COES...35A...1C .

doi : 10.1016/j.cosust.2018.11.003 .

hdl : 10810/47635 .

Chang, Jiang (2001). "Axiology and Ethics: Past, Present, and Future".

The Future of Value Inquiry . Brill. pp.

67– 73.

ISBN 978-90-04-49451-0 .

Archived from the original on 2024-04-15 . Retrieved 2024-09-21 .

Chappell, Timothy (2013). "10. There Are No Thin Concepts". In Kirchin, Simon (ed.).

Thick concepts (1st ed.). Oxford University Press. pp.

182– 196.

ISBN 978-0-19-967234-9 .

Chenneville, Tiffany (2017).

"Ethics and Social Justice: A Review of Theoretical Frameworks and Pedagogical Considerations" . In Liston, Delores D.; Rahimi, Regina (eds.).

Promoting Social Justice through the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning . Indiana University Press. pp.

3– 14.

ISBN 978-0-253-03132-7 .

Cherniss, Joshua; Hardy, Henry (2023).

"Isaiah Berlin" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 29 June 2023 . Retrieved 9 September 2024 .

Chrisman, Matthew (2016).

What is this Thing Called Metaethics?

. Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-1-315-43832-0 .

Cowan, Steven B. (2020). "Introduction to Part One". In Cowan, Steven B. (ed.).

Problems in Value Theory: An Introduction to Contemporary Debates . Bloomsbury Publishing. pp.

17– 27.

ISBN 978-1-350-14741-6 .

Crisp, Roger (2005). "Deontological Ethics". In Honderich, Ted (ed.).

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . Oxford University Press. pp.

200– 201.

ISBN 978-0-19-926479-7 .

Crisp, Roger (2005a). "Good, Greatest". In Honderich, Ted (ed.).

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . Oxford University Press. p. 349.

ISBN 978-0-19-926479-7 .

Crisp, Roger (2011). "Ethics".

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780415249126-L132-2 .

ISBN 978-0-415-25069-6 .

Archived from the original on August 1, 2023 . Retrieved January 7, 2024 .

Crisp, Roger (2021).

"Well-Being" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 15 December 2024 .

Crosby, Donald A. (1988).

The Specter of the Absurd: Sources and Criticisms of Modern Nihilism . SUNY Press.

ISBN 978-0-88706-719-8 .

Crosby, Donald A. (1998).

"Nihilism" .

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780415249126-N037-1 .

ISBN 978-0-415-25069-6 .

Cullity, Garrett (2015). "Neutral and Relative Value". In Hirose, Iwao; Olson, Jonas (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Value Theory . Oxford University Press. pp.

96– 116.

ISBN 978-0-19-022143-0 .

Dabbagh, Hossein (2022).

The Moral Epistemology of Intuitionism: Neuroethics and Seeming States . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-350-29758-6 .

Dafermos, Manolis (2018).

Rethinking Cultural-Historical Theory: A Dialectical Perspective to Vygotsky . Springer Nature Singapore.

ISBN 978-981-13-0191-9 .

Dancy, Jonathan (2004).

Ethics Without Principles . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-927002-6 .

Darr, Ryan (2023).

The Best Effect: Theology and the Origins of Consequentialism . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-82999-9 .

Davis, Zachary; Steinbock, Anthony (2024).

"Max Scheler" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2024 . Retrieved 8 September 2024 .

de Bres, Helena (2014). "Hedonism". In Mandle, Jon; Reidy, David A. (eds.).

The Cambridge Rawls Lexicon . Cambridge University Press. pp.

336– 338.

ISBN 978-0-521-19294-1 .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-22 . Retrieved 2024-09-09 .

De Haan, Daniel D. (2020).

"Beauty and Aesthetic Perception in Thomas Aquinas" . In Ramos, Alice M. (ed.).

Beauty and the Good: Recovering the Classical Tradition from Plato to Duns Scotus . CUA Press. pp.

288– 318.

ISBN 978-0-8132-3353-6 .

Dehsen, Christian von (2013).

Philosophers and Religious Leaders . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-135-95102-3 .

DeLapp, Kevin M.

"Metaethics" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on January 23, 2024 . Retrieved 19 December 2023 .

DeNicola, Daniel R. (2019).

Moral Philosophy: A Contemporary Introduction . Broadview Press.

ISBN 978-1-77048-704-8 .

Devettere, Raymond J. (2002).

Introduction to Virtue Ethics: Insights of the Ancient Greeks . Georgetown University Press.

ISBN 978-1-58901-817-4 .

Direk, Zeynep (2014).

"Phenomenology and Ethics: From Value Theory to an Ethics of Responsibility" .

Studia Phaenomenologica .

14 : 371– 393.

doi : 10.5840/studphaen20141418 .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-22 . Retrieved 2024-09-22 .

Dorsey, Dale (2020).

"Consequences" . In Portmore, Douglas W. (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of Consequentialism . Oxford University Press. pp.

93– 112.

ISBN 978-0-19-090534-7 . Retrieved January 3, 2024 .

Durand, Marion; Shogry, Simon; Baltzly, Dirk (2023).

"Stoicism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 29 September 2018 . Retrieved 20 September 2024 .

Ebrey, Patricia Buckley (2010).

The Cambridge Illustrated History of China . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-12433-1 .

Edwards, Rem B. (2021). "1. Introduction".

Formal Axiology and Its Critics . Brill. pp.

1– 8.

ISBN 978-90-04-49596-8 .

JSTOR 10.1163/j.ctv20dsb9p.5 .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-08 . Retrieved 2024-09-09 .

Edwards, Rem; Hartman, Robert S. (2023). Poff, Deborah C.; Michalos, Alex C. (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Business and Professional Ethics . Springer.

ISBN 978-3-030-22767-8 .

Emilsson, Eyjólfur Kjalar (1998). "Plotinus (AD 204/5–70)".

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780415249126-A090-1 .

ISBN 978-0-415-25069-6 . Retrieved 20 September 2024 .

Engstrom, Stephen (1992). "The Concept of the Highest Good in Kant's Moral Theory".

Philosophy and Phenomenological Research .

52 (4): 747– 780.

doi : 10.2307/2107910 .

JSTOR 2107910 .

Fatehi, Kamal; Priestley, Jennifer L; Taasoobshirazi, Gita (2020). "The Expanded View of Individualism and Collectivism: One, Two, or Four Dimensions?".

International Journal of Cross Cultural Management .

20 (1): 7– 24.

doi : 10.1177/1470595820913077 .

Findlay, John Niemeyer (1970).

Axiological Ethics . Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0-333-00269-8 .

FitzPatrick, William J. (2011).

"Ethical Non-Naturalism and Normative Properties" . In Brady, Michael (ed.).

New Waves in Metaethics . Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

7– 35.

doi : 10.1057/9780230294899_2 .

ISBN 978-0-230-29489-9 .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2024 . Retrieved December 22, 2023 .

Fluehr-Lobban, Carolyn (2013).

Ethics and Anthropology: Ideas and Practice . AltaMira Press.

ISBN 978-0-7591-2188-1 .

Frankena, William K. (2006). "Value and Valuation". In Borchert, Donald M. (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Vol. 9 (2nd ed.). Macmillan. pp.

636– 641.

ISBN 978-0-02-865789-9 .

Fraser, Ian (2009). "Exchange Value".

The Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-920780-0 .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-22 . Retrieved 2024-09-14 .

Gaskin, J. C. A. (2005). "Epicurus". In Honderich, Ted (ed.).

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . Oxford University Press. p. 258.

ISBN 978-0-19-926479-7 .

Gill, Robin (2024).

Human Perfection, Transfiguration and Christian Ethics . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-009-47674-4 .

Goffi, Jean-Yves; Roux, Sophie (2011).

"On the Very Idea of a Thought Experiment" .

Thought Experiments in Methodological and Historical Contexts . Brill: 165– 191.

doi : 10.1163/ej.9789004201767.i-233.35 .

ISBN 978-90-04-20177-4 .

S2CID 260640180 .

Archived from the original on 30 October 2021 . Retrieved 18 April 2022 .

Grenz, Stanley J.; Guretzki, David; Nordling, Cherith Fee (2010).

Pocket Dictionary of Theological Terms . InterVarsity Press.

ISBN 978-0-8308-6707-3 .

Groothuis, Douglas (2020). "The Meaning of Life Is Found in God". In Cowan, Steven B. (ed.).

Problems in Value Theory: An Introduction to Contemporary Debates . Bloomsbury Publishing. pp.

160– 170.

ISBN 978-1-350-14741-6 .

Grünberg, Ludwig (1990). "The Phenomenology of Value and the Value of Phenomenology". In Tymieniecka, Anna-Teresa (ed.).

The Moral Sense and its Foundational Significance: Self, Person, Historicity, Community: Phenomenological Praxeology and Psychiatry . Springer. pp.

199– 206.

ISBN 978-94-009-0555-9 .

Grünberg, Ludwig (2000).

The Mystery of Values: Studies in Axiology . Rodopi.

ISBN 978-90-420-0670-6 .

Gupta, Abhik (2024).

Many Layers of Ecocentrism: Revering Life, Revering the Earth . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-1-040-03034-9 .

Haines, William.

"Consequentialism and Utilitarianism" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on December 24, 2023 . Retrieved 28 December 2023 .

Hall, Alicia; Tiberius, Valerie (2015).

"Well-Being and Subject Dependence" . In Fletcher, Guy (ed.).

The Routledge Handbook of Philosophy of Well-Being . Routledge. pp.

175– 186.

ISBN 978-1-317-40265-7 .

Hardin, Russell (2009).

David Hume: Moral and Political Theorist . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-161013-4 .

HarperCollins (2022).

"Value" .

The American Heritage Dictionary entry . HarperCollins.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2024 . Retrieved 28 August 2024 .

HarperCollins (2022a).

"Truth Value" .

The American Heritage Dictionary . HarperCollins.

Archived from the original on 8 September 2024 . Retrieved 8 September 2024 .

Hart, Samuel L. (1971). "Axiology – Theory of Values".

Philosophy and Phenomenological Research .

32 (1): 29– 41.

doi : 10.2307/2105883 .

JSTOR 2105883 .

Hart, James G. (1997).

"Introduction" . In Hart, James G.; Embree, Lester (eds.).

Phenomenology of Values and Valuing . Contributions to Phenomenology. Vol. 28. Springer. pp.

1– 9.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-017-2608-5_1 .

ISBN 978-94-017-2608-5 .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-15 . Retrieved 2024-09-16 .

Hartman, Charles (1998). "Han Yu (768–824)".

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780415249126-G034-1 .

ISBN 978-0-415-25069-6 .

Archived from the original on 3 March 2024 . Retrieved 17 September 2024 .

Hartman, Robert S. (2011) [1967].

The Structure of Value: Foundations of Scientific Axiology . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-7252-3067-5 .

Hearn, Thomas K. (1971).

"Introduction" .

Studies in Utilitarianism . Appleton-Century-Crofts. pp.

1– 14.

OCLC 149211 .

Heathwood, Chris (2013). "Hedonism".

The International Encyclopedia of Ethics (1st ed.). Wiley.

doi : 10.1002/9781444367072.wbiee780 .

ISBN 978-1-4051-8641-4 .

Heathwood, Chris (2015). "Monism and Pluralism about Value". In Hirose, Iwao; Olson, Jonas (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Value Theory . Oxford University Press. pp.

136– 157.

ISBN 978-0-19-022143-0 .

Heathwood, Chris (2016). "11. Desire-fulfillment Theory". In Fletcher, Guy (ed.).

The Routledge Handbook of Philosophy of Well-Being . Routledge. pp.

135– 147.

ISBN 978-1-317-40264-0 .

Heinaman, Robert (2016).

Plato and Aristotle's Ethics . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-1-351-91076-7 .

Heis, Jeremy (2018).

"Neo-Kantianism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 6 August 2019 . Retrieved 18 September 2024 .

Hiles, David R. (2008). "Axiology". In Given, Lisa M. (ed.).

The Sage Encyclopedia of Qualitative Research Methods: A-L . Vol. 1. Sage. pp.

52– 56.

ISBN 978-1-4129-4163-1 .

Hirose, Iwao (2015).

Moral Aggregation . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-993368-6 .

Hirose, Iwao; Olson, Jonas (2015). "Introduction to Value Theory". In Hirose, Iwao; Olson, Jonas (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Value Theory . Oxford University Press. pp.

1– 12.

ISBN 978-0-19-022143-0 .

Holtug, Nils (2015). "Theories of Value Aggregation: Utilitarianism, Egalitarianism, Prioritarianism". In Hirose, Iwao; Olson, Jonas (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Value Theory . Oxford University Press. pp.

267– 284.

ISBN 978-0-19-022143-0 .

Honderich, Ingrid Coggin (2005). "Good, Form of the". In Honderich, Ted (ed.).

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . Oxford University Press. p. 349.

ISBN 978-0-19-926479-7 .

Hooker, Brad (2015).

"The Elements of Well-Being" .

Journal of Practical Ethics .

3 (1).

SSRN 2624595 .

Hooker, Brad (2023).

"Rule Consequentialism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on February 1, 2024 . Retrieved 29 December 2023 .

Howard, Christopher (2023).

"Fitting Attitude Theories of Value" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 25 April 2025 .

Hsieh, Nien-hê; Andersson, Henrik (2021).

"Incommensurable Values" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2024 . Retrieved 6 September 2024 .

Hurka, Thomas (2006). "13. Value Theory". In Copp, David (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of Ethical Theory . Oxford University Press. pp.

357– 379.

ISBN 978-0-19-514779-7 .

Hurka, Thomas (2006a). "Intrinsic Value". In Borchert, Donald M. (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Vol. 4 (2nd ed.). Macmillan. pp.

719– 720.

ISBN 978-0-02-866072-1 .

Hurka, Thomas (2021).

"Moore's Moral Philosophy" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 22 March 2023 . Retrieved 21 September 2024 .

Jax, Kurt (2023).

Conservation Concepts: Rethinking Human–Nature Relationships . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-1-000-99354-7 .

Johnson, Robert; Cureton, Adam (2024).

"Kant's Moral Philosophy" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 1 February 2024 . Retrieved 18 September 2024 .

Karp, David R. (2000). "Values Theory and Research". In Borgatta, Edgar F.; Montgomery, Rhonda J. V. (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Sociology (2nd ed.). Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0-02-864853-8 .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-12 . Retrieved 2024-09-14 .

Kershnar, Stephen (2010).

Desert and Virtue: A Theory of Intrinsic Value . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-7391-3936-3 .

Kim, Min-Sun (2002).

Non-Western Perspectives on Human Communication: Implications for Theory and Practice . Sage.

ISBN 978-0-7619-2351-0 .

Kinneging, Andreas (2011). "Hartmann's Platonic Ethics". In Poli, Roberto; Scognamiglio, Carlo; Tremblay, Frederic (eds.).

The Philosophy of Nicolai Hartmann . Walter de Gruyter. pp.

195– 220.

ISBN 978-3-11-025418-1 .

Kinzel, Katherina (2024).

"Wilhelm Windelband" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2024 . Retrieved 18 September 2024 .

Kriegel, Uriah (2017).

"Introduction" .

The Routledge Handbook of Franz Brentano and the Brentano School . Taylor & Francis. pp.

1– 14.

ISBN 978-1-317-69055-9 .

Kriegel, Uriah (2018).

Brentano's Philosophical System: Mind, Being, Value . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-879148-5 .

Kuijper, Hans (2022).

Comprehending the Complexity of Countries: The Way Ahead . Springer Nature Singapore.

ISBN 978-981-16-4709-3 .

Kunnan, Antony John (2020).

"A Case for an Ethics-Based Approach to Evaluate Language" . In Ockey, Gary J.; Green, Brent A. (eds.).

Another Generation of Fundamental Considerations in Language Assessment: A Festschrift in Honor of Lyle F. Bachman . Springer Nature Singapore. pp.

77– 94.

ISBN 978-981-15-8952-2 .

Kupperman, Joel J. (2005). "Axiological Ethics". In Honderich, Ted (ed.).

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . Oxford University Press. pp.

73– 74.

ISBN 978-0-19-926479-7 .

Landau, Iddo (2012).

"Foundationless Freedom and Meaninglessness of Life in Sartre's: Being and Nothingness" .

Sartre Studies International .

18 (1): 1– 8.

doi : 10.3167/ssi.2012.180101 .

Laskowski, Nicholas; Finlay, Stephen (2017). "34. Conceptual Analysis in Metaethics". In McPherson, Tristram; Plunkett, David (eds.).

The Routledge Handbook of Metaethics . Routledge. pp.

536– 551.

ISBN 978-1-351-81791-2 .

Li, Deshun (2014).

Value Theory: A Research into Subjectivity . Springer.

ISBN 978-3-642-25617-2 .

Littlejohn, Ronnie.

"Chinese Philosophy: Overview of History" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 1 June 2023 . Retrieved 20 September 2024 .

Lobel, Diana (2017).

Philosophies of Happiness: A Comparative Introduction to the Flourishing Life . Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-54532-7 .

Lougheed, Kirk (2020).

The Axiological Status of Theism and Other Worldviews . Springer.

ISBN 978-3-030-54820-9 .

Lutz, Matthew (2023).

"Moral Naturalism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on October 2, 2019 . Retrieved 20 December 2023 .

Løgstrup, K. E. (2020).

Ethical Concepts and Problems . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-260282-4 .

Mander, W. J. (2016).

Idealist Ethics . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-106570-5 .

Marcum, James A. (2008).

An Introductory Philosophy of Medicine: Humanizing Modern Medicine . Springer.

ISBN 978-1-4020-6797-6 .

Martin, Robert M. (2002).

The Philosopher's Dictionary (3rd ed.). Broadview Press.

ISBN 978-1-55111-494-1 .

Martin, John Levi (2016). "The Birth of the True, the Good, and the Beautiful: Toward an Investigation of the Structures of Social Thought".

Current Perspectives in Social Theory .

35 : 3– 56.

doi : 10.1108/S0278-120420160000035001 .

ISBN 978-1-78635-470-9 .

Mason, Elinor (2023).

"Value Pluralism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 23 June 2023 . Retrieved 6 September 2024 .

McDonald, Hugh P. (2021).

Radical Axiology: A First Philosophy of Values . Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-49581-4 .

McGinnis, Jon (2010).

Avicenna . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-533147-9 .

Metz, Thaddeus (2023).

"The Meaning of Life" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 12 February 2025 .

Milkov, Nikolay.

"Lotze, Rudolph Hermann" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 19 July 2019 . Retrieved 18 September 2024 .

Moore, Andrew (2019).

"Hedonism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 18 September 2018 . Retrieved 8 September 2024 .

Moritz, Manfred (1972).

"Axiology and Analysis" . In Kuypers, K. (ed.).

Human Sciences and the Problem of Values / Les Sciences Humaines et le Problème des Valeurs . Springer. pp.

33– 46.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-010-2424-2_3 .

ISBN 978-94-010-2424-2 .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-15 . Retrieved 2024-09-16 .

Moseley, Fred (2023).

Marx's Theory of Value in Chapter 1 of Capital: A Critique of Heinrich's Value-Form Interpretation . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-3-031-13210-0 .

Mukherjee, Sampat; Mukherjee, Mallinath; Ghose, Amitava (2013).

Microeconomics . Prentice-Hall of India.

ISBN 978-81-203-2318-6 .

Nagel, Thomas (2006). "Ethics". In Borchert, Donald (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Vol. 3 (2nd ed.). Macmillan. pp.

379– 394.

ISBN 978-0-02-865790-5 .

Archived from the original on August 24, 2018 . Retrieved January 7, 2024 .

Nebel, Jacob M. (2024).

"A Choice-Functional Characterization of Welfarism" .

Journal of Economic Theory .

222 105918.

doi : 10.1016/j.jet.2024.105918 .

Norman, Richard (2005). "Moral Philosophy, History of". In Honderich, Ted (ed.).

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . Oxford University Press. pp.

622– 627.

ISBN 978-0-19-926479-7 .

Archived from the original on January 29, 2021 . Retrieved December 19, 2023 .

Oddie, G. (2001). "Axiological Atomism".

Australasian Journal of Philosophy .

79 (3): 313– 332.

doi : 10.1080/713659262 .

Oddie, Graham (2013). "Value Realism".

The International Encyclopedia of Ethics (1st ed.). Wiley.

doi : 10.1002/9781444367072.wbiee588 .

ISBN 978-1-4051-8641-4 .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-22 . Retrieved 2024-09-09 .

Oddie, Graham (2015). "Value and Desire". In Hirose, Iwao; Olson, Jonas (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Value Theory . Oxford University Press. pp.

60– 79.

ISBN 978-0-19-022143-0 .

Oddie, Graham (2017).

"Desire and the Good: In Search of the Right Fit" . In Lauria, Federico; Deonna, Julien A. (eds.).

The Nature of Desire . Oxford University Press. pp.

29– 56.

ISBN 978-0-19-067961-3 .

Oka, Tosihiro (2017).

"The New Theory of International Values in the Context of the Ricardo-Sraffian Theory of Value and Distribution" . In Shiozawa, Yoshinori; Oka, Tosihiro; Tabuchi, Taichi (eds.).

A New Construction of Ricardian Theory of International Values: Analytical and Historical Approach . Springer. pp.

77– 98.

ISBN 978-981-10-0191-8 .

O'Keefe, Tim.

"Epicurus" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 19 September 2024 . Retrieved 19 September 2024 .

Oliveira, Luis R. G. (2016).

"Rossian totalism about intrinsic value" .

Philosophical Studies .

173 (8): 2069– 2086.

doi : 10.1007/s11098-015-0597-8 .

Oliver, Alex (1998). "Value, Ontological Status of".

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780415249126-N066-1 .

ISBN 978-0-415-25069-6 .

Ollig, Hans-Ludwig (1998). "Neo-Kantianism".

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780415249126-DC055-1 .

ISBN 978-0-415-25069-6 .

Archived from the original on 2024-03-02 . Retrieved 2024-09-02 .

Onof, Christian J.

"Sartre, Jean Paul: Existentialism" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 26 June 2024 . Retrieved 5 September 2024 .

Orsi, Francesco (2015).

Value Theory . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4725-2408-9 .

Pape, John (2000).

Economics: An Introduction for South African Learners . Juta and Company Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-7021-5206-1 .

Perrin, Ron (1991).

Max Scheler's Concept of the Person: An Ethics Of Humanism . Springer.

ISBN 978-1-349-21399-3 .

Peterson, John (2008).

Aquinas: A New Introduction . University Press of America.

ISBN 978-0-7618-4180-7 .

Peterson, Martin (2013).

The Dimensions of Consequentialism: Ethics, Equality and Risk . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-107-03303-0 .

Pigliucci, Massimo.

"Stoicism" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 24 June 2021 . Retrieved 20 September 2024 .

Pirgmaier, Elke (2021).

"The Value of Value Theory for Ecological Economics" .

Ecological Economics .

179 106790.

Bibcode : 2021EcoEc.17906790P .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2020.106790 .

PMC 7445139 .

PMID 32863580 .

Powe, Neil A. (2007).

Redesigning Environmental Valuation: Mixing Methods Within Stated Preference Techniques . Edward Elgar Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-84720-711-1 .

Pradhan, Ramesh Chandra (2024).

Ethics, Self and the World: Exploring Metaphysical Foundations in Moral Philosophy . Springer Nature Singapore.

ISBN 978-981-97-3496-2 .

Prasad, Hari Shankar (2007).

The Centrality of Ethics in Buddhism: Exploratory Essays . Motilal Banarsidass.

ISBN 978-81-208-3239-8 .

Pratt, Alan.

"Nihilism" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 7 February 2025 .

Ranganathan, Shyam.

"Hindu Philosophy" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 30 June 2024 . Retrieved 17 September 2024 .

Rescher, Nicholas (1969).

Introduction to Value Theory . Prentice-Hall.

OCLC 1070925450 .

Richey, Jeff.

"Confucius" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 29 September 2023 . Retrieved 17 September 2024 .

Ridge, Michael (2019).

"Moral Non-Naturalism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 24 February 2024 . Retrieved 20 December 2023 .

Robbins, Joel (2023).

"Values" .

The Open Encyclopedia of Anthropology . Cambridge University Press.

Archived from the original on 2024-09-12 . Retrieved 2024-09-14 .

Rogers, Alisdair; Castree, Noel; Kitchin, Rob (2013). "Use Value".

A Dictionary of Human Geography . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-959986-8 .

Archived from the original on 2024-09-22 . Retrieved 2024-09-14 .

Rosenkrantz, Gary S.; Hoffman, Joshua (2011).

Historical Dictionary of Metaphysics . Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 978-0-8108-5950-0 .

Rønnow-Rasmussen, Toni (2011).

Personal Value . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-960378-7 .

Rønnow-Rasmussen, Toni (2015). "Intrinsic and Extrinsic Value". In Hirose, Iwao; Olson, Jonas (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Value Theory . Oxford University Press. pp.

29– 43.

ISBN 978-0-19-022143-0 .

Sayre-McCord, Geoffrey (1988).

"Introduction: The Many Moral Realisms" . In Sayre-McCord, Geoffrey (ed.).

Essays on Moral Realism . Cornell University Press. pp.

1– 26.

ISBN 978-0-8014-9541-0 .

Scanlon, Thomas (1993). "Value, Desire, and Quality of Life". In Nussbaum, Martha; Sen, Amartya (eds.).

The Quality of Life . Oxford University Press. pp.

185– 200.

doi : 10.1093/0198287976.003.0015 .

ISBN 978-0-19-152136-2 .

Schellekens, Elisabeth (2010).

Aesthetics and Morality . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4411-2298-8 .

Schroeder, Mark (2021).

"Value Theory" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 27 June 2013 . Retrieved 26 August 2024 .

Schroeder, Mark (2021a).

"Supplement to Value Theory: Atomism/Holism about Value" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2024 . Retrieved 26 August 2024 .

Schwartz, S. H.; Cieciuch, J. (2016). "Values". In Leong, F. T. L.; Bartram, D.; Cheung, F. M.; Geisinger, K. F.; Iliescu, D. (eds.).

The ITC International Handbook of Testing and Assessment . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-935694-2 .

Schwartz, Shalom H.; Cieciuch, Jan; Vecchione, Michele; Davidov, Eldad; Fischer, Ronald; Beierlein, Constanze; Ramos, Alice; Verkasalo, Markku; Lönnqvist, Jan-Erik; Demirutku, Kursad; Dirilen-Gumus, Ozlem; Konty, Mark (2012). "Refining the Theory of Basic Individual Values".

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

103 (4): 663– 688.

doi : 10.1037/a0029393 .

PMID 22823292 .

Seachris, Joshua.

"The Meaning of Life: Contemporary Analytic Perspectives" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 12 February 2025 .

Serna, Cristina; Martínez, Isabel (2022).

"Parenting and Adolescent Technological Addictions" . In Selin, Helaine (ed.).

Parenting Across Cultures: Childrearing, Motherhood and Fatherhood in Non-Western Cultures . Springer. pp.

417– 436.

ISBN 978-3-031-15359-4 .

Sharma, Arvind (1999). "The Purusārthas: An Axiological Exploration of Hinduism".

Journal of Religious Ethics .

27 (2): 223– 256.

doi : 10.1111/0384-9694.00016 .

Sharma, Rajendra Kumar (1996).

Fundamentals of Sociology . Atlantic Publishers & Distributors.

ISBN 978-81-7156-645-7 .

Sharma, Ram Nath (1991).

Plato: An Interdisciplinary Perspective . Atlantic Publishers & Distributors.

ISBN 978-81-7156-166-7 .

Shea, Matthew; Kintz, James (2022).

"A Thomistic Solution to the Deep Problem for Perfectionism" .

Utilitas .

34 (4): 461– 477.

doi : 10.1017/S0953820822000346 .

Silverstein, Matthew (2016).

"Teleology and Normativity" . In Shafer-Landau, Russ (ed.).

Oxford Studies in Metaethics 11 . Oxford University Press. pp.

214– 240.

ISBN 978-0-19-878464-7 .

Sim, May (2015).

"Why Confucius' Ethics Is a Virtue Ethics" . In Besser-Jones, Lorraine; Slote, Michael (eds.).

The Routledge Companion to Virtue Ethics . Routledge. pp.

63– 76.

ISBN 978-1-135-09669-4 .

Simpson, David L.

"Ross, William David" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 20 June 2019 . Retrieved 19 September 2024 .

Sinnott-Armstrong, Walter (2023).

"Consequentialism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on June 18, 2023 . Retrieved 28 December 2023 .

Slingerland, Edward (2007).

Effortless Action: Wu-wei as Conceptual Metaphor and Spiritual Ideal in Early China . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-987457-6 . Retrieved December 19, 2023 .

Smith, Joel.

"Phenomenology" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 25 May 2020 . Retrieved 15 September 2024 .

Smith, Barry; Thomas, Alan (1998). "Axiology".

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780415249126-L120-1 .

ISBN 978-0-415-25069-6 .

Archived from the original on 2023-11-30 . Retrieved 2024-08-27 .

Staiti, Andrea (2020).

"Reduction" . In Santis, Daniele De; Hopkins, Burt C.; Majolino, Claudio (eds.).

The Routledge Handbook of Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy . Routledge. pp.

368– 375.

ISBN 978-1-000-17042-9 .

Steinert, Steffen (2023).

Interdisciplinary Value Theory . Springer.

ISBN 978-3-031-10733-7 .

Stratton-Lake, Philip (2020).

"Intuitionism in Ethics" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2024 . Retrieved 14 September 2024 .

Suikkanen, Jussi (2009).

"Buck-Passing Accounts of Value" .

Philosophy Compass .

4 (5): 768– 779.

doi : 10.1111/j.1747-9991.2009.00253.x .

Sullivan, David (1998). "Lotze, Rudolph Hermann (1817–81)".

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780415249126-DC049-1 .

ISBN 978-0-415-25069-6 .

Archived from the original on 5 September 2024 . Retrieved 18 September 2024 .

Sullivan, David (2023).

"Hermann Lotze" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2024 . Retrieved 18 September 2024 .

Sutton, Mark Q. (2021).

Archaeology: The Science of the Human Past . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-000-35113-2 .

Sykes, Karen (2016).

"Value" .

Oxford Bibliographies .

doi : 10.1093/obo/9780199766567-0138 .

Archived from the original on 16 March 2024 . Retrieved 13 September 2024 .

Taliaferro, Charles (2010).

A Dictionary of Philosophy of Religion . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4411-8504-4 .

Tappolet, Christine (2015). "Values and Emotions". In Hirose, Iwao; Olson, Jonas (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Value Theory . Oxford University Press. pp.

80– 95.

ISBN 978-0-19-022143-0 .

Tiberius, Valerie (2015). "Prudential Value". In Hirose, Iwao; Olson, Jonas (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Value Theory . Oxford University Press. pp.

158– 174.

ISBN 978-0-19-022143-0 .

Tilley, John J. (2012). "Hedonism". In Chadwick, Ruth (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Applied Ethics (PDF) . Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0-12-373932-2 .

Tormos, Raül (2019).

The Rhythm of Modernization: How Values Change over Time . Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-41191-3 .

Townsend, Dabney (2006).

Historical Dictionary of Aesthetics . Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 978-0-8108-6483-2 .

Tuboly, Adam Tamas (2021).

"Introduction: From Spying to Canonizing—Ayer and His Language, Truth and Logic" .

The Historical and Philosophical Significance of Ayer's Language, Truth and Logic . Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

1– 38.

ISBN 978-3-030-50884-5 .

Turner, R. Kerry; Georgiou, Stavros; Clark, Rebecca; Brouwer, Roy; Burke, Jacob (2004).

Economic Valuation of Water Resources in Agriculture: From the Sectoral to a Functional Perspective of Natural Resource Management . Food & Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

ISBN 978-92-5-105190-0 .

Vilkka, Leena (2021).

The Intrinsic Value of Nature . Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-49510-4 .

Wall, Steven (2021).

"Perfectionism in Moral and Political Philosophy" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2024 . Retrieved 6 September 2024 .

Welch, Patrick J.; Welch, Gerry F. (2009).

Economics: Theory and Practice . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-0-470-45009-3 .

Wieland, Georg (2002).

"Happiness (Ia IIae, qq. 1–5)" . In Pope, Stephen J. (ed.).

The Ethics of Aquinas . Translated by Kaplan, Grant. Georgetown University Press. pp.

57– 68.

ISBN 978-0-87840-888-7 .

Wiland, Eric; Driver, Julia (2022).

"Gertrude Elizabeth Margaret Anscombe" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 22 September 2024 .

Wilson, Jeff (2010).

"Saṃsāra and Rebirth" .

Oxford Bibliographies . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/obo/9780195393521-0141 .

Archived from the original on 22 September 2024 . Retrieved 20 September 2024 .

Woodward, William R. (2015).

Hermann Lotze . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-41848-5 .

Woodworth, Robert; Marquis, Donald (2014).

Psychology: A Study of Mental Life . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-1-317-66144-3 .

Yalom, Irvin D. (2020).

Existential Psychotherapy . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-1-5416-4744-2 .

Ylirisku, Salu; Arvola, Mattias (2018).

"The Varieties of Good Design" . In Vermaas, Pieter E.; Vial, Stéphane (eds.).

Advancements in the Philosophy of Design . Springer. pp.

51– 70.

ISBN 978-3-319-73302-9 .

Young, Robert A.; Loomis, John B. (2014).

Determining the Economic Value of Water: Concepts and Methods . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-135-04052-9 .

Zagzebski, Linda (2004).

Divine Motivation Theory . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-53576-2 .

Zagzebski, Linda (2004a).

"Morality and Religion" . In Wainwright, William (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Religion . Oxford University Press. pp.

344– 365.

ISBN 978-0-19-803158-1 .

Zaibert, Leo (2018).

Rethinking Punishment . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-108-58261-2 .

Zimmer, Alfred (2017).

"Christian von Ehrenfels (1859–1932)" . In Albertazzi, Liliana; Jacquette, Dale (eds.).

The School of Alexius Meinong . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-1-351-88226-2 .

Zimmerman, Michael J. (2001).

The Nature of Intrinsic Value . Rowman & Littlefield. pp.

135– 144.

ISBN 978-0-7425-1263-4 .

Zimmerman, Michael J. (2015). "Value and Normativity". In Hirose, Iwao; Olson, Jonas (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Value Theory . Oxford University Press. pp.

13– 28.

ISBN 978-0-19-022143-0 .

Zimmerman, Michael J.; Bradley, Ben (2019).

"Intrinsic vs. Extrinsic Value" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2024 . Retrieved 29 August 2024 .

v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Good and evil Good Form of the Good Higher good Omnibenevolence Summum bonum Evil Absence of good Lesser of two evils Moral evil Radical evil Natural evil Necessary evil Wickedness Study Ponerology Problem of evil Value theory NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐dwtkf
Cached time: 20250816101913
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.749 seconds
Real time usage: 2.905 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 20853/1000000
Revision size: 173282/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 746103/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6174/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 716704/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.873/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16941136/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2503.632      1 -total
 38.18%  955.839    147 Template:Cite_book
 27.75%  694.756      2 Template:Reflist
 22.09%  553.016    160 Template:Multiref
 17.49%  437.887    503 Template:Harvnb
 10.96%  274.446     48 Template:Cite_web
  4.10%  102.712      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
  4.00%  100.226     18 Template:Cite_journal
  3.99%   99.848      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  3.78%   94.520      3 Template:Lang Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:32361:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816101913 and revision id 1305193418. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Value_theory&oldid=1305193418 " Category : Axiology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Featured articles Use American English from February 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 16:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Value theory 15 languages Add topic

