Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Famous corsairs Toggle Famous corsairs subsection 3.1 Jean Bart 3.2 René Duguay-Trouin 3.3 Robert Surcouf 3.4 François Aregnaudeau 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents French corsairs 6 languages Беларуская Français 한국어 Polski Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French privateers authorized by the French crown Not to be confused with Piracy .

A statue of French corsair Robert Surcouf in Saint-Malo , Brittany Corsairs ( French : corsaire ) were privateers , authorised to conduct raids on shipping of a foreign state at war with the Kingdom of France , on behalf of the French crown. Seized vessels and cargo were sold at auction, with the corsair captain entitled to a portion of the proceeds. Although not French Navy personnel, corsairs were considered legitimate combatants in France (and allied nations), provided the commanding officer of the vessel was in possession of a valid letter of marque ( lettre de marque or lettre de course , the latter giving corsairs their name), and the officers and crew conducted themselves according to contemporary admiralty law . By acting on behalf of the French Crown, if captured by the enemy, they could in principle claim treatment as prisoners of war , instead of being considered pirates .

Because corsairs gained a swashbuckling reputation, the word "corsair" is also used generically as a more romantic or flamboyant way of referring to privateers, or even to pirates. The Barbary pirates of North Africa as well as the Ottoman Empire were sometimes called "Turkish corsairs".

Etymology [ edit ] The word "corsair" comes directly from the French phrase lettre de course , the word corsaire borrowed from the Italian corsaro .  This derives from the Latin cursus , meaning "course" (as in journey or expedition).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The French word corsaire may have originated as a mispronunciation of the Arabic word قُرْصَان qurṣān ; [ 3 ] the term pirate had been in use in French since the Middle Ages .

[ 4 ] However, Sayyid Sulaimān Nadvī, an Indian Muslim scholar of Islamic studies, says that "Qarsan ... [may be] the arabicised form of 'Corsair'." [ 5 ] History [ edit ] The Return of the Corsairs in 1806 by Maurice Orange The corsairs were privateers working for the King of France attacking the ships of France's enemies. In France they did not need to fear punishment for piracy—being hanged—as they were granted a licence as combatants, the lettre de marque or lettre de course , a document which legitimised their actions to the French justice system and which they hoped gave them the status of a war prisoner in case they were ever captured.

The corsair was ordered to attack only the ships of enemy countries, theoretically respecting those of neutral nations and his own nations.  If he did not respect this rule, he was then treated as a pirate and hanged. The corsairs' activities also provided the King with revenue as the licence required them to hand over a part of their booty to the King.

In common with privateers of other nationalities, however, they were often considered pirates by their foreign opponents, and might be hanged as pirates if captured by the foreigners they preyed on.

The "corsair" activities started in the Middle Ages the main goals really being to compensate for the economic problems in war periods; and the ship owners did not accept that the war was an obstacle to their trade. Jean de Châtillon, who was a bishop, in 1144 gave the town of Saint-Malo the status of rights of asylum which encouraged all manner of thieves and rogues to move there. Their motto was "Neither Breton, nor French, but from Saint-Malo am I!". Saint-Malo, however, progressed and in 1308 the town was made into a free commune to encourage the commercial activities of craftsmen as well as merchants and ship owners. This did not really work out and later in 1395 the town became a free port. This situation continued until 1688.

Between the early 1500s and 1713, when the signing of the Peace of Utrecht effectively put an end to the French corsair raids in the Caribbean, the guerre de course , as the French called it, took a huge toll on the Spanish treasure fleet's efforts to ship the gold and silver from Peru to Santo Domingo and Havana and then on to Spain. During this period, there was an intense drive to improve, not only the speed of the ships involved in this contest, but also their manoeuvrability and ability to sail into the wind (the close haul ). It was a matter of life or death, and immense wealth was at stake. Jean d'Ango, father and son, came to be among the wealthiest and most influential men in France. In addition to those listed below, Giovanni da Verrazzano (namesake of the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge ) and Jean Fleury were among the principals in this era. The 1517 travel journal of Antonio de Beatis [ 6 ] described the ship of Fra Bernardino, known as the "Great Corsair" (operating against Turkish vessels) in Marseille : "His galleon is massively timbered, new and extremely well-fitted out, especially in point of artillery, carrying as it does twelve cannon, twelve falconets and a hundred arquebuses ." The activities of the corsairs were so profitable that the Minister of the Navy used this in his strategy to make money. Moreover, the King used to take one-quarter or even one-third of the booty. The corsairs' activities weakened France's enemies; indeed, English trade losses were very important from 1688 to 1717.

In a note based on an examination of Lloyd's List from 1793 to 1800, the anonymous author showed that British shipping losses to captures exceeded those resulting from the perils of the sea.

[ 7 ] Losses to capture: 4314; recaptured 705; Net – 3639 Perils of the sea: 2385 plus 652 driven on shore, of which 70 recovered; Net – 2967.

The relationship between the corsairs and the State changed as the power of the State grew. The rules became stricter and State control more and more present. At the end of the 18th century, the "course" started to decline until its legal death in 1856. The "course" disappeared in France with the Empire in 1804, but was officially ended only by the 1814 Treaty of Paris , where every major northern hemisphere nation except Spain, Mexico, and the United States, was present, and the 1815 Congress of Vienna .

Famous corsairs [ edit ] Jean Bart [ edit ] Jean Bart (21 October 1650 – 27 April 1702) was a French naval commander and privateer. He achieved his greatest successes during the Nine Years' War (1688–1697) serving under Admiral Michiel de Ruyter , [ 8 ] participating in the Battle of Texel and the Battle of Dogger Bank .

René Duguay-Trouin [ edit ] René Duguay-Trouin was born in Saint-Malo in 1673, and the son of a rich ship owner took a fleet of 64 ships and was honoured in 1709 for capturing more than 300 merchant ships and 20 warships.  He had a brilliant privateering and naval career and eventually became "Lieutenant-General of the Naval Armies of the King", i.e., admiral, (French:Lieutenant-Général des armées navales du roi), and a Commander in the Order of Saint-Louis. He died peacefully in 1736.

Robert Surcouf [ edit ] Robert Surcouf was the last and best-known corsair of the Saint-Malo.  Born there in 1773, his father was a ship owner and his mother the daughter of a captain.  Ship's boy at 13 and corsair captain at 22 years old, and then—very much against his licence—for several years attacked ships including those of the French East India Company, or Compagnie Française des Indes . During the French Revolution , the convention government disapproved of lettres de course , so Surcouf operated at great personal risk as a pirate against British shipping to India. Surcouf was so successful that he became a popular celebrity in France. After a brief early retirement Surcouf again operated against shipping to the Indies. Surcouf became a ship owner himself and died in Saint-Malo in 1827. There is a statue of him on public display there, and his house is now a small museum.

François Aregnaudeau [ edit ] François Aregnaudeau (1774 – c.1813), was a Breton who commanded a number of privateers, most notably Blonde , and Duc de Dantzig . In them he captured numerous prizes. He and Duc de Dantzig disappeared without a trace around the end of 1812. Their disappearance gave rise to an unsubstantiated gruesome ghost ship legend.

Jean Bart (1650–1702) Duguay-Trouin (1673–1736) Robert Surcouf  (1702–1756) Julien Pépin, seigneur de Belle-Isle (1705–1785) References [ edit ] ^ Dictionnaire de L'Académie Française, 9e edition en ligne ^ "Online Etymology Dictionary" .

www.etymonline.com .

^ Francis Joseph Steingass (1884).

قاموس الطالب عربي - انكليزي: Companion Volume to the Author's English-Arabic Dictionary . W.H. Allen. p. 829.

^ Berbouche, Alain (17 June 2010). Pascal Galodé (ed.).

Pirates, flibustiers & corsaires, de René Duguay-Troüin à Robert Surcouf: Le droit et les réalités de la guerre de Course . p. 318.

ISBN 978-2-35593-090-4 .

^ Sayyid Sulaimān Nadvī (1962).

Indo-Arab Relations: An English Rendering of Arab Oʼ Hind Ke Taʼllugat . Institute of Indo-Middle East Cultural Studies. p. 38.

^ Antonio de Beatis.

The Travel Journal of Antonio De Beatis, 1517-1518.

Translated by J.R. Hale (Ed.) and J.M.A. Lindon. Hakluyt Society (1979), pp. 155.

^ Naval Chronicle , Vol. 17, p. 369.

^ "Bart, Jean" .

A Naval Encyclopædia . Vol. 1. L. R. Hamersly & co. 1880. p. 67 . Retrieved 3 June 2011 .

External links [ edit ] Look up french corsairs in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

A Swiss-German page showing financial documents related to corsairs: " Die sehr geehrten Freibeuter " (the honorable buccaneers) v t e Piracy Periods Ancient Mediterranean Golden Age 21st century 2022 2023 2024 Types of pirate Albanian piracy Anglo-Turkish piracy Baltic Slavic pirates Barbary pirates (corsairs) Algiers Brethren of the Coast Buccaneers Cilician pirates Child pirate Cossack pirates Filibusters French corsairs Jewish pirates Moro pirates Narentines Privateers Confederate River pirate Sea Beggars Sea Dogs Sindhi corsairs Timber pirate Ushkuyniks Uskoks Vikings Victual Brothers Wokou Women in piracy Areas Atlantic World Caribbean British Virgin Islands Spanish Main Lake Nicaragua Venezuela Gulf of Guinea Indian Ocean Horn of Africa Somali Coast Indonesia Persian Gulf Strait of Malacca Nosy Boraha Other waters Baltic Slavic piracy Barbary Coast Falcon Lake South China Coast Sulu Sea Pirate havens and bases Barataria Bay Île Sainte-Marie Libertatia Lundy Mamora Port Royal Republic of Pirates Republic of Salé Saint Augustin Saint-Malo Tortuga Major figures Pirates Abduwali Muse Abshir Boyah Adam Baldridge Abraham Samuel Alfhild Albert W. Hicks Anne Bonny Anne Dieu-le-Veut António de Faria Alexandre Exquemelin Artemisia I of Caria Bartolomeu Português Bartholomew Roberts Benito de Soto Benjamin Hornigold Black Caesar Blackbeard Bully Hayes Cai Qian John Rackham Charles Gibbs Charlotte Badger Charlotte de Berry Cheung Po Tsai Christina Anna Skytte Chui A-poo Dan Seavey Diabolito Dido Dirk Chivers Dominique You Edward England Edward Low Eli Boggs Elise Eskilsdotter Eustace the Monk Flora Burn Flying Gang Fūma Kotarō Francis Drake François Le Clerc François l'Olonnais Gan Ning Grace O'Malley Hayreddin Barbarossa Hendrick Lucifer Henri Caesar Henry Every Henry Morgan Henry Strangways Hippolyte Bouchard Huang Bamei Israel Hands Jacquotte Delahaye Jan Janszoon Jean Lafitte Jeanne de Clisson Johanna Hård John Hawkins John Hoar John Newland Maffitt John Pro Jørgen Jørgensen José Joaquim Almeida Joseph Baker Joseph Barss Klaus Störtebeker Lai Choi San Laurens de Graaf Lawrence Prince Liang Daoming Limahong Lo Hon-cho Louis-Michel Aury Mansel Alcantra Manuel Ribeiro Pardal Martin Frobisher Mary Critchett Mary Lindsey Mary Read Mary Wolverston Michel de Grammont Moses Cohen Henriques Nathaniel Gordon Nicholas van Hoorn Ng Akew Olivier Levasseur Pedro Gilbert Peter Easton Pierre Lafitte Piet Pieterszoon Hein Princess Sela Rahmah ibn Jabir al-Jalhami Rachel Wall Redbeard Richard Glover Robert Culliford Robert Surcouf Roberto Cofresí Roche Braziliano Rusla Sadie Farrell Samuel Bellamy Samuel Hall Lord Samuel Mason Samuel Pallache Sayyida al Hurra Sister Ping Shap-ng-tsai Shirahama Kenki Simon Mascarino Stede Bonnet Teuta Thomas Cavendish Thomas Tew Veborg Victual Brothers Vincenzo Gambi Wang Zhi William Dampier William Kidd Zheng Jing Zheng Qi Zheng Yi Zheng Zhilong Zheng Yi Sao Pirate hunters Angelo Emo Chaloner Ogle David Porter Duarte Pacheco Pereira James Brooke Julius Caesar Jose Campuzano-Polanco Luis Fajardo Miguel Enríquez Pedro Menéndez de Avilés Pompey Richard Avery Hornsby Robert Maynard Thomas Warren Woodes Rogers Pirate ships Adventure Galley Ambrose Light Fancy Flying Dutchman Ganj-i-Sawai Queen Anne's Revenge Quedagh Merchant Marquis of Havana My Revenge Royal Fortune Saladin Whydah Gally York Pirate battles and incidents 1582 Cagayan battles 1985 Lahad Datu ambush Action of 9 November 1822 Action of 28 October 2007 Action of 11 November 2008 Action of 9 April 2009 Action of 23 March 2010 Action of 1 April 2010 Action of 5 April 2010 Anti-piracy in the Aegean Antelope incident Anti-piracy in the West Indies Attack on Veracruz Balanguingui Expedition Battle of Boca Teacapan Battle of Cape Fear River Battle of Cape Lopez Battle of Doro Passage Battle of Mandab Strait Battle of Manila Battle off Minicoy Island Battle off Mukah Battle of Nam Quan Battle of New Orleans Battle of Ocracoke Inlet Battle of Pianosa Battle of the Leotung Battle of the Tiger's Mouth Battle of Tonkin River Battle of Ty-ho Bay Battle of Tysami Beluga Nomination incident Blockade of Charleston (Vane) Chepo Expedition Capture of the Ambrose Light Capture of John Rackham Capture of the schooner Bravo Capture of the schooner Fancy Capture of the sloop Anne Carré d'As IV incident Dai Hong Dan incident Falklands Expedition Great Lakes Patrol Irene incident Jiajing wokou raids Maersk Alabama hijacking MT Zafirah hijacking MT Orkim Harmony hijacking MV Moscow University hijacking North Star affair Operation Enduring Freedom – HOA Operation Atalanta Operation Dawn of Gulf of Aden Operation Dawn 8: Gulf of Aden Operation Ocean Shield Persian Gulf Campaign Pirate attacks in Borneo Quest incident Raid on Cartagena Sack of Baltimore Sack of Campeche Salvador Pirates Slave raid of Suðuroy Turkish Abductions Piracy law Acts of grace ( 1717–1718 Acts of Grace ) International piracy law Letter of marque Paris Declaration Respecting Maritime Law Piracy Act ( 1536 , 1698 , 1717 , 1721 , 1837 , 1850 ) Piracy Law of 1820 Slave trade African slave trade African Slave Trade Patrol Amistad Incident Atlantic slave trade Baltic slave trade Barbary slave trade Blockade of Africa Capture of the Veloz Passagera Capture of the brig Brillante Indian Ocean slave trade Trans-Saharan slave trade Pirates in popular culture Fictional pirates Askeladd Tom Ayrton Barbe Rouge Brook Captain Birdseye Captain Blood Captain Crook Captain Flint Captain Hook Captain Nemo Captain Pugwash Captain Sabertooth Captain Stingaree Charlotte de Berry Davy Jones Edward Kenway Elaine Marley Elizabeth Swann Franky Guybrush Threepwood Hector Barbossa Jack Sparrow Jacquotte Delahaye Jimbei José Gaspar Joshamee Gibbs Long John Silver Monkey D. Luffy Vaas Montenegro Mr. Smee Nami Nico Robin Roronoa Zoro Sandokan Sanji Tony Tony Chopper Usopp Will Turner Yellowbeard Zanzibar Novels The Pirate The Pilot: A Tale of the Sea Treasure Island Facing the Flag On Stranger Tides Jim Hawkins and the Curse of Treasure Island Castaways of the Flying Dutchman The Angel's Command Voyage of Slaves Long John Silver Pirate Latitudes Mistress of the Seas Silver: Return to Treasure Island Tropes Buried treasure Davy Jones's locker Eyepatch Jolly Roger skull and crossbones Keelhauling Marooning No purchase, no pay Pegleg Pet parrot Pirate code Pirate utopia Treasure map Walking the plank Miscellaneous Air pirate Space pirate International Talk Like a Pirate Day Pirates versus Ninjas Miscellaneous A General History of the Pyrates Captain Charles Johnson Truce of Ratisbon Pirate Round Mutiny Matelotage Piracy kidnappings Lists Pirates Pirate films and TV series Privateers List of ships attacked by Somali pirates Timeline of piracy Women in piracy Piracy portal Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=French_corsairs&oldid=1294755444 " Categories : Privateering Piracy in the Atlantic Ocean Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 16:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents French corsairs 6 languages Add topic

