Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Philosophy 2 Education Toggle Education subsection 2.1 Academic writing 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 5.1 Books 5.2 Papers Toggle the table of contents Social constructivism 23 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Íslenska עברית Magyar Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sociological theory of knowledge Not to be confused with Social constructionism or Constructivism (philosophy of education) .

For other uses, see Constructivism (disambiguation) .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Social constructivism is a sociological theory of knowledge according to which human development is socially situated, and knowledge is constructed through interaction with others.

[ 1 ] Like social constructionism , social constructivism states that people work together to actively construct artifacts . But while social constructivism focuses on cognition , social constructionism focuses on the making of social reality .

[ 2 ] A very simple example is an object like a cup. The object can be used for many things, but its shape does suggest some 'knowledge' about carrying liquids (see also Affordance ). A more complex example is an online course —not only do the 'shapes' of the software tools indicate certain things about the way online courses should work, but the activities and texts produced within the group as a whole will help shape how each person behaves within that group. A person's cognitive development will also be influenced by the culture that they are involved in, such as the language, history, and social context. For a philosophical account of one possible social-constructionist ontology , see the 'Criticism' section of Representative realism [ dead link ] .

[ 3 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Strong social constructivism as a philosophical approach tends to suggest that "the natural world has a small or non-existent role in the construction of scientific knowledge".

[ 4 ] According to Maarten Boudry and Filip Buekens, Freudian psychoanalysis is a good example of this approach in action.

[ 5 ] However, Boudry and Buekens do not claim that ' bona fide ' science is completely immune from all socialisation and paradigm shifts , [ 6 ] merely that the strong social constructivist claim that all scientific knowledge is constructed ignores the reality of scientific success.

[ 5 ] One characteristic of social constructivism is that it rejects the role of superhuman necessity in either the invention/discovery of knowledge or its justification . In the field of invention it looks to contingency as playing an important part in the origin of knowledge, with historical interests and resourcing swaying the direction of mathematical and scientific knowledge growth. In the area of justification while acknowledging the role of logic and reason in testing, it also accepts that the criteria for acceptance vary and change over time. Thus mathematical proofs follow different standards in the present and throughout different periods in the past, as Paul Ernest argues.

[ 7 ] Education [ edit ] Social constructivism has been studied by many educational psychologists, who are concerned with its implications for teaching and learning. Social constructivism extends constructivism by incorporating the role of other actors and culture in development. In this sense it can also be contrasted with social learning theory by stressing interaction over observation. For more on the psychological dimensions of social constructivism, see the work of A. Sullivan Palincsar.

[ 8 ] Psychological tools are one of the key concepts in Lev Vygotsky 's sociocultural perspective.

Studies on increasing the use of student discussion in the classroom both support and are grounded in theories of social constructivism. There is a full range of advantages that results from the implementation of discussion in the classroom. Participating in group discussion allows students to generalize and transfer their knowledge of classroom learning and builds a strong foundation for communicating ideas orally.

[ 9 ] Many studies argue that discussion plays a vital role in increasing student ability to test their ideas, synthesize the ideas of others, and build deeper understanding of what they are learning.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Large and small group discussion also affords students opportunities to exercise self-regulation, self-determination , and a desire to persevere with tasks.

[ 11 ] [ 13 ] Additionally, discussion increases student motivation, collaborative skills, and the ability to problem solve.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Increasing students’ opportunity to talk with one another and discuss their ideas increases their ability to support their thinking, develop reasoning skills, and to argue their opinions persuasively and respectfully.

[ 9 ] Furthermore, the feeling of community and collaboration in classrooms increases through offering more chances for students to talk together.

[ 10 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Studies have found that students are not regularly accustomed to participating in academic discourse.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Martin Nystrand argues that teachers rarely choose classroom discussion as an instructional format. The results of Nystrand’s (1996) three-year study focusing on 2400 students in 60 different classrooms indicate that the typical classroom teacher spends under three minutes an hour allowing students to talk about ideas with one another and the teacher.

[ 12 ] Even within those three minutes of discussion, most talk is not true discussion because it depends upon teacher-directed questions with predetermined answers.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Multiple observations indicate that students in low socioeconomic schools and lower track classrooms are allowed even fewer opportunities for discussion.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Discussion and interactive discourse promote learning because they afford students the opportunity to use language as a demonstration of their independent thoughts. Discussion elicits sustained responses from students that encourage meaning-making through negotiating with the ideas of others. This type of learning “promotes retention and in-depth processing associated with the cognitive manipulation of information”.

[ 12 ] One recent branch of work exploring social constructivist perspectives on learning focuses on the role of social technologies and social media in facilitating the generation of socially constructed knowledge and understanding in online environments.

[ 17 ] Academic writing [ edit ] In a constructivist approach, the focus is on the sociocultural conventions of academic discourse such as citing evidence, hedging and boosting claims, interpreting the literature to back one's own claims, and addressing counter claims.  These conventions are inherent to a constructivist approach as they place value on the communicative, interpersonal nature of academic writing with a strong focus on how the reader receives the message. The act of citing others’ work is more than accurate attribution; it is an important exercise in critical thinking in the construction of an authorial self.

[ 1 ] [ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Constructivist epistemology Educational psychology Experiential learning Learning theory Virtual community References [ edit ] ^ a b McKinley, J. (2015).

"Critical Argument and Writer Identity: Social Constructivism as a Theoretical Framework for EFL Academic Writing" (PDF) .

Critical Inquiry in Language Studies .

12 (3): 184– 207.

doi : 10.1080/15427587.2015.1060558 .

S2CID 53541628 . Retrieved 23 June 2024 .

^ Schwandt, Thomas A. (1998). "Constructivist, Interpretivist Approaches to Human Inquiry". In Denzin, Norman K.; Lincoln, Yvonna S. (eds.).

The landscape of qualitative research: theories and issues . Thousand Oaks (Calif.) London New Delhi: Sage Publications.

ISBN 978-0-7619-1433-4 .

^ See also Wright, Edmond (2005) Narrative, Perception, Language, and Faith. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 103–120.

^ Collins, H. M. (1981). "Stages in the Empirical Program of Relativism - Introduction".

Social Studies of Science .

11 (1): 3.

doi : 10.1177/030631278101100101 .

S2CID 145123888 .

^ a b Boudry, M & Buekens, F (2011) The Epistemic Predicament of a Pseudoscience: Social Constructivism Confronts Freudian Psychoanalysis. Theoria, 77, 159–179 ^ Kuhn, T (1962) Structure of Scientific Revolutions . Chicago University Press.

^ Ernest, Paul (1998), Social Constructivism as a Philosophy of Mathematics, Albany NY: SUNY Press.

^ Palincsar, A. Sullivan (1998). "Social Constructivist Perspectives on Teaching and Learning".

Annual Review of Psychology .

49 : 345– 375.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.psych.49.1.345 .

PMID 15012472 .

S2CID 40335935 .

^ a b c Reznitskaya, A., Anderson, R.C., and Kuo, L.J. (2007). Teaching and Learning Argumentation. Elementary School Journal, 107: 449–472.

^ a b c K. Weber, C. Maher, A. Powell, and H. Lee (2008). Learning opportunities from group discussions: Warrants become the objects of debate. Educational Studies in Mathematics, 68, 247-261.

^ a b c d e Corden, R.E. (2001). Group discussion and the importance of a shared perspective: Learning from collaborative research. Qualitative Research, 1(3), 347-367.

^ a b c d e f g Nystrand, M. (1996). Opening dialogue: Understanding the dynamics of language and learning in the English classroom. New York: Teachers College Press.

^ a b Matsumura, L.C., Slater, S.C., & Crosson, A. (2008). Classroom climate, rigorous instruction and curriculum, and students’ interactions in urban middle schools. The Elementary School Journal, 108(4), 294-312.

^ a b Dyson, A. H. (2004).

Writing and the sea of voices: Oral language in, around, and about writing. In R.B. Ruddell, & N.J. Unrau (Eds.), Theoretical Models and Processes of Reading (pp. 146–162). Newark, DE: International Reading Association .

^ Barab, S., Dodge, T. Thomas, M.K., Jackson, C. & Tuzun, H. (2007). Our designs and the social agendas they carry. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(2), 263-305.

^ Hale, M.S. & City, E.A. (2002). “But how do you do that?”: Decision making for the seminar facilitator. In J. Holden & J.S. Schmit. Inquiry and the literary text: Constructing discussions in the English classroom / Classroom practices in teaching English, volume 32. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.

^ Dougiamas, M. (1998, November).

A journey into Constructivism .

Further reading [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Dyson, A. H. (2004). Writing and the sea of voices: Oral language in, around, and about writing. In R.B. Ruddell, & N.J. Unrau (Eds.), Theoretical Models and Processes of Reading (pp. 146–162). Newark, DE: International Reading Association.

Paul Ernest (1998), Social Constructivism as a Philosophy of Mathematics , Albany NY: SUNY Press ISBN 0-7914-3587-3 ISBN 978-0-7914-3587-8 Fry, H & Kettering, S & Marshall, S (Eds.) (2008). A Handbook for Teaching and Learning in Higher Education.  Routledge Glasersfeld, Ernst von (1995).

Radical Constructivism:  A Way of Knowing and Learning .  London:  RoutledgeFalmer.

Grant, Colin B. (2000).

Functions and Fictions of Communication . Oxford and Bern: Peter Lang.

Grant, Colin B. (2007).

Uncertainty and Communication: New Theoretical Investigations . Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

Hale, M.S. & City, E.A. (2002). “But how do you do that?”: Decision making for the seminar facilitator. In J. Holden & J.S. Schmit. Inquiry and the literary text: Constructing discussions in the English classroom / Classroom practices in teaching English, volume 32. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.

André Kukla (2000), Social Constructivism and the Philosophy of Science , London: Routledge ISBN 0-415-23419-0 ISBN 978-0-415-23419-1 Nystrand, M. (1996). Opening dialogue: Understanding the dynamics of language and learning in the English classroom. New York: Teachers College Press.

Poerksen, Bernhard (2004), The Certainty of Uncertainty:  Dialogues Introducing Constructivism .  Exeter:  Imprint-Academic.

Schmidt, Siegfried J. (2007).

Histories & Discourses:  Rewriting Constructivism .  Exeter:  Imprint-Academic.

Vygotsky, L. (1978).

Mind in Society . London: Harvard University Press.

Chapter 6, Social Constructivism in Introduction to International Relations: Theories and Approaches , Robert Jackson and Georg Sørensen, Third Edition, OUP 2006 Papers [ edit ] Barab, S., Dodge, T. Thomas, M.K., Jackson, C. & Tuzun, H. (2007). Our designs and the social agendas they carry. Journal of the Learning Sciences, 16(2), 263-305.

Boudry, M & Buekens, F (2011) The Epistemic Predicament of a Pseudoscience: Social Constructivism Confronts Freudian Psychoanalysis. Theoria, 77, 159–179 Collins, H. M. (1981) Stages in the Empirical Program of Relativism - Introduction. Social Studies of Science. 11(1) 3-10 Corden, R.E. (2001). Group discussion and the importance of a shared perspective: Learning from collaborative research. Qualitative Research, 1(3), 347-367.

Paul Ernest, Social constructivism as a philosophy of mathematics: Radical constructivism rehabilitated? 1990 Mark McMahon, Social Constructivism and the World Wide Web - A Paradigm for Learning, ASCILITE 1997 Carlson, J. D., Social Constructivism, Moral Reasoning and the Liberal Peace: From Kant to Kohlberg, Paper presented at the annual meeting of The Midwest Political Science Association, Palmer House Hilton, Chicago, Illinois 2005 Glasersfeld, Ernst von, 1981. ‘An attentional model for the conceptual construction of units and number’, Journal for Research in Mathematics Education, 12:2, 83-94.

Glasersfeld, Ernst von, 1989.

Cognition, construction of knowledge, and teaching , Synthese, 80, 121-40.

Matsumura, L.C., Slater, S.C., & Crosson, A. (2008). Classroom climate, rigorous instruction and curriculum, and students’ interactions in urban middle schools. The Elementary School Journal, 108(4), 294-312.

McKinley, J. (2015).

Critical argument and writer identity: social constructivism as a theoretical framework for EFL academic writing . Critical Inquiry in Language Studies, 12(3), 184-207.

Reznitskaya, A., Anderson, R.C., & Kuo, L. (2007). Teaching and learning argumentation, The Elementary School Journal, 107(5), 449-472.

Ronald Elly Wanda.

"The Contributions of Social Constructivism in Political Studies" .

Weber, K., Maher, C., Powell, A., & Lee, H.S. (2008).

Learning opportunities from group discussions: Warrants become the objects of debate . Educational Studies in Mathematics, 68 (3), 247-261.

v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Social_constructivism&oldid=1285892979 " Categories : Constructivism Enactive cognition Social epistemology Epistemology of science Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from August 2016 Use dmy dates from August 2016 Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2010 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2025 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 16 April 2025, at 12:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Social constructivism 23 languages Add topic

