Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Physical geography Toggle Physical geography subsection 2.1 Geology and formation 2.2 Hydrology 3 Flora and fauna 4 History Toggle History subsection 4.1 Pre-Columbian 4.2 European exploration and settlement 4.3 American Revolution to the present 5 Navigation Toggle Navigation subsection 5.1 Tides 6 Economy Toggle Economy subsection 6.1 Fishing industry 6.2 Tourism and recreation 7 Cuisine 8 Environmental issues Toggle Environmental issues subsection 8.1 Agricultural pollution in the colonial era 8.2 Pollution in the 20th century 8.3 Sewage overflows and treatment plant upsets 8.4 Depletion of oysters 8.5 Institutional responses to pollution problems 8.6 Restoration efforts 8.7 Regulatory actions 8.8 Water quality improvements 8.9 Climate change 8.10 Scientific research 9 Underwater archaeology Toggle Underwater archaeology subsection 9.1 Location and research processes 9.2 Significant sites 10 Publications 11 Cultural depictions Toggle Cultural depictions subsection 11.1 In literature 11.2 In film 11.3 In TV 11.4 Other media 12 See also 13 Notes 14 References 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Chesapeake Bay 56 languages Afrikaans Ænglisc العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar მარგალური Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Occitan Piemontèis Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 37°48′N 76°06′W ﻿ / ﻿ 37.8°N 76.1°W ﻿ / 37.8; -76.1 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Estuary in the U.S. states of Maryland and Virginia Chesapeake Bay A satellite image of the Chesapeake Bay The Chesapeake Bay drainage basin extends into six states, Maryland , Virginia , West Virginia , Delaware , Pennsylvania , and New York , and the federal capital of Washington, D.C.

Chesapeake Bay Location Maryland and Virginia Coordinates 37°48′N 76°06′W ﻿ / ﻿ 37.8°N 76.1°W ﻿ / 37.8; -76.1 Type Estuary Etymology Chesepiooc , Algonquian for village 'at a big river' Primary inflows Susquehanna River mouth east of Havre de Grace, Maryland River sources Deer Creek , Bush River , Gunpowder River , Back River , Patapsco River , Severn River , Patuxent River , Potomac River , Rappahannock River , York River , James River , Chester River , Choptank River , Nanticoke River , Pocomoke River Primary outflows Atlantic Ocean north of Virginia Beach, Virginia 36°59′45″N 75°57′34″W ﻿ / ﻿ 36.99583°N 75.95944°W ﻿ / 36.99583; -75.95944 Catchment area 64,299 sq mi (166,530 km 2 ) Basin countries United States Max. length 200 mi (320 km) Max. width 30 mi (48 km) Surface area 4,479 sq mi (11,600 km 2 ) Average depth 21 ft (6.4 m) Residence time 180 days [ note 1 ] Settlements Annapolis , Baltimore , Cambridge , Cape Charles , Chesapeake , Chesapeake Beach , Elkton , Hampton , Havre de Grace , Newport News , Norfolk , Portsmouth , Virginia Beach References Ramsar Wetland Official name Chesapeake Bay Estuarine Complex Designated 4 June 1987 Reference no.

375 [ 2 ] Chesapeake Bay ( / ˈ tʃ ɛ s ə p iː k / CHESS -ə-peek ) is the largest estuary in the United States. The bay is located in the Mid-Atlantic region and is primarily separated from the Atlantic Ocean by the Delmarva Peninsula , including parts of the Eastern Shore of Maryland , the Eastern Shore of Virginia , and the state of Delaware . The mouth of the bay at its southern point is located between Cape Henry and Cape Charles .

[ 3 ] With its northern portion in Maryland and the southern part in Virginia , the Chesapeake Bay is a very important feature for the ecology and economy of those two states, as well as others surrounding within its watershed. More than 150 major rivers and streams flow into the bay's 64,299-square-mile (166,534 km 2 ) drainage basin , which covers parts of six states ( New York , Pennsylvania , Delaware , Maryland, Virginia, and West Virginia ) and all of Washington, D.C.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The bay is approximately 200 miles (320 km) long from its northern headwaters in the Susquehanna River to its outlet in the Atlantic Ocean. It is 2.8 miles (4.5 km) wide at its narrowest (between Kent County's Plum Point near Newtown in the east and the Harford County western shore near Romney Creek) and 30 miles (48 km) at its widest (just south of the mouth of the Potomac River which divides Maryland from Virginia). Total shoreline including tributaries is 11,684 miles (18,804 km), circumnavigating a surface area of 4,479 square miles (11,601 km 2 ). Average depth is 21 feet (6.4 m), reaching a maximum of 174 feet (53 m).

[ 5 ] The bay is spanned twice, in Maryland by the Chesapeake Bay Bridge from Sandy Point (near Annapolis ) to Kent Island and in Virginia by the Chesapeake Bay Bridge–Tunnel connecting Virginia Beach to Cape Charles .

Known for both its beauty and bounty, the bay has become "emptier", with fewer crabs, oysters and watermen (fishermen) since the mid-20th century.

[ 6 ] Nutrient pollution and urban runoff have been identified as major components of impaired water quality in the bay stressing ecosystems and compounding the decline of shellfish due to overharvesting . Restoration efforts that began in the 1990s have continued into the 21st century and show potential for growth of the native oyster population.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The health of the Chesapeake Bay improved in 2015, marking three years of gains over a four-year period.

[ 9 ] Slight improvements in water quality were observed in 2021, compared to indicators measured in 2020.

[ 10 ] The bay is experiencing other environmental concerns, including climate change which is causing sea level rise that erodes coastal areas and infrastructure and changes to the marine ecosystem.

[ 11 ] Etymology [ edit ] The word Chesepiooc is an Algonquian word referring to a village 'at a big river'. It is the seventh-oldest surviving English placename in the United States, first applied as Chesepiook by explorers heading north from the Roanoke Colony into a Chesapeake tributary in 1585 or 1586. The name may also refer to the Chesapeake people or the Chesepian, a Native American tribe who inhabited the area now known as South Hampton Roads in the U.S. state of Virginia. They occupied an area that is now the Norfolk, Portsmouth, Chesapeake, and Virginia Beach areas.

[ 12 ] In 2005, Algonquian linguist Blair Rudes "helped to dispel one of the area's most widely held beliefs: that 'Chesapeake' means something like 'great shellfish bay'. It does not, Rudes said. The name might have actually meant something like 'great water', or it might have just referred to a village location at the bay's mouth." [ 13 ] The first European name for the bay was "Bahia de Santa Maria" (St. Mary's bay). This name was coined by the Spanish.

[ 14 ] Physical geography [ edit ] Geology and formation [ edit ] Boundaries of the Chesapeake Bay impact crater .

Chesapeake Bay is an estuary to the North Atlantic, lying between the Delmarva Peninsula to the east and the North American mainland to the west. It is the ria , or drowned valley, of the Susquehanna River , meaning that it was the alluvial plain where the river flowed when the sea level was lower. It is not a fjord , because the Laurentide Ice Sheet never reached as far south as the northernmost point on the bay. North of Baltimore , the western shore borders the hilly Piedmont region of Maryland; south of the city the bay lies within the state's low-lying coastal plain , with sedimentary cliffs to the west, and flat islands, winding creeks and marshes to the east. The large rivers entering the bay from the west have broad mouths and are extensions of the main ria for miles up the course of each river.

The bay's geology, its present form, and its very location were created by a bolide impact event at the end of the Eocene (about 35.5 million years ago), forming the Chesapeake Bay impact crater and much later the Susquehanna River valley. The bay was formed starting about 10,000 years ago when rising sea levels at the end of the last ice age flooded the Susquehanna River valley.

[ 4 ] Parts of the bay, especially the Calvert County, Maryland , coastline, are lined by cliffs composed of deposits from receding waters millions of years ago. These cliffs, generally known as Calvert Cliffs , are famous for their fossils , especially fossilized shark teeth, which are commonly found washed up on the beaches next to the cliffs.

Scientists' Cliffs is a beach community in Calvert County named for the desire to create a retreat for scientists when the community was founded in 1935.

[ 15 ] Hydrology [ edit ] View of the eastern bay in Maryland at sunset The Chesapeake Bay Bridge , near Annapolis, Maryland Much of the bay is shallow. At the point where the Susquehanna River flows into the bay, the average depth is 30 feet (9 m), although this soon diminishes to an average of 10 feet (3 m) southeast of the city of Havre de Grace, Maryland , to about 35 feet (11 m) just north of Annapolis. On average, the depth of the bay is 21 feet (6.4 m), including tributaries; [ 16 ] over 24 percent of the bay is less than 6 ft (2 m) deep.

[ 17 ] Because the bay is an estuary, it has fresh water, salt water and brackish water. Brackish water has three salinity zones: oligohaline, mesohaline, and polyhaline . The freshwater zone runs from the mouth of the Susquehanna River to north Baltimore . The oligohaline zone has very little salt. Salinity varies from 0.5 ppt (parts per thousand) to 10 ppt, and freshwater species can survive there. The north end of the oligohaline zone is north Baltimore and the south end is the Chesapeake Bay Bridge. The mesohaline zone has a medium amount of salt and runs from the Bay Bridge to the mouth of the Rappahannock River . Salinity there ranges from 1.07% to 1.8%. The polyhaline zone is the saltiest zone, and some of the water can be as salty as sea water. It runs from the mouth of the Rappahannock River to the mouth of the bay. The salinity ranges from 1.87% to 3.6%. (3.6% is as salty as the ocean.) [ 18 ] The climate of the area surrounding the bay is primarily humid subtropical , with hot, very humid summers and cold to mild winters. Only the area around the mouth of the Susquehanna River is continental in nature, and the mouth of the Susquehanna River and the Susquehanna flats often freeze in winter. It is rare for the surface of the bay to freeze in winter, something that happened most recently in the winter of 1976–77.

[ 19 ] Chesapeake Bay is the end point of over 150 rivers and streams.

[ 20 ] The largest rivers flowing directly into the bay, in order of discharge, [ 21 ] [ 22 ] are the Susquehanna River , Potomac River , James River , Rappahannock River , York River , Patuxent River , and Choptank River .

For more information on Chesapeake Bay rivers, see the List of Chesapeake Bay rivers .

The bay viewed from a plane Flora and fauna [ edit ] Food chain diagram for waterbirds of the Chesapeake Bay Chesapeake Bay is home to numerous fauna that either migrate to the bay at some point during the year or live there year-round. There are over 300 species of fish and numerous shellfish and crab species. Some of these include the Atlantic menhaden , striped bass , American eel , eastern oyster , Atlantic horseshoe crab , and the blue crab .

[ 23 ] Birds include ospreys , great blue herons , bald eagles , [ 24 ] and peregrine falcons , the last two of which were threatened by DDT ; their numbers plummeted but have risen in recent years.

[ 25 ] The piping plover is a near threatened species that inhabits the wetlands.

[ 25 ] Larger fish such as Atlantic sturgeon , [ 26 ] varieties of sharks, [ 27 ] [ 28 ] and stingrays visit the bay.

[ 29 ] The waters of Chesapeake Bay have been regarded as one of the most important nursery areas for sharks along the east coast.

[ 30 ] Megafaunas such as bull sharks , tiger sharks , scalloped hammerhead sharks , and basking sharks [ 30 ] and manta rays are also known to visit. Smaller species of sharks and stingrays that are known to be regular to occasional residents in the bay include the smooth dogfish , spiny dogfish , cownose ray , and bonnethead .

Bottlenose dolphins are known to live seasonally/yearly in the bay.

[ 31 ] There have been unconfirmed sightings of humpback whales in recent years.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Endangered North Atlantic right whale [ 34 ] and fin , and minke and sei whales have also been sighted within and in the vicinity of the bay.

[ 29 ] A male manatee visited the bay several times between 1994 and 2011, even though the area is north of the species' normal range. The manatee, recognizable due to distinct markings on its body, was nicknamed "Chessie" after a legendary sea monster that was allegedly sighted in the bay during the 20th century.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] The same manatee has been spotted as far north as Rhode Island , and was the first manatee known to travel so far north.

[ 38 ] Other manatees are occasionally seen in the bay and its tributaries, which contain sea grasses that are part of the manatee's diet.

[ 39 ] Loggerhead turtles are known to visit the bay.

[ 29 ] Chesapeake Bay is also home to a diverse flora, both land and aquatic. Common submerged aquatic vegetation includes eelgrass and widgeon grass . A report in 2011 suggested that information on underwater grasses would be released, because "submerged grasses provide food and habitat for a number of species, adding oxygen to the water and improving water clarity." [ 40 ] Other vegetation that makes its home in other parts of the bay are wild rice , various trees like the red maple , loblolly pine and bald cypress , and spartina grass and phragmites .

[ 41 ] Invasive plants have taken a significant foothold in the bay. Plants such as Phragmites, Purple loosestrife and Japanese stiltgrass have established high levels of permanency in Chesapeake wetlands.

[ 42 ] Additionally, plants such as Brazilian waterweed , native to South America, have spread to most continents with the help of aquarium owners, who often dump the contents of their aquariums into nearby lakes and streams. It is highly invasive and has the potential to flourish in the low-salinity tidal waters of the bay. Dense stands of Brazilian waterweed can restrict water movement, trap sediment and affect water quality. Various local K-12 schools in the Maryland and Virginia region often have programs that cultivate native bay grasses and plant them in the bay.

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] Pre-Columbian [ edit ] It is presumed that the Chesapeake Bay was once inhabited by Paleoindians 11,000 years ago.

[ 43 ] For thousands of years, Native American societies lived in villages of wooden longhouses close to water bodies where they fished and farmed the land. Agricultural products included beans, corn, tobacco, and squash. Villages often lasted between 10 and 20 years before being abandoned due to local resources such as firewood running out or soil depleting.

[ 44 ] To produce enough food, labor was divided with men hunting while the women supervised the village's farming. All village members took part in the harvesting of fish and shellfish from the local bodies of water. As time went on, communities around the Chesapeake Bay formed confederations such as the Powhatan , the Piscataway , and the Nanticoke . Each of these confederations consisted of a collection of smaller tribes falling under the leadership of a central chief.

[ 45 ] European exploration and settlement [ edit ] Revised map [ 46 ] of John White's original by Theodore DeBry. In this 1590 version, the Chesapeake Bay appears named for the first time.

[ 47 ] Later (1630) version of the 1612 map by Captain John Smith during his exploration of the Chesapeake. The map is oriented with west at top.

In 1524, Italian explorer Giovanni da Verrazzano , (1485–1528), in service of the French crown , (famous for sailing through and thereafter naming the entrance to New York Bay as the " Verrazzano Narrows ", including now in the 20th century, a suspension bridge also named for him ) sailed past the Chesapeake, but did not enter the bay.

[ 48 ] Spanish explorer Lucas Vásquez de Ayllón sent an expedition out from Hispaniola in 1525 that reached the mouths of the Chesapeake and Delaware Bays . It may have been the first European expedition to explore parts of the Chesapeake Bay, which the Spaniards called "Bahía de Santa María" ("Bay of St. Mary") or "Bahía de Madre de Dios."("Bay of the Mother of God") [ 49 ] De Ayllón established a short-lived Spanish mission settlement, San Miguel de Gualdape , in 1526 along the Atlantic coast . Many scholars doubt the assertion that it was as far north as the Chesapeake; most place it in present-day Georgia 's Sapelo Island .

[ 50 ] In 1573, Pedro Menéndez de Márquez , the governor of Spanish Florida, conducted further exploration of the Chesapeake.

[ 48 ] In 1570, Spanish Jesuits established the short-lived Ajacan Mission on one of the Chesapeake tributaries in present-day Virginia.

[ citation needed ] The arrival of English colonists under Sir Walter Raleigh and Humphrey Gilbert in the late 16th century to found a colony, later settled at Roanoke Island (off the present-day coast of North Carolina ) for the Virginia Company , marked the first time that the English approached the gates to the Chesapeake Bay between the capes of Cape Charles and Cape Henry . Three decades later, in 1607, Europeans again entered the bay.

Captain John Smith of England explored and mapped the bay between 1607 and 1609, resulting in the publication in 1612 back in the British Isles of "A Map of Virginia" .

[ 51 ] Smith wrote in his journal: "Heaven and earth have never agreed better to frame a place for man's habitation." [ 52 ] The Captain John Smith Chesapeake National Historic Trail , the first designated "all-water" National Historic Trail in the US, was established in 2006 by the National Park Service . The trail follows the route of Smith's historic 17th-century voyage.

[ 53 ] Because of economic hardships and civil strife in the "Mother Land", there was a mass migration of southern English Cavaliers and their servants to the Chesapeake Bay region between 1640 and 1675, to both of the new colonies of the Province of Virginia and the Province of Maryland .

[ citation needed ] American Revolution to the present [ edit ] Oyster boats at war off the Maryland shore (1886 wood engraving). Regulation of the oyster beds in Virginia and Maryland has existed since the 19th century.

The Chesapeake Bay was the site of the Battle of the Chesapeake (also known as the "Battle of the Capes", Cape Charles and Cape Henry ) in 1781, during which the French fleet defeated the Royal Navy in the decisive naval battle of the American Revolutionary War . The French victory enabled General George Washington and his French allies under the Comte de Rochambeau to march down from New York and bottle up a British army under Lord Cornwallis from the North and South Carolinas at the siege of Battle of Yorktown in Yorktown, Virginia . Their marching route from Newport, Rhode Island through Connecticut, New York State, Pennsylvania, New Jersey and Delaware to the "Head of Elk" by the Susquehanna River along the shores and also partially sailing down the bay to Virginia . It is also the subject of a designated National Historic Trail as the Washington–Rochambeau Revolutionary Route .

[ citation needed ] The bay would again see conflict during War of 1812 . During the year of 1813, from their base on Tangier Island , British naval forces under the command of Admiral George Cockburn raided several towns on the shores of the Chesapeake, treating the bay as if it were a "British Lake". The Chesapeake Bay Flotilla , a fleet of shallow-draft armed barges under the command of U.S. Navy Commodore Joshua Barney , was assembled to stall British shore raids and attacks. After months of harassment by Barney, the British landed on the west side of the Patuxent at Benedict, Maryland , the Chesapeake Flotilla was scuttled, and the British trekked overland to rout the U.S. Army at Bladensburg and burn the U.S. Capitol in August 1814. A few days later in a "pincer attack", they also sailed up the Potomac River to attack Fort Washington below the National Capital and raided the nearby port town of Alexandria, Virginia .

[ citation needed ] There were so-called " Oyster Wars " in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Until the mid-20th century, oyster harvesting rivaled the crab industry among Chesapeake watermen, a dwindling breed whose skipjacks and other workboats were supplanted by recreational craft in the latter part of the century.

[ 54 ] In the 1960s, the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant on the historic Calvert Cliffs in Calvert County on the Western Shore of Maryland began using water from the bay to cool its reactor.

[ 55 ] Navigation [ edit ] Lighthouses and lightships such as Chesapeake have helped guide ships into the bay.

The Chesapeake Bay forms a link in the Intracoastal Waterway , of the bays, sounds and inlets between the off-shore barrier islands and the coastal mainland along the Atlantic coast connecting the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal (linking the bay to the north and the Delaware River ) with the Albemarle and Chesapeake Canal (linking the bay, to the south, via the Elizabeth River , by the cities of Norfolk and Portsmouth to the Albemarle Sound and Pamlico Sound in North Carolina and further to the Sea Islands of Georgia). A busy shipping channel (dredged by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers since the 1850s) runs the length of the bay, is an important transit route for large vessels entering or leaving the Port of Baltimore , and further north through the Chesapeake and Delaware Canal to the ports of Wilmington and Philadelphia on the Delaware River .

During the later half of the 19th century and the first half of the 20th century, the bay was plied by passenger steamships and packet boat lines connecting the various cities on it, notably the Baltimore Steam Packet Company ("Old Bay Line").

In the later 20th century, a series of road crossings were built. One, the Chesapeake Bay Bridge (also known as the Governor William Preston Lane Jr. Memorial Bridge) between the state capital of Annapolis, Maryland and Matapeake on the Eastern Shore , crossing Kent Island , was constructed 1949–1952. A second, parallel, span was added in 1973. The Chesapeake Bay Bridge–Tunnel , connecting Virginia's Eastern Shore with its mainland (at the metropolitan areas of Virginia Beach , Norfolk , Portsmouth , and Chesapeake ), is approximately 20 miles (32 km) long; it has trestle bridges as well as two stretches of two-mile-long (3.2 km) tunnels that allow unimpeded shipping; the bridge is supported by four 5.25-acre (21,200 m 2 ) man-made islands. The Chesapeake Bay Bridge – Tunnel was opened for two lanes in 1964 and four lanes in 1999.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] Tides [ edit ] Example Chesapeake Bay tides from Baltimore and the Chesapeake Bay Bridge–Tunnel for quarter and full moons during June 2013 Tides in the Chesapeake Bay exhibit an interesting and unique behavior due to the nature of the topography (both horizontal and vertical shape), wind-driven circulation, and how the bay interacts with oceanic tides. Research into the peculiar behavior of tides both at the northern and southern extents of the bay began in the late 1970s. One study noted sea level fluctuations at periods of 5 days, driven by sea level changes at the bay's mouth on the Atlantic coast and local lateral winds, and 2.5 days, caused by resonant oscillations driven by local longitudinal winds, [ 58 ] while another study later found that the geometry of the bay permits for a resonant period of 1.46 days.

[ 59 ] A good example of how the different Chesapeake Bay sites experience different tides can be seen in the tidal predictions published by the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)( See figure ) At the Chesapeake Bay Bridge–Tunnel (CBBT) site, which lies at the southernmost point of the bay where it meets the Atlantic Ocean near Norfolk, Virginia , and the capes of Charles and Henry , there is a distinct semi-diurnal tide throughout the lunar month, with small amplitude modulations during spring (new/full moon) vs. neap (one/three quarter moon) tidal periods. The main forcing of the CBBT tides are typical, semi-diurnal ocean tides that the East Coast of the United States experiences.

Baltimore, in the northern portion of the bay, experiences a noticeable modulation to form its mixed tidal nature during spring vs. neap tides. Spring tides, when the sun-earth-moon system forms a line, cause the largest tidal amplitudes during lunar monthly tidal variations. In contrast, neap tides, when the sun-earth-moon system forms a right angle, are muted, and in a semi-diurnal tidal system (such as that seen at the CBBT site) this can be seen as a lowest intertidal range.

Two interesting points that arise from comparing these two sites at opposite ends of the bay are their tidal characteristics – semi-diurnal tide for CBBT and mixed tide for Baltimore (due to resonance in the bay) – and the differences in amplitude (due to dissipation in the bay).

Economy [ edit ] Fishing industry [ edit ] A skipjack , part of the oystering fleet in Maryland The bay is well known for its seafood, especially blue crabs , [ 60 ] clams , and oysters . In the middle of the 20th century, the bay supported 9,000 full-time watermen, according to one account.

[ 60 ] Today, the body of water is less productive than it used to be because of runoff from urban areas (mostly on the Western Shore) and farms (especially on the Eastern Shore and in the Susquehanna River watershed), over-harvesting, and invasion of foreign species .

The plentiful oyster harvests led to the development of the skipjack (such as the Helen Virginia ), the state boat of Maryland, which is the only remaining working boat type in the United States still under sail power. Other characteristic bay-area workboats include sail-powered boats such as the log canoe , the pungy , the bugeye , and the motorized Chesapeake Bay deadrise , the state boat of Virginia.

[ 61 ] In addition to harvesting wild oysters, oyster farming is a growing industry in the bay. Oyster aquaculture is passive in that the bay provides all the natural oyster food needed, making it an environmentally friendly practice in contrast to other kinds of fish farming.

[ 62 ] Oyster farms provide jobs as well as a natural effort for filtering excess nutrients from the water in an effort to reduce the effects of eutrophication pollution (too much algae). The Chesapeake Bay Program promotes oyster restoration projects to reduce the amount of nitrogen compounds entering the bay.

[ 63 ] The bay is famous for its rockfish, a regional name for striped bass . Once on the verge of extinction, rockfish have made a significant comeback because of legislative action that put a moratorium on rockfishing, which allowed the species to re-populate. Rockfish can now be fished in strictly controlled and limited quantities.

[ 64 ] Other popular recreational fisheries in the Chesapeake Bay include shad , [ 65 ] cobia , croaker , and redfish , winter flounder , and summer flounder . Recently, non-native blue catfish have proliferated in tributaries like the James River and may be moving to other areas of the bay.

[ 66 ] A commercial fishery exists for menhaden , too oily for human consumption but instead used for bait, fish oil, and livestock feed.

[ 67 ] Tourism and recreation [ edit ] The Thomas Point Shoal Light in Maryland As of 2021, the luxury townhomes on Carr's Beach and Sparrow's Beach.

Tidal wetlands of the Chesapeake Bay The Chesapeake Bay is a main feature for tourists who visit Maryland and Virginia each year.

[ 68 ] Fishing, crabbing, swimming, boating, kayaking, [ 24 ] and sailing are extremely popular activities enjoyed on the waters of the Chesapeake Bay. As a result, tourism has a notable impact on Maryland's economy.

[ 69 ] One report suggested that Annapolis was an appealing spot for families, water sports and boating.

[ 70 ] Commentator Terry Smith spoke about the bay's beauty: The water is glassy, smooth and gorgeous, his wake white against the deep blue. That's the problem with the Chesapeake. It's so damned beautiful.

[ 52 ] One account suggested how the Chesapeake attracts people: You see them everywhere on Maryland's Eastern Shore, the weekend sailors. They are unmistakable with their deep tans, their baggy shorts, their frayed polo shirts, their Top-Siders worn without socks. Some may not even own their own boats, much less win regattas, but they are inexorably drawn to the Chesapeake Bay ... I planned to spend my days boating, eating as many Chesapeake Bay blue crabs as possible and making a little study of Eastern Shore locals. For city folk like me, they're interesting, even exotic –the weather-beaten crabbers and oystermen called "watermen," gentlemen-farmers and sharecroppers, boat builders, antiques dealers – all of whom sound like Southerners with mouthfuls of marbles when they talk. — Susan Spano, Los Angeles Times , 2008 [ 71 ] The Chesapeake Bay plays an extremely important role in Maryland, Virginia, and Pennsylvania's economies, in addition to the ecosystem. The nature-based recreation of wildlife, boating, and ecotourism are dependent on enforcement of the Clean Water Act (CWA), which regulates pollutant discharges and supports related pollution control programs. In 2006, "roughly eight million wildlife watchers spent $636 million, $960 million, and $1.4 billion in Maryland, Virginia, and Pennsylvania" according to the Chesapeake Bay Foundation .

[ 72 ] Cuisine [ edit ] In colonial times, simple cooking techniques were used to create one pot meals like ham and potato casserole , clam chowder, or stews with common ingredients like oysters, chicken or venison. When John Smith landed in Chesapeake in 1608, he wrote: "The fish were so thick, we attempted to catch them with frying pans". Common regional ingredients in the local cuisine of Chesapeake included terrapins , smoked hams, blue crab, shellfish, local fish, game meats and various species of waterfowl. Blue crab continues to be an especially popular regional specialty.

[ 73 ] Environmental issues [ edit ] Agricultural pollution in the colonial era [ edit ] European settlers around the Chesapeake Bay in the late 17th and early 18th centuries brought with them industrial agricultural techniques. Land clearance and deep plowing of farmland increased sediment and nutrient loading into the bay, which continued to increase as the area continued to develop.

[ 74 ] Pollution in the 20th century [ edit ] This section has an unclear citation style .

The references used may be made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation and footnoting .

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Dead menhaden floating in the bay in 1973 Dissolved oxygen levels (Milligrams per liter) required by various marine animals living in the Chesapeake Bay.

Dissolved oxygen levels, 2023 In the 1970s, the Chesapeake Bay was found to contain one of the planet's first identified marine dead zones , where waters were so depleted of oxygen that they were unable to support life, resulting in massive fish kills . In 2010 the bay's dead zones were estimated to kill 75,000 tons of bottom-dwelling clams and worms each year, weakening the base of the estuary's food chain and robbing the blue crab in particular of a primary food source. Crabs are sometimes observed to amass on shore to escape pockets of oxygen-poor water, a behavior known as a "crab jubilee".

Hypoxia results in part from large algal blooms , which are nourished by the runoff of residential, farm and industrial waste throughout the watershed. A 2010 report criticized Amish farmers in Pennsylvania for raising cows with inadequate controls on the manure that they generate. Farms in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania generate large quantities of manure that washes into tributaries of the bay.

[ 75 ] The pollution entering the bay has multiple components that contribute to algal blooms, principally the nutrients phosphorus and nitrogen . The algae prevents sunlight from reaching the bottom of the bay while alive and deoxygenates the bay's water when it dies and rots. Soil erosion and runoff of sediment into the bay, exacerbated by devegetation, construction and the prevalence of pavement in urban and suburban areas, also block vital sunlight. The resulting loss of aquatic vegetation has depleted the habitat for much of the bay's animal life. Beds of eelgrass , the dominant variety in the southern Chesapeake Bay, have shrunk by more than half there since the early 1970s. Overharvesting, pollution, sedimentation and disease have turned much of the bay's bottom into a muddy wasteland.

[ 76 ] The principal sources of nutrient pollution in the bay are surface runoff from farms, as well as runoff from urban and suburban areas. About half of the nutrient pollutant loads in the bay are generated by manure and poultry litter.

[ 77 ] Extensive use of lawn fertilizers [ 78 ] [ 79 ] and air pollution from motor vehicles and power plants are also significant nutrient sources.

[ 80 ] The sediment record of the bay shows a major increase in nutrient levels, suggesting limited availability of oxygen, starting between the 17th and 18th centuries.

[ 74 ] (Zimmerman & Canuel, 2002) The overloading of nutrients into the bay only continued to increase throughout the modern era. Recently deposited sediments in the bay have 2 to 3 times greater amounts of organic carbon, and 4 to 20 times greater amounts of nitrogen and phosphorus input into the bay than the pre-colonial era (Cornwell et al., 1996; Fisher et al., 2006).

The nutrient runoff from land sources causes a huge increase in available nutrients in the water. Algae present in the bay take up those nutrients and rapidly reproduce in algal blooms. As algae sink to the bottom, they are decomposed, consuming oxygen (Long et al. 2014). Seasonal stratification in the bay typically occurs between Spring and early Fall (Officer et al. 1984; Cerco & Noel 2007). More sunlight, higher temperatures, and less storms and winds during the summer cause strongly stratified water column, with a pycnocline typically 10 meters below the surface (Cerco & Noel; Seliger et al.). As oxygen is depleted from the decomposition of organic matter in bottom waters, but is not able to exchange gas with surface water due to a strong pycnocline, dissolved oxygen levels reach near zero by mid-June and can persist until October (Officer et al.). Organisms living in bottom waters may have some tolerance to hypoxia, but when events exceed their tolerance, ecologically and commercially important crabs, oysters, and mesoplankton become unhealthy and may experience die offs (Kirby & Miller; Officer; Kimmel).

One particularly harmful source of toxicity is Pfiesteria piscicida , which can affect both fish and humans.

Pfiesteria caused a small regional panic in the late 1990s when a series of large blooms started killing large numbers of fish while giving swimmers mysterious rashes; nutrient runoff from chicken farms was blamed for the growth.

[ 81 ] Sewage overflows and treatment plant upsets [ edit ] Sanitary sewers and some sewage treatment plants in the Chesapeake Bay region have occasionally contributed significant pollution to the bay. Although the region's treatment plants are designed to meet state and federal standards, the Baltimore city sewage collection system experiences sanitary sewer overflows (SSOs) during large rainstorms, which can cause excessive pollutant discharges into the bay.

[ 82 ] In 2021, 11% of nitrogen and 15% of phosphorus levels in the Chesapeake Bay were traced from sewage plants.

[ 83 ] In 2024, a heavy rainfall led to the overflow of 14 million gallons of sewage discharged by the Back River Wastewater Treatment Plant . The sewage leaked into local Baltimore waterways and the bay, leading to an amount of sewage overflow expected in one year to be released in one day.

[ 84 ] The city has also had difficulty in providing regular adequate maintenance at the Back River plant, which can lead to spills and leaks.

[ 85 ] The Patapsco and Back River plants, the two largest treatment plants in Maryland, have contributed to the growth of phragmite plants in biological cleaning tanks, which are used for cleaning returning water of nitrogen and phosphorus. In 2021 the city completed its "Headworks Project" at the Back River plant which provides additional underground storage of wastewater, to address the SSO problems, at a cost of $124 million.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] In April 2025 the Maryland Department of the Environment announced that it had awarded grants to make further improvements to the Baltimore treatment plants, and to install a trash interceptor on the Back River.

[ 88 ] Washington, D.C., similar to Baltimore and many older U.S. cities, operates a combined sewer system. The oldest portions of the sewage collection system were built in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and cover about one-third of the city's service area. During large rain storms, the collection system may be overloaded, leading to combined sewer overflows (CSOs) and discharges of untreated sewage into the Potomac River, Anacostia River and Rock Creek . To address the city's CSO problems, in 2013 DC Water began building large stormwater storage facilities as part of its " Clean Rivers " project. As of 2025 portions of the storage tunnel system are in operation. When the $2.99 billion project concludes in 2030 the system improvements, which include construction of 18 miles (29 km) of tunnels, as well as green infrastructure projects, are expected to reduce CSO discharges by 96%.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] Depletion of oysters [ edit ] While the bay's salinity is ideal for oysters and the oyster fishery was at one time the bay's most commercially viable, [ 91 ] the population has in the last fifty years been devastated. Maryland once had roughly 200,000 acres (810 km 2 ) of oyster reefs. In 2008 there were about 36,000 acres (150 km 2 ).

[ 91 ] It has been estimated that in pre-colonial times, oysters could filter the entirety of the bay in about 3.3 days; by 1988 this time had increased to 325 days.

[ 92 ] The harvest's gross value decreased 88% from 1982 to 2007.

[ 93 ] One report suggested the bay had fewer oysters in 2008 than 25 years earlier.

[ 6 ] The primary problem is overharvesting . Lax government regulations allow anyone with a license to remove oysters from state-owned beds, and although limits are set, they are not strongly enforced. The overharvesting of oysters has made it difficult for them to reproduce, which requires close proximity to one another. A second cause for the oyster depletion is that the drastic increase in human population caused a sharp increase in pollution flowing into the bay.

[ 91 ] [ needs update ] The bay's oyster industry has also suffered from two diseases: MSX and Dermo .

[ 94 ] The depletion of oysters has had a particularly harmful effect on the quality of the bay. Oysters serve as natural water filters, and their decline has further reduced the water quality of the bay. Water that was once clear for meters is now so turbid that a wader may lose sight of his feet while his knees are still dry.

[ citation needed ] Institutional responses to pollution problems [ edit ] Concern about the increasing discoveries of bay pollution problems, and of the institutional challenges of organizing bay restoration programs over a large geographical area, led to Congress directing the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to take a greater role in studying the scientific and technical aspects of the problems beginning in the late 1970s. The agency conducted its research over a seven-year period and published a major report in 1983. The report stated that the bay was an "ecosystem in decline" and cited numerous instances of declines in the populations of oysters, crabs, freshwater fish and other wildlife.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] The growing concerns about pollution also prompted the legislatures of Maryland and Virginia to establish the Chesapeake Bay Commission , an advisory body, in 1980. The commission consults with the state legislatures and executive agencies, as well as Congress, about environmental, economic and social issues related to the bay.

[ 97 ] As an initial follow-up to the EPA report, the Chesapeake Bay Commission and EPA developed the Chesapeake Bay Agreement in 1983. The agreement was signed by the governors of Maryland, Virginia and Pennsylvania; the Mayor of the District of Columbia; and the EPA Administrator. The parties agreed to: Creation of an "Executive Council" consisting of cabinet-level appointees from each state and Washington, D.C., and the EPA Regional Administrator The council's creation of an implementation committee to coordinate technical issues and development management plans for bay restoration The establishment of the Chesapeake Bay Program as a liaison office for all of the participating organizations. The program's office, based in Annapolis, is partially funded by EPA and staffed by experts from the member states, EPA and other federal agencies, and academic institutions.

[ 98 ] Concurrent with the 1983 agreement EPA began providing matching grants to the bay states for research and restoration projects.

[ 96 ] In 1987 the parties agreed to set a goal of reducing the amount of nutrients that enter the bay by 40 percent by 2000. In 1992, the bay program partners agreed to continue the 40 percent reduction goal beyond 2000 and to attack nutrients at their source: upstream, in the bay tributaries .

[ 99 ] In response to the decline of the oyster population, for decades the Maryland Department of Natural Resources (MDNR) has restricted the amount of oyster harvesting in the bay, and designated certain areas as off-limits to harvesting.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] As of 2025 MDNR continues to regulate oyster harvesting by limiting the amount of oysters harvested per day, and limiting the number of harvest days per week.

[ 102 ] Restoration efforts [ edit ] A cluster of oysters grown in a sanctuary Efforts of federal, state and local governments, working in partnership through the Chesapeake Bay Program along with the Chesapeake Bay Foundation and other nonprofit environmental groups, to restore or at least maintain the current water quality , have had mixed results. One particular obstacle to cleaning up the bay is that much of the polluting substances are discharged far upstream in states far removed from the bay: New York and Pennsylvania. Despite the State of Maryland spending over $100 million to restore the bay, conditions have continued to grow worse. In the mid-20th century, the bay supported over 6,000 oystermen. As of 2008, there were fewer than 500.

[ 103 ] [ needs update ] In June 2000, the Chesapeake Bay Program adopted Chesapeake 2000, an agreement adopted by the member jurisdictions, intended to guide restoration activities throughout the Chesapeake Bay watershed through 2010.

[ 104 ] One component of this agreement was a series of upgrades to sewage treatment plants throughout the watershed. In 2016 EPA stated that the upgrades "have resulted in steep reductions in nitrogen and phosphorus pollution... despite increases in human population and wastewater volume." [ 105 ] EPA published a series of scientific documents on water quality criteria for the bay between 2004 and 2010. The criteria documents, which describe specific pollutants and their effects on aquatic species, [ 106 ] are used by the states to develop water quality standards (WQS) for individual water bodies.

[ 107 ] Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, and the District of Columbia adopted WQS for various Chesapeake Bay tributaries in the mid-2000s, referencing the EPA criteria documents, as well as their own extensive data gathering and modeling efforts.

[ 108 ] Restoration efforts that began in the 1990s have continued into the 21st century and show potential for growth of the native oyster population.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Efforts to repopulate the bay using oyster hatcheries have been carried out by a group called the Oyster Recovery Partnership , with some success. In 2011 the group placed 6 million oysters on eight acres (32,000 m 2 ) of the Trent Hall sanctuary.

[ 109 ] Scientists from the Virginia Institute of Marine Science at the College of William & Mary claim that experimental reefs created in 2004 now house 180 million native oysters, Crassostrea virginica , which is far fewer than the billions that once existed.

[ 110 ] Regulatory actions [ edit ] Sediment sources in the Chesapeake Bay In 2009 the Chesapeake Bay Foundation (CBF) filed suit against EPA for its failure to finalize a total maximum daily load (TMDL) ruling for the bay, pursuant to the Clean Water Act. The TMDL would restrict water pollution from farms, land development, power plants and sewage treatment plants.

[ 111 ] EPA, which had been working with the states on various components of the TMDL since the 1980s (e.g. water quality criteria, standards for individual tributaries, improvements in data gathering and modeling techniques), [ 108 ] agreed to settle the lawsuit and issued its TMDL for nitrogen, phosphorus and sediment pollution on December 29, 2010. This was the largest, most complex TMDL document that EPA had issued to date.

[ 112 ] The TMDL was challenged in litigation by the agriculture and construction industries, but EPA's document was upheld by the courts.

[ 113 ] In 2020 the CBF filed another lawsuit against EPA for its failure to require the states of New York and Pennsylvania to comply with their TMDL goals and reduce pollution in the bay.

[ 114 ] CBF and EPA reached a settlement on the lawsuit in 2023. EPA agreed to increase its efforts to reduce farm and stormwater runoff pollution in Pennsylvania, including compliance and enforcement actions.

[ 115 ] [ 116 ] EPA's 2010 TMDL document requires all states in the bay watershed region to develop detailed implementation plans for pollutant reduction.

[ 117 ] The states have been developing their plans for years, in many cases building upon restoration projects that they had initiated before EPA's TMDL was finalized.

[ 118 ] These plans are long and complex, involving regular consultation with many stakeholders (i.e. governments, industry, agriculture, citizen groups). The plans include multiple milestone goals for project initiation or continued progress in water quality, through the use of pollution control upgrades (such as at sewage treatment plants) and more widespread utilization of various best management practices (BMPs). The BMPs are designed for specific sites to control pollution from nonpoint sources, principally agriculture, land development and urban runoff. For example, a farmer may install vegetated stream buffers along a stream bank to reduce runoff of sediment, nutrients and other pollutants.

[ 119 ] A land developer may install stormwater management facilities such as infiltration basins or constructed wetlands during the construction of housing or commercial buildings.

[ 120 ] In 2011 both Maryland and Virginia enacted laws to reduce the effects of lawn fertilizer use, by restricting nitrogen and phosphorus content.

[ 121 ] The Virginia law also banned deicers containing urea, nitrogen or phosphorus.

[ 122 ] Installation of stormwater management facilities is already a requirement for most new construction projects in the bay region, under various state and local government requirements. These facilities reduce erosion and keep sediment and other pollutants from entering tributaries and the bay.

[ 123 ] However retrofitting such facilities into existing developed areas is often expensive due to high land costs, or difficult to install among existing structures. As a result, the extent of such retrofit projects in the bay region has been limited.

[ 124 ] In May 2025 Governor Wes Moore signed the Chesapeake Bay Legacy Act which allots up to $900,000 per year to a new certification program for farmers who use sustainable practices that decrease runoff into the bay, establishes a water quality monitoring program to unify current testing efforts and aims to streamline oyster aquaculture leasing, among other provisions.

[ 125 ] Water quality improvements [ edit ] In 2010 bay health improved slightly in terms of the overall health of its ecosystem, earning a rating of 31 out of 100, up from a 28 rating in 2008.

[ 3 ] [ needs update ] An estimate in 2006 from a "blue ribbon panel" said cleanup costs would be $15 billion.

[ 52 ] Compounding the problem is that 100,000 new residents move to the area each year.

[ 52 ] A 2008 Washington Post report suggested that government administrators had overstated progress on cleanup efforts as a way to "preserve the flow of federal and state money to the project." [ 126 ] In January 2011, there were reports that millions of fish had died, but officials suggested it was probably the result of extremely cold weather.

[ 127 ] The health of the Chesapeake Bay improved in 2015, marking three years of gains over a four-year period, according to a 2016 report by the University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science (UMCES).

[ 9 ] In 2021 scientists at the UMCES reported slight improvements in bay water quality compared to levels measured in 2020. The greatest improvements were seen in the lower bay areas, while the Patapsco River and Back River (Maryland) regions showed minimal improvement. Positive indicators included decreased nitrogen levels and increases in dissolved oxygen.

[ 10 ] The CBF reported that as of 2022 pollution control efforts in the bay have continued to show mixed results, with no improvement in levels of toxic contaminants, nitrogen and dissolved oxygen, and a small decrease in water clarity compared to 2020 levels (measured as Secchi depth ). Oyster and rockfish populations in the bay have improved, but blue crab populations have continued to decline.

[ 128 ] In the 2023 annual report the University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science rated the Chesapeake Bay's overall health a C-plus or 55%, its highest score since 2002.

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] Climate change [ edit ] Population density and elevation above sea level around the Chesapeake Bay. The Chesapeake Bay is especially vulnerable to sea level rise .

The Chesapeake Bay is already experiencing the effects of climate change . Key among these is sea level rise: water levels in the bay have already risen one foot, with a predicted increase of 1.3 to 5.2 feet in the next 100 years. This has related environmental effects, causing changes in marine ecosystems, destruction of coastal marshes and wetlands, and intrusion of saltwater into otherwise brackish parts of the bay. Sea level rise also compounds the effects of extreme weather on the bay, making coastal flooding as part of the events more extreme and increasing runoff from upstream in the watershed.

[ 11 ] [ 131 ] With increases in flooding events and sea level rise, the 11,600 miles of coastline, which include significant historic buildings and modern infrastructure, will be at risk of erosion. Islands such as Holland Island have disappeared due to the rising sea levels.

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] Beyond sea level rise, other changes in the marine ecosystem due to climate change, such as ocean acidification and temperature increases, will put increasing pressure on marine life. Projected effects include decreasing dissolved oxygen, more acidic waters making it harder for shellfish to maintain shells and changing the seasonal cycles important for breeding and other lifecycle activities.

[ 11 ] Seasonal shifts and warmer temperatures also mean that there is a greater likelihood of pathogens to stay active in the ecosystem.

[ 131 ] Climate change may worsen hypoxia . However, compared to the current effects of nutrient pollution and algal blooms , climate change's effect to increase hypoxia is relatively small. Warmer waters can hold less dissolved oxygen. Therefore, as the bay warms, there may be a longer duration of hypoxia each summer season in the deep central channel of the bay. However, comparing the effects of climate change and nutrient pollution, reduced nutrient pollution would increase oxygen concentrations more dramatically than if climate change were to level out.

[ 134 ] Climate change adaptation and mitigation programs in Maryland and Virginia often include significant programs to address the communities in the Chesapeake Bay.

[ 135 ] Key infrastructure in Virginia, such as the port of Norfolk , [ 135 ] and major agriculture and fishing industries of the Eastern Shore of Maryland will be directly impacted by the changes in the bay.

[ 136 ] Scientific research [ edit ] Maryland Department of Natural Resources survey vessel tied up to a private dock with a continuous monitoring station.

Chesapeake Bay Interpretive Buoy System smart buoy on the Patapsco River .

Researchers work in the Chesapeake Bay to collect information about water quality, plant and animal abundances, shoreline erosion, tides, waves, and harmful algal blooms. For example, the Virginia Institute of Marine Science monitors the abundance of submerged aquatic vegetation in the shallow areas of the Chesapeake Bay each summer.

[ 137 ] Many organizations run continuous monitoring programs. Monitoring programs set out instruments at fixed stations on buoys , moorings, and docks throughout the bay to record things like temperature, salinity , chlorophyll-a concentration, dissolved oxygen , and turbidity over time.

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] [ 140 ] Organizations actively collecting data in the Chesapeake Bay include, but are not limited to: Chesapeake Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve in Maryland Chesapeake Bay National Estuarine Research Reserve in Virginia Chesapeake Bay Program Hampton Roads Sanitation District Maryland Department of Natural Resources Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Ocean Biology group GSFC Applied Sciences group (Water Resources and Human Health areas) NOAA Chesapeake Bay Office Old Dominion University 's Earth and Ocean Sciences Department Smithsonian Environmental Research Center United States Geological Survey University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science Virginia Department of Environmental Quality Virginia Department of Health Virginia Institute of Marine Science Virginia Marine Resources Commission Underwater archaeology [ edit ] In 1988, the Maryland Maritime Archeology Program (MMAP) was established to manage and explore various underwater archaeological. This was in response to the National Abandoned Shipwreck Act passed in 1987, which gave ownership of historically significant shipwrecks to those states with proper management programs.

[ 141 ] Location and research processes [ edit ] The Chesapeake Bay watershed has been heavily impacted by natural forces such as erosion, tides, and a history of hurricanes and other storms. Along with environmental factors, the bay has been negatively impacted by humans since being settled in the 17th century, bringing with them problems like pollution, construction, destruction of the environment, and currently poultry farms. All of these circumstances have made it increasingly difficult for the MMAP to identify potential underwater archaeological sites. As sea levels rise and historically significant areas are sunk and covered in sediment, the MMAP relies on various pieces of equipment to locate these man-made anomalies but also ensure that the material being examined is kept intact. Using marine magnetometers (detects iron/absent space), side-scan sonar (detects objects on sea floor), along with precise global positioning systems, Langley and the MMAP have been much more successful in locating submerged archaeological sites. After locating the site, Langley and her team have a strict process in order to preserve the site and its contents, allowing more accurate and thorough research to be conducted. The remains of nearly every site have been submerged in saltwater for sometimes centuries, the integrity of shipwrecks and other materials are fragile and careful precaution must be used when working with them. Taking photos and videos, creating maps, and constructing models are all a part of the process of preserving remains. Susan Langley notes herself, "If you have only ten percent of a ship’s hull, you can reconstruct the ship. Construction techniques can tell us about the people who built the vessels, artifacts can tell us about the people who profited from the ship’s trade, and eco-facts—evidence of insect infestation and organic remains, such as seeds, that are preserved in anaerobic, muddy environments—can tell us about the climate and season when a ship sank." [ 142 ] Still, the MMAP makes it a point to publish their data and information once a site is officially identified; however, the details of the location are left out to sway would-be looters, who have plagued marine archaeologists for decades.

Significant sites [ edit ] Altogether there are more than 1,800 ship and boat wrecks that scatter the bottom of the Chesapeake Bay and its surrounding waterways.

[ 143 ] Dozens of precolonial era canoes and artifacts have been extracted from the bay, helping to portray a better picture of the lives of Native Americans (e.g., Powhatan , Pamunkey , Nansemond ) In 1974, scallop fishermen dredged up the skull of a prehistoric mastodon , which through carbon dating was found to be 22,000 years old. Along with the skull, a carved blade was also discovered in the same area. Unable to accurately carbon date the stone tool, archaeologists looked at similar styles of blade carving in order to gauge when it was made. The technique was similar to the Solutrean tools that were crafted in Europe between 22,000 and 17,000 years ago and it was noted that the stone tool must be at least 14,000 years old. The Solutrean hypothesis challenges the previous theory regarding the first inhabitants of North America, whereas it is commonly accepted amongst anthropologists that the Clovis people were the first to settle the region somewhere around 13,000 years ago. There is some controversy surrounding these findings; many anthropologists have disputed this, claiming that the environment and setting make properly identifying the origins of these artifacts nearly impossible.

[ 144 ] The Chesapeake Bay Flotilla , which was constructed using shallow barges and ships to counter British naval attacks during the War of 1812 . After holding strong for some months, the British eventually defeated the flotilla and dozens of these vessels were burnt and sunk. Starting in 1978, there were numerous expeditions launched in hopes of successfully discovering what was left of the Chesapeake Bay Flotilla. Since then, hundreds of artifacts and remains have been extracted from the submerged ships such as weapons, personal items, and many other objects. Underwater archaeologists have also been successful in constructing accurate models and maps of the wreckage amongst the sea floor.

[ 145 ] In October 1774, the British merchant brig Peggy Stewart arrived at the port of Annapolis loaded with tea disguised as linens and garments. The tea was hidden by the ship's crew to avoid conflict with local colonists as the recently imposed tea tax had created hostility and uncertainty in the colonies. The crew of Peggy Stewart informed the colonists of the new taxes for the purchased tea. The colonists refused to pay the tax and after a few days of public meetings, the colonists decided to burn Peggy Stewart and the contents of it. The brig was burnt to the waterline in what became known as the 'Annapolis Tea Party' and has since become an important site for underwater archaeologists in the Chesapeake Bay.

[ 146 ] In 1949, after the Nazi's defeat in World War 2, the United States seized a German U-1105 built with sonar-evading rubber sheathing for study purposes. It was sunk the same year in the Potomac River off of the Chesapeake Bay following a high explosives test hosted by the U.S. Navy and has since been a popular site for underwater archaeologists.

[ 147 ] Maryland has controlled the majority of underwater archaeology research around the Chesapeake Bay; however, Virginia's Department of Historic Resources has had a State Underwater Archaeologist since the 1970s. In 1982, the Virginia Department of Historic Resources along with the first State Underwater Archaeologist, John Broadwater, led an expedition to explore and research a sunken fleet of Revolution-era battleships. In September 1781, during the Revolutionary War, the British scuttled more than a dozen ships in the York River , near the mouth of the Chesapeake Bay. Under the ultimate command of Lord Cornwallis , a group of British ships was pushed back towards the rivers of the Chesapeake, and to avoid them from falling into French and Spanish hands, Cornwallis began ordering them to be scuttled with the hopes of stalling the incoming Franco-American forces. Cornwallis was eventually forced to surrender on October 19 and the ships along with its contents were at the bottom of the York River. One of the British ships, Betsy , has been explored more than any other and over 5,000 relics were removed from Betsy on their original expedition in 1982, including weapons, personal objects, and some valuable metals. Broadwater and his team were awarded a 20-page article in the magazine National Geographic for their findings. Virginia has recently been granted funding for further research of these sunken vessels and expeditions are currently underway with the goal to fully explore the scuttled ships. Unfortunately, following the publicity of these sunken ships, many divers have taken it upon themselves to explore the wreckage for 'treasure'.

[ 148 ] Publications [ edit ] There are several magazines and publications that cover topics directly related to the Chesapeake Bay and life and tourism within the bay region: The Bay Journal provides environmental news for the Chesapeake Bay watershed region.

[ 149 ] Bay Weekly is the Chesapeake Bay region's independent newspaper.

[ 150 ] The Capital , a newspaper based in Annapolis, reports about news pertaining to the Western Shore of Maryland and the Annapolis area.

[ 151 ] Chesapeake Bay Magazine and PropTalk focus on powerboating in the bay, [ 152 ] [ 153 ] and SpinSheet focuses on sailing.

[ 154 ] What's Up Magazine is a free monthly publication with special issues focused on Annapolis and the Eastern Shore.

[ 155 ] Cultural depictions [ edit ] In literature [ edit ] Beautiful Swimmers: Watermen, Crabs and the Chesapeake Bay (1976), a Pulitzer Prize -winning non-fiction book by William W. Warner about the Chesapeake Bay, blue crabs, and watermen.

Chesapeake (1978), a novel by author James A. Michener .

Chesapeake Requiem: A Year with the Watermen of Vanishing Tangier Island (2018), by Earl Swift , a New York Times bestselling nonfiction book about the crabbing community of Chesapeake Bay.

[ 156 ] Dicey's Song (1983) and the rest of Cynthia Voigt 's Tillerman series are set in Crisfield on the Chesapeake Bay.* John Barth wrote two novels featuring Chesapeake Bay Jacob Have I Loved (1980) by Katherine Paterson , winner of the 1981 Newbery Medal . This is a novel about the relationship between two sisters in a waterman family who grow up on an island in the bay.

Patriot Games (1987), in which protagonist Jack Ryan lives on the fictional Peregrine Cliffs overlooking the Chesapeake Bay, and Without Remorse (1993), in which protagonist John Kelly (later known as John Clark when he goes to work for the CIA ), lives on a boat and an island in the bay, both by Tom Clancy .

Red Kayak (2004) by Priscilla Cummings portrays class conflict between waterman people and wealthy newcomers.

Sabbatical: A Romance (1982) centered on a yacht race through the bay, and The Tidewater Tales (1987) detailed a married couple telling stories to each other as they cruise the bay, both novels by John Barth .

The Oyster Wars of Chesapeake Bay (1997) by John Wennersten, on the Oyster Wars in the decades following the Civil War.

[ 157 ] In film [ edit ] The Bay , a 2012 found footage -style eco-horror movie about a pandemic due to deadly pollution from chicken factory farm run-off and mutant isopods and aquatic parasites able to infect humans.

Expedition Chesapeake, A Journey of Discovery , a 2019 film starring Jeff Corwin created by The Whitaker Center for Science and the Arts .

[ 158 ] [ 159 ] [ 160 ] In TV [ edit ] In Chesapeake Shores , the O'Brien family lives in a small town in the bay, not far from Baltimore.

In MeatEater by Steven Rinella , Season 8, Episode 3–4 "Ghosts of the Chesapeake" features the Chesapeake Bay eastern shore.

[ 161 ] Other media [ edit ] Singer and songwriter Tom Wisner recorded several albums, often about the Chesapeake Bay.

The Boston Globe wrote that Wisner "always tried to capture the voice of the water and the sky, of the rocks and the trees, of the fish and the birds, of the gods of nature he believed still watched over it all." [ 162 ] He was known as the "Bard of the Chesapeake Bay." [ 162 ] The Atlanta -based band Starbuck referenced the Chesapeake Bay in their debut single, “ Moonlight Feels Right ”, which reached the No. 3 position on the Billboard Hot 100 singles charts in 1976.

[ 163 ] The Chesapeake Bay is referenced in the hit musical Hamilton , in the song " Yorktown (The World Turned Upside Down) ." It describes the famous Battle of Yorktown , the last battle in the Revolutionary War . When describing the US army's plan for attack, Hamilton sings: "When we finally drive the British away, Lafayette is there waiting in Chesapeake Bay!" See also [ edit ] Geography portal Water portal Chesapeake Bay Interpretive Buoy System Chesapeake Bay Retriever Chesapeake Climate Action Network Chesepian Chessie (sea monster) Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation Great Ireland List of islands in Maryland (with the islands in the bay) National Estuarine Research Reserve Old Bay Seasoning Notes [ edit ] ^ Residence time ranges from 110 to 264 days with an average of 180 days based on circulation in the years 1980 to 2012.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ Du, Jiabi; Shen, Jian (2016).

"Water residence time in Chesapeake Bay for 1980–2012" .

Journal of Marine Systems .

164 . Elsevier BV: 101– 111.

Bibcode : 2016JMS...164..101D .

doi : 10.1016/j.jmarsys.2016.08.011 .

ISSN 0924-7963 .

^ "Chesapeake Bay Estuarine Complex" .

Ramsar Sites Information Service . Retrieved 25 April 2018 .

^ a b c Kaufman, Leslie (December 28, 2010).

"More Blue Crabs, but Chesapeake Bay Is Still at Risk, Report Says" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on April 12, 2011 . Retrieved 2011-04-20 .

^ a b "Fact Sheet 102–98 – The Chesapeake Bay: Geologic Product of Rising Sea Level" . U. S. Geological Survey (USGS). 1998-11-18 . Retrieved 2008-01-13 .

^ "Chesapeake Bay, VA/MD (M130) Bathymetric Digital ElevationModel (30 meter resolution) Derived From Source Hydrographic Survey Soundings Collected by NOAA" .

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . 2013-05-17. Archived from the original on 2015-04-11 . Retrieved 2015-01-21 .

^ a b Fahrenthold, David A. (2008-12-28).

"Way of Life Slipping Away Along Chesapeake's Edge" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 2011-04-20 .

^ a b "Signs of a Chesapeake Bay oyster comeback" .

The Washington Post . 19 November 2013.

^ a b Kuebler, Brian (2015-02-01).

"Maryland oysters making a comeback" . United States: ABC News. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015.

^ a b Cox, Jeremy (2016-05-18).

"Report: Chesapeake Bay at healthiest level in years" .

Delmarva Now . Gannett.

^ a b Lai, Stephanie (2021-06-22).

"The Chesapeake Bay's water quality is inching in the right direction, scientists say" .

The Washington Post .

^ a b c "Climate Change" . Annapolis, MD: Chesapeake Bay Program. Archived from the original on 2020-12-18 . Retrieved 2020-12-16 .

^ Also shown as Chisupioc (by John Smith ) and Chisapeack , in Algonquian che means 'big' or 'great', sepi means river, and the oc or ok ending indicated something (a village, in this case) 'at' that feature.

Sepi is also found in another placename of Algonquian origin, Mississippi . The name was soon transferred by the English from the big river and the village at that site to the entire bay.

Stewart, George (1945).

Names on the Land: A Historical Account of Place-Naming in the United States . New York: Random House. p.

23 .

^ Farenthold, David A. (2006-12-12).

"A Dead Indian Language Is Brought Back to Life" .

The Washington Post . p. A1 . Retrieved 2007-03-19 .

^ "The Spanish at Ajacan" .

virginiaplaces.org . Retrieved 2025-07-15 .

^ "FAQ" . Scientists Cliffs community. Archived from the original on January 7, 2009 . Retrieved 2008-05-08 .

^ "Geography" . Chesapeake Bay Foundation. Archived from the original on October 14, 2007 . Retrieved 2008-04-21 .

Other sources give values of 25 feet (e.g.

"Charting the Chesapeake 1590–1990" . Maryland State Archives. Archived from the original on 2021-02-15 . Retrieved 2008-04-21 .

) or 30 feet (9.1 m) deep ( "Healthy Chesapeake Waterways" (PDF) . University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-06-26 . Retrieved 2008-04-21 .

) ^ "Chesapeake Bay Program: A Watershed Partnership: Facts & Figures" . Chesapeake Bay Program Office. 2010-05-04. Archived from the original on 2010-12-04 . Retrieved 2010-10-29 .

^ "Figure 1. Map of the Chesapeake Bay and salinity zones. Salinity zones..." ResearchGate .

^ "The Big Freeze" .

Time . 1977-01-31. Archived from the original on March 8, 2008 . Retrieved 2007-03-19 .

^ "Facts & Figures" . Chesapeake Bay Program . Retrieved 18 August 2021 .

^ Zhang, Qian; Brady, Damien C.; Boynton, Walter R.; Ball, William P. (2015). "Long-term trends of nutrients and sediment from the nontidal Chesapeake watershed: An assessment of progress by river and season".

Journal of the American Water Resources Association .

51 (6): 1534– 1555.

Bibcode : 2015JAWRA..51.1534Z .

doi : 10.1111/1752-1688.12327 .

S2CID 129432081 .

^ Sprague, Lori A.; Langland, Michael J.; Yochum, Steven E.; Edwards, Robert E.; Blomquist, Joel D.; Phillips, Scott W.; Shenk, Gary W.; Preston, Stephen D. (2000).

Factors Affecting Nutrient Trends in Major Rivers of the Chesapeake Bay Watershed (Report). USGS. Water Resources Investigations Report 00-4218. Archived from the original on 2021-10-23 . Retrieved 2021-08-18 .

^ A Comprehensive List of Chesapeake Bay Basin Species . Chesapeake Bay Program. 2007 . Retrieved 11 October 2015 .

^ a b Elton Dunn, Demand Media (2011-04-20).

"Chesapeake Bay Kayak Tours" .

USA Today . Archived from the original on 2023-06-01 . Retrieved 2011-04-20 .

^ a b Blankenship, Karl (September 1995).

"Endangered Species Around the Chesapeake" .

Chesapeake Bay Journal .

5 (6). Archived from the original on 2011-06-23 . Retrieved 2011-04-02 .

^ "Atlantic Sturgeon" . Chesapeake Bay Program. Archived from the original on November 8, 2014 . Retrieved December 21, 2014 .

^ The Chesapeake Bay News. 2010.

Are there sharks in the Chesapeake Bay?

. Retrieved on December 21. 2014 ^ Shinkman, D.P.

"Sharks in the Chesapeake: More likely than thought" . Washington, D.C.: WTOP-FM Radio. Archived from the original on 2014-12-20.

^ a b c Lippson J.A.; Lippson L.R. (2006), Life in the Chesapeake Bay , Johns Hopkins University Press, pp.

275– 281, ISBN 9780801883385 , retrieved 2014-12-21 [ dead link ] ^ a b The National Aquarium.

Sharks Among Us: Chesapeake Bay Species Archived 2014-10-24 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved on December 22. 2014 ^ "Bottlenose Dolphin" . Chesapeake Bay Program. Archived from the original on December 21, 2014 . Retrieved December 21, 2014 .

^ O'Brien, D. (1992).

"Whale in Chesapeake Provides Reminders About Nature" .

The Baltimore Sun . Retrieved December 21, 2014 .

^ The Southside Sentinel. 2010.

Whale sighted in the Chesapeake Bay Archived 2014-12-20 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved on December 21. 2014 ^ National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . 2010.

NOAA: Ship Speed Restrictions to Protect Endangered North Atlantic Right Whales . Retrieved on December 22. 2014 ^ "Four rare Chesapeake Bay "oddities" to learn about this leap year" . Chesapeake Bay Program. February 27, 2012 . Retrieved December 21, 2014 .

^ Kilar, Steve; Wheeler, Timothy B. (July 15, 2011).

"Chessie the manatee is back in the Bay" .

The Baltimore Sun .

Archived from the original on September 23, 2016 . Retrieved January 29, 2017 .

^ Beck, Cathy; Pawlitz, Rachel; Bloomer, Jen (September 2011).

"Famous Manatee "Chessie" Sighted in Chesapeake Bay After Long Absence" .

Sound Waves . USGS. Archived from the original on November 4, 2017 . Retrieved January 29, 2017 .

^ Hamilton, Hannah; Puckett, Catherine (September 2006).

"Manatee Traveler in Northeastern Waters Not Chessie" .

Sound Waves . USGS. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017 . Retrieved January 29, 2017 .

^ Hedgpeth, Dana (July 16, 2015).

"Manatee spotted in tributary off Chesapeake Bay near Waldorf, Md" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved January 29, 2017 .

^ "Chesapeake Bay Program to release new data on underwater grasses in bay, rivers" .

The Washington Post . Associated Press. April 20, 2011 . Retrieved 2011-04-20 .

[ dead link ] ^ Domes S., Lewis M., Moran R., Nyman D.. "Chesapeake Bay Wetlands". Emporia State University. May 2009. Retrieved 2010-03-14.

^ "Wetlands" .

Chesapeake Bay . Retrieved 2024-04-09 .

^ Arnett, Earl; Brugger, Robert J.; Papenfuse, Edward C. (3 May 1999).

Maryland: A New Guide to the Old Line State . JHU Press. p. 128.

ISBN 978-0-8018-5980-9 .

^ "History & Culture—Chesapeake Bay" . National Park Service . Retrieved 2021-03-07 .

^ Tayac, Gabrielle (2006).

We Have A Story To Tell: Native Peoples of the Chesapeake Region; A Guide for Teachers . National Museum of the American Indian, Smithsonian Institution . Retrieved March 6, 2021 .

^ orientation of map depicts west at top ^ Woodard, Buck (2006-11-22).

A Study of Virginia Indians and Jamestown: The First Century . Colonial National Historical Park, National Park Service. p. Appendix A . Retrieved 9 April 2016 .

^ a b Parramore, Thomas (2000).

Norfolk: The First Four Centuries . University of Virginia Press. pp.

1– 16.

ISBN 9780813919881 . Retrieved 2011-11-05 .

^ Grymes, Charles A.

"Spanish in the Chesapeake" . Retrieved 2010-07-08 .

^ Weber, David (1994).

The Spanish Frontier in North America . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. pp.

36– 37.

^ "Smith's Maps" .

Captain John Smith Chesapeake National Historical Trail . National Park Service. Archived from the original on 29 May 2012 . Retrieved 12 June 2012 .

^ a b c d Terry Smith (commentator), Michele Norris (host) (April 13, 2006).

"The Chesapeake Bay, Scenic and Unhealthy" . NPR . Retrieved 2011-04-20 .

^ "H.R. 5466 [109th] Captain John Smith Chesapeake National Historic Trail Designation Act" . GovTrack.us. Archived from the original on November 3, 2011 . Retrieved December 16, 2007 .

^ Morris, Kendra Bailey (November 21, 2007).

"Consider the Chesapeake Bay Oyster" . NPR . Retrieved April 20, 2011 .

^ Patel, Sonal (2022-11-01).

"A Half-Century of Reliability: Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant" .

POWER Magazine . Retrieved 2024-02-24 .

^ "CBBT Facts" . Archived from the original on 2015-04-28 . Retrieved 2015-05-21 .

^ Wollf, J.D. (April 20, 2011).

"Fishing at the Chesapeake Bay Bridge Tunnel" .

USA Today . Archived from the original on July 23, 2011 . Retrieved April 20, 2011 .

^ Wang, D-P. (1979). "Subtidal Sea Level Variations in the Chesapeake Bay and Relations to Atmospheric Forcing".

Journal of Physical Oceanography .

9 (2): 413– 421.

Bibcode : 1979JPO.....9..413W .

doi : 10.1175/1520-0485(1979)009<0413:SSLVIT>2.0.CO;2 .

^ Wang, D-P.; Elliott, A.J. (1978). "Non-Tidal Variability in the Chesapeake Bay and Potomac River: Evidence for Non-Local Forcing".

Journal of Physical Oceanography .

8 (2): 225– 232.

Bibcode : 1978JPO.....8..225W .

doi : 10.1175/1520-0485(1978)008<0225:NTVITC>2.0.CO;2 .

^ a b Grimes, William (April 30, 2008).

"William W. Warner, Chesapeake Bay Author, Dies at 88" .

The New York Times . Retrieved April 20, 2011 .

^ "Chesapeake Bay Workboats" . Chesapeake Bay Gateway Network. Archived from the original on 2007-04-07 . Retrieved 2007-03-19 .

^ Hall, S. J.; Delaporte, A.; Phillips, M. J.; Beveridge, M.; O'Keefe, M. (2011).

Blue Frontiers: Managing the Environmental Costs of Aquaculture (PDF) . The WorldFish Center, Penang, Malaysia.

^ "Oyster Restoration Projected to Provide Significant Boost to Bay Grasses While Removing Nitrogen Pollution from the Bay" . Annapolis, MD: Maryland Department of Natural Resources (MDNR). Archived from the original on 2006-09-03.

^ "Striped Bass Regulations for 2022" (PDF) . MDNR. 2022 . Retrieved 2023-06-24 .

^ "Shad" .

Chesapeake Bay Magazine . 5 April 2018 . Retrieved 21 October 2021 .

^ Nepal, Vaskar; Fabrizio, Mary C. (5 November 2019). Patterson, Heather M. (ed.).

"High salinity tolerance of invasive blue catfish suggests potential for further range expansion in the Chesapeake Bay region" .

PLOS ONE .

14 (11). Public Library of Science (PLoS): e0224770.

Bibcode : 2019PLoSO..1424770N .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0224770 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 6830772 .

PMID 31689331 .

^ "Atlantic Menhaden" . Chesapeake Bay Program . Retrieved 21 October 2021 .

^ "Maryland Sea Grant" .

Maryland Sea Grant . Retrieved 2018-09-12 .

^ Harvey M. Katz (2009-08-27).

"Chesapeake Bay Executive Order | Targeting Resources to Better Protect the Chesapeake Bay is Aim of U.S. Department of Agriculture's 202(b) Report" . Executiveorder.chesapeakebay.net. Archived from the original on 2014-03-05 . Retrieved 2014-02-28 .

^ Glusker, Anne (October 9, 2005).

"A Treasure Chest of Fun on Chesapeake Bay" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2011-04-20 .

^ Spano, Susan (June 23, 2002).

"Peak Season on Chesapeake Bay" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 2011-04-20 .

^ Grisham, Carrie.

"The Economic Importance of the Bay" . Chesapeake Bay Foundation . Retrieved 1 November 2020 .

^ Shields, John.

Chesapeake Bay Cooking . Johns Hopkins University Press.

^ a b Cooper, S.R.; Brush, G.S. (1991). "Long-Term History of Chesapeake Bay Anoxia".

Science .

254 (5034): 992– 996.

doi : 10.1126/science.254.5034.992 .

^ Bhanoo, Sindya N. (2010-06-08).

"Amish Farming Draws Rare Government Scrutiny" .

The New York Times .

^ "Bad Water and the Decline of Blue Crabs in the Chesapeake Bay" . Chesapeake Bay Foundation. December 2008. Archived from the original on 2010-06-17 . Retrieved 2009-01-21 .

^ "Agricultural Runoff" .

Threats to the Bay . Chesapeake Bay Program . Retrieved 2022-12-24 .

^ Pimental, Alicia (2011-03-29).

"Report details effects of pollution from lawn fertilizer on Chesapeake Bay" . Chesapeake Bay Program.

^ Fears, Darryl (2011-03-28).

"Lawns are adding to Chesapeake Bay pollution, study says" .

The Washington Post .

^ "Air Pollution" .

Threats to the Bay . Chesapeake Bay Program . Retrieved 2022-12-24 .

^ Fahrenthold, David A. (2008-09-12).

"Md. Gets Tough on Chicken Farmers" .

The Washington Post .

^ "Sanitary Sewer Overflows" . Baltimore City Health Department. 9 April 2015 . Retrieved 2025-03-03 .

^ "Baltimore's Sewage Along With Farm Run-Off and Other Pollutants Are Killing Chesapeake Bay" . Washington, D.C.: Pulitzer Center. 2023-05-04.

^ WBFF FOX45 Baltimore (2024-01-18).

14 million gallons of sewage overflow spills into Baltimore waterways . Retrieved 2025-03-03 – via YouTube.

{{ cite AV media }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Azhar, Aman (November 7, 2023).

"Baltimore City, Maryland Department of the Environment Settle Lawsuits Over City-Operated Sewage Treatment Plants" .

Inside Climate News . Retrieved December 25, 2024 .

^ "The Headworks Project" . Baltimore City Department of Public Works. 11 August 2017 . Retrieved 2025-03-03 .

^ "Baltimore's Wastewater Treatment Plants" . Chesapeake Bay Foundation . Retrieved 2025-03-03 .

^ "Maryland Department of the Environment Announces $1.7 Million in Community Projects, Progress on Pollution Reduction at Back River and Patapsco River Wastewater Treatment Plants" . Baltimore, MD: Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE). 2025-04-15. Press release.

^ "DC Water's Clean Rivers Project" . District of Columbia Water and Sewer Authority (DC Water) . Retrieved 2025-03-03 .

^ "DC Water Awards $819 Million Contract for Potomac River Tunnel" . DC Water. 2023-10-06.

^ a b c "Oysters: Gem of the Ocean" .

The Economist . December 8, 2008.

^ "Oyster Reefs: Ecological importance" . US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). Archived from the original on October 3, 2008 . Retrieved 2007-11-06 .

^ "Estimating Net Present Value in the Northern Chesapeake Bay Oyster Fishery" (PDF) . NOAA Chesapeake Bay Office. 2008-11-07. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 29, 2009 . Retrieved 2009-09-08 .

^ "Research – Shellfish Diseases" . Gloucester Point, VA: Virginia Institute of Marine Science. 2007-03-16. Archived from the original on February 11, 2007 . Retrieved 2008-02-22 .

^ Chesapeake Bay Program: Findings and Recommendations (Report). Philadelphia, PA: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). September 1983. EPA 903/R-83/008.

^ a b Franklin, Ben A. (1983-09-27).

"Chesapeake Bay Study Citing Pollution Threats" .

The New York Times . p. A24.

^ "History" .

About Us . Annapolis, MD: Chesapeake Bay Commission . Retrieved 2022-01-15 .

^ "1983 Chesapeake Bay Agreement" (PDF) . Annapolis, MD: Chesapeake Bay Program (CBP). 1983.

^ "1987 Chesapeake Bay Agreement" (PDF) . CBP. 1987.

^ Vesey, Tom (1987-09-20).

"Maryland Oystermen Face Troubled Waters" .

The Washington Post .

^ Turque, Bill (2016-08-01).

"Oyster population in protected areas of Chesapeake shows signs of renewal" .

The Washington Post .

^ "2025-2026 Commercial Oyster Rules — Effective 7/4/2025" (PDF) . MDNR. 2025-06-30. Public notice.

^ Urbina, Ian (2008-11-29).

"In Maryland, Focus on Poultry Industry Pollution" .

The New York Times . p. A14.

^ CBP (2000).

"Chesapeake 2000." ^ "Chesapeake Bay Progress: Wastewater Pollution Reduction Leads the Way" (PDF) . Philadelphia, PA: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). June 2016.

^ "Water Quality Criteria" . EPA. 2021-11-17.

^ "What are Water Quality Standards?" . EPA. 2021-02-26.

^ a b "Section 3. Chesapeake Bay Water Quality Standards" . Chesapeake Bay Total Maximum Daily Load for Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Sediment (Report). EPA. 2010-12-29.

^ Program turns pork into oysters Archived 2011-04-12 at the Wayback Machine , Jesse Yeatman, South Maryland Newspapers Online, August 12, 2009.

^ Fountain, Henry (August 3, 2009).

"Oysters Are on the Rebound in the Chesapeake Bay" .

The New York Times .

^ Fahrenthold, David A. (2009-01-06).

"Bay Advocates Sue EPA" .

The Washington Post .

^ Chesapeake Bay TMDL Executive Summary (PDF) (Report). EPA. 2010-12-29.

^ Fears, Darryl (2016-03-01).

"Supreme Court ends challenge to the Chesapeake Bay cleanup plan" .

The Washington Post .

^ Finley, Ben (2020-09-10).

"Lawsuit: EPA fails to enforce Chesapeake Bay pollution caps" .

The Washington Post . Associated Press.

^ "EPA Activities Pursuant to 2023 Settlement Agreement" . EPA. 2024-09-12.

^ "Settlement Reached in Suit Over Pennsylvania Pollution" . Chesapeake Bay Foundation. 2023-07-12. Press release.

^ "Chesapeake Bay Milestones" .

Chesapeake Bay TMDL . EPA. 2024-05-17.

^ For example, see "Maryland's Two-Year Milestones", documents issued biennially outlining the state's projects and goals for pollution reduction. The state intends to initiate "all necessary pollution reduction actions" by 2025.

"Maryland's Two-Year Milestones" . Baltimore, MD: Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE). Archived from the original on 2022-01-20 . Retrieved 2024-11-04 .

^ "Riparian Forest Buffer; Conservation Practice Job Sheet" (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service. 1997. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2021-12-29 . Retrieved 2021-12-29 .

^ National Research Council, Committee on Reducing Stormwater Discharge Contributions to Water Pollution (2009).

"5. Stormwater Management Approaches" .

Urban Stormwater Management in the United States . Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.

ISBN 978-0-309-12540-6 .

^ Pimental, Alicia (2011-05-23).

"Maryland passes law to reduce pollution from lawn fertilizer" . Chesapeake Bay Program.

^ Pimental, Alicia (2011-08-18).

"Va. governor signs bill banning phosphorus lawn fertilizer" . Chesapeake Bay Program.

^ For example, see the Maryland Stormwater Design Manual, Volumes I and II (Report). MDE. May 2009.

^ Constructing Stormwater Retrofits in Maryland: Challenges & Recommendations for Cost Estimation (Report). Ellicott City, MD: Center for Watershed Protection. January 2019.

^ "Moore signs Chesapeake Bay bill as federal cuts loom large" .

Maryland Matters . 14 May 2025 . Retrieved 14 May 2025 .

^ Fahrenthold, David A. (2008-12-27).

"Failing the Chesapeake Bay—Broken Promises on the Bay" .

The Washington Post .

^ "Two Million Dead Fish Appear in Chesapeake Bay" . CBS News. 2011-01-05.

Archived from the original on 2011-04-25 . Retrieved 2011-04-20 .

^ State of the Bay 2022 (PDF) (Report). Chesapeake Bay Foundation. 2022.

^ "Report card gives Chesapeake Bay a C+, its best grade in 21 years" .

Maryland Matters . 12 July 2024.

^ "Bay Health" .

Eco Report Card . Retrieved 17 July 2024 .

^ a b "Climate change already affecting Chesapeake Bay region" . Cambridge, MD: University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science. 2017-04-04 . Retrieved 2020-12-16 .

^ "Climate Change and the Chesapeake Bay" . Arlington, VA: The Conservation Fund. Archived from the original on 2020-11-29 . Retrieved 2020-12-16 .

^ "Portrait of an Island Part I: What used to be home" . Chesapeake Bay Program. 20 June 2018 . Retrieved 2022-12-25 .

^ Irby, Isaac D.; Friedrichs, Marjorie A. M.; Da, Fei; Hinson, Kyle E. (4 May 2018).

"The competing impacts of climate change and nutrient reductions on dissolved oxygen in Chesapeake Bay" .

Biogeosciences .

15 (9). Copernicus GmbH: 2649– 2668.

Bibcode : 2018BGeo...15.2649I .

doi : 10.5194/bg-15-2649-2018 .

ISSN 1726-4189 .

^ a b "After decades of waterfront living, climate change is forcing communities to plan their retreat from the coasts" .

The Washington Post .

^ "What Climate Change Means for Maryland" (PDF) . EPA. August 2016.

^ Orth, Robert J.; Dennison, William C.; Lefcheck, Jonathan S.; Gurbisz, Cassie; Hannam, Michael; Keisman, Jennifer; Landry, J. Brooke; Moore, Kenneth A.; Murphy, Rebecca R.; Patrick, Christopher J.; Testa, Jeremy; Weller, Donald E.; Wilcox, David J. (14 June 2017).

"Submersed Aquatic Vegetation in Chesapeake Bay: Sentinel Species in a Changing World" .

BioScience .

67 (8). Oxford University Press (OUP): 698– 712.

doi : 10.1093/biosci/bix058 .

ISSN 0006-3568 .

^ "Chesapeake Bay Interpretive Buoy System" .

Home . 23 December 2021 . Retrieved 3 March 2022 .

^ "Water Quality Monitoring" .

Virginia Institute of Marine Science . Retrieved 3 March 2022 .

^ "Eyes on the Bay: Your home for Maryland tidal water quality data, downloads and visualizations" . MDNR. 22 February 2022.

^ "Maryland Maritime Archaeology Program" . Crownsville, MD: Maryland Historical Trust . Retrieved February 25, 2025 .

^ Lewis, Nancy Breslau (2006).

"Underwater Archaeology: History From the Deep" .

Inside Annapolis . Backyard Publications, LLC . Retrieved 2020-11-16 .

^ "Shipwrecks" . Chesapeake Bay Program . Retrieved 2020-11-16 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Ghose, Tia (2014-08-11).

"Fisherman Pulls Up Beastly Evidence of Early Americans" .

Live Science . New York: Future US, Inc.

^ "Chesapeake Flotilla" .

Naval History and Heritage Command . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Navy . Retrieved 2020-11-16 .

^ "Digging into Underwater Archaeology" . Washington, D.C.: Archaeology in the Community. 2016-07-27. Archived from the original on 2016-11-13 . Retrieved 2020-11-16 .

^ "State Submerged Resources: Maryland" . Archeology Program. Washington, D.C.: National Park Service. Archived from the original on August 30, 2010 . Retrieved 2020-11-16 .

^ Kimberlin, Joanne (2019-05-18).

"Revolutionary War shipwrecks near Yorktown getting their first good look in years" .

The Virginian-Pilot . Norfolk, VA.

^ "Bay Journal: Independent environmental news for the Chesapeake region" .

Bay Journal . Retrieved 23 February 2022 .

^ "Bay Weekly -" .

Bay Weekly .

^ "Top Stories" .

The Capital Newspaper .

Capital Gazette Communications . Archived from the original on February 8, 2009 . Retrieved April 22, 2011 .

^ "Chesapeake Bay Magazine" . Retrieved April 22, 2011 .

^ "PropTalk" . PropTalk Media LLC. Archived from the original on May 1, 2011 . Retrieved April 22, 2011 .

^ "SpinSheet" . SpinSheet Publishing Co . Retrieved April 22, 2011 .

^ "Annapolis Magazine – Eastern Shore Magazine – West County Magazine" .

What's Up? Media . 21 February 2022 . Retrieved 23 February 2022 .

^ Mayer, Petra (27 August 2018).

" 'Chesapeake Requiem' Chronicles Life on an Endangered Island" . NPR . Retrieved 2021-07-03 .

^ Wennersten, J. (2007).

The Oyster Wars of Chesapeake Bay . Eastern Branch Press.

ISBN 978-0-615-18250-6 . Retrieved 23 February 2022 .

^ "Expedition Chesapeake" .

Expedition Chesapeake . Archived from the original on 23 January 2022 . Retrieved 23 February 2022 .

^ Center, Whitaker; Arts (21 July 2021).

"Expedition Chesapeake" . Whitaker Center. Archived from the original on 23 February 2022 . Retrieved 23 February 2022 .

^ "Expedition Chesapeake Official Trailer" . 23 February 2022 . Retrieved 23 February 2022 – via YouTube.

^ Callaghan, Ryan (31 October 2019).

"Season 8, Episode 3 Gear: Ghosts of the Chesapeake" .

MeatEater Hunting . Retrieved 23 February 2022 .

^ a b Johnson, Jenna (April 9, 2010).

"Tom Wisner; Chesapeake Bay served as bard's muse; at 79" .

The Boston Globe . The Boston Globe Media Partners, LLC . Retrieved 20 April 2011 .

^ Stephen Thomas Erlewine .

"Moonlight Feels Right - Starbuck | Songs, Reviews, Credits, Awards" . AllMusic . Retrieved February 10, 2014 .

Cerco, C. F., Noel, M. R. (2007). Can oyster restoration reverse cultural eutrophication in Chesapeake Bay? Estuaries and Coasts, 30(2): 331–343.

Cornwell, J. C., Conley, D. J., Owens, M., Stevenson, J. C. (1996). A sediment chronology of the eutrophication of Chesapeake Bay. Estuaries, 19(2B): 486–499.

Fisher, T. R., Hagy III, J. D., Boynton, W. R., Williams, M. R. (2006). Cultural eutrophication of the Choptank and Patuxent estuaries of Chesapeake Bay. Limnology and Oceanography, 51(1, part 2): 435–447.

Kimmel, D, G., Boynton, W. R., Roman, M. R. (2012). Long-term decline in calanoid copepod Acartia tonsa in central Chesapeake Bay, USA: An indirect effect of eutrophication? Estuarine, Coastal, and Shelf Science, 101: 76–85.

Kirby, M. X., Miller, H. M. (2005). Response of a benthic suspension feeder (Crassostrea virginica Gmelin) to three centuries of anthropogenic eutrophication in Chesapeake Bay. Estuarine, Coastal, and Shelf Science, 62:679–689.

Long, W. C., Seitz, R. D., Brylawski, B. J., Lipicus, R. N. (2014). Individual, population, and ecosystem effects of hypoxia on a dominant benthic bivalve in Chesapeake Bay. Ecological Monographs, 84(2): 303–327.

Officer, C. B., Biggs, R. B., Taft, J. L., Cronin, L. E., Tyler, M. A., Boynton, W. R. (1984). Chesapeake Bay anoxia: origin, development, and significance. Science, 223(4631): 22–27.

Seliger, H. H., Boggs, J. A., Biggley, W. H. (1985).  Catastrophic anoxia in the Chesapeake Bay in 1984. Science, 228(4695): 70–73.

Zimmerman, A. R., Canuel, E. A. (2002). Sediment geochemical records of eutrophication in the mesohaline Chesapekae Bay. Limnology and Oceanography, 47(4): 1084–1093.

Further reading [ edit ] Cleaves, E.T. et al. (2006).

Quaternary geologic map of the Chesapeake Bay 4º x 6º quadrangle, United States [Miscellaneous Investigations Series; Map I-1420 (NJ-18)]. Reston, VA: U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey.

Crawford, S.  2012.  Terrapin Bay Fishing.  Chesapeake Bay Tides and Currents Meyers, Debra and Perrealt, Melanie (eds.) (2014).

Order and Civility in the Early Modern Chesapeake.

Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.

Phillips, S.W., ed. (2007).

Synthesis of U.S. Geological Survey science for the Chesapeake Bay ecosystem and implications for environmental management [U.S. Geological Survey Circular 1316]. Reston, VA: U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Geological Survey.

Thomas, William G., III.

"The Chesapeake Bay." Southern Spaces , April 16, 2004.

William W. Warner, Beautiful Swimmers , about the history, ecology and anthropology of the Chesapeake Bay, published 1976 Sturdivant, S. K., Diaz, R., Llanso, R., Dauer, D. (2014). Relationship between hypoxia and macrobenthic production in Chesapeake Bay. Estuaries and Coasts. 37(5). DOI:10.1007/s12237-013-9763-4.

External links [ edit ] Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Chesapeake Bay .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Chesapeake Bay .

Chesapeake Bay History & Culture, U.S. National Park Service Chesapeake Bay Program University of Maryland Center for Environmental Science Research and science application activities emphasizing Chesapeake Bay and its watershed.

v t e State of Maryland Annapolis (capital) Topics Index Cities Government Congressional delegations Congressional maps History Mass media Newspapers Radio TV People Symbols Tourist attractions Society Abortion African Americans Agriculture Climate change Culture Crime Demographics Economy Education Gun laws Homelessness LGBT rights Politics Sports Regions Allegheny Mountains Atlantic coastal plain Blue Ridge Chesapeake Cumberland Valley Delaware Valley Delmarva Peninsula Eastern Shore Piedmont Ridge and Valley Southern Maryland Tidewater Washington–Baltimore combined statistical area Baltimore metropolitan area Washington metropolitan area Western Maryland Cities Aberdeen Annapolis Baltimore Bowie Brunswick Cambridge College Park Cumberland Frederick Gaithersburg Greenbelt Hagerstown Havre de Grace Laurel Pocomoke City Rockville Salisbury Takoma Park Westminster Towns Bel Air Denton Easton Elkton Leonardtown Ocean City Port Deposit Upper Marlboro CDPs Arbutus Arnold Aspen Hill Baltimore Highlands Bethesda Camp Springs Carney Catonsville Chillum Clinton Cockeysville-Hunt Valley Colesville Columbia Crofton Dundalk Edgewood Eldersburg Elkridge Ellicott City Essex Fairland Ferndale Fort Washington Germantown Glen Burnie Green Haven Hillcrest Heights Landover Langley Park Lanham Lansdowne Lochearn Lutherville Middle River Milford Mill Montgomery Village Odenton Olney Owings Mills Oxon Hill Parkville Pasadena Perry Hall Pikesville Potomac Randallstown Redland Reisterstown Rosedale St. Charles Severn Severna Park Silver Spring South Gate Suitland Timonium Towson Urbana Waldorf Wheaton-Glenmont White Oak Woodlawn Counties Allegany Anne Arundel Baltimore Calvert Caroline Carroll Cecil Charles Dorchester Frederick Garrett Harford Howard Kent Montgomery Prince George's Queen Anne's St. Mary's Somerset Talbot Washington Wicomico Worcester Maryland portal v t e Commonwealth of Virginia Richmond (capital) Topics Outline Administrative divisions Climate Colony Congressional districts Delegations Senators Representatives Environment Furniture Government Historic houses Historic Landmarks History First Families Slavery Homelessness Housing Law Gun laws in Virginia LGBT rights Music People Rights Rivers Scouting Slogan Sports teams State Fair State parks Symbols Tourist attractions Transportation Tribes Culture Abortion Crime Demographics Economy Education Colleges and universities Media Newspapers Radio TV Politics Regions Allegheny Mountains Atlantic Coastal Plain Blue Ridge Chesapeake Bay Cumberland Mountains Delmarva Peninsula Eastern Shore Hampton Roads Middle Peninsula Northern Neck Northern Virginia Piedmont Ridge-and-Valley Appalachians Shenandoah Valley South Hampton Roads Southside Southwest Virginia Tennessee Valley Tidewater Tri-Cities Virginia Peninsula Western Virginia Metro areas Blacksburg-Christiansburg Bluefield Bristol Charlottesville Danville Harrisonburg Lynchburg Martinsville Richmond Roanoke Staunton-Waynesboro Virginia Beach-Norfolk-Newport News Washington-Arlington-Alexandria Winchester Counties Accomack Albemarle Alleghany Amelia Amherst Appomattox Arlington Augusta Bath Bedford Bland Botetourt Brunswick Buchanan Buckingham Campbell Caroline Carroll Charles City Charlotte Chesterfield Clarke Craig Culpeper Cumberland Dickenson Dinwiddie Essex Fairfax Fauquier Floyd Fluvanna Franklin Frederick Giles Gloucester Goochland Grayson Greene Greensville Halifax Hanover Henrico Henry Highland Isle of Wight James City King and Queen King George King William Lancaster Lee Loudoun Louisa Lunenburg Madison Mathews Mecklenburg Middlesex Montgomery Nelson New Kent Northampton Northumberland Nottoway Orange Page Patrick Pittsylvania Powhatan Prince Edward Prince George Prince William Pulaski Rappahannock Richmond Roanoke Rockbridge Rockingham Russell Scott Shenandoah Smyth Southampton Spotsylvania Stafford Surry Sussex Tazewell Warren Washington Westmoreland Wise Wythe York Independent cities Alexandria Bristol Buena Vista Charlottesville Chesapeake Colonial Heights Covington Danville Emporia Fairfax Falls Church Franklin Fredericksburg Galax Hampton Harrisonburg Hopewell Lexington Lynchburg Manassas Manassas Park Martinsville Newport News Norfolk Norton Petersburg Poquoson Portsmouth Radford Richmond Roanoke Salem Staunton Suffolk Virginia Beach Waynesboro Williamsburg Winchester Virginia portal v t e Waters of Maryland Bays/estuaries Assawoman Chesapeake Chincoteague Curtis Bay Eastern Fishing Herring Isle of Wight Mallows Newport Pocomoke Sinepuxent Tangier Rivers Anacostia Annemessex (Big) Annemessex (Little) Back Bird Blackwater Blackwater (Little) Bohemia Bush Casselman Chester Chicamacomico Choptank Choptank (Little) Christina Corsica Elk Front Gunpowder Hawlings Jones Falls Magothy Magothy (Little) Manokin Middle Miles Monocacy Monocacy (Little) Nanticoke North North East Patapsco Patuxent Pocomoke Port Tobacco Potomac Rhode St. Martin St. Marys Sassafras Savage Severn South Susquehanna Transquaking Tred Avon Warwick West Wicomico (Potomac) Wicomico Wye Wye East Youghiogheny Creeks, runs, streams Antietam Alloway Arundel Cove Ballenger Bear (Patapsco) Bear (Sideling Hill) Bear (Youghiogheny) Beaverdam Bennett Big Hunting Big Pipe Bodkin Bonnie Branch Bread and Cheese Broad (Choptank) Broad (Potomac) Broad (Susquehanna) Broad Run Budds Bush Cabin John Carroll Catoctin Catoctin (Little) Chicamuxen Collington Branch Conococheague Conococheague (Little) Conowingo Cuckold Curtis Deep Run Deer Dividing Dorsey Run Double Pipe Dry Seneca Dueling Dundee Edge Creek Evitts Fifteenmile Fishing Flintstone Frog Mortar Furnace Georges Great Seneca Green Branch Greys Gwynns Falls Harris Henson Herbert Run Herring Run Honga Hunting (Little) Indian (Anacostia) Indian (Patuxent) Israel Laurel Run Licking Linganore Little Falls Little Falls Branch Little Pipe Little Seneca Lyons Main Marley Marsh Marshyhope Mattawoman Meekins Middle Mill Branch Minnehaha Branch Moores Run Muddy Branch Nanjemoy Nassawango Northeast Branch Anacostia River Northwest Branch Anacostia River Octoraro Owens Otter Point Oxon Paint Branch Parsons Piney Piscataway Plumtree Branch Pomonkey Principio Rock (Potomac) Rock Run Rockburn Branch Roland Run Romney St. Leonard Saltpeter Sams Sellman Seneca (Middle) Seneca (Potomac) Sideling Hill Slaughter Sligo Soapstone Branch Stony Stony Run Swanson Tenmile Creek Thoms Cove Toms Tonoloway Town (Patuxent) Town (Potomac) Town (Tred Avon) Towson Run Trappe Tuckahoe Turville Tuscarora (Monocacy) Tuscarora (Potomac) Tuscarora (Little) Watts Branch Western Run Wills Winters Run Lakes Allen Pond Artemesia Buckel's Bog Centennial Deep Creek Elkhorn Bernard Frank Jennings Randolph Kittamaqundi Little Seneca Needwood Quarry Lake Roland Parker Pond Schumaker Pond Woodward Pond Youghiogheny Reservoirs Dalecarlia Habeeb Liberty Loch Raven Piney Run Prettyboy Rocky Gorge Triadelphia v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category v t e Ramsar sites in the United States Ash Meadows National Wildlife Refuge Bad River Slough Bitter Lake National Wildlife Refuge Bolinas Lagoon Cache River National Wildlife Refuge Caddo Lake Cape May National Wildlife Refuge Catahoula Lake Chesapeake Bay Cheyenne Bottoms Congaree National Park Connecticut River Corkscrew Swamp Sanctuary Cypress Creek National Wildlife Refuge Delaware Bay Dixon Waterfowl Refuge Elkhorn Slough Emiquon National Wildlife Refuge Everglades National Park Edwin B. Forsythe National Wildlife Refuge Francis Beidler Forest Grasslands Wildlife Management Area Heron Pond – Little Black Slough Nature Preserve Horicon Marsh Humbug Marsh Izembek National Wildlife Refuge Kakagon Sloughs Kawainui Marsh Laguna de Santa Rosa Missisquoi National Wildlife Refuge Niagara River Corridor Okefenokee National Wildlife Refuge Olentangy River Wetland Research Park Palmyra Atoll Pelican Island National Wildlife Refuge Quivira National Wildlife Refuge San Francisco Bay Sand Lake National Wildlife Refuge Tijuana River National Estuarine Research Reserve Tomales Bay Upper Mississippi River National Wildlife and Fish Refuge White River National Wildlife Refuge Authority control databases International VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Croatia Israel Other IdRef NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐5zd4p
Cached time: 20250817044108
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.217 seconds
Real time usage: 2.566 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13097/1000000
Revision size: 128292/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 469343/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 35537/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 24/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 614763/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.413/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19941839/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2131.709      1 -total
 54.04% 1152.042      2 Template:Reflist
 21.15%  450.911     89 Template:Cite_web
 18.73%  399.370      3 Template:Infobox
 15.20%  324.054      1 Template:Infobox_body_of_water
  9.69%  206.655     37 Template:Cite_news
  7.66%  163.290      9 Template:Cite_journal
  5.01%  106.901      2 Template:US_state_navigation_box
  4.65%   99.223      1 Template:Maryland
  4.45%   94.796      1 Template:Native_name_checker Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:59473:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044108 and revision id 1306144172. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chesapeake_Bay&oldid=1306144172 " Categories : Chesapeake Bay Chesapeake Bay watershed Environment of the Mid-Atlantic states Estuaries of Maryland Estuaries of Virginia Intracoastal Waterway Marine ecoregions Ramsar sites in the United States Estuaries of the United States Eutrophication Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with text in Algonquian languages All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2018 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with dead external links from June 2021 CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using infobox body of water without alt Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map alt Articles using infobox body of water without image bathymetry All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 Wikipedia references cleanup from July 2025 All articles needing references cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from July 2025 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Wikipedia articles in need of updating from August 2025 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from December 2021 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 05:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chesapeake Bay 56 languages Add topic

