Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Work 3 Bibliography 4 See also 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz 25 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano Қазақша Кыргызча مصرى 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Polish philosopher and logician (1890-1963) This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( September 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Polish .

(December 2023) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Polish Wikipedia article at [[:pl:Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|pl|Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz Born ( 1890-12-12 ) 12 December 1890 Tarnopol , Austrian Galicia , Austria-Hungary (now Ternopil , Ukraine ) Died 12 April 1963 (1963-04-12) (aged 72) Warsaw , Poland Alma mater University of Lwów Known for Categorial grammar Scientific career Fields Logician Notable students Mojżesz Presburger Signature Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz ( Polish: [ajduˈkʲɛvʲit͡ʂ] ; 12 December 1890 – 12 April 1963) was a Polish philosopher and logician , a prominent figure in the Lwów–Warsaw school of logic .

He originated many novel ideas in semantics . Among these was categorial grammar , a highly flexible framework for the analysis of natural language syntax and (indirectly) semantics that remains a major influence on work in formal linguistics .

Ajdukiewicz's fields of research were model theory and the philosophy of science .

Biography [ edit ] Ajdukiewicz was born in 1890 in Tarnopol in Galicia , which at that time, due to Partitions of Poland , was annexed by Austria-Hungary ( The Austrian Partition ). His father was a senior civil servant. Ajdukiewicz studied at the University of Lwów , and lectured there, as well as in Warsaw and in Poznań. He received his PhD degree with the thesis on Kant 's philosophy of space. He was Rector of the University of Poznań from 1948 to 1952. He was one of the founders of the journal Studia Logica in its current incarnation, editing it from 1953 to his death.

Work [ edit ] In his early epistemological system, which he called Radical Conventionalism, Ajdukiewicz analyzed any language as a set of expressions or sentences, with inferential rules of meaning that specify the relation of one expression to another, or to external data. There are three kinds of rules: Axiomatic, Deductive, and Empirical. Following the rules, one can map all knowable sentences of a language. However, some languages' vocabularies can produce disconnected sentences, which are only partly mapped by the meaning rules . Therefore, when one uses a language, even scientific one, a conceptual apparatus , an untranslatable set of meanings, is needed too, and with it a choice of the problems to be settled. For this reason the theory is a form of conventionalism , and it is radical because even simple experiential reports are exposed to these language-wide considerations. Ajdukiewicz discarded this theory as the 1930s progressed.

Bibliography [ edit ] 1921 "Z metodologii nauk dedukcyjnych" 1923 "Główne kierunki filozofii" 1928 "Główne zasady metodologii nauk i logiki formalnej" 1931 "O znaczeniu wyrażeń" 1934 "Logiczne podstawy nauczania" 1938 "Propedeutyka filozofii" 1948 "Epistemologia i semantyka" 1949 "Zagadnienia i kierunki filozofii" 1952 "Zarys logiki" 1964 "Zagadnienia empiryzmu a koncepcja znaczenia" 1965 "Logika pragmatyczna" 1960–1965 "Język i poznanie. Wybór pism" 1966- Selected articles in "Logiczna Teoria Nauki" ( Logical Theory of Science) Ed. T.Pawłowski, Printed PWN, Warszawa.

Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz: Pragmatic Logic , Dordrecht , Reidel, 1974 Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz: Problems and Theories of Philosophy , Cambridge, Cambridge University Press , 1975 Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz: The Scientific World-Perspective and Other essays 1931–1963 , Dordrecht , Reidel, 1977 See also [ edit ] History of philosophy in Poland List of Poles Logology (science of science) External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz .

Polish Philosophy Page: Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz Lwów–Warsaw school of logic , at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Sections on Categorial Grammar and Radical Conventionalism.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Croatia Korea Poland Israel Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kazimierz_Ajdukiewicz&oldid=1278097159 " Categories : 1890 births 1963 deaths Writers from Ternopil 20th-century Polish philosophers Philosophers of science Polish logicians Members of the Polish Academy of Sciences University of Lviv alumni Academic staff of the University of Lviv Academic staff of the University of Warsaw Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from September 2019 All articles lacking in-text citations Biography articles needing translation from Polish Wikipedia Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages with Polish IPA This page was last edited on 28 February 2025, at 13:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kazimierz Ajdukiewicz 25 languages Add topic

