Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Book series 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Henry Holt and Company 10 languages العربية Español فارسی Français Italiano Polski Português Română Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American book-publishing company Henry Holt and Company Parent company Georg Von Holtzbrinck Publishing Group Founded 1866 ; 159 years ago ( 1866 ) Founder Henry Holt and Frederick Leypoldt Country of origin United States Headquarters location Equitable Building , 120 Broadway , New York City , New York , U.S.

Distribution Macmillan (US) Melia Publishing Services (UK) [ 1 ] Publication types Books (Hardcover and Paperback) Nonfiction topics Various Imprints Henry Holt Books for Young Readers, Francis Coady, John Macrae, Metropolitan, Times , Godwin, Christy Ottaviano Official website www .henryholtandco .com Henry Holt and Company is an American book-publishing company based in New York City . One of the oldest publishers in the United States, it was founded in 1866 by Henry Holt and Frederick Leypoldt .

[ 2 ] The company publishes in the fields of American and international fiction , biography , history , politics , science , psychology , health , and children's literature . In the U.S., it operates under Macmillan Publishers .

History [ edit ] Logo of Henry Holt and Company as it appeared in the book In the Dwellings of the Wilderness by Charlotte Bryson Taylor in 1904 The company publishes under several imprints, including Metropolitan Books, Times Books , Owl Books, and Picador . It also publishes under the name of Holt Paperbacks.

[ 3 ] The company has published works by renowned authors Erich Fromm , Paul Auster , Hilary Mantel , Robert Frost , Hermann Hesse , Norman Mailer , Herta Müller , Thomas Pynchon , Robert Louis Stevenson , Ivan Turgenev , and Noam Chomsky .

From 1951 to 1985, Holt published the magazine Field & Stream .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Holt merged with Rinehart & Company of New York and the John C. Winston Company of Philadelphia in 1960 to become Holt, Rinehart and Winston .

The Wall Street Journal reported on March 1 that Holt stockholders had approved the merger, last of the three approvals. "Henry Holt is the surviving concern, but will be known as Holt, Rinehart, Winston, Inc." [ 6 ] CBS purchased the company in 1967, but in 1985, the group split, and the retail publishing arm, along with the Holt name, was sold to the Georg von Holtzbrinck Publishing Group based in Stuttgart , which has retained Holt as a subsidiary publishing under its original name and in the US it is part of Macmillan Publishers .

The educational publishing arm, which retained the Holt, Rinehart and Winston name, was sold to Harcourt .

Book series [ edit ] Amateur Studies American Science Series [ 7 ] The American Presidents Series [ 8 ] English Readings [ 9 ] Holt Spoken Language Series Leisure Hour Series [ 10 ] Leisure Moment Series Library of Foreign Poetry The Makers of the Nineteenth Century (General editor: Basil Williams ) See also [ edit ] Holt McDougal Books in the United States References [ edit ] ^ "Melia Publishing – List of client publishers" . Retrieved 2017-12-27 .

^ Nancy Lewis Tuten.

The Robert Frost Encyclopedia .

pg.149 ^ "Henry Holt" .

US Macmillan . Retrieved 2019-04-19 .

^ Opalic, Zoran (2011-10-28).

"Hunting, fishing…" .

iNewsDesign . Archived from the original on 2019-04-19 . Retrieved 2019-04-19 .

^ Roberts, Sam (2015-10-28).

"John Backe Dies at 83; Put CBS Back Atop Prime Time" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2019-04-19 .

^ "Henry Holt Merger".

The Wall Street Journal . March 1, 1960. Page 12.

^ American Science Series (Henry Holt and Company) - Book Series List , publishinghistory.com. Retrieved 19 February 2019.

^ "The American Presidents Series" .

Macmillan . Retrieved 2022-04-09 .

^ English Readings , seriesofseries.com. Retrieved 31 January 2019.

^ The Leisure Hour Series (Henry Holt and Company) - Book Series List , publishinghistory.com. Retrieved 20 February 2019.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Henry Holt and Company at Wikimedia Commons Official website Henry Holt and Company at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database Henry Holt and Company at Library of Congress , with 73 library catalog records v t e Holtzbrinck Publishing Group Holtzbrinck DIE ZEIT Verlagsgruppe Die Zeit (50%) Zeit Wissen Spotlight Verlag Digital & Services Digital Science Altmetric Gutefrage.net Macmillan United States Trade Farrar, Straus and Giroux First Second Henry Holt Macmillan Audio Picador Quick and Dirty Tips St. Martin's Press Tor/Forge Tor.com Macmillan Learning Bedford-St. Martin's W. H. Freeman Worth Publishers i>clicker Hayden-McNeil Children's FSG Books for Young Readers Feiwel and Friends Holt Books for Young Readers Kingfisher Roaring Brook Priddy Square Fish United Kingdom Macmillan Pan Picador Tor Macmillan Children's Books Campbell Young Picador Sidgwick & Jackson Mantle Macmillan Audio Books Macmillan New Writing The Collector's Library Germany S. Fischer Rowohlt Kiepenheuer & Witsch (85%) Droemer Knaur (50%) Springer Nature (53%) Apress BioMed Central Birkhäuser Macmillan Education Nature Research Journals Palgrave Macmillan Journals Scientific American Springer Journals Springer Gabler Springer Medizin Ärzte-Zeitung Springer Vieweg v t e Books Production Binding Covers dust jackets Design Editing Illustration Illuminated manuscripts Printing edition history incunabula instant book limited edition Publishing advance copy hardcover paperback Size Typesetting Volume (bibliography) Collection (publishing) Book series Consumption Awards Bestsellers list Bibliography Bibliomania ( tsundoku ) Bibliophilia Bibliotherapy Bookmarks Bookselling blurbs book towns history used Censorship Clubs Collecting Digitizing Bookworm (insect) Furniture bookcases bookends Library Print culture Reading literacy Reviews By country Brazil China France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Pakistan Spain United Kingdom United States Other Genres non-fiction novel imaginary miniature pop-up textbook Grimoire Formats audiobooks Ebooks Folio Coffee table book Related Banned books Book burning incidents Nazi Book curses Book packaging Book swapping Book tour Conservation and restoration Dog ears History of books scroll codex Intellectual property ISBN Outline Preservation The Philobiblon World Book Day World Book Capital Outline Category Portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Henry_Holt_and_Company&oldid=1304547095 " Categories : 1866 establishments in New York (state) Academic publishing companies Book publishing companies based in New York (state) Holtzbrinck Publishing Group Publishing companies based in New York City Publishing companies established in 1866 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 17:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Henry Holt and Company 10 languages Add topic

