Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Central ideas 2 History 3 Criticism 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 6.1 Primary sources 6.2 Secondary sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Ordinary language philosophy 24 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Latviešu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia View that philosophical problems are distortions of natural language For the philosophy of language, see Philosophy of language .

Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e Ordinary language philosophy ( OLP [ 1 ] ) is a philosophical methodology that sees traditional philosophical problems as rooted in misunderstandings philosophers develop by distorting or forgetting how words are ordinarily used to convey meaning in non-philosophical contexts . "Such 'philosophical' uses of language, on this view, create the very philosophical problems they are employed to solve." [ 2 ] This approach typically involves eschewing philosophical "theories" in favor of close attention to the details of the use of everyday "ordinary" language. Its earliest forms are associated with the later work of Ludwig Wittgenstein and a number of mid-20th century philosophers who can be split into two main groups, neither of which could be described as an organized "school".

[ 3 ] In its earlier stages, contemporaries of Wittgenstein at Cambridge University such as Norman Malcolm , Alice Ambrose , Friedrich Waismann , Oets Kolk Bouwsma and Morris Lazerowitz started to develop ideas recognisable as ordinary language philosophy. These ideas were further elaborated from 1945 onwards through the work of some Oxford University philosophers led initially by Gilbert Ryle , then followed by J. L. Austin and Paul Grice . This Oxford group also included H. L. A. Hart , Geoffrey Warnock , J. O. Urmson and P. F. Strawson . The close association between ordinary language philosophy and these later thinkers has led to it sometimes being called "Oxford philosophy". The posthumous publication of Wittgenstein's Philosophical Investigations in 1953 further solidified the notion of ordinary language philosophy. Philosophers a generation after Austin who made use of the method of ordinary language philosophy include Antony Flew , Stanley Cavell , John Searle and Oswald Hanfling . Today, Alice Crary , Nancy Bauer , Sandra Laugier , as well as literary theorists Toril Moi , Rita Felski , and Shoshana Felman have adopted the teachings of Cavell in particular, generating a resurgence of interest in ordinary language philosophy.

Central ideas [ edit ] This section is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( December 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The later Wittgenstein held that the meanings of words reside in their ordinary uses and that this is why philosophers trip over words taken in abstraction . From this came the idea that philosophy had gotten into trouble by trying to use words outside of the context of their use in ordinary language. For example, "understanding" is what you mean when you say "I understand". "Knowledge" is what you mean when you say "I know". The point is that you already know what "understanding" or "knowledge" are, at least implicitly. Philosophers are ill-advised to construct new definitions of these terms, because this is necessarily a re definition, and the argument may unravel into self-referential nonsense. Rather, philosophers must explore the definitions these terms already have, without forcing convenient redefinitions onto them.

The controversy really begins when ordinary language philosophers apply the same leveling tendency to questions such as What is Truth?

or What is Consciousness?

Philosophers in this school would insist that we cannot assume that (for example) truth 'is' a 'thing' (in the same sense that tables and chairs are 'things') that the word 'truth' represents. Instead, we must look at the differing ways in which the words 'truth' and 'conscious' actually function in ordinary language. We may well discover, after investigation, that there is no single entity to which the word 'truth' corresponds, something Wittgenstein attempts to get across via his concept of a 'family resemblance' (cf.

Philosophical Investigations ). Therefore, ordinary language philosophers tend to be anti- essentialist .

History [ edit ] Early analytic philosophy had a less positive view of ordinary language.

Bertrand Russell tended to dismiss language as being of little philosophical significance, and ordinary language as just too confused to help solve metaphysical and epistemological problems.

Gottlob Frege , the Vienna Circle (especially Rudolf Carnap ), the young Wittgenstein, and W. V. O. Quine all attempted to improve upon it, in particular using the resources of modern logic . In his Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus Wittgenstein more or less agreed with Russell that language ought to be reformulated so as to be unambiguous, so as to accurately represent the world, so that we can better deal with philosophical questions.

By contrast, Wittgenstein later described his task as bringing "words back from their metaphysical to their everyday use".

[ 4 ] The sea change brought on by his unpublished work in the 1930s centered largely on the idea that there is nothing wrong with ordinary language as it stands, and that many traditional philosophical problems are only illusions brought on by misunderstandings about language and related subjects. The former idea led to rejecting the approaches of earlier analytic philosophy—arguably, of any earlier philosophy—and the latter led to replacing them with careful attention to language in its normal use, in order to "dissolve" the appearance of philosophical problems, rather than attempt to solve them. At its inception, ordinary language philosophy (also called linguistic philosophy ) was taken as either an extension of or as an alternative to analytic philosophy.

Ordinary language analysis largely flourished and developed at Oxford University in the 1940s, under Austin and Ryle, and was quite widespread for a time before declining rapidly in popularity in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Despite this decline, Stanley Cavell and John Searle (both students of Austin) published seminal texts which draw significantly from the ordinary language tradition in 1969.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Cavell more explicitly adopted the banner of ordinary language philosophy and inspired a generation of philosophers and literary theorists to reexamine the merits of this philosophical approach, all the while distancing himself from the limitations of traditional analytic philosophy. This caused a relatively recent resurgence of interest in this methodology, with some updates particularly due to the literature and teachings of Cavell, has also become a mainstay of what might be called postanalytic philosophy . Seeking to avoid the increasingly metaphysical and abstruse language found in mainstream analytic philosophy , posthumanism , and post-structuralism , a number of feminist philosophers have adopted the methods of ordinary language philosophy.

[ 7 ] Many of these philosophers were students or colleagues of Cavell.

There are some affinities between contemporary ordinary language philosophy and philosophical pragmatism (or neopragmatism ). Interestingly, the pragmatist philosopher F. C. S. Schiller might be seen as a forerunner to ordinary language philosophy, especially in his noted publication Riddles of the Sphinx .

[ 8 ] Seneca the Younger described the activities of other philosophers in ways that reflect some of the same concerns as ordinary language philosophers.

[ 9 ] For these men, too, have left to us, not positive discoveries, but problems whose solution is still to be sought.  They might perhaps have discovered the essentials, had they not sought the superfluous also.  They lost much time in quibbling about words and in sophistical argumentation; all that sort of thing exercises the wit to no purpose.  We tie knots and bind up words in double meanings, and then try to untie them. Have we leisure enough for this?  Do we already know how to live, or die?  We should rather proceed with our whole souls towards the point where it is our duty to take heed lest things, as well as words, deceive us.  Why, pray, do you discriminate between similar words, when nobody is ever deceived by them except during the discussion?  It is things that lead us astray: it is between things that you must discriminate.

Criticism [ edit ] One of the most ardent critics of ordinary language philosophy was a student at Oxford (and later a philosopher himself), Ernest Gellner , who said: [ 10 ] "[A]t that time the orthodoxy best described as linguistic philosophy, inspired by Wittgenstein, was crystallizing and seemed to me totally and utterly misguided. Wittgenstein's basic idea was that there is no general solution to issues other than the custom of the community. Communities are ultimate. He didn't put it this way, but that was what it amounted to. And this doesn't make sense in a world in which communities are not stable and are not clearly isolated from each other. Nevertheless, Wittgenstein managed to sell this idea, and it was enthusiastically adopted as an unquestionable revelation. It is very hard nowadays for people to understand what the atmosphere was like then. This was the Revelation. It wasn't doubted. But it was quite obvious to me it was wrong. It was obvious to me the moment I came across it, although initially, if your entire environment, and all the bright people in it, hold something to be true, you assume you must be wrong, not understanding it properly, and they must be right. And so I explored it further and finally came to the conclusion that I did understand it right, and it was rubbish, which indeed it is." — Ernest Gellner, Interview with John Davis, 1991 Gellner criticized ordinary language philosophy in his book Words and Things published in 1959.

See also [ edit ] Definitions of philosophy Ideal language philosophy Linguistic phenomenology References [ edit ] ^ Baz, Avner (2012).

When Words Are Called For: A Defense of Ordinary Language Philosophy . Harvard University Press MA. p. xiii.

^ Parker-Ryan, Sally (3 April 2012).

"Ordinary language philosophy" .

The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Chappell, VC (1964).

Ordinary Language: essays in philosophical method . Englewood Cliffs N.J. : Prentice-Hall. pp.

2–4 .

^ See §116 in Ludwig Wittgenstein (2009). Peter Hacker; Joachim Schulte (eds.).

Philosophical Investigations (Translation by Gertrude Elizabeth Margaret Anscombe, 4th ed.). John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-1405159289 .

Posthumously published in 1953. Part 1: Philosophical Investigations; Part 2: Philosophy of Psychology - A fragment.

^ Searle, John R.; Searle, John Rogers (2 January 1969).

Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521096263 .

^ Chase, Greg; Floyd, Juliet; Laugier, Sandra, eds. (2022).

Cavell's Must We Mean What We Say? At 50 . Cambridge Philosophical Anniversaries. Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/9781009099714 .

ISBN 9781316515259 .

S2CID 247288246 .

^ Bauer, Nancy; Beckwith, Sarah; Crary, Alice; Laugier, Sandra; Moi, Toril; Zerilli, Linda (Spring 2015).

"Introduction" (PDF) .

New Literary History .

46 (2). Johns Hopkins University Press: v– xiii.

doi : 10.1353/nlh.2015.0012 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 September 2015.

^ Schiller, F.C.S. (1891).

Riddles of the Sphinx: a study in the philosophy of evolution .

OCLC 850714 .

^ Seneca, Lucius Annaeus.

"XLV+ On Sophistical Argumentation" .

Moral Epistles . Vol. I. Translated by Gummere, Richard M. Harvard University Press.

^ Interview with Gellner by John Davis, section 2. Quoted by Iczkovits, Yaniv (2012).

Wittgenstein's Ethical Thought . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1137026354 .

Further reading [ edit ] Primary sources [ edit ] Austin, J. L .

How to do things with Words , ed. J. O. Urmson and Marina Sbisa. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1975.

-----. "A Plea for Excuses". In Austin, Philosophical Papers , ed. J. O. Urmson & G. J. Warnock. Oxford: Oxford UP, 1961.

-----.

Sense and Sensibilia ,  ed. G. J. Warnock. Oxford, Oxford University Press, 1962.

Hanfling, Oswald .

Philosophy and Ordinary Language .

Hart, H. L. A . "The Ascription of Responsibility and Rights".

Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society , 1949.

Ryle, Gilbert .

The Concept of Mind . New York: Barnes and Noble, 1965.

-----.

Dilemmas .

Strawson, P. F.

Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics . Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1963.

-----. "On Referring". Reprinted in Meaning and Reference , ed. A. W. Moore. Oxford, Oxford University Press: 1993.

John Wisdom , Other Minds , 1952, Philosophy & Psychoanalysis , 1953, Paradox and Discovery , 1965 Wittgenstein, Ludwig .

Blue and Brown Books -----.

Philosophical Investigations ,  trans.

G. E. M. Anscombe . New York: Macmillan, 1953.

Secondary sources [ edit ] Forguson, Lynd . "Oxford and the "Epidemic" of Ordinary Language Philosophy", The Monist 84: 325–345, 2001.

Passmore, John .

A Hundred Years of Philosophy , revised edition. New York: Basic Books, 1966. See chapter 18, "Wittgenstein and Ordinary Language Philosophy".

Soames, Scott .

Philosophical Analysis in the Twentieth Century: Volume Two, The Age of Meaning . Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2005.

Ordinary Language Philosophy: A Reappraisal – edited by Anthony Coleman & Ivan Welty.

Garth Kemerling (12 November 2011).

"Analysis of ordinary language" .

The Philosophy Pages .

Garth Kemerling (12 November 2011).

"Ludwig Wittgenstein: Analysis of language" .

The Philosophy Pages .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ordinary language philosophy .

"Ordinary language philosophy" .

InPho . Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project. Archived from the original on 26 June 2013.

"Ordinary Language Philosophy" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Ludwig Wittgenstein Family Margaret Stonborough-Wittgenstein Karl Wittgenstein Paul Wittgenstein Works associated with Paul Wittgenstein Early work Picture theory of language Truth tables Truth conditions Truth functions State of affairs Logical necessity Wittgenstein's ladder Late work Meaning as use Language-game Private language argument Family resemblance Ideal language analysis Rule-following Form of life Wittgenstein's philosophy of mathematics Therapeutic approach Anti-skepticism Publications Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus " Some Remarks on Logical Form " Blue and Brown Books Philosophical Remarks Philosophical Investigations On Certainty Culture and Value Remarks on Frazer's Golden Bough Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics Zettel Remarks on Colour Lectures and Conversations on Aesthetics, Psychology, and Religious Belief Remarks on the Philosophy of Psychology Movements Analytic philosophy Linguistic turn Ideal language philosophy Logical atomism Logical positivism Pyrrhonian skepticism Ordinary language philosophy Wittgensteinian fideism Quietism Therapeutic approach Postanalytic philosophy Friends G. E. M. Anscombe R. B. Braithwaite Rudolf Carnap Paul Engelmann John Maynard Keynes Peter Geach Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore David Pinsent Frank P. Ramsey Rush Rhees Bertrand Russell Moritz Schlick Francis Skinner Piero Sraffa Vienna Circle Friedrich Waismann Peter Winch G. H. von Wright Biographers David Edmonds Ray Monk William Warren Bartley Secondary sources A. J. Ayer Gordon Baker Jacques Bouveresse Stanley Cavell James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Terry Eagleton Juliet Floyd Warren Goldfarb A. C. Grayling Peter Hacker Oswald Hanfling Cressida Heyes Jaakko Hintikka Dale Jacquette Anthony Kenny Fergus Kerr Saul Kripke Sandra Laugier Elisabeth Leinfellner Werner Leinfellner Sabina Lovibond Norman Malcolm John McDowell Colin McGinn Marie McGinn Stephen Mulhall D. Z. Phillips Rupert Read Constantine Sandis Hans Sluga Barry Stroud Stephen Toulmin Michael Williams Crispin Wright John Wisdom Related Austrian Ludwig Wittgenstein Society Cambridge Apostles Cambridge University Moral Sciences Club International Wittgenstein Symposium Haidbauer incident Haus Wittgenstein New Wittgenstein Fritz Mauthner Wittgenstein's Poker Film Wittgenstein (film) Wittgenstein Tractatus v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ordinary_language_philosophy&oldid=1295339099 " Categories : Ordinary language philosophy Analytic philosophy Philosophical methodology Philosophy of language Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2024 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Wikipedia articles with style issues from December 2022 All articles with style issues Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 June 2025, at 05:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ordinary language philosophy 24 languages Add topic

