Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Modeling technological change Toggle Modeling technological change subsection 1.1 Invention 1.2 Diffusion 2 Technological change as a social process Toggle Technological change as a social process subsection 2.1 Elements of diffusion 2.2 Innovation 2.2.1 Communication channels 2.2.2 Social system 2.2.3 Time 3 Economics 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Notes 5.2 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Technological change 28 languages العربية Asturianu Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Latina Latviešu Македонски Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( September 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Process of invention, innovation and diffusion of technology or processes Technological change ( TC ) or technological development is the overall process of invention , innovation and diffusion of technology or processes .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In essence, technological change covers the invention of technologies (including processes) and their commercialization or release as open source via research and development (producing emerging technologies ), the continual improvement of technologies (in which they often become less expensive), and the diffusion of technologies throughout industry or society (which sometimes involves disruption and convergence ). In short, technological change is based on both better and more technology.

History of technology By technological eras Premodern / Pre-industrial Prehistoric Stone Age ( lithic ) First Agricultural Revolution Copper Age Urban revolution Bronze Age Iron Age Ancient Modern Proto-industrialization Second Agricultural Revolution First Industrial Revolution Standardization Second Industrial Revolution Machine Age Jet Age Third Agricultural Revolution Atomic Age Space Age Third Industrial Revolution Digital transformation Information Age Fourth Industrial Revolution Imagination Age Future Post-industrial Singularity Emerging technologies By historical regions Ancient Africa Ancient Egypt Indian subcontinent Ancient China Maya civilization Hellenistic world Roman Empire Byzantine Empire Medieval Islamic world Arab Agricultural Revolution Medieval Europe Renaissance Europe By type of technology History of agriculture History of biotechnology History of communication History of computer hardware History of electrical engineering History of manufacturing History of maritime History of materials science History of measurement History of medicine History of simple machine History of nuclear technology History of transport Technology timelines Timeline of historic inventions Technological revolution Complete list by category Article indices Outline of technology Outline of prehistoric technology v t e Modeling technological change [ edit ] Obsolete "Linear Model of Innovation", of three phases of the process of technological change In its earlier days, technological change was illustrated with the ' Linear Model of Innovation ', which has now been largely discarded to be replaced with a model of technological change that involves innovation at all stages of research, development, diffusion, and use. When speaking about "modeling technological change," this often means the process of innovation. This process of continuous improvement is often modeled as a curve depicting decreasing costs over time (for instance fuel cell which have become cheaper every year). TC is also often modelled using a learning curve , ex.: Ct=C0 * Xt^-b Technological change itself is often included in other models (e.g. climate change models) and was often taken as an exogenous factor. These days TC is more often included as an endogenous factor. This means that it is taken as something you can influence. Today, there are sectors that maintain the policy which can influence the speed and direction of technological change. For example, proponents of the Induced Technological Change hypothesis state that policymakers can steer the direction of technological advances by influencing relative factor prices and this can be demonstrated in the way climate policies impact the use of fossil fuel energy, specifically how it becomes relatively more expensive.

[ 3 ] Until now, the empirical evidence about the existence of policy-induced innovation effects is still lacking and this may be attributed to a variety of reasons outside the sparsity of models (e.g. long-term policy uncertainty and exogenous drivers of (directed) innovation).

[ 4 ] A related concept is the notion of Directed Technical Change with more emphasis on price induced directional rather than policy induced scale effects.

[ 5 ] Invention [ edit ] The creation of something new, or a "breakthrough" technology. This is often included in the process of product development and relies on research. This can be demonstrated in the invention of the spreadsheet software . Newly invented technologies are conventionally patented.

Diffusion [ edit ] Main article: Diffusion of innovations For the mathematical treatment of diffusion, see Logistic function .

Diffusion pertains to the spread of a technology through a society or industry.

[ 6 ] The diffusion of a technology theory generally follows an S-shaped curve as early versions of technology are rather unsuccessful, followed by a period of successful innovation with high levels of adoption, and finally a dropping off in adoption as a technology reaches its maximum potential in a market. In the case of a personal computer, it has made way beyond homes and into business settings, such as office workstations and server machines to host websites .

Technological change as a social process [ edit ] Underpinning the idea of a technological change as a social process is a general agreement on the importance of social context and communication. According to this model, technological change is seen as a social process involving producers and adopters and others (such as government) who are profoundly affected by cultural setting, political institutions, and marketing strategies.

In free market economies, the maximization of profits is a powerful driver of technological change. Generally, only those technologies that promise to maximize profits for the owners of incoming producing capital are developed and reach the market. Any technological product that fails to meet this criterion - even though they may satisfy important societal needs - are eliminated. Therefore, technological change is a social process strongly biased in favor of the financial interests of capital. There are currently no well established democratic processes, such as voting on the social or environmental desirability of a new technology prior to development and marketing, that would allow average citizens to direct the course of technological change.

[ 7 ] Elements of diffusion [ edit ] Emphasis has been on four key elements of the technological change process: (1) an innovative technology (2) communicated through certain channels (3) to members of a social system (4) who adopt it over a period of time. These elements are derived from Everett M. Rogers ' diffusion of innovations theory using a communications-type approach.

Innovation [ edit ] Rogers proposed that there are five main attributes of innovative technologies that influence acceptance. He called these criteria ACCTO, which stands for Advantage, Compatibility, Complexity, Trialability, and Observability.

Relative advantage may be economic or non-economic, and is the degree to which an innovation is seen as superior to prior innovations fulfilling the same needs. It is positively related to acceptance (e.g. the higher the relative advantage, the higher the adoption level, and vice versa).

Compatibility is the degree to which an innovation appears consistent with existing values, past experiences, habits and needs to the potential adopter; a low level of compatibility will slow acceptance.

Complexity is the degree to which an innovation appears difficult to understand and use; the more complex an innovation, the slower its acceptance.

Trialability is the perceived degree to which an innovation may be tried on a limited basis, and is positively related to acceptance. Trialability can accelerate acceptance because small-scale testing reduces risk.

Observability is the perceived degree to which results of innovating are visible to others and is positively related to acceptance.

Communication channels [ edit ] Communication channels are the means by which a source conveys a message to a receiver. Information may be exchanged through two fundamentally different, yet complementary, channels of communication. Awareness is more often obtained through the mass media , while uncertainty reduction that leads to acceptance mostly results from face-to-face communication .

Social system [ edit ] The social system provides a medium through which and boundaries within which, innovation is adopted. The structure of the social system affects technological change in several ways. Social norms, opinion leaders, change agents, government and the consequences of innovations are all involved. Also involved are cultural setting, nature of political institutions, laws, policies and administrative structures.

Time [ edit ] Time enters into the acceptance process in many ways. The time dimension relates to the innovativeness of an individual or other adopter, which is the relative earliness or lateness with which an innovation is adopted.

Technological change can cause the production-possibility frontier to shift outward, allowing economic growth.

Economics [ edit ] In economics , technological change is a change in the set of feasible production possibilities .

A technological innovation is Hicks neutral , following John Hicks (1932), if a change in technology does not change the ratio of capital 's marginal product to labour's marginal product for a given capital-to-labour ratio. A technological innovation is Harrod neutral (following Roy Harrod ) if the technology is labour-augmenting (i.e. helps labor); it is Solow neutral if the technology is capital-augmenting (i.e. helps capital).

[ 2 ] [ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Accelerating change Cultural lag Innovation Investment specific technological progress Posthumanization Productivity Productivity improving technologies (historical) Second Industrial Revolution Technical change Technological innovation system Technological revolution Technological transitions Technological unemployment Theories of technology Wait calculation References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Derived from Jaffe et al. (2002) Environmental Policy and technological Change and Schumpeter (1942) Capitalism, Socialisme and Democracy by Joost.vp on 26 August 2008 ^ a b From [[The New Palgrave Dictionary of technical change [ permanent dead link ] " by S. Metcalfe.

• " biased and biased technological change " by Peter L. Rousseau.

• " skill-biased technical change " by Giovanni L. Violante.

^ Ruttan, Vernon W. "Technology, growth, and development: an induced innovation perspective." OUP Catalogue (2000).

^ Jaffe, Adam B., Richard G. Newell, and Robert N. Stavins. "Technological change and the environment." Handbook of environmental economics. Vol. 1. Elsevier, 2003. 461-516.

^ Acemoglu, Daron. "Directed technical change." The Review of Economic Studies 69.4 (2002): 781–809.

^ Lechman, Ewa (2015).

ICT Diffusion in Developing Countries: Towards a New Concept of Technological Takeoff . New York: Springer. p. 30.

ISBN 978-3-319-18253-7 .

^ Huesemann, Michael H., and Joyce A. Huesemann (2011).

Technofix: Why Technology Won’t Save Us or the Environment , Chapter 11, "Profit Motive: The Main Driver of Technological Development", New Society Publishers, Gabriola Island, Canada, ISBN 0865717044 ^ J. R. Hicks (1932, 2nd ed., 1963).

The Theory of Wages , Ch. VI, Appendix, and Section III. Macmillan.

Further reading [ edit ] Books Jones, Charles I.

(1997).

Introduction to Economic Growth . W. W. Norton.

ISBN 0-393-97174-0 Kuhn, Thomas Samuel (1996).

The Structure of Scientific Revolutions , 3rd edition. University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-45808-3 Mansfield, Edwin (2003).

Microeconomic Theory and Applications , 11th edition. W. W. Norton ISBN 0-393-97918-0 Rogers, Everett (2003).

Diffusion of Innovations , 5th edition, Free Press.

ISBN 0-7432-2209-1 Green, L (2001).

Technoculture , Allen and Unwin, Crows Nest, pp. 1–20.

Articles Danna, W. (2007). "They Had a Satellite and They Knew How to Use It", American Journalism [ clarification needed ] , Spring, Vol. 24 Issue 2, pp. 87–110. Online source: abstract and excerpt.

Dickey, Colin (January 2015), A fault in our design Archived 12 August 2015 at the Wayback Machine .

"Perhaps a brighter technological future lies less in the latest gadgets, and rather in learning to understand ourselves better, particularly our capacity to forget what we’ve already learned. The future of technology is nothing without a long view of the past, and a means to embody history’s mistakes and lessons." Aeon Hanlon, Michael (December 2014), The golden quarter.

Archived 5 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine "Some of our greatest cultural and technological achievements took place between 1945 and 1971. Why has progress stalled?" Aeon External links [ edit ] Media related to Technological change at Wikimedia Commons v t e Emerging technologies Topics Automation Collingridge dilemma Differential technological development Disruptive innovation Ephemeralization Ethics AI Bioethics Cyberethics Neuroethics Robot ethics Exploratory engineering Proactionary principle Technological change Technological unemployment Technological convergence Technological evolution Technological paradigm Technology forecasting Accelerating change Future-oriented technology analysis Horizon scanning Moore's law Technological singularity Technology scouting Technology in science fiction Technology readiness level Technology roadmap Transhumanism List v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars v t e Population Major topics Demographics of the world Demographic transition Estimates of historical world population Population growth Population momentum Human population projections World population Population biology Population decline Population density Physiological density Population dynamics Population model Population pyramid Population ecology Biocapacity Carrying capacity I = P × A  × T Kaya identity Malthusian growth model Overshoot (population) World3 model Society and population Eugenics Dys genics Human overpopulation Malthusian catastrophe Human population planning Compulsory sterilization Dependency ratio Family planning One-child policy Two-child policy Overconsumption Political demography Population ethics Antinatalism Intergenerational equity Mere addition paradox Natalism Non-identity problem Reproductive rights Sustainable population Zero population growth Publications Population and Environment Population and Development Review Lists Population and housing censuses by country Dependency ratio Largest cities Number of births World population milestones 6 billion 7 8 Population concern organizations Events and organizations 7 Billion Actions Church of Euthanasia International Conference on Population and Development Population Action International Population Connection Population Matters United Nations Population Fund United Nations world population conferences Voluntary Human Extinction Movement World Population Conference World Population Day World Population Foundation Related topics Bennett's law Green Revolution Human impact on the environment Migration Net migration rate Sustainability Commons Category Authority control databases National Germany France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐wfgpt
Cached time: 20250815014458
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.396 seconds
Real time usage: 0.528 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2212/1000000
Revision size: 13787/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 79735/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4086/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 62636/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.235/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6372559/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  420.996      1 -total
 22.20%   93.445      1 Template:Reflist
 17.06%   71.841      1 Template:History_of_technology_sidebar
 16.72%   70.377      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.76%   66.334      1 Template:Cite_book
 13.21%   55.621      1 Template:Morefootnotes
  9.59%   40.367      1 Template:Ambox
  9.15%   38.515      1 Template:Short_description
  8.84%   37.202      2 Template:Navbox
  8.22%   34.587      1 Template:Emerging_technologies Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1605798:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815014458 and revision id 1305083633. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Technological_change&oldid=1305083633 " Categories : Technological change Innovation Engineering studies Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles lacking in-text citations from September 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2020 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2011 Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 23:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Technological change 28 languages Add topic

