Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Amateur sports law 2 Labor issues in sports 3 Antitrust issues in sports 4 Tort law issues 5 Academic aspects of sports law 6 Outside the United States 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Sports law in the United States Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Law and regulations that relate to Sports For rules of sports, also called "laws", see Laws of the Game .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Sports law in the United States" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Sports law in the United States overlaps substantially with labor law , contract law , competition or antitrust law , and tort law . Issues like defamation and privacy rights are also integral aspects of sports law. This area of law was established as a separate entity only a few decades ago, coinciding with the rise of player-agents and increased media scrutiny of sports law topics.

Amateur sports law [ edit ] Membership is voluntary. The NCAA operates along a series of bylaws that govern the areas of ethical conduct, amateur eligibility, financial aid, recruiting, gender equity , championship events, and academic standards. The NCAA has enforcement power and can introduce a series of punishments up to the death penalty, the company term for the full shut-down of a sporting activity at an offending college. Coaches are offered contracts and if any contractual agreement is violated NCAA has the right to hold any person(s) under the contract liable.

[ 1 ] Title IX is an increasingly important issue in college sports law.

[ 2 ] The act, passed in 1972, makes it illegal for a federally funded institution to discriminate on the basis of sex or gender . In sports law, the piece of legislation often refers to the effort to achieve equality for women's sports in colleges. The Office of Civil Rights (OCR) is charged with enforcing this legislation. This agency implemented a three-prong test for schools to adhere to: Are the opportunities for female and male athletes proportionate to their enrollment?

Does the school have a history of expanding athletic opportunities for women?

Has the school demonstrated success in meeting the needs of its students?

In 1995 the Gender in Equity Disclosure Act was passed to require schools to make an annual, public report on male-female athletic participation rates, recruiting by gender, and financial support. The U.S. Supreme Court's decision in Brown University v. Cohen , is an important aspect of litigation for women's sports.

A critical piece of federal legislation, the Amateur Sports Act of 1978 guarantees certain due process rights including hearings and appeals for U.S. athletes under the governance of the USOC and its NGBs.

Labor issues in sports [ edit ] In 1967, the National Labor Relations Board accepted that players have the right to form unions or players' associations. It is now common for professional athletes to organize into associations or unions in order to negotiate collective bargaining agreements ' (CBAs) with their sport's owners. Under federal labor law, players and owners must negotiate mandatory issues, those relating to hours, wages, and working conditions, in good faith. All other issues are deemed "permissive," and do not have to be negotiated. Once a CBA is in place, players agree not to strike and owners promise not to lock out players. By way of example, the 2005 National Hockey League season was cancelled because of an owners' lockout after the parties' CBA had expired. In 1994, Major League Baseball lost half its season and the playoffs because ballplayers went on strike over the issue of a salary cap . Historically, the most controversial issues subject to CBA negotiation are free agency , minimum salary , squad size, draft, salary cap, grounds for termination, and suspension.

In nearly all professional sports, the issue of limits on the use of performance-enhancing drugs has become an integral aspect of CBA negotiations. Drug policies are not uniform for all professional sports. Typically, each CBA explains the policy regarding drug testing, list of banned drugs , violations, penalties, privacy issues, and rights of appeal. Drug violations may lead to suspensions and loss of salary. The BALCO controversy involving high-profile professional athletes and coaches highlights the allegedly widespread use of performance-enhancing drugs in different sports.

Sports agents are generally certified by each sport's players' association. Once certified, agents or contract advisors may negotiate individual player contracts. Agents who are entrusted to conduct business on a player's behalf owe a fiduciary duty , i.e., a duty to remain loyal, act honestly, behave ethically, and act in the player's best interest when negotiating. More than half the states in the United States currently regulate the activities of agents in addition to union regulation for bad acts. Super agents like baseball's Scott Boras and football's Drew Rosenhaus are frequently the subject of media profiles.

The first body to assist agents in learning the ins and outs of contract negotiations, endorsements and media relations was the Association for Representatives of Athletes (ARPA). The co-founders and leaders of ARPA, since absorbed into the NFL Players Association , were Professor William Weston of  the University of Baltimore Law School and Professor Michael E. Jones of the University of Massachusetts Lowell . The late Bob Woolf is acknowledged [ by whom?

] as being one of the first agents for assisting Boston Red Sox pitcher Earl Wilson to negotiate his player contract.

Antitrust issues in sports [ edit ] See also: Fraser v. Major League Soccer Until a few decades ago, [ when?

] most United States professional sports leagues' contracts retained clauses contracts that essentially prevented players from leaving their original teams by their own choice.

[ 3 ] These "reserve clauses" were upheld because courts found that these sports leagues did not operate in interstate trade or commerce, meaning they did not fall under antitrust laws .

[ 4 ] See Federal Baseball Club v. National League (1922).  This interpretation has largely been eroded today. However, Major League Baseball may still retain limited antitrust exemptions (it is unclear whether the entire exemption has been overruled by Flood Act because the true extent of the exemption was vague). It is important to note that the formation of players unions for the purpose of negotiating contracts with management is exempt from antitrust scrutiny under labor law. The by-product of good faith negotiations between management and players unions in the form of a CBA is also exempt from antitrust scrutiny.

Antitrust challenges have recently taken the form of other domestic leagues challenging Major League Soccer and the United States Soccer Federation . This occurred in 2017, when the North American Soccer League (NASL) filed a lawsuit against United States Soccer Federation (USSF) following USSF's modification of its divisional requirements and its decision not to renew NASL's status as Division 2 for the 2018 year.

[ 5 ] NASL’s antitrust case was based on MLS’s single-entity structure and lack of promotion and relegation, something MLS receives an exemption from FIFA for doing.

[ 6 ] This was the first time a challenge to single-entity, closed-shop structure was brought by a lower league.

[ 7 ] NASL sought preliminary injunction against USSF imposing the new requirements, but was denied again on appeal.

[ 8 ] While preliminary injunction was denied, the case remains pending and may go trial.

[ 9 ] In July 2021, a New York court found no violation of antitrust laws when FIFA and USSF set standards blocking foreign clubs from hosting competitive matches in the United States.

[ 10 ] Friendly and exhibition matches commonly take place in the United States.

Tort law issues [ edit ] Until recently, torts were never part of the landscape of sports law. A tort can be defined as an actionable wrong [ 11 ] However, in 1975 an Illinois appeals court established that players can be found guilty of negligence if their actions are "deliberate, willful or with a reckless disregard for the safety of another player so as cause injury to that player." See Nabozny v. Barnhill .  Negligence torts are typically harder to prove in contact sports , where violent actions and injuries are more common and thus more expected ("assumption of risk" or "self-defense"). Spectators can also sue for negligence if their injuries could not have been expected (not "foreseeable") given the nature of the sporting event they were attending. A baseball fan sitting in the bleachers could reasonably expect a baseball might come toward the seat, but a wrestling fan sitting courtside would not reasonably expect a wrestler to come flying his or her way.

Sports' tort law extends into other less obvious areas. Team doctors could be liable for medical malpractice, a form of negligence, for giving a player a false clean bill of health so the player may continue to perform. A player who purposefully causes bodily harm to another athlete, coach, or spectator may be guilty of committing an intentional tort along with a criminal act of assault and battery .

[ 12 ] The law of defamation protects a person's good character or reputation. The publication of false information about a well-known athlete ("public figure") may be actionable if it was published with a reckless disregard for the truth or actual malice . The growth of non-traditional media outlets, e.g. web pages, instant messaging , cable, etc. has added a new dynamic to this area of the law.

In recent years, the topic of concussions in the National Football League has come to the spotlight. Numerous agents, doctors, players, and their families have spoken out about the impact that repeated concussions have had on their [loved one's] life. In 2011, over 4,500 former NFL players "filed a class-action lawsuit against the NFL" [ 13 ] in support of allegations that the NFL has downplayed or ignored an unfortunate truth: that NFL players are more at risk of Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy (CTE) and other forms of brain trauma. In fact, a recent study conducted by Boston University 's school of medicine claimed that 99% of the "brains obtained from the NFL" tested positive for CTE.

[ 14 ] The lawsuit filed against the NFL displays the assumption of risk defense in the law of torts. The NFL uses this doctrine as a defense, stating that the plaintiff (players) knew the risks of their job prior to when the injuries occurred. This doctrine is countered by the prosecution who claim the NFL had the duty to warn , stating that the NFL did not fulfill their duty to warn their players of the full risks associated with playing. This lawsuit was settled in 2015. The NFL was forced to donate $1 billion towards educational programs, payments to retired players, and in-game safety precautions.

[ 15 ] Closely related to the subject of torts in some ways, is the area of publicity rights. While the tort of defamation protects a person's reputation, the right of publicity permits a person to commercially exploit his or her likeness, name, and image. This area of sports law includes trademarks, trade-names, domain names, and copyrights.

Academic aspects of sports law [ edit ] This section may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject , potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral .

Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent sources .

( June 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Arizona State University 's Sandra Day O'Connor College of Law located in Downtown Phoenix has one of the most highly respected and innovative sports law programs in the nation.

[ 16 ] The home of the Allan "Bud" Selig Sports Law and Business program which offers a plethora of opportunities to enroll in sports law courses ranging from Negotiations and ADR in Sports to NCAA Compliance, Infractions, and Enforcement to Pro Team Sports Legal Operations and everything in between.

[ 17 ] ASU Law students can enroll in the dual-degree program to earn both a Juris Doctor and Masters of Sports Law and Business in only seven (7) semesters.

[ 18 ] ASU has their own student-run journal Arizona State Sports and Entertainment Law Journal which is one of the most cited publications in all of sports law.

[ 19 ] Marquette University Law School offers a sports law program.

[ 20 ] The program provides students with the opportunity to earn a Sports Law Certificate from its National Sports Law Institute, and publishes the Marquette Sports Law Review.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] The NSLI is one of the leading national educational and research institutes for the study of legal, ethical, and business issues affecting amateur and professional sports.

[ citation needed ] Marquette's Sports Law Program and the NSLI combine to host an annual sports law conference, guest speakers, and other events, as well as sponsor student internships with several sports organizations in the greater Milwaukee area.

[ 24 ] The Tulane University Law School offers a certificate in sports law and runs the Sports Lawyers Journal , a student-run law journal funded by the Sports Lawyers Association.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Tulane also hosts two nationally renowned sports law competitions, the Tulane National Baseball Arbitration Competition and the Tulane Pro Football Negotiation Competition.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Villanova University School of Law 's Jeffrey S. Moorad Center is one of the premier sports law programs in the country.

[ citation needed ] The Center aims to be a thought leader not only in sports law but also in topical issues and the changing dynamics in sports news, sports business, sports media, and sports policy.

[ citation needed ] The Center takes students, alumni, and patrons to broader issues that lead to discourse and provide thoughtful and experienced analysis.

[ 29 ] Villanova School of Law also boasts the biannual Jeffrey S. Moorad Sports Law Journal, which publishes scholarly articles on topics in the field of sports law.

[ 30 ] Outside the United States [ edit ] International amateur sports are run by a variety of organizations. The International Olympic Committee (IOC) is made up of each country's Olympic Committee, which in turn recognizes a national governing body (NGB) for each Olympic related sport. The United States Olympic Committee (USOC) is the national governing body for all U.S. athletes in the Olympic and Pan-American Games . The IOC is the international governing body for the summer and winter Olympic Games .

Labor issues are not unique to United States law. The European Union has dealt with countless sports-related legal issues. The most important development in this area was the Bosman ruling , in which the European Court of Justice invalidated restrictions imposed by EU member countries and UEFA (the governing body for football within Europe) on foreign EU nationals. Bosman was extended to countries with associate trading relationships with the EU by the Kolpak ruling . The 6+5 rule was a proposed rule by FIFA that sought to limit the effects of Bosman and its offshoots on football clubs; it sparked considerable legal controversy in Europe and was abandoned in 2010.

The subject of drug testing , especially in international sports like cycling and track and field , is under the jurisdiction of each sport's NGB and international federation, the USOC, the IOC, and the World Anti-Doping Agency . The final arbitrator in resolving drug related disputes is the Court of Arbitration for Sports .

Australia The capacity for the law of assault to intervene in contact sports is limited by the athlete's willing participation. By engaging in a sport, participants are held to accepted the inherent risks of such an activity as applied in Rootes v Shelton .

[ 31 ] However, questions of legality arise where the conduct was deliberate as was the case in McCracken v Melbourne Storm & Orcs, where Melbourne Storm players sought to intentionally injure McCracken during play.

[ 32 ] Similarly, issues also arise where conduct can be characterised to fall "outside the scope of the Plaintiff's consent to degree of physical contact during the game", [ 33 ] thus invoking compensation.

See also [ edit ] International Association of Sports Law Jock tax References [ edit ] ^ "myLSU - Single Sign On".

{{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |url= ( help ) ^ Abrams, Roger I.; A01 (22 May 2018).

Sports Justice: The Law and the Business of Sports . Northeastern University Press.

ISBN 9781555537357 – via Project MUSE.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "baseball - The minor leagues" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2021-09-22 .

^ ALITO, JR., SAMUEL A. (July 2009).

"The Origin of the Baseball Antitrust Exemption:Federal Baseball Club of Baltimore, Inc. v. National League of Professional Baseball Clubs" .

Journal of Supreme Court History .

34 (2): 183– 195.

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-5818.2009.01208.x .

ISSN 1059-4329 .

S2CID 247668532 .

^ Fielkow, Justin (April 26, 2018).

"US Soccer Federation Scores Big Win In Antitrust Lawsuit" .

Franklin Law Group . Retrieved October 13, 2021 .

^ "North American Soccer League, LLC v. United States Soccer Federation, Inc., No. 17-3585 (2d Cir. 2018)" .

Justia . February 23, 2018 . Retrieved November 4, 2021 .

^ "NASL Loses Again in Bid for Preliminary Injunction in Antitrust Case" .

Sports Litigation Alert .

^ Carlisle, Jeff (January 3, 2019).

"New York court dismisses NASL lawsuit against 15 USSF members" . Retrieved October 13, 2021 .

^ Litan, Robert (September 24, 2019).

"Possible outcomes from the NASL's antitrust lawsuit against US Soccer" .

The Athletic . Retrieved October 13, 2021 .

^ Stempel, Jonathan (July 20, 2021).

"FIFA, U.S. Soccer win dismissal of promoter's antitrust lawsuit in New York" .

Reuters . Retrieved October 13, 2021 .

^ chester, nolte (1979).

Sports Law [microform] : Tort Liability of the College and University Athletic Department Administrator . Washington D.C.: ERIC clearinghouse. pp.

1– 2.

^ R v Tevaga [1990] 1 NZLR 296 ^ Thompson, Derek (2016-10-11).

"NFL Ratings Just Fell Off a Cliff: Why?" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 2020-04-13 .

^ "BU Researchers Find CTE in 99% of Former NFL Players Studied" .

Boston University . 26 July 2017 . Retrieved 2020-04-13 .

^ Garcia-Roberts, Brett Murphy and Gus.

"NFL players with brain trauma receive notice of settlements stripped to nothing" .

USA TODAY . Retrieved 2020-04-13 .

^ "ASU unveils innovative sports law programs | Sandra Day O'Connor College of Law" .

law.asu.edu . Retrieved 2021-04-02 .

^ "Allan Bud Selig Sports Law and Business | Sandra Day O'Connor College of Law" .

law.asu.edu . Retrieved 2021-04-02 .

^ "Allan Bud Selig Sports Law and Business | Sandra Day O'Connor College of Law" .

law.asu.edu . Retrieved 2021-04-02 .

^ "Arizona State Sports and Entertainment Law Journal (SELJ) | Sandra Day O'Connor College of Law" .

law.asu.edu . Retrieved 2021-04-02 .

^ "National Attraction: Vibrant and Mature, Marquette's Pioneering Sports Law Institute Draws Students from Coast to Coast" (PDF) . 2022-03-01.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2023-06-03.

^ "Sports Law Certificate | Marquette University Law School" . Archived from the original on 2013-03-05 . Retrieved 2013-03-28 .

^ "National Sports Law Institute - Marquette University Law School" .

law.marquette.edu .

^ anderson, paul (Spring 2015).

"marquette sports law review" .

Marquette Sports Law Review . Retrieved 2015-10-26 .

^ Sports Law Marquette University Law School ^ "Tulane Law School - The Sports Lawyers Journal" .

www.law.tulane.edu .

^ "Tulane Law School Academics" .

www.law.tulane.edu .

^ "Tulane Sports Law Society" .

www.law.tulane.edu .

^ "Tulane Law School |" .

^ Mission The Jeffrey S. Moorad ^ "Sports & Entertainment Law Practice - Villanova University" .

www1.villanova.edu .

^ "(1967) 116 CLR 383, 385" .

^ McCracken v Melbourne Storm & Ors [2005] NSWSC 107; see also Canterbury Bankstown Rugby League Football Club Ltd v Rogers; Bugden v Rogers [1993] NSWCA 49 ^ Sibley v Milutinovic [1990] ACTC 6 Champion, Walter, Sports Law. 2nd edition, St. Paul, MN: West Publishing Co. 2000.

ISBN 0314238891 Dudley, William, Drugs and Sports. San Diego, CA: Greenhaven Press, 2001.

ISBN 1565106970 Epstein, Adam, Sports Law. Clifton Park, NY: Thomson Press, 2003.

ISBN 0766823245 Jones, Michael. Sports Law. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1999.

ISBN 0136765459 Jones, Michael. Rules of the Game: Sports Law, Rowman & Littlefield, 2016.

ISBN 978-1-4422-5806-8 Weiler, Paul and Roberts, Gary. Sports and the Law. St. Paul, MN: West Publishing, 1993.

ISBN 0-314-02162-0 Wong, Glenn. Essentials of Amateur Sports Law. Westport, CN: Praeger, 1994.

Yasser, Raymond, et al. Sports Law: Cases and Materials, 5th edition, Cincinnati, OH: Anderson Publishing Co., 2003 ISBN 1583607994 Further reading [ edit ] Gardiner, Simon; et al. (2005-12-13).

Sports Law (3rd ed.). London: Routledge-Cavendish.

ISBN 978-1-85941-894-9 .

Panagiotopoulos, Dimitrios (2011).

Sports Law Lex Sportiva & Lex Olympica . Athens: Sakoulas. p. 740.

ISBN 978-960-15-2486-3 .

Prathyusha, S. (2022).

Sports Law: Theory and Practices . Hyderabad, India: ICFAI Law School.

ISBN 978-93-92347-07-8 .

External links [ edit ] Sports related legal forms.

Court of Arbitration for Sport ASSER International Sports Law Centre Sports Law Institute at Vermont Law School Archived 2014-04-30 at the Wayback Machine International Academy of Sportslaw Practitioners and Executives International Association of Sports Law British Association for Sport and the Law Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine Sport and the Law Journal Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine Entertainment and Sports Law Journal American Bar Association - Forum on the Entertainment and Sports Industries Marquette Sports Law Review Derecho Deportivo en Línea http://www.the-aasl.org/en/index.php Asian Association of Sports Law LawinSport - The International Sports Law Publication SportsNLaw - Sports News Through A Legal Lens v t e Sports in the United States By state / territory Midwest Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Michigan Minnesota Missouri Nebraska North Dakota Ohio South Dakota Wisconsin Northeast Connecticut Delaware Maine Maryland Massachusetts New Hampshire New Jersey New York Pennsylvania Rhode Island Vermont Washington, D.C.

South Alabama Arkansas Florida Georgia Kentucky Louisiana Mississippi North Carolina Oklahoma South Carolina Tennessee Texas Virginia West Virginia West Alaska Arizona California Colorado Hawaii Idaho Montana Nevada New Mexico Oregon Utah Washington Wyoming Territories American Samoa Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico U.S. Virgin Islands Major team sports American football NFL Baseball MLB Basketball NBA / WNBA Ice hockey NHL / PWHL Rugby MLR Soccer MLS / NWSL Lacrosse NLL / PLL Softball Volleyball NVA / PVF Major individual sports Bowling Boxing Bull riding Golf Gymnastics Horse racing Thoroughbred Harness Steeplechase Ice skating Mixed martial arts Motorsport Swimming Surfing Tennis Winter sports Wrestling X Games Minor sports Australian rules football Badminton Bodybuilding Cricket Cycling Disc golf Fishing Futsal Field hockey Gaelic football Handball Judo Karate Netball Pickleball Polo Roller derby Rowing Ultimate Water polo International sporting competitions World Baseball Classic Basketball World Cup Cricket World Cup FIFA Confederations Cup FIFA World Cup Rugby League World Cup Rugby World Cup Multi-sport events Olympics Pan American Games Paralympics Parapan American Games Deaflympics Maccabiah Senior Olympics World Senior Games World University Games United States Olympic & Paralympic Committee History Law Major professional sports leagues v t e Law of the United States Constitutional law and legislation Federalism Separation of powers Civil rights Act of Congress Bill (United States Congress) United States Code Courts of the United States Federal courts Supreme Appeals District ( list ) Bankruptcy Claims International Trade Tax State courts State supreme Education Pre-law Law School Admission Test Law school Reading law Bar exam Admission to the bar Master of Laws Doctor of Juridical Science Types of law Abortion Administrative law Antitrust Child custody Child sexual abuse Civil procedure Conflict of laws Constitutional Contract Copyright Property Corporate Criminal Procedure Energy Environmental Gun Human rights Juvenile Labor Martial Obscenity Patent Privacy State Financial Race Sports State Tort Defamation Trademark Trust Water Groundwater v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐m2wvz
Cached time: 20250812055933
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.631 seconds
Real time usage: 0.763 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3075/1000000
Revision size: 27130/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 161559/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3734/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 147705/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.381/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7118946/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  612.221      1 -total
 38.85%  237.828      1 Template:Reflist
 28.62%  175.219     23 Template:Cite_web
 17.73%  108.562      5 Template:Navbox
 12.69%   77.672      1 Template:Sports_in_the_United_States
 11.18%   68.465      1 Template:Short_description
  9.05%   55.384      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.61%   52.700      2 Template:Ambox
  6.60%   40.385      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.90%   36.152      5 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:8616483:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812055933 and revision id 1303131959. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sports_law_in_the_United_States&oldid=1303131959 " Categories : Sports law Law of the United States Sports in the United States Hidden categories: CS1 errors: requires URL CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2010 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from October 2017 Articles lacking reliable references from June 2016 All articles lacking reliable references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2016 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 07:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sports law in the United States Add languages Add topic

