Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General concept 2 In philosophy of science 3 In mathematics 4 In engineering 5 In chemistry 6 In pharmacy 7 In fashion 8 References 9 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Elegance 17 languages Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Nederlands Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Українська 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Conceptual beauty that shows unusual effectiveness and simplicity "Elegant" redirects here. For the American novelist, see Robert Elegant . For other uses, see Elegance (disambiguation) .

Elegance of the Epoque by Frédéric Soulacroix An example of "beauty in method"—a simple and elegant proof of the Pythagorean theorem .

Elegance is beauty that shows unusual effectiveness and simplicity .

Elegance is frequently used as a standard of tastefulness , particularly in visual design , decorative arts , literature , science , and the aesthetics of mathematics .

Elegant things often exhibit refined grace and suggest maturity, and in the case of mathematics, a deep mastery of the subject matter.

[ 1 ] General concept [ edit ] Essential components of the concept include simplicity and consistency of design , focusing on the essential features of an object. In art of any kind one might also require dignified grace, or restrained beauty of style.

Visual stimuli are frequently considered elegant, if a small number of colors and stimuli are used, emphasizing the remainder.

[ 2 ] In philosophy of science [ edit ] In the philosophy of science , there are two concepts referring to two aspects of simplicity: elegance (syntactic simplicity), which means the number and complexity of hypotheses, and parsimony ( ontological simplicity ), which is the number and complexity of things postulated.

[ 3 ] In mathematics [ edit ] In mathematical problem solving, the solution to a problem (such as a proof of a mathematical theorem ) exhibits mathematical elegance if it is surprisingly simple and insightful yet effective and constructive. Such solutions might involve a minimal amount of assumptions and computations, while outlining an approach that is highly generalizable. Similarly, a computer program or algorithm is elegant if it uses a small amount of code to great effect.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In engineering [ edit ] In engineering , a solution may be considered elegant if it uses a non-obvious method to produce a solution which is highly effective and simple. An elegant solution may solve multiple problems at once, especially problems that are not thought to be inter-related.

[ 6 ] Elegance can arguably be measured for engineering problems as the ratio of problem complexity to that of solution complexity.

[ 7 ] Thus a simple (low complexity) solution to a problem of high complexity is seen as elegant. This measure does not advise of process to produce elegant solutions, and is merely a way of comparing between multiple solutions for elegance assessment.

In chemistry [ edit ] In chemistry , chemists might look for elegance in theory, method, technique and procedure. For example, elegance might comprise creative parsimony and versatility in the utilization of resources, in the manipulation of materials, and in the effectiveness in syntheses and analysis.

In pharmacy [ edit ] In pharmacy , elegance in formulation is important for quality as well as for effectiveness in dosage form design , a major component of pharmaceuticals.

In fashion [ edit ] The concept of elegance in fashion is often associated with the modern taste for subtraction and understatement that capitalistic societies have developed to convey a sense of status. Unlike similar concepts such as glamour , elegance is a unisex practice, and it was initially developed amongst the male ruling classes after the French Revolution. Elegance was later adopted by ladieswear, from the 20th century onwards. This approach to clothes based on subtraction and understatement is pursued by the upper classes to avoid vulgarity, hence belonging to a lower social status. Several elements that determine the adoption of elegance and its rule have been recognized: a key role is played by class, gender, morality and taste.

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Definition of ELEGANCE" .

www.merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 2019-11-20 .

^ Walden, Stephanie.

"The Elements of Elegance: What Makes Design 'Sophisticated'?" .

Mashable . Retrieved 2019-11-20 .

^ Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry ^ Perrin, Chad (16 August 2006).

"ITLOG Import: Elegance" . Chad Perrin: SOB. Archived from the original on 30 July 2020 . Retrieved 9 June 2008 .

^ Spolsky, Joel (15 December 2006).

"Elegance" . Joel on Software.

^ Zeldes, Nathan (2007).

"Ingenious simplicity" . Nathan's Possibly Interesting Web Site . Retrieved 11 October 2011 .

^ Efatmaneshnik, Mahmoud; Ryan, Mike (2019), "On the Definitions of Sufficiency and Elegance in Systems Design", IEEE Systems Journal , 13 (3): 2077– 2088, doi : 10.1109/JSYST.2018.2875152 , S2CID 69432051 ^ d'Aura, G., 2021. The Silence of Garments: Modernity and the conquest of elegance. Aisthema, International Journal, 8(1), pp.77-99.

http://www.aisthema.eu/ojs/index.php/aisthema/article/view/80/86 Further reading [ edit ] Schiro, Anne-Marie (30 August 1988).

"For Galanos, Elegance Is Eternal" .

The New York Times .

v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases National Germany France BnF data Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Elegance&oldid=1277073192 " Category : Concepts in aesthetics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 February 2025, at 13:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Elegance 17 languages Add topic

