Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Variability Toggle Variability subsection 1.1 Quiescent phase 1.2 Active phase 2 Nomenclature Toggle Nomenclature subsection 2.1 Sub-types 3 Jets 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Symbiotic binary 13 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Français Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Class of astronomical objects Artist's impression of R Aquarii , a symbiotic binary, during an active phase A symbiotic binary is a type of binary star system, often simply called a symbiotic star .  They usually contain a white dwarf with a companion red giant .  The cool giant star loses material via Roche lobe overflow or through its stellar wind , which flows onto the hot compact star, usually via an accretion disk .

Symbiotic binaries are of particular interest to astronomers as they can be used to learn about stellar evolution. They are also vital in the study of stellar wind, ionized nebulae, and accretion because of the unique interstellar dynamics present within the system.

Variability [ edit ] Many symbiotic binaries show brightness changes and are classified as variable stars .  The star Z Andromedae is often considered the prototype of the symbiotic binary class of stars.  More commonly it is considered as the prototype of only a subset of symbiotic stars with irregular variations up to about 4 magnitudes in amplitude.  Even the Z Andromedae variable stars are thought to be an inhomogeneous group.  The so-called symbiotic novae are a closely related class of symbiotic binaries, more formally known as type NC novae .  They appear similar to classical novae but have extremely slow outbursts that can remain near maximum brightness for years.

[ 1 ] The typical behavior of symbiotic binaries can be divided into two phases, based on the rate of accretion to the compact component.  The two phases have very different luminosities, but the systems are often also variable in each phase.

Quiescent phase [ edit ] When the accretion, mass-loss and ionization processes are all in equilibrium between the stars, the system is said to be in quiescence. At this point, the system will continue to release energy at an approximately average rate.

[ 2 ] This can be observed through the spectral energy distribution (SED) of the star which will remain relatively constant.

Active phase [ edit ] If the equilibrium of a quiescent symbiotic star is disturbed, it will transition into an active phase. This phase is shown through a large change in both the nature of the radiation from the star, and a brightening of the optical emission of the star by several magnitudes. The transitions between phases are poorly understood, and it is currently difficult to predict when a star will transition into an active phase from quiescence, or when it will return to quiescence. Many systems have not yet been observed to enter an active state. Others, however, such as AG Draconis enter active phases on a regular and cyclical basis.

[ 2 ] Nomenclature [ edit ] The term 'symbiotic star' was first used in 1958 in a publication about 'stars of composite spectra'.

[ 3 ] However, the distinct category of symbiotic stars had been previously known. They were first recognized as a class of stars with unique spectroscopic qualities by Annie Cannon near the beginning of the 20th century. Their binary nature was made clear by the simultaneous existence of the spectral lines indicative of a red giant and of a white dwarf or neutron star.

[ 4 ] Symbiotic stars are all binaries and so the term symbiotic binary is synonymous.  Many are variable and the term symbiotic variable or symbiotic variable star is sometimes also used synonymously, but more commonly is used only for Z Andromedae variable stars.

[ 5 ] Sub-types [ edit ] Symbiotic binaries are often divided into two sub-types based on the nature of the continuum in their spectra.

S-type systems have a stellar continuum since the giant component is not obscured.

[ 5 ] D-type systems are surrounded by optically thick dusty nebulosity and the star itself is not directly visible.  D-type systems tend to contain a Mira variable or other long period variable star.

[ 6 ] Jets [ edit ] Some symbiotic stars have jets which are a collimated outflow of material. These typically are bi-polar and extend from both poles of the white dwarf. Jets are most commonly observed on stars which are currently in active phase or outburst. Once the outburst has ended, the jet fades and the ejected emissions dissipate. It has been argued that the jets present in symbiotic stars could help further the understanding of jets in other systems, such as in active galactic nuclei .

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ Samus, N. N.; Durlevich, O. V.; et al. (2009). "VizieR Online Data Catalog: General Catalogue of Variable Stars (Samus+ 2007-2013)".

VizieR On-line Data Catalog: B/GCVS. Originally Published in: 2009yCat....102025S .

1 .

Bibcode : 2009yCat....102025S .

^ a b Skopal, Augustin (8 May 2008). "How to understand the light curves of symbiotic stars".

Journal of the American Association of Variable Star Observers .

36 (1): 9.

arXiv : 0805.1222 .

Bibcode : 2008JAVSO..36....9S .

^ Tomokazu Kogure; Kam-Ching Leung (5 May 2010).

The Astrophysics of Emission-Line Stars . Springer Science & Business Media. pp. 5–.

ISBN 978-0-387-68995-1 .

^ Mikołajewska, Joanna (2002). "Orbital and stellar parameters of symbiotic stars".

ASP Conference Series .

303 : 9.

arXiv : astro-ph/0210489 .

Bibcode : 2003ASPC..303....9M .

^ a b Skopal, A (2005). "Disentangling the composite continuum of symbiotic binaries. I. S-type systems".

Astronomy and Astrophysics .

440 (3): 995– 1031.

arXiv : astro-ph/0507272 .

Bibcode : 2005A&A...440..995S .

doi : 10.1051/0004-6361:20034262 .

S2CID 15292910 .

^ Mikołajewska, J (2007). "Symbiotic Stars: Continually Embarrassing Binaries".

Baltic Astronomy .

16 : 1.

Bibcode : 2007BaltA..16....1M .

^ Sokoloski, J. L. (June 20, 2003). "Symbiotic Stars as Laboratories for the Study of Accretion and Jets: A Call for Optical Monitoring".

Journal of the American Association of Variable Star Observers .

31 (2): 89– 102.

arXiv : astro-ph/0403004 .

Bibcode : 2003JAVSO..31...89S .

External links [ edit ] List of symbiotic stars discovered by IPHAS Symbiotic binaries Astrophysics Group, University of Exeter v t e Stars List Formation Accretion Molecular cloud Bok globule Young stellar object Protostar Pre-main-sequence Herbig Ae/Be T Tauri Herbig–Haro object Hayashi track Henyey track Evolution Main sequence Red-giant branch Horizontal branch Red clump Asymptotic giant branch post-AGB super-AGB Blue loop Planetary nebula Protoplanetary Wolf–Rayet nebula PG1159 Dredge-up OH/IR Instability strip Luminous blue variable Stellar population Supernova Superluminous Hypernova Classification Early Late Main sequence O B A F G K M Subdwarf O B WR OB Subgiant Giant Blue Red Yellow Bright giant Supergiant Blue Red Yellow Hypergiant Yellow Carbon S CN CH White dwarf Chemically peculiar Am Ap/Bp CEMP HgMn He-weak Barium Lambda Boötis Lead Technetium Be Shell B[e] Helium Extreme Blue straggler Remnants Compact star Parker's star White dwarf Helium planet Neutron Radio-quiet Pulsar Binary X-ray Magnetar Stellar black hole X-ray binary Burster SGR Hypothetical Blue dwarf Black dwarf Exotic Boson Electroweak Strange Preon Planck Dark Dark-energy Quark Q Black hole star Black Hawking Quasi-star Gravastar Thorne–Żytkow object Iron Blitzar White hole Nucleosynthesis Deuterium burning Lithium burning Proton–proton chain CNO cycle Helium flash Triple-alpha process Alpha process C burning Ne burning O burning Si burning s-process r-process p-process Nova Symbiotic Remnant Luminous red nova Recurrent Micronova Supernova Structure Core Convection zone Microturbulence Oscillations Radiation zone Atmosphere Photosphere Starspot Chromosphere Stellar corona Alfvén surface Stellar wind Bubble Bipolar outflow Accretion disk Protoplanetary disk Proplyd Asteroseismology Helioseismology Circumstellar dust Cosmic dust Circumstellar envelope Eddington luminosity Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism Properties Designation Dynamics Effective temperature Luminosity Kinematics Magnetic field Absolute magnitude Mass Metallicity Rotation Gravity darkening Starlight Variable Photometric system Color index Hertzsprung–Russell diagram Color–color diagram Strömgren sphere Kraft break Star systems Binary Contact Common envelope Eclipsing Symbiotic Multiple Cluster Open Globular Super Planetary system Earth-centric observations Sun Solar eclipse Solar radio emission Solar System Sunlight Pole star Circumpolar Constellation Asterism Magnitude Apparent Extinction Photographic Radial velocity Proper motion Parallax Photometric-standard Lists Proper names Arabic Chinese Extremes Most massive Highest temperature Lowest temperature Largest volume Smallest volume Brightest Historical brightest Most luminous Nearest bright Most distant With resolved images With multiple exoplanets Brown dwarfs Red dwarfs White dwarfs Milky Way novae Supernovae Candidates Remnants Planetary nebulae Timeline of stellar astronomy Related Substellar object Brown dwarf Desert Sub Planet Galactic year Galaxy Guest Gravity Intergalactic Neutron star merger Planet-hosting stars Stellar collision Stellar engulfment Tidal disruption event Category Stars portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Symbiotic_binary&oldid=1236670200 " Categories : Cataclysmic variable stars Binary stars Red giants White dwarfs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 July 2024, at 23:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Symbiotic binary 13 languages Add topic

