Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Traditional mechanical tide clocks 2 Digital tide clocks 3 Public clocks with tide indications 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Tide clock 2 languages Français 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Specially designed clock that keeps track of the Moon's apparent motion around the Earth Tide clock Tide clock Alunatime at Trinity Buoy Wharf , London A tide clock is a specially designed clock that keeps track of the Moon 's apparent motion around the Earth . Along many coastlines, the Moon contributes the major part (67%) of the combined lunar and solar tides . The exact interval between tides is influenced by the position of the Moon and Sun relative to the Earth , as well as the specific location on Earth where the tide is being measured. Due to the Moon's orbital prograde motion , it takes a particular point on the Earth (on average) 24 hours and 50.5 minutes to rotate under the Moon, so the time between high lunar tides fluctuates between 12 and 13 hours. A tide clock is divided into two roughly 6 hour tidal periods that show the average length of time between high and low tides in a semi-diurnal tide region, such as most areas of the Atlantic Ocean .

Traditional mechanical tide clocks [ edit ] The bottom of the tide clock dial (6 o'clock position) is marked "low tide" and the top of the tide clock dial (12 o'clock position) is marked "high tide." The left side of the dial is marked "hours until high tide" and has a count-down of hours from 5 to 1. There is one hand on the clock face, and along the left side it points to the number of hours "until" the (lunar) high tide. The right hand side of the clock is marked "hours until low tide"  and has a count-down of hours from 5 to 1. The number pointed to by the hand gives the time "until" the (lunar) low tide.  Some tide clocks incorporate time (using standard quartz movement) and even humidity and temperature in the same instrument.

Some tide clocks count down the number of hours from high or low tide, as in "one hour past high or low tide". When the clock reaches the halfway point ("half-tide"), it then counts the hours up to high tide or low tide, as in "one hour until high or low tide". Generally, there is an adjustment knob on the back on the instrument which may be used to set the tide using official tide tables for a specific location at either high or low tide.

Tides have an inherent lead or lag, known as the lunitidal interval , that is different at every location, so tidal clocks are set for the time when the local lunar high tide occurs. This is often complicated because the lead or lag varies during the course of the lunar month , as the lunar and solar tides fall into and out of synchronization.  The lunar tide and solar tide are synchronized (ebb and flow at the same time) near the full moon and the new moon . The two tides are unsynchronized near the first and last quarter moon (or "half moon"). Also, in addition to the relative position of the moon and the elliptical pattern of the sun, the tide can be affected to some degree by wind and atmospheric pressure. All of these variables have less impact on the tide at the time of the full moon, so this is usually the best time to set a tide clock.  If the tide clock is mounted on a moving boat, it will need to be reset more frequently. The best time to set the clock is at the new moon or the full moon, which is also when the clock can most reliably indicate the actual combined tide. A simple tide clock will always be least reliable near the quarter moon.

Tide range is the vertical distance between the highest high tide and lowest low tide. The size of the lunar tide compared to the solar tide (which comes once every 12 hours) is generally about 2 to 1, but the actual proportion along any particular shore depends on the location, orientation, and shape of the local bay or estuary. Along some shorelines, the solar tide is the only important tide, and ordinary 12-hour clocks suffice since the high and low tides come at nearly the same time every day. Because ordinary tidal clocks only track a part of the tidal effect, and because the relative size of the combined effects is different in different places, they are in general only partially accurate for tracking the tides. Consequently, all navigators use tide tables either in a booklet, computer or digital tide clock.

Analog tide clocks are most accurate for use on the Atlantic coasts of America and Europe.  This is because along the Atlantic coastline the moon controls the tides predictably, ebbing and flowing on a regular (12- to 13-hour) schedule.  However, in other parts of the world such as along the Pacific Coast, tides can be irregular.

[ 1 ] The Pacific Ocean is so vast that the moon cannot control the entire ocean at once.  The result is that parts of the Pacific Coast can have 3 low tides a day.  Similarly, there are areas in the world like the Gulf of Mexico or the South China Sea that have only one high tide a day. Mechanical tide clocks used on the Pacific Coast must be adjusted frequently, often as much as weekly, and are not useful in diurnal areas (those with one tide per day).

[ 2 ] Digital tide clocks [ edit ] Digital tide clocks are not married to the 24 hour 50.5 minute tide cycle and thus track tides beyond the Atlantic coast. Smart digital tide clocks can work across all locations in North America without any adjustments. This is achieved by storing all the variations of tides at numerous locations. Given a particular location and date/time, a digital tide clock can display the previous tide, next tide and current absolute tide height. Thus, they are able to track semi-diurnal, diurnal and mixed diurnal tides.

[ 3 ] Public clocks with tide indications [ edit ] Belgium Lier . The Zimmer tower 's astronomical clock has twelve dials surrounding a central clockface. The dial at position X indicates the tides at Lier: the flag without a pennant, at the top of the dial, indicates high water; the flag with a pennant above indicates rising water, the flag with a pennant below indicates ebbing water. The size of the ships indicates the level of the tide.

France Fécamp . The clock of 1667 at Fécamp Abbey shows the time of local high tide, and the present state of the sea by means of a disc with a quarter-circle aperture which rotates with the lunar phase, revealing a green background at the syzygies (at new moon and full moon), when the tidal range is most extreme ("spring tides"), and a black background at times of smaller tidal range ("neap tides").

[ 4 ] Netherlands Arnemuiden . The 16th-century church clock at Arnemuiden indicates the time of local high tide as a pointer on a 12-hour clockface.

Maassluis . Jacob Venker's tide clock on the exterior of the Nationaal Sleepvaart Museum [ nl ] was installed in 1996. Despite the clock's traditional dial, it is computer-controlled, and accounts for 94 waves in its tidal timekeeping.

[ 5 ] United Kingdom King's Lynn . The south tower of King's Lynn Minster houses a tide clock, a 20th-century restoration of the original installed by Thomas Tue in 1681, which shows the moon phase and the time of local high tide, indicated by a dragon hand. The dial reads "LYNN HIGH TIDE" clockwise, but is to be interpreted as a 24-hour dial, with "L" at the top of the dial as midday and "G" at the bottom of the dial as midnight.

[ 6 ] London . Alunatime at Trinity Buoy Wharf is a tide clock designed by Laura Williams, installed in 2010, which indicates the lunar phase, lunar day and tide cycle using a graphical notation of lights.

[ 7 ] Arnemuiden Maassluis Zimmertoren, Lier Fécamp Abbey King's Lynn See also [ edit ] Tide predicting machine References [ edit ] ^ Administration, US Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric.

"NOAA's National Ocean Service: Low tide" .

oceanservice.noaa.gov . Retrieved 2018-09-18 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Why are Time and Tide Clocks Best Used on the Atlantic Coast?

, Archived 2015-06-03 at the Wayback Machine Weems & Plath ^ "Digital Tide Clock - North America" .

WeND : Digital Tide Clock - North America . Retrieved 2018-09-18 .

^ Decressain, Abbé Georges (May 1899).

"L'horloge de la Sainte-Trinité à Fécamp" .

Revue chronométrique (in French) (512): 259– 262.

^ "Tide clock" .

Nationaal Sleepvaart Museum Maassluis . Retrieved 26 March 2020 .

^ Cartwright, David Edgar (1999).

Tides: A Scientific History . Cambridge University Press. p.

20 .

ISBN 9780521621458 . Retrieved 26 March 2020 .

^ "Alunatime" .

Trinity Buoy Wharf . 2013 . Retrieved 26 March 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to tide clocks at Wikimedia Commons v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tide_clock&oldid=1229964920 " Category : Clocks Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 June 2024, at 18:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tide clock 2 languages Add topic

