Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Organization and finances 2 Expenditures 3 Honest Elections Project 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents The 85 Fund Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 501(c)(3) organization based in Washington D.C.

The 85 Fund Formation 2011 ; 14 years ago ( 2011 ) Type 501(c)3 organization Tax ID no.

20-2466871 Headquarters Washington, D.C.

, U.S.

Region served United States Key people Leonard Leo Affiliations Concord Fund CRC Advisors Formerly called Judicial Education Project This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The 85 Fund , also known as the Honest Elections Project , and formerly known as the Judicial Education Project , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] is a 501(c)(3) organization based in Washington D.C. It is among a network of conservative organizations associated with Leonard Leo , a longtime prominent figure in the Federalist Society , that are funded mostly by anonymous donors . The 85 Fund had revenue of over $65 million in 2020 and, with the Concord Fund , acts as a funding hub for other organizations in the Leo network.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] As the Honest Elections Project, it participated in lawsuits during the 2020 United States presidential election and ran advertisements against mail-in voting .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 1 ] [ 7 ] It is a proponent of the independent state legislature theory that posits state legislatures have sole authority to establish and enforce state election laws and rules.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Leo has said that the fund-raising prowess of Arabella Advisors , a liberal consulting firm, was an inspiration for the 85 Fund to serve a similar function on the right.

[ 2 ] Organization and finances [ edit ] The secretary of The 85 Fund is Carrie Severino, who is the president of the Concord Fund .

[ 10 ] Both funds are closely connected to Leonard Leo , the chairman of CRC Advisors and former vice president of the Federalist Society .

[ 2 ] [ 11 ] [ 5 ] [ 10 ] [ 12 ] The group's 2017 tax return listed a payment of $675,000 to the BH Group , an employer of Leo.

[ 1 ] [ 13 ] Neil Corkery formerly served as president of the group.

[ 14 ] Between 2012 and 2017, the group raised $46 million.

[ 15 ] In 2018, more than 99% of the group's funding came from a single $7.8 million donation from Donors Trust , a donor-advised fund.

[ 1 ] [ 16 ] In 2020, The 85 Fund received $20 million in donations from Donors Trust.

[ 10 ] Leo is a powerful figure in fund-raising and expertise for the American conservative movement.

[ 2 ] He has said that the 85 Fund was inspired by the fund-raising of Arabella Advisors , a liberal consulting firm that advises donors.

[ 2 ] Politico reported in August 2023 that Attorney General for the District of Columbia Brian Schwalb was investigating Leo and his network of nonprofit groups. Schwalb's office did not confirm or deny the existence of a probe.

[ 17 ] Expenditures [ edit ] The group donated $300,000 to the Independent Women's Forum , a conservative nonprofit organization.

[ 13 ] In 2011 and 2012, Leonard Leo arranged for Liberty Consulting, a firm owned by Ginni Thomas , wife of Supreme Court justice Clarence Thomas , to be paid $80,000 by Kellyanne Conway and her firm The Polling Company, billed to the Judicial Education Project. Leo directed Conway not to mention Ginni Thomas in the paperwork. Leo told The Washington Post , "As an advisor to JEP I have long been supportive of its opinion research relating to limited government, and The Polling Company, along with Ginni Thomas's help, has been an invaluable resource for gauging public attitudes." He also said "Knowing how disrespectful, malicious and gossipy people can be, I have always tried to protect the privacy of Justice Thomas and Ginni." [ 18 ] In 2020, The 85 Fund provided $750,000 in funding to the Mercatus Center , a think tank affiliated with George Mason University .

[ 10 ] In 2020, The 85 Fund donated $1 million to the Accountability and Civics Trust Project, formerly run by Matthew Whitaker .

[ 10 ] [ 19 ] The Accountability and Civics Trust Project filed a complaint to the Office of Special Council to investigate Jennifer Granholm , the then current United States Secretary of Energy .

[ 10 ] In 2020, The 85 Fund donated $2 million to the Government Accountability Institute , a group founded by former White House strategist Steve Bannon and investigator Peter Schweizer and chaired by Rebekah Mercer .

[ 10 ] In September 2024, Leo wrote to recipients of 85 Fund grants to say that he was conducting a "comprehensive review" to determine whether recipients are being assertive enough to "operationalize or weaponize the conservative vision" to "crush liberal dominance at the choke points of influence and power in our society." [ 20 ] Honest Elections Project [ edit ] In April 2020, the Honest Elections Project (HEP) announced it was launching a week-long $250,000 digital and television ad campaign on Fox News, MSNBC, and CNN against mail-in voting .

[ 1 ] [ 7 ] Lawyers contracted by HEP sent letters to the secretaries of state in Colorado , Florida , and Michigan to lobby for purges of voter rolls in these states.

[ 1 ] The Guardian reported that these letters used "misleading data to accuse jurisdictions of having bloated voter rolls" and threatened legal action.

[ 1 ] HEP filed legal briefs in favor of voting restrictions in Nevada , Virginia , Texas , and Minnesota .

[ 1 ] [ 21 ] In 2020, The 85 Fund provided $70,000 in funding to HEP.

[ 10 ] In September 2020, HEP was involved in legal action concerning whether mail-in ballots that were postmarked before the election but arrived up to 14 days after it should be counted; [ 6 ] the suit was successful.

[ 5 ] [ 22 ] HEP concluded that there was no widespread fraud in the 2020 United States presidential election and did not participate in any litigation to try to challenge or overturn the election results.

[ 5 ] HEP issued a statement criticizing the 2021 United States Capitol attack that occurred on January 6, saying: "The violent insurrection at the Capitol was a heinous attack against democracy, the rule of law, and the election system HEP was created to defend." [ 5 ] In May 2021, HEP lobbied against H.R. 1, also known as the For the People Act .

[ 23 ] As of 2021, the executive director of HEP was Jason Snead.

[ 24 ] HEP is a proponent of the independent state legislature theory that posits state legislatures have sole authority to establish and enforce state election laws and rules, without judicial or executive review. It has argued the doctrine in amicus briefs to the United States Supreme Court , which in June 2022 decided to hear a case brought by North Carolina Republicans during its next session beginning in October 2022. Critics of the doctrine said it might allow state legislatures controlled by one party, commonly made possible through gerrymandering , to decide the outcome of federal elections against the will of the majority of voters.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] HEP has been described as an alias of the Judicial Education Project [ 5 ] [ 1 ] and the 85 Fund.

[ 1 ] [ 9 ] [ 3 ] HEP has led advocacy efforts against ranked choice voting .

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] HEP is a member of the advisory board of Project 2025 , [ 27 ] a collection of conservative and right-wing policy proposals from the Heritage Foundation to reshape the United States federal government and consolidate executive power should the Republican nominee win the 2024 presidential election .

[ 28 ] See also [ edit ] Donors Capital Fund Donors Trust References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j "Revealed: conservative group fighting to restrict voting tied to powerful dark money network" .

The Guardian . 2020-05-27 . Retrieved 2020-10-25 .

^ a b c d e Swan, Jonathan.

"Leonard Leo to shape new conservative network, step aside from the Federalist Society" .

Axios . Retrieved 2020-10-25 .

^ a b Colby Itkowitz; Isaac Stanley-Becker (July 1, 2022).

"Democracy advocates raise alarm after Supreme Court takes election case" .

The Washington Post .

^ Vogel, Kenneth P. (October 12, 2022).

"Leonard Leo's Network Is Increasingly Powerful. But It Is Not Easy to Define" .

The New York Times .

^ a b c d e f Schwartz, Brian (2021-01-13).

"Dark-money GOP fund funneled millions of dollars to groups that pushed voter fraud claims" .

CNBC . Retrieved 2021-12-12 .

^ a b Mauger, Craig.

"Former GOP Michigan secretaries of state sue over plan to count late arriving ballots" .

The Detroit News . Retrieved 2021-12-12 .

^ a b Caldwell, Leigh Ann.

"Conservative group to launch ads opposing mail-in voting" .

www.nbcnews.com . Retrieved 2020-10-25 .

^ a b Colby Itkowitz; Isaac Stanley-Becker (July 1, 2022).

"Democracy advocates raise alarm after Supreme Court takes election case" .

The Washington Post .

^ a b c Wang, Hansi Lo (August 12, 2022).

"This conservative group helped push a disputed election theory" .

National Public Radio .

^ a b c d e f g h Schwartz, Brian (2021-11-18).

"Trump ally's fund received over $20 million last year, then funneled cash to other right-leaning groups" .

CNBC . Retrieved 2021-12-12 .

^ Slodysko, Brian; Beaumont, Thomas (2020-07-27).

"Wealthy donors pour millions into fight over mail-in voting" .

AP News . Retrieved 2020-10-25 .

^ Riccardi, Nicholas (March 2, 2021).

"Conservative group pushes proposals to tighten voting laws" .

Associated Press .

^ a b "Trump judicial adviser's 'dark money' network hides Supreme Court spending" .

OpenSecrets . 2020-01-02.

^ "An influential 'dark money' group turns off the lights for the last time" .

OpenSecrets .

^ Suozzo, Andrea; Glassford, Alec; Ngu, Ash; Roberts, Brandon.

"Judicial Education Project - Nonprofit Explorer" .

ProPublica . Retrieved 2020-10-25 .

^ "Conservative 'dark money' network rebranded to push voting restrictions before 2020 election" .

OpenSecrets .

^ Przybyla, Heidi (August 22, 2023).

"D.C. Attorney General is probing Leonard Leo's network" .

Politico .

^ Emma Brown; Shawn Boburg; Jonathan O'Connell (May 4, 2023).

"Judicial activist directed fees to Clarence Thomas's wife, urged 'no mention of Ginni' " .

The Washington Post .

^ Bronstein, Scott.

"Whitaker ran conservative group funded by dark money" .

CNN . Retrieved 2021-12-12 .

^ Nichols, Hans (September 12, 2024).

"Scoop: Activist Leonard Leo pushes to "weaponize" conservatives" .

Axios .

^ Marimow, Ann E.

"Coming to Trump's defense: An unconventional lawyer for an unconventional president" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 2020-10-25 .

^ Corse, Alexa (2020-10-17).

"Michigan Court Rescinds 14-Day Extension for Receipt of Mail Ballots" .

Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 0099-9660 . Retrieved 2021-12-12 .

^ Lejeune, Tristan (2021-03-23).

"Conservative group says polling shows Democrats' voting rights bill 'out of sync with American voters' " .

TheHill . Retrieved 2021-12-12 .

^ Corasaniti, Nick (2021-12-04).

"Voting Battles of 2022 Take Shape as G.O.P. Crafts New Election Bills" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2021-12-12 .

^ Lueders, Bill.

"The Problem With 'Guarding' the Vote" .

plus.thebulwark.com . Retrieved 2024-01-26 .

^ "Bill looks to ban ranked-choice voting in the Buckeye State" .

spectrumnews1.com . Retrieved 2024-01-26 .

^ "Advisory Board" .

The Heritage Foundation .

Archived from the original on November 19, 2023 . Retrieved July 8, 2024 .

^ Mascaro, Lisa (August 29, 2023).

"Conservative Groups Draw Up Plan to Dismantle the US Government and Replace It with Trump's Vision" .

Associated Press News .

Archived from the original on September 22, 2023 . Retrieved July 8, 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Honest Elections Project website "The 85 Fund" . Internal Revenue Service filings.

ProPublica Nonprofit Explorer .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_85_Fund&oldid=1293690544 " Categories : Charities based in Washington, D.C.

Voting in the United States 2011 establishments in Washington, D.C.

Organizations established in 2011 Conservative organizations in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 04:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The 85 Fund Add languages Add topic

