Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 See also 3 References 4 Further references 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Deep scattering layer 7 languages Español فارسی Gaeilge Հայերեն Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Layer of small animals in the ocean Static image of a sonar scan. The backscattered signal (green) above the bottom is likely the deep scattering layer.

[ 1 ] The swim bladder (marked here as S and S' ) of Alburnoides bipunctatus . The swim bladders of large numbers of mesopelagic fishes cause sonar waves to be reflected in a recognisable layer.

The deep scattering layer , sometimes referred to as the sound scattering layer , is a layer in the ocean consisting of a variety of marine animals. It was discovered through the use of sonar , as ships found a layer that scattered the sound and was thus sometimes mistaken for the seabed . For this reason it is sometimes called the false bottom or phantom bottom . It can be seen to rise and fall each day in keeping with diel vertical migration .

Sonar operators, using the newly developed sonar technology during World War II, were puzzled by what appeared to be a false sea floor 300–500 metres (980–1,640 ft) deep at day, and less deep at night. Initially, this mysterious phenomenon was called the ECR layer using the initials of its three discoverers.

[ 2 ] It turned out to be due to millions of marine organisms, most particularly small mesopelagic fish, with swim bladders that reflected the sonar. These organisms migrate up into shallower water at dusk to feed on plankton. The layer is deeper when the moon is out, and can become shallower when clouds pass over the moon.

[ 3 ] Lanternfish account for much of the biomass responsible for the deep scattering layer of the world's oceans.

Sonar reflects off the millions of lanternfish swim bladders, giving the appearance of a false bottom.

[ 4 ] Description [ edit ] Lanternfish account for as much as 65 percent of all deep sea fish biomass and are largely responsible for the deep scattering layer of the world's oceans.

The phantom bottom is caused by the sonar misinterpreting as the ocean floor a layer of small seagoing creatures that congregate between 1,000 and 1,500 feet (300 and 460 m) below the surface.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The name is derived from the fact that the first people to see these measurements erroneously reported that they had discovered sunken islands.

[ 6 ] Most mesopelagic fishes are small filter feeders which ascend at night to feed in the nutrient rich waters of the epipelagic zone . During the day, they return to the dark, cold, oxygen deficient waters of the mesopelagic where they are relatively safe from predators.

[ 6 ] Most mesopelagic organisms, including mesopelagic fish , squid and siphonophores , make daily vertical migrations . They ascend at night into the shallow epipelagic zone , often following similar migrations of zooplankton , and return to the mesopelagic depths for safety when there is daylight.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] These vertical migrations often occur over large vertical distances. Fish undertake these migrations with the assistance of a swimbladder . The swimbladder is inflated when the fish wants to move up, and, due to the high pressures in the mesopelagic zone, this requires significant energy. As the fish ascends, the pressure in the swimbladder must adjust to prevent it from bursting. When the fish wants to return to the depths, the swimbladder is deflated.

[ 10 ] Some mesopelagic fishes make daily migrations through the thermocline , where the temperature changes between 10 and 20 °C (50 and 68 °F), thus displaying considerable tolerances for temperature change.

In 1998, sampling via deep trawling indicated lanternfish account for as much as 65% of all deep sea fish biomass .

[ 11 ] Lanternfish are among the most widely distributed, populous, and diverse of all vertebrates , playing an important ecological role as prey for larger organisms. The previous estimated global biomass of lanternfish was 550–660 million tonnes , about six times the annual tonnage captured worldwide by fisheries. However, this was revised upwards as these fish have a special gland for detecting movement from up to 30 metres (98 ft) away (e.g. fishing nets and fish sampling nets). In 2007 global sonar detectors indicated a more accurate figure for the global biomass was between 5 and 10 billion tonnes: a truly massive weight of living mass.

[ 4 ] [ 12 ] Time lapse video of a 3D mapping of water column sonar data by the NOAA research ship Okeanos Explorer in the North Atlantic Ocean [ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Diel vertical migration False bottom (sea ice) References [ edit ] ^ a b Water Column Sonar Data National Geophysical Data Center, NOAA.

^ Carson, Rachel (2011) [1951].

The Sea Around Us .

Open Road Media .

ISBN 978-1-4532-1476-3 .

The discovery was made by three scientists, C. F. Eyring, R. J. Christensen, and R. W. Raitt, aboard the USS Jasper in 1942...

^ Ryan P "Deep-sea creatures: The mesopelagic zone" Te Ara - the Encyclopedia of New Zealand . Updated 21 September 2007.

^ a b R. Cornejo, R. Koppelmann & T. Sutton.

"Deep-sea fish diversity and ecology in the benthic boundary layer" .

Archived from the original on 27 September 2007.

^ Rachel Carson (29 March 2011).

The Sea Around Us . Open Road Media. pp.

33– 36.

ISBN 978-1-4532-1476-3 . Retrieved 20 June 2013 .

^ a b c Rachel Carson (1999).

Lost Woods: The Discovered Writing of Rachel Carson . Beacon Press. p. 81.

ISBN 978-0-8070-8547-9 . Retrieved 20 June 2013 .

^ Moyle and Cech, 2004, p. 585 ^ Bone & Moore 2008, p. 38.

^ Barham EG (May 1963). "Siphonophores and the Deep Scattering Layer".

Science .

140 (3568): 826– 828.

Bibcode : 1963Sci...140..826B .

doi : 10.1126/science.140.3568.826 .

PMID 17746436 .

S2CID 43485719 .

^ Douglas EL, Friedl WA and Pickwell GV (1976) "Fishes in oxygen-minimum zones: blood oxygenation characteristics" Science , 191 (4230) 957–959.

^ Hulley, P. Alexander (1998). Paxton, J.R.; Eschmeyer, W.N. (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Fishes . San Diego: Academic Press. pp.

127– 128.

ISBN 978-0-12-547665-2 .

^ Rowan at Facts in Motion (17 September 2020).

"How this tiny fish is cooling the planet" .

YouTube .

Further references [ edit ] Bone Q and Moore RH (2008) Biology of Fishes Taylor & Francis Group.

ISBN 978-0-415-37562-7 External links [ edit ] Deep scattering layer Britannica online .

v t e Hydroacoustics Sonar Active acoustics Baffles (submarine) Bistatic sonar Echo sounding Fessenden oscillator GLORIA sidescan sonar Multibeam echosounder Passive acoustics Scientific echosounder Side-scan sonar Sonar beamforming Sonobuoy Surveillance Towed Array Sensor System Synthetic aperture sonar Towed array sonar Upward looking sonar Ocean acoustics Acoustic release Acoustic Doppler current profiler Acoustic seabed classification Acoustical oceanography Hydrophone Long baseline acoustic positioning system Ocean acoustic tomography Short baseline acoustic positioning system Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Sound speed gradient Sound velocity probe Ultra-short baseline acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustics Underwater acoustic communication Underwater acoustic positioning system Acoustic ecology Acoustic survey in fishing Acoustic tag Animal echolocation Beached whale Deep scattering layer Fishfinder Fisheries acoustics Hearing range of marine mammals Marine mammals and sonar Whale song Related topics Acoustic signature Bioacoustics Biophony Geophysical MASINT Hydrographic survey Noise map Soundscape v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Deep_scattering_layer&oldid=1305709046 " Categories : Marine organisms Oceanography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2022 Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 16:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Deep scattering layer 7 languages Add topic

