Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical background Toggle Historical background subsection 1.1 Rise of the Khmer Rouge 1.1.1 Cambodian Civil War 1.1.2 United States bombing campaign 1.2 International supporters of the Khmer Rouge 1.2.1 China 1.2.1.1 Mao era 1.2.2 Transition period 1.2.3 Deng era 1.2.4 Other supporters 2 Ideology 3 Massacres Toggle Massacres subsection 3.1 Androcide 3.2 Classicide 3.3 Ethnic victims 3.3.1 Vietnamese 3.3.2 Chinese 3.3.3 Cham Muslims 3.4 Religious groups 3.5 Internal purges 4 Use of children 5 Torture and human experimentation 6 Number of deaths 7 After Democratic Kampuchea Toggle After Democratic Kampuchea subsection 7.1 Commemoration 7.2 War crimes trials 7.3 The Cambodian Genocide Project 7.4 Denial of the genocide 7.5 Denial of support of the Khmer Rouge by China 7.6 Recognition of rescuers 8 In literature and media 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References Toggle References subsection 11.1 Sources 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Cambodian genocide 44 languages العربية Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa മലയാളം 日本語 Norsk bokmål پنجابی Português Русский Sardu Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1975–1979 mass murder in Cambodia Cambodian genocide Part of the Cold War in Asia and the aftermath of the Cambodian Civil War Skulls at the Choeung Ek memorial in Cambodia Location Democratic Kampuchea Date 17 April 1975 – 7 January 1979 (3 years, 8 months and 20 days) Target Cambodia's previous military and political leadership, middle-class professionals, businesspeople, intellectuals and ethnic, linguistic, and religious minorities Attack type Genocide , classicide , politicide , ethnic cleansing , cultural genocide , starvation , forced labour , torture , mass rape , summary execution Deaths 1.2–2.8 million [ 1 ] Perpetrators Khmer Rouge , Kampuchea Revolutionary Army , Santebal , Communist Party of Kampuchea Motive Establishment of an agrarian socialist society based on Maoist principles Cultural reset ( Year Zero ) Khmer ultranationalism and racism Anti-Vietnamese sentiment Anti-Chinese sentiment Anti-Western sentiment Anti-intellectualism Islamophobia State atheism Part of a series on the History of Cambodia Early history Funan Chenla Khmer Empire Angkor Khmer–Cham wars Đại Việt–Khmer War Post-Angkor period Chaktomuk era Longvek era Siamese-Cambodian War Cambodian–Spanish War Cambodian–Dutch War Siamese annexation Oudong era Loss of Mekong Delta Dai Viet invasion Colonial period French protectorate French Indochina Japanese occupation ( Cambodia in 1945 ) Independence and conflict Post-independence US bombing Sihanouk Trail Cambodian campaign 1970 coup Khmer Republic US bombing Cambodian Civil War Fall of Phnom Penh Democratic Kampuchea Mayaguez incident Cambodian genocide Cambodian–Vietnamese War People's Republic of Kampuchea exiled coalition government K5 Plan Peace process Cambodian Conflict (1979–1998) 1991 Paris Peace Agreements United Nations Administration ( UNTAC ) (1992-1993) 1993 election Khmer Rouge PGNUNSC Modern Cambodia Economy 1997 coup Khmer Rouge Tribunal 2003 Phnom Penh riots 2008–2013 Cambodian–Thai border crisis 2013–2014 protests COVID-19 pandemic 2025 Cambodia–Thailand border conflict By topic Buddhism Economic history Humanitarian crisis Military history Monarchy Names Timeline Cambodia portal v t e The Cambodian genocide [ a ] was the systematic persecution and killing of Cambodian citizens [ b ] by the Khmer Rouge under the leadership of Pol Pot . It resulted in the deaths of 1.5 to 2 million people from 1975 to 1979, nearly 25% of Cambodia's population in 1975 ( c.

7.8 million).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge were supported for many years by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), led by Mao Zedong ; [ c ] it is estimated that at least 90% of the foreign aid which the Khmer Rouge received came from China, including at least US$1 billion in interest-free economic and military aid in 1975 alone.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] After it seized power in April 1975 , the Khmer Rouge wanted to turn the country into an agrarian socialist republic , founded on the policies of ultra- Maoism and influenced by the Cultural Revolution .

[ d ] Pol Pot and other Khmer Rouge officials met with Mao in Beijing in June 1975, receiving approval and advice, while high-ranking CCP officials such as Politburo Standing Committee member Zhang Chunqiao later visited Cambodia to offer help.

[ e ] To fulfill its goals, the Khmer Rouge emptied the cities and marched Cambodians to labor camps in the countryside, where mass executions, forced labor , physical abuse, torture , malnutrition , and disease were rampant.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] In 1976, the Khmer Rouge renamed the country Democratic Kampuchea .

The massacres ended when the Vietnamese military invaded in 1978 and toppled the Khmer Rouge regime.

[ 19 ] By January 1979, 1.5 to 2 million people had died due to the Khmer Rouge's policies, including 200,000–300,000 Chinese Cambodians , 90,000–500,000 [ f ] Cambodian Cham (who are mostly Muslim ), [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] and 20,000 Vietnamese Cambodians .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] 20,000 people passed through the Security Prison 21 , one of the 196 prisons the Khmer Rouge operated, [ 4 ] [ 28 ] and only seven adults survived.

[ 29 ] The prisoners were taken to the Killing Fields , where they were executed (often with pickaxes , to save bullets) [ 30 ] and buried in mass graves . Abduction and indoctrination of children was widespread, and many were persuaded or forced to commit atrocities.

[ 31 ] As of 2009, the Documentation Center of Cambodia has mapped 23,745 mass graves containing approximately 1.3 million suspected victims of execution. Direct execution is believed to account for up to 60% of the genocide's death toll, [ 32 ] with other victims succumbing to starvation, exhaustion, or disease.

The genocide triggered a second outflow of refugees , many of whom escaped to neighboring Thailand and, to a lesser extent, Vietnam.

[ 33 ] In 2003, by agreement [ 34 ] between the Cambodian government and the United Nations, the Extraordinary Chambers in the Court of Cambodia ( Khmer Rouge Tribunal ) were established to try the members of the Khmer Rouge leadership responsible for the Cambodian genocide. Trials began in 2009.

[ 35 ] On 26 July 2010, the Trial Chamber convicted Kang Kek Iew for crimes against humanity and grave breaches of the 1949 Geneva Conventions . The Supreme Court Chamber increased his sentence to life imprisonment.

Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan were tried and convicted in 2014 of crimes against humanity and grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions. On 28 March 2019, the Trial Chamber found Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan guilty of crimes against humanity, grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions, and genocide of the Vietnamese ethnic, national and racial group. The Chamber additionally convicted Nuon Chea of genocide of the Cham ethnic and religious group under the doctrine of superior responsibility .

[ 2 ] Both Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan were sentenced to terms of life imprisonment.

[ 36 ] Historical background [ edit ] Main article: History of Cambodia Rise of the Khmer Rouge [ edit ] Main article: Khmer Rouge Cambodian Civil War [ edit ] Main article: Cambodian Civil War In 1968, the Khmer Rouge officially launched a nationwide insurgency across Cambodia. Though the government of North Vietnam was not informed about the Khmer Rouge's decision in advance, its forces still provided shelter and weapons. This support made it difficult for the Cambodian military to effectively counter the insurgents, and for the next two years, King Norodom Sihanouk did very little to stop it. As such, the insurgency grew in strength, resulting in the party openly declaring itself to be the Communist Party of Kampuchea.

[ 37 ] Sihanouk was deposed in 1970 by Premier Lon Nol , with the support of the National Assembly , establishing the pro-United States Khmer Republic . On the Chinese Communist Party (CCP)'s advice, Sihanouk, who was in exile in Beijing , formed an alliance with the Khmer Rouge, and became the nominal head of a Khmer Rouge–dominated government-in-exile (known by its French acronym, GRUNK ) backed by China. Although thoroughly aware of the weakness of Lon Nol's forces and loath to commit American military force to the new conflict in any form other than air power, the Nixon administration announced its support for the new Khmer Republic.

[ 38 ] On 29 March 1970, North Vietnam launched an offensive against the Cambodian army. Documents which were uncovered from the Soviet Union 's archives reveal that the invasion was launched at the Khmer Rouge's explicit request after negotiations were held with Nuon Chea.

[ 39 ] A North Vietnamese force quickly overran large parts of eastern Cambodia, reaching within 15 miles (24 km) of Phnom Penh before being pushed back. By June, three months after Sihanouk's removal, they had swept government forces from the entire northeastern third of the country. After defeating those forces, the Vietnamese turned the newly won territories over to the local insurgents. The Khmer Rouge also established "liberated" areas in the southern and southwestern parts of the country, where they operated independently of the Vietnamese.

[ 40 ] After Sihanouk demonstrated his support for the Khmer Rouge by visiting them in the field, their ranks swelled from 6,000 to 50,000 fighters. Many of the Khmer Rouge's new recruits were apolitical peasants who fought in support of the King, rather than for communism , of which they had little understanding.

[ 41 ] By 1975, with Lon Nol's government running out of ammunition due to its loss of support from the U.S., it was clear that its collapse was imminent. On 17 April 1975, the Khmer Rouge captured Phnom Penh and ended the civil war. Mortality estimates for the Cambodian Civil War vary widely. Sihanouk used a figure of 600,000 civil war deaths, [ 42 ] while Elizabeth Becker reported over a million civil war deaths, military and civilian included.

[ 43 ] Other researchers were unable to corroborate such high estimates.

[ 44 ] Marek Sliwinski notes that many estimates of the dead are open to question and may have been used for propaganda, suggesting that the true number lies between 240,000 and 310,000.

[ 45 ] Judith Banister and E. Paige Johnson described 275,000 war deaths as "the highest mortality that we can justify".

[ 46 ] Patrick Heuveline states that "Subsequent reevaluations of the demographic data situated the death toll for the [civil war] in the order of 300,000 or less".

[ 47 ] United States bombing campaign [ edit ] From 1970 to 1973, a massive United States bombing campaign against the Khmer Rouge devastated rural Cambodia.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] An earlier U.S. bombing campaign of Cambodia began on 18 March 1969 with Operation Breakfast , but U.S. bombing in Cambodia had commenced years before that.

[ 44 ] The number of Cambodian civilian and Khmer Rouge deaths caused by U.S. bombing is disputed and difficult to disentangle from the broader Cambodian Civil War .

[ 45 ] Estimates range from 30,000 to 500,000.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] Sliwinski estimates that approximately 17% of total civil war deaths can be attributed to U.S. bombing, noting that this is far behind the leading causes of death, as the U.S. bombing was concentrated in underpopulated border areas.

[ 45 ] Ben Kiernan attributes 50,000 to 150,000 deaths to the U.S. bombing.

[ 54 ] The relationship between the United States' massive bombing of Cambodia and the growth of the Khmer Rouge in recruitment and popular support has been a matter of interest to historians. Some scholars, including Michael Ignatieff , Adam Jones [ 55 ] and Greg Grandin , [ 56 ] have cited the United States intervention and bombing campaign from 1965 to 1973 as a significant factor that led to increased support for the Khmer Rouge among the Cambodian peasantry.

[ 57 ] According to Ben Kiernan, the Khmer Rouge "would not have won power without U.S. economic and military destabilization of Cambodia. ... It used the bombing's devastation and massacre of civilians as recruitment propaganda and as an excuse for its brutal, radical policies and its purge of moderate communists and Sihanoukists." [ 58 ] Pol Pot biographer David P. Chandler writes that the bombing "had the effect the Americans wanted—it broke the Communist encirclement of Phnom Penh", but also accelerated the collapse of rural society and increased social polarization.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] Craig Etcheson agrees that U.S. intervention increased recruitment for the Khmer Rouge but disputes that it was a primary cause of the Khmer Rouge victory.

[ 61 ] According to William Shawcross , the United States bombing and ground incursion plunged Cambodia into the chaos that Sihanouk had worked for years to avoid.

[ 62 ] International supporters of the Khmer Rouge [ edit ] China [ edit ] Main article: Cambodia–China relations Mao era [ edit ] See also: Cultural Revolution , Great Leap Forward , and Maoism Pol Pot in 1978 Since the 1950s, Pol Pot (leader of the Khmer Rouge from 1963 to 1979) made frequent visits to the People's Republic of China , where he received political and military training—especially on the theory of the dictatorship of the proletariat —from the personnel of the CCP.

[ 5 ] [ 7 ] [ 63 ] From November 1965 to February 1966, high-ranking CCP officials such as Chen Boda and Zhang Chunqiao trained him on topics such as the communist revolution in China , class conflicts , Communist International , etc.

[ 63 ] Pol Pot also met with other officials, including Deng Xiaoping and Peng Zhen .

[ 64 ] He was particularly impressed by Kang Sheng 's lecture on how to conduct a political purge .

[ 5 ] [ 63 ] Mao Zedong , Peng Zhen , Norodom Sihanouk and Liu Shaoqi (1965) In 1970, Lon Nol overthrew Sihanouk, who fled to Beijing, where Pol Pot was also visiting. On the advice of the CCP, the Khmer Rouge changed its position, and in order to support Sihanouk, it established the National United Front of Kampuchea . In 1970 alone, the Chinese reportedly gave the United Front 400 tons of military aid.

[ 65 ] In April 1974, Sihanouk and Khmer Rouge leaders Ieng Sary and Khieu Samphan met with Mao in Beijing; Mao supported many of the policies proposed by the Khmer Rouge, but he did not want the Khmer Rouge to marginalize Sihanouk after they won the civil war and established a new Cambodia.

[ 64 ] [ 66 ] In June 1975, Pol Pot and other Khmer Rouge officials met with Mao Zedong in Beijing, where Mao lectured Pol Pot on his "Theory of Continuing Revolution under the Dictatorship of the Proletariat (无产阶级专政下继续革命理论)", recommending two articles which were written by Yao Wenyuan and sending Pol Pot over 30 books which were authored by Karl Marx , Friedrich Engels , Vladimir Lenin , and Joseph Stalin as gifts.

[ 7 ] [ 9 ] [ 64 ] [ 63 ] During this meeting, Mao said to Pol Pot: [ 7 ] [ 9 ] [ 67 ] We agree with you! Much of your experience is better than ours. China is not qualified to criticize you. We committed errors of the political routes for ten times in fifty years—some are national, some are local…Thus I say China has no qualification to criticize you but to applaud you. You are basically correct…During the transition from the democratic revolution to adopting a socialist path, there exist two possibilities: one is socialism, the other is capitalism. Our situation now is like this. Fifty years from now, or one hundred years from now, the struggle between two lines will exist. Even ten thousand years from now, the struggle between two lines will still exist. When Communism is realized, the struggle between two lines will still be there. Otherwise, you are not a Marxist. This is unity existing among opposites. If one mentions only one side of the two, this is metaphysics. I believe in what Marx and Lenin have said, that the path [of advance] would be tortuous ... Our state now is, as Lenin said, a capitalist state without capitalists. This state protects capitalist rights, and the wages are not equal. Under the slogan of equality, a system of inequality has been introduced. There will exist a struggle between two lines, the struggle between the advanced and the backward, even when Communism is realized. Today we cannot explain it completely.

Pol Pot replied: "The issue of lines of struggle raised by Chairman Mao is an important strategic issue. We will follow your words in the future. I have read and learned various works of Chairman Mao since I was young, especially the theory on people's war . Your works have guided our entire party." [ 64 ] On the other hand, during another meeting in August 1975, Chinese Premier Zhou Enlai warned Sihanouk as well as Khmer Rouge leaders including Khieu Samphan and Ieng Sary of the danger of radical movement towards communism, citing the mistakes in China's own Great Leap Forward .

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] Zhou urged them not to repeat the mistakes that had caused havoc.

[ 68 ] [ 70 ] Sihanouk later recalled that Khieu Samphan and Ieng Thirith responded only with "an incredulous and superior smile".

[ 70 ] During the genocide, China was the largest military and economic supporter of the Khmer Rouge, supplying "more than 15,000 military advisers" and most of its external aid.

[ 6 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] It is estimated that at least 90% of foreign aid to Khmer Rouge came from China, with 1975 alone seeing US$ 1 billion in interest-free economic and military aid, "the biggest aid ever given to any one country by China".

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] A series of internal crises in 1976 prevented Beijing from exerting substantial influence over Khmer Rouge policies.

[ 69 ] Transition period [ edit ] After Mao's death in September 1976, China underwent a two-year transitionary period that ended with the appointment of Deng Xiaoping as its new paramount leader in December of 1978. During the transition period, Pol Pot made an official visit to China in July 1977 and he was welcomed by chairman Hua Guofeng and other high-ranking CCP officials, with the People's Daily calling him the "Comrade from Cambodia" ( 柬埔寨战友 ).

[ 73 ] Pol Pot also toured around the agricultural production model of Dazhai , a product of Mao's era.

Chen Yonggui , Vice Premier of China and the leader of Dazhai, visited Cambodia in December 1977, commending the achievement of its movement towards communism.

[ 74 ] In 1978, Son Sen , a Khmer Rouge leader and the Minister of National Defense of Democratic Kampuchea , visited China and obtained its approval for military aid.

[ 75 ] In the same year, high-ranking CCP officials such as Wang Dongxing and Deng Yingchao visited Cambodia to offer support.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Deng era [ edit ] See also: Sino-Vietnamese War and Sino-Soviet split Soon after Deng Xiaoping became the Paramount Leader of China , the Vietnamese invaded Cambodia and ended the genocide by defeating the Khmer Rouge in January 1979.

[ 19 ] The People's Republic of Kampuchea was then established. In order to counter the power of the Soviet Union and Vietnam in Southeast Asia , China officially condemned the Vietnamese invasion and continued its material support to the Khmer Rouge. In early 1979, China launched an invasion of Vietnam to retaliate against Vietnam's invasion of Cambodia.

[ 77 ] Deng informed U.S. President Jimmy Carter about the attack on Vietnam beforehand, during his visit to the United States soon after the People's Republic of China and the United States established formal diplomatic relation on January 1, 1979.

[ 78 ] Carter attempted to dissuade Deng from pursuing the military action, but did not succeed.

[ 78 ] Deng was convinced by a conversation with Singapore's prime minister Lee Kuan Yew to limit the scale and duration of the war. Following the one-month war, Singapore attempted to serve as a mediator between Vietnam and China on the Cambodian issue.

[ 77 ] Other supporters [ edit ] As a result of Chinese and Western opposition to the Vietnamese invasion of 1978 and 1979, the Khmer Rouge continued to hold Cambodia's United Nations (UN) seat until 1982, after which the seat was filled by a Khmer Rouge-dominated coalition which was known as the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea (CGDK).

[ 4 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] Owing to support from China, Thailand, other South East Asian countries, the U.S., and some Western countries, the CGDK held Cambodia's UN seat until 1993, long after the Cold War ended.

[ 44 ] China trained Khmer Rouge soldiers on its soil from 1979 to at least 1986, "stationed military advisers with Khmer Rouge troops as late as 1990", [ 79 ] and "supplied at least $1 billion in military aid" during the 1980s.

[ 81 ] There are allegations of United States support for the Khmer Rouge , because they wished to weaken Vietnam's influence in Southeast Asia.

[ 4 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] The UK has also been accused of helping the group as the SAS trained non Khmer Rouge soldiers of the CGDK coalition from 1985 to 1989 in Thailand.

[ 86 ] After the 1991 Paris Peace Accords , Thailand continued to allow the Khmer Rouge "to trade and move across the Thai border to sustain their activities ... although international criticism, particularly from the United States and Australia ... caused it to disavow passing any direct military support." [ 87 ] Ideology [ edit ] Ideology played an important role in the genocide . Pol Pot was influenced by Marxism–Leninism and he wanted to transform Cambodia into an entirely self-sufficient agrarian socialist society that would be free from foreign influences. Stalin's works have been described as a "crucial formative influence" on his thought. Mao's works were also heavily influential, particularly influential was Mao's booklet which was titled On New Democracy .

Jean-Jacques Rousseau was one of Pol Pot's favorite authors, according to historian David Chandler. In the mid-1960s, Pol Pot reformulated his ideas about Marxism–Leninism to suit the Cambodian situation by advocating goals such as bringing Cambodia back to an alleged and mythical past of the powerful Khmer Empire , eradicating influences which he viewed as "corrupting", such as foreign aid and Western culture , as well as restoring Cambodia's agrarian society .

[ 88 ] Pol Pot's strong belief that Cambodia needed to be transformed into an agrarian utopia stemmed from his experience in Cambodia's rural northeast—where he developed an affinity for the agrarian self-sufficiency of the area's isolated tribes—while the Khmer Rouge gained power.

[ 89 ] [ better source needed ] Attempts to implement these goals (formed upon the observations of small, rural communes) into a larger society were key factors in the ensuing genocide.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] One Khmer Rouge leader said that the killings were meant for the "purification of the populace." [ 92 ] The Khmer Rouge forced virtually the entire population of Cambodia to divide itself into mobile work teams.

[ 93 ] Michael Hunt has written that it was "an experiment in social mobilization unmatched in twentieth-century revolutions." [ 93 ] The Khmer Rouge used a forced labor regime, starvation, forced resettlement , land collectivization , and state terror to keep the population in line.

[ 93 ] The Khmer Rouge's economic plan was named the "Maha Lout Ploh", [ needs translation ] a direct allusion to the " Great Leap Forward " of China that caused tens of millions of deaths in the Great Chinese Famine .

[ 5 ] [ 94 ] [ page needed ] Kenneth M. Quinn , the author of a doctoral dissertation about the "origins of the radical Pol Pot regime" [ 95 ] is "widely acknowledged as the first person to report on the genocidal policies of Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge." [ 96 ] [ 97 ] While he was employed as a Foreign Service Officer for the U.S. State Department in Southeast Asia, Quinn was stationed at the South Vietnamese border for nine months between 1973 and 1974.

[ 98 ] While there, Quinn "interviewed countless Cambodian refugees who had escaped the brutal clutches of the Khmer Rouge." [ 98 ] Based upon the compiled interviews and the atrocities he witnessed firsthand, Quinn wrote "a 40-page report about it, which was submitted throughout the U.S. government." [ 96 ] In the report, he wrote that the Khmer Rouge had "much in common with those of totalitarian regimes in Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union ." [ 99 ] Quinn has written of the Khmer Rouge that "[w]hat emerges as the explanation for the terror and violence that swept Cambodia during the 1970s is that a small group of alienated intellectuals, enraged by their perception of a corrupt society and imbued with a Maoist plan to create a pure socialist order in the shortest possible time, recruited extremely young, poor, and envious cadres, instructed them in harsh and brutal methods learned from Stalinist mentors, and used them to destroy physically the cultural underpinnings of the Khmer civilization and to impose a new society through purges, executions, and violence." [ 100 ] Ben Kiernan has compared the Cambodian genocide to the Armenian genocide which was perpetrated by the Ottoman Empire during World War I and the Holocaust which was perpetrated by Nazi Germany during World War II . While each genocide was unique, certain features were common in all three genocides, and racism was a major part of the ideology of all three regimes. All three regimes targeted religious minorities and they also tried to use force in order to expand their rule into what they believed were their historic heartlands (the Khmer Empire, eastern Anatolia, and Lebensraum , respectively), and all three regimes "idealized their ethnic peasantry as the true 'national' class, the ethnic soil from which the new state grew." [ 101 ] Massacres [ edit ] Part of a series on Genocide Issues List of genocides Genocides in history Genocides in history (before 1490) 1490–WWI WWI–WWII 1946–1999 21st century Effects on youth Denial Massacre Rape Incitement In relation to Colonialism / War Perpetrators, victims, and bystanders Prevention Psychology Recognition politics Risk factors Stages Types Anti-Indigenous Cultural Paper Utilitarian Studies Outline Bibliography Education Related topics Compulsory sterilization Democide Ethnic cleansing Ethnocide Forced assimilation Category v t e Androcide [ edit ] Main article: Androcide Analysis of existing mortality estimates show that men accounted for 81% of all violent deaths and 67% of all excess deaths in this period.

[ 102 ] The killing of about 50–70% of Cambodia's working-age men led to a shift in norms regarding the sexual division of labor and correlates with present-day indicators of women's economic advancements and increased representation in local-level elected office.

[ 103 ] Classicide [ edit ] Main article: Classicide The Khmer Rouge regime frequently arrested and executed anyone whom it suspected of having connections with the former Cambodian government along with anyone whom it suspected of having connections with foreign governments, as well as professionals, intellectuals, the Buddhist monkhood , and ethnic minorities. Even those people who were stereotypically thought of as having intellectual qualities, such as wearing glasses or speaking multiple languages , were executed out of fear that they would rebel against the Khmer Rouge.

[ 89 ] [ better source needed ] As a result, Pol Pot has been described as "a genocidal tyrant" by journalists and historians such as William Branigin.

[ 104 ] The British sociologist Martin Shaw described the Cambodian genocide as "the purest genocide of the Cold War era".

[ 105 ] The attempt to "purify" Cambodian society along racial, social and political lines led to purges of Cambodia's previous military and political leadership, along with business leaders, journalists, students, doctors, and lawyers.

[ 106 ] Due to the fact that the perpetrators and the victims of the mass murder were largely members of the same ethnic group, the term autogenocide was coined to describe the unique character of the genocide.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] [ 109 ] According to Samuel Totten , 25% of the urban Khmer population or 500,000 people perished under the rule of the Khmer Rouge, along with 16% of the rural Khmer population or 825,000 people [ 110 ] putting the killing at a scale comparable to the genocide of the Roma (25% of the Roma population of Europe, or 130,000 to 500,000 people) [ 111 ] and the genocide of Serbians (300,000 to 500,000 people) [ 112 ] during the Holocaust .

Ethnic victims [ edit ] Rooms of the Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum contain thousands of photos taken by the Khmer Rouge of their victims Ethnic Vietnamese , ethnic Thai , ethnic Chinese , ethnic Cham , Cambodian Christians , and other minorities were also targeted for persecution and genocide. The Khmer Rouge forcibly relocated minority groups and banned their languages . By decree, the Khmer Rouge banned the existence of more than 20 minority groups, which constituted 15% of Cambodia's population.

[ 113 ] While Cambodians in general were victims of the Khmer Rouge regime, the persecution, torture, and killings committed by the Khmer Rouge are considered an act of genocide according to the United Nations as ethnic and religious minorities were systematically targeted by Pol Pot and his regime.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] Scholars and historians have varying opinions on whether the persecution and killings which occurred during the rule of the Khmer Rouge should be considered genocide. These conflicting opinions exist because scholars who conducted research in Cambodia immediately after the fall of the Khmer Rouge regime in 1979 claimed that the victims could have been killed due to the circumstances which they were living under. For instance, Michael Vickery opined that the killings were "largely the result of the spontaneous excesses of a vengeful, undisciplined peasant army." [ 116 ] [ page needed ] This point of view was also supported by Alexander Hinton , who cited an account by a former Khmer Rouge cadre who claimed that the killings were acts of retribution for the atrocities which were perpetrated by Lon Nol's soldiers when they killed people who were known to be former Viet Minh agents [ 117 ] before Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge's rise to power. Vickery—erroneously, as has been proven by the research which was more recently conducted by Ben Kiernan —argued that the number of Cham victims who were killed during the Khmer Rouge's rule of Cambodia was around 20,000 [ 118 ] which would still be a substantial part of the Cham group and would thus constitute the crime of genocide by Pol Pot and the Khmer Rouge. The killings were a centralized and bureaucratic effort which was undertaken by the Khmer Rouge regime, according to documents which were recently published by the Documentation Center of Cambodia (DC-Cam) as a result of the discovery of Khmer Rouge internal security documents which instructed the killings across Cambodia.

[ 119 ] However there were also instances of "indiscipline and spontaneity in the mass killings." [ 120 ] On top of that, Etcheson has also proven that as a result of the systematic and mass killings which were based on political affiliations, ethnicity, religion, and citizenship, a third of Cambodia's population perished, so the Khmer Rouge is effectively guilty of committing genocide.

[ 121 ] David Chandler has argued that, even though ethnic minorities fell victim to the Khmer Rouge regime, they were not specifically targeted by it because of their ethnic backgrounds, instead, they were targeted because they were considered enemies of the regime.

[ 122 ] Chandler also rejects the use of the terms "chauvinism" and "genocide" just to avoid drawing possible parallels to Hitler. This indicates that Chandler does not believe in the argument of charging the Khmer Rouge regime with the crime of genocide. Similarly, Michael Vickery holds a similar position to Chandler's, and refuses to acknowledge the atrocities of the Khmer Rouge regime as genocide; Vickery regarded the Khmer Rouge a "chauvinist" regime, due to its anti-Vietnam and anti-religion policies.

[ 123 ] Stephen Heder also believed that the Khmer Rouge were not guilty of genocide, stating that the atrocities of the regime were not motivated by racism .

[ 124 ] Ben Kiernan makes the argument that it was indeed a genocide and he disagrees with these three scholars, by bringing forth examples from the history of the Cham people in Cambodia, as did an international tribunal finding Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan guilty of 92 and 87 counts of said crime respectively.

[ 125 ] Genocide scholar Gregory Stanton concluded that the mass killings and starvation by the Khmer Rouge did constitute genocide, both as defined in the Genocide Convention and in the broader definition of Raphael Lemkin, which includes destruction of political, social, and economic groups. The crimes were genocide under the Genocide Convention because they included the intentional destruction of a significant part of two ethnic groups, the Vietnamese and the Cham.

[ 126 ] Vietnamese [ edit ] The Khmer Rouge officially blamed minority groups, particularly the Cham and the Vietnamese, for the country's ills.

[ 127 ] The regime initially ordered the expulsion of ethnic Vietnamese from Cambodia but then conducted large scale massacres of large numbers of Vietnamese civilians who were being deported out of Cambodia.

[ 128 ] The regime then prevented the remaining 20,000 ethnic Vietnamese from fleeing, and much of this group was also executed.

[ 26 ] The Khmer Rouge also used the media to support their goals of genocide. Radio Phnom Penh called on Cambodians to "exterminate the 50 million Vietnamese." [ 129 ] Additionally, the Khmer Rouge conducted many cross-border raids into Vietnam, where they slaughtered an estimated 30,000 Vietnamese civilians.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] Most notably, during the Ba Chúc massacre in April 1978, the Khmer Rouge military crossed the border and entered the village, slaughtering 3,157 Vietnamese civilians. This caused an urgent response from the Vietnamese government, precipitating the Cambodian–Vietnamese War in which the Khmer Rouge was ultimately defeated.

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] Chinese [ edit ] The state of the Chinese Cambodians during the rule of the Khmer Rouge regime was alleged to be "the worst disaster ever to befall any ethnic Chinese community in Southeast Asia." [ 113 ] Cambodians of Chinese descent were massacred by the Khmer Rouge under the justification that they "used to exploit the Cambodian people".

[ 134 ] The Chinese were stereotyped as traders and moneylenders associated with capitalism, while historically the group attracted resentment due to their lighter skin color and cultural differences.

[ 135 ] Hundreds of Cham, Chinese and Khmer families were rounded up in 1978 and told that they were to be resettled, but were actually executed.

[ 134 ] At the beginning of the rule of the Khmer Rouge regime in 1975, there were 425,000 ethnic Chinese in Cambodia. By the end of 1979, there were just 200,000, most of them were stuck in Thai refugee camps and the rest of them were stuck in Cambodia. 170,000 Chinese fled from Cambodia and moved to Vietnam, and others were repatriated.

[ 136 ] The Chinese were predominantly city-dwellers, making them vulnerable to the Khmer Rouge's revolutionary ruralism and its evacuation of city residents to farms.

[ 113 ] The government of the People's Republic of China did not protest against the killings of ethnic Chinese in Cambodia, [ 137 ] despite its awareness of the atrocities and its simultaneous condemnation of the Vietnamese government's mistreatment of ethnic Chinese who lived in Vietnam.

[ 138 ] Cham Muslims [ edit ] According to Ben Kiernan, the "fiercest extermination campaign was directed against the ethnic Chams , Cambodia's Muslim minority." [ 139 ] Islam was seen as an "alien" and "foreign" culture that did not belong in the new Communist system. Initially, the Khmer Rouge aimed for the " forced assimilation " of Chams through population dispersal. Pol Pot then began using intimidation efforts against the Chams that included the assassination of village elders, but he ultimately ordered the full-scale mass killing of the Cham people. American professor Samuel Totten and Australian professor Paul R. Bartrop estimate that these efforts would have completely wiped out the Cham population were it not for the overthrow of the Khmer Rouge in 1979. In a Khmer Rouge official meeting took place in Sector 41, Kampong Cham province in 1977, a plan was proclaimed up to "smash enemies of the revolution", stating that "the enemies of the revolution are many, but our biggest enemy are Cham. So the Plan calls for the destruction of all the Cham people before 1980." More telegrams were sent from Pol Pot to local governments between 1978 and 1979 than usual and hastily ordered that the total eradication of the Cham must be achieved before 1980.

[ 140 ] The Cham began to rise in prominence when they joined the communists as early as the 1950s, with a Cham elder, Sos Man joining the Indochina Communist Party and rising through the ranks to become a major in the Party's forces. He then returned home to the Eastern Zone in 1970 and joined the Communist Party of Kampuchea (CPK), and he co-established the Eastern Zone Islamic Movement with his son, Mat Ly. Together, they became the mouthpiece of the Khmer Rouge and they encouraged the Cham people to participate in the revolution. Sos Man's Islamic Movement was also tolerated by the Khmer Rouge's leadership between 1970 and 1975. The Chams were gradually forced to abandon their faith and their distinct practices, a campaign which was launched in the Southwest as early as 1972.

[ 141 ] Ten Cham villages were taken over by the Khmer Rouge in 1972–1973, where new Cham leaders were installed, and they forced the villagers to work in the fields which were located away from their hometowns. A witness who was interviewed by Kiernan asserts that at that time, they were well-treated by the Khmer Rouge, and in 1974, they were allowed to return to their homes.

[ 142 ] Moreover, the Cham were classified as "depositee base people", making them vulnerable to persecution.

[ citation needed ] Despite their plight, the Cham and the locals live side by side in many areas, speaking the Khmer language, and even inter-marrying with the majority Khmers as well as with the minority Chinese and Vietnamese.

[ 143 ] The diverse ethnic and cultural practices of Cambodians began to deteriorate during the rise of the Khmer Rouge in 1972, when the Cham were prohibited from practising their faith and culture: Cham women were required to keep their hair short like the Khmers; Cham men were not allowed to wear the sarong ; farmers were forced to wear rudimentary dark or black clothing; religious activities like the recitation of the mandatory daily prayers were forbidden.

[ 141 ] Vickery notes that the Cambodian Cham were discriminated against by the Khmer before the beginning of the war "in some localities", partly because the Cham were stereotyped as being practitioners of black magic.

[ 144 ] [ 145 ] In other localities, the Cham were well-assimilated within the host communities, speaking the Khmer language and marrying Khmers, Vietnamese, and Chinese.

[ citation needed ] Between 1972 and 1974, the Khmer Rouge intensified the enforcement of the restrictions which they imposed on the Cham because they believed that the Cham were a threat to their communist agenda due to the existence of their unique language, their culture, their beliefs, and their independent communal system. Additionally, the Cham were renamed "Islamic Khmers" in an attempt to disassociate them from their ancestral heritage and ethnicity and force them to assimilate into the larger and Khmer-dominated Democratic Kampuchea. The Khmer Rouge believed that the Cham would jeopardize their attempts to establish close-knit communities where everyone could be easily monitored. As a result, the regime decided to disperse the Cham by deporting them from their respective localities and forcing them to work as peasants across Cambodia, hence forcing them to directly contribute to the creation and maintenance of the new Cambodian economy. This move was undertaken in an attempt to ensure that the Cham would not congregate in an attempt to form their own community again, which would have undermined the regime's plan to establish centralized economic cooperatives. Slowly, those Cham who defied the restrictions which the Khmer Rouge imposed on them were arrested by the regime. Hence, in October 1973, Cham Muslims in the Eastern Zone demonstrated their displeasure with the Khmer Rouge's restrictions by beating their drums—they traditionally beat their drums in order to inform locals that it is time to recite the daily prayers—at local mosques . This act of communal defiance prompted the blanket arrest of many Cham Muslim leaders and religious teachers.

[ 146 ] In February 1974, the Cham who lived in Region 31, which was located in the Western Zone, protested against the Khmer Rouge's policy which required fishermen to register their daily catch with the local cooperative and sell it to the cooperative at a low price. At the same time, the locals were also forced to buy those fish from the cooperative at a higher price. This policy prompted the locals to confront the cooperative to express their discontent, the locals were shot at, "killing and wounding more than 100", as one account put it. By December 1974, a rebellion by the Cham in Region 21 of the Eastern Zone had broken out against the Khmer Rouge after community leaders were arrested. The rebellion was forcefully repressed by the regime and no records of casualties were documented.

[ 146 ] As much as there are records of these restrictions, resistance, and repressions, there are also accounts by members of the Cham community which deny the oppression which it was subjected to by the regime between 1970 and early 1975. While restrictions on certain activities like trade and travel were imposed during that period, they were understood to be the by-products of the ongoing civil war. Moreover, some Cham had also joined the revolution as soldiers and members of the Khmer Rouge. According to some local accounts, people had confidence in the Khmer Rouge when they first came to the village communities which assisted the locals by providing food and provisions to them, and there were no bans on local cultures or religions; even if restrictions were imposed, the consequences of them were not harsh.

[ 147 ] Many regarded the Khmer Rouge as heroes because they believed that the Khmer Rouge supported the peasantry during its war against the United States backed government.

[ 135 ] Because the Cham communities could be found across Cambodia, various Cham communities might have experienced the effects of the Khmer Rouge's pre-1975 rule differently; some communities experienced the repressions and restrictions but other communities did not. When Pol Pot consolidated his power by the end of 1975, the persecution became more severe, and it indiscriminately affected all of the Cham people. This could well be one of the simpler reasons as to why the Cambodian government and the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC) have not prosecuted any Khmer Rouge members who perpetrated atrocities during the pre-1975 period, the period before Pol Pot consolidated his power. As a result, the accounts of those Cham who experienced the repressions prior to 1975 were not considered parts of the genocide [ citation needed ] , mainly because according to the Article 1 of the Law on the Establishment of the Extraordinary Chambers, jurisdiction ratione temporis is limited to the period from 17 April 1975 to 6 January 1979.

[ 148 ] In 1975, upon the victory of the Khmer Rouge over the Khmer Republic's forces, two brothers of Cham descent who had joined the Khmer Rouge as soldiers returned home to Region 21 within the Kampong Cham Province , where the largest Cham Muslim community could be found. The brothers told their father about the adventures which they had experienced as participants in the revolution, adventures which included the killing of Khmers and the consumption of pork, in the hope that they would be able to convince their father to join the communist cause. The father, who remained silent, was clearly not impressed by the accounts which were given by his sons. Instead, he grabbed a cleaver, killed his sons, and told his fellow villagers that he killed the enemy. When the villagers pointed out that he murdered his own sons, he recounted the stories which his sons had previously told to him, citing the Khmer Rouge's hatred for Islam and the Cham people. This event prompted the villagers to make a unanimous agreement, that night, they would kill all Khmer Rouge soldiers who were stationed in the area. The next morning, more Khmer Rouge soldiers descended upon the area with heavy weapons, and they surrounded the village, killing every single villager in it.

[ 149 ] Similarly, in June or July 1975, the Khmer Rouge authorities in Region 21 of the Eastern Zone tried to confiscate all copies of the Qur'an from the people, and at the same time, they tried to impose a mandatory short haircut on Cham women. The authorities encountered a mass demonstration which was staged by members of the local Cham community who were shot at by the regime's soldiers. The Cham forcefully retaliated with swords and blades, killing a few soldiers, only to be retaliated against by the regime's military reinforcements, which annihilated the villagers and their property.

[ 150 ] In another account which was given by Cham refugees in Malaysia, thirteen leading figures within the Cham Muslim community were killed by the regime in June 1975. The supposed reason for the killings was because some of them were "leading prayers instead of attending a CPK meeting", while the others were purportedly "petitioning for the permission on marriage ceremonies." [ 151 ] The events went from bad to worse in mid-1976 due to the rebellion, when the ethnic minorities were only allowed to pledge allegiance to the Khmer nationality and religion: there were to be no other identities besides the Khmer identity. Consequently, the Cham language was not spoken, communal eating in which everyone eats the same food became mandatory, forcing Cham Muslims to violate their religious beliefs by raising pigs and consuming pork.

[ 152 ] One reason for the occurrence of such rebellions which has been offered by locals is the fact that some of the Cham who were involved in the Khmer Rouge as soldiers were anticipating the acquisition of positions of power once Pol Pot consolidated his power. In 1975, these soldiers were dismissed from the Khmer Rouge's forces, deprived of their Islamic practices and robbed of their ethnic identity.

[ 153 ] The patterns were consistent throughout the killings of the Cham people: first, the communal structures were dismantled as a result of the murder of Cham Muslim leaders, including muftis , imams , and other learned men of influence. Second, the Cham's Islamic and ethnic identities were both dismantled when the practices that distinguished the Cham from the Khmers were restricted. Third, the Cham were dispersed from their communities, they were either forced to perform labour in the fields or they were accused of plotting to incite acts of resistance or rebellions against the Khmer Rouge and arrested.

[ citation needed ] During the Khmer Rouge's rule of Cambodia, all religions, including Buddhism , Christianity , and Islam, were banned and adherents of them were persecuted. According to Cham sources, 132 mosques were destroyed during the Khmer Rouge's rule, many other mosques were desecrated, and Muslims were not allowed to practice their faith. Muslims were forced to eat pork and they were murdered when they refused to eat it. Whole Cham villages were exterminated. Chams were not permitted to speak their language. Cham children were separated from their parents and raised as Khmers.

[ 154 ] Orders which were given by the Khmer Rouge government in 1979 stated: "The Cham nation no longer exists on Kampuchean soil belonging to the Khmer. Accordingly, Cham nationality, language, customs and religious beliefs must be immediately abolished. Those who fail to obey this order will suffer all the consequences for their acts of opposition to Angkar ." [ 155 ] After the end of the Khmer Rouge's rule, all religions were restored. Vickery believes that about 185,000 Cham lived in Cambodia in the mid-1980s and he also believes that the number of mosques was about the same then as it was before 1975. In early 1988, there were six mosques in the Phnom Penh area and a "good number" of mosques also existed in the provinces, but Muslim dignitaries were thinly stretched; only 20 of the previous 113 most prominent Cham clergy in Cambodia survived the rule of the Khmer Rouge period.

[ 156 ] According to Ben Kiernan, the racialization of the Cham during the colonial and post-colonial eras could be the main reason behind the Khmer Rouge's hatred of the Cham people. Misinformation and racial stereotypes were used to disconnect the Cham from their ancestral homelands, including the Cham extinction theory that was proposed by colonial scholars, according to that theory, the "real" Cham were extinct. Kiernan writes: "In the twentieth century, Chams have suffered from two myths: the glory of their "empire" has been exaggerated, and so has their present plight. A romanticized view of Cham doom helped deprive them of rights in 1975–79. They were called "Malays" by the French, and after Cambodia's independence, received a new, equally inaccurate label: "Islamic Khmers." Again their ethnic origin was denied, in the perverse sense, Chams became victims of History." [ 157 ] Scholars also compare the denial of the Khmer Rouge's racist motivation for its genocide against the Cham to the denial of the Holocaust , both forms of genocide denial are analogous narrational canards that seek to use victims' religions to justify the actions of genocide perpetrators but they ignore wider race and ethnic hatreds and discriminatory backgrounds.

[ 158 ] [ 159 ] [ 160 ] Religious groups [ edit ] Under the leadership of Pol Pot, who was an ardent Marxist atheist , [ 161 ] the Khmer Rouge enforced a policy of state atheism . According to Catherine Wessinger, "Democratic Kampuchea was officially an atheist state, and the persecution of religion by the Khmer Rouge was only matched in severity by the persecution of religion in the communist states of Albania (see Religion in communist Albania ) and North Korea (see Freedom of religion in North Korea )." [ 162 ] All religions were banned, and the repression of adherents of Islam, [ 163 ] Christianity, [ 164 ] and Buddhism was extensive. It is estimated that up to 50,000 Buddhist monks were massacred by the Khmer Rouge.

[ 165 ] [ 166 ] Internal purges [ edit ] Main article: Eastern Zone massacres In 1978, in order to purge the Eastern Military Zone of those he perceived to have been contaminated by the Vietnamese, Pol Pot ordered military units from the Southwest Zone to move into eastern Kampuchea and eliminate the "hidden traitors". Unable to withstand an attack from the Kampuchea Government, So Phim committed suicide while his deputy Heng Samrin defected to Vietnam. The series of massacres in the Eastern Zone were the most serious of all of the massacres which took place during the Pol Pot regime's genocide.

[ 167 ] Use of children [ edit ] Further information: Child soldiers in Cambodia and History of children in the military The Khmer Rouge exploited thousands of desensitized, conscripted children in their early teens to commit mass murder and other atrocities during and after the genocide. The indoctrinated children were taught to follow any order without hesitation.

[ 31 ] The organization continued to use children extensively until at least 1998, often forcibly recruiting them. During this period, the children were deployed mainly in unpaid support roles, such as ammunition-carriers, and also as combatants. Many children had fled the Khmer Rouge without a means to feed themselves and believed that joining the government forces would enable them to survive, although local commanders frequently denied them any pay.

[ 168 ] Torture and human experimentation [ edit ] Main article: Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum The Khmer Rouge regime is also well known for practicing torturous medical experiments on prisoners. People were imprisoned and tortured merely on suspicion of opposing the regime or because other prisoners gave their names under torture. Whole families (including women and children) ended up in prisons and were tortured because the Khmer Rouge feared that if they did not do this, their intended victims' relatives would seek revenge. Pol Pot said, "if you want to kill the grass, you also have to kill the roots".

[ 169 ] Most prisoners did not even know why they were imprisoned and, if they dared to ask the prison guards, the guards would answer only by saying that Angkar (the Communist Party of Kampuchea) never makes mistakes, which meant that they must have done something illegal.

[ 170 ] There are many accounts of torture in both the Security Prison 21 records and the documents of the trial; as told by the survivor Bou Meng in his book (written by Huy Vannak), tortures were so atrocious and heinous that the prisoners tried in every way to commit suicide, even using spoons, and their hands were constantly tied behind their back to prevent them from committing suicide or trying to escape. When it was believed that they could not provide any further useful information, they were blindfolded and sent to the Killing Fields , which were mass graves where prisoners were killed at night with metal tools such as scythes or nails and hammers (since bullets were too expensive). Often times, their screams were covered with loudspeakers playing propaganda music of Democratic Kampuchea and noise from generator sets.

[ citation needed ] A Chankiri Tree . The sign reads "Chankiri Tree against which executioners beat children" Inside S-21, a special treatment was given to babies and children; they were taken away from their mothers and relatives, and sent to the Killing Fields, where they were smashed against the so-called Chankiri Tree . A similar treatment is supposed to have been given to babies of other prisons like S-21, spread all over Democratic Kampuchea. S-21 also incarcerated a few Westerners who were captured by the regime. One was the British teacher John Dawson Dewhirst , captured by the Khmer Rouge while he was on a yacht. One guard of S-21, Cheam Soeu, said that one of the Westerners had been burned alive, but Kang Kek Iew ("Comrade Duch") denied that. He said that Pol Pot asked him to burn their corpses (after death) and that "nobody would dare to violate my order".

[ 171 ] Tortures were meant not only to force prisoners to confess but for the prison guards' amusement. They feared that they would themselves become prisoners if they treated the prisoners well.

[ 172 ] The previous doctors were killed or sent to the countryside to work as farmers during the Khmer Rouge and the library of the Medical Faculty in Phnom Penh was set on fire. The regime then employed child medics, who were just teenagers with no or very little training. They did not have any knowledge of Western medicine (which was forbidden since it was considered a capitalist invention), and they had to practice their own medical experiments and make progress by themselves. They did not have Western medicines (since Cambodia, according to the Khmer Rouge, had to be self-sufficient) and all medical experiments were systematically conducted without proper anesthetics.

[ 173 ] A medic who worked inside S-21 said that a 17-year-old girl had her throat slit and her abdomen pierced before being beaten and put into water for an entire night. This procedure was repeated many times and carried out without anesthetics.

[ 174 ] In a hospital of Kampong Cham province , child medics cut out the intestines of a living non-consenting person and joined their ends to study the healing process. The patient died after three days due to the "operation".

[ 173 ] In the same hospital, other "physicians" trained by the Khmer Rouge opened the chest of a living person, just to see the heart beating. The operation resulted in the patient's immediate death.

[ 173 ] Other testimonies, as well as Khmer Rouge policy, suggest that these were not isolated cases.

[ 175 ] [ 176 ] [ 177 ] They also performed drug testing, for instance by injecting coconut juice into a living person's body and studying the effects. Coconut juice injection is often lethal.

[ 173 ] Witness at Tribunal hearing also disclosed that in Tbong Khmum province, he saw a medical staff at the hospital carrying out experiments on the wives of arrested cadre at night, when it was quiet. The victims' bodies were cut open and injected with some liquid that other reports stated that the injection could be some form of coconut fluid.

[ 177 ] Tuol Sleng genocide museum Photo from genocide museum Tuol Sleng Tuol Sleng Genocide museum In the museum Number of deaths [ edit ] Impact of the genocide on the country's average life expectancy Ben Kiernan estimates that between 1.671 million and 1.871 million Cambodians died as a result of Khmer Rouge policy, or between 21% and 24% of Cambodia's 1975 population.

[ 178 ] A study by French demographer Marek Sliwinski calculated slightly fewer than 2 million unnatural deaths under the Khmer Rouge out of a 1975 Cambodian population of 7.8 million; 33.5% of Cambodian men died under the Khmer Rouge compared to 15.7% of Cambodian women.

[ 4 ] According to a 2001 academic source, the most widely accepted estimates of excess deaths under the Khmer Rouge range from 1.5 million to 2 million, although figures as low as 1 million and as high as 3 million have been cited; conventionally accepted estimates of deaths due to Khmer Rouge executions range from 500,000 to 1 million, "a third to one half of excess mortality during the period." [ 47 ] However, a 2013 academic source (citing research from 2009) indicates that execution may have accounted for as much as 60% of the total, with 23,745 mass graves containing approximately 1.3 million suspected victims of execution.

[ 32 ] While considerably higher than earlier and more widely accepted estimates of Khmer Rouge executions, the Documentation Center of Cambodia (DC-Cam)'s Craig Etcheson defended such estimates of over one million executions as "plausible, given the nature of the mass grave and DC-Cam's methods, which are more likely to produce an under-count of bodies rather than an over-estimate." [ 42 ] [ 44 ] Demographer Patrick Heuveline estimated that between 1.17 million and 3.42 million Cambodians died unnatural deaths between 1970 and 1979, with between 150,000 and 300,000 of those deaths occurring during the civil war. Heuveline's central estimate is 2.52 million excess deaths, of which 1.4 million were the direct result of violence.

[ 44 ] [ 47 ] Despite being based on a house-to-house survey of Cambodians, the estimate of 3.3 million deaths promulgated by the Khmer Rouge's successor regime, the People's Republic of Kampuchea (PRK), is generally considered to be an exaggeration; [ 4 ] among other methodological errors, the PRK authorities added the estimated number of victims that had been found in the partially exhumed mass graves to the raw survey results, meaning that some victims would have been double-counted.

[ 44 ] After Democratic Kampuchea [ edit ] Commemoration [ edit ] Although executions of public officials of the old regime had taken place after Phnom Penh fell, 20 May 1975 is commemorated in Cambodia as the date that the Khmer Rouge campaign against private citizens began [ 179 ] and 20 May is now observed annually as the "National Day of Remembrance" ( Khmer : ទិវាជាតិនៃការចងចាំ , romanized : Tivea Cheate nei kar Changcham ) and marked by a national holiday.

[ 180 ] In 2025, three sites associated with the genocide ( Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum and Choeung Ek in Phnom Penh , and M-13 prison in Kampong Chhnang province ) were designated as World Heritage Sites by UNESCO as part of the Cambodian Memorial Sites .

[ 181 ] War crimes trials [ edit ] Main article: Khmer Rouge Tribunal The tribunal's main building with the court room The Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia ended the genocide by defeating and overthrowing the Khmer Rouge regime in January 1979. On 15 July 1979, the new Vietnamese installed government of Cambodia passed "Decree Law No. 1." This allowed for the trial of Pol Pot and Ieng Sary for the crime of genocide. They were given an American defense lawyer, Hope Stevens , [ 182 ] and were tried in absentia and convicted of genocide.

[ 183 ] The war continued until 1989 as an insurgency against the Vietnamese occupation by the Khmer Rouge and several other groups. Following the Vietnamese withdrawal, the 1991 Paris Peace Agreements were signed to mark the official end of the war.

[ 19 ] In order to include the Khmer Rouge in the agreement, the major powers agreed to avoid using the word "genocide" to describe their actions between 1975 and 1979.

[ 184 ] Nearly every major leader in Cambodia in 1991 had at one point allied themselves with the Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge, so they were reluctant to advocate bringing him to trial. The United States had avoided describing Khmer Rouge atrocities as genocide until 1989, claiming it was "counterproductive to finding peace" and only approved capturing and holding a trial for Pol Pot in 1997. There was also speculation that a trial might examine the U.S. bombing of Cambodia during the Vietnam War.

[ 185 ] The Cambodian Genocide Project [ edit ] The Cambodian Genocide Project was founded by Gregory Stanton in 1982. Stanton started the project after directing the Church World Service and CARE relief program in Phnom Penh in 1980. Stanton proposed that the Khmer Rouge regime, which still held Cambodia's seat in the United Nations, should be charged in the International Court of Justice for violation of the Genocide Convention, to which Cambodia is a State-Party.

[ 186 ] Stanton undertook investigations in Cambodia with Dr. Ben Kiernan of Yale University in the 1980s. They interviewed many survivors, visited mass graves and extermination prisons, and collected hours of videotaped eye-witness testimony. Kiernan wrote several books about the history of the Khmer Rouge regime. Stanton wrote the legal analyses for an ICJ case, which could be filed by any State-Party to the Genocide Convention without reservations. After meeting with Stanton, the Foreign Minister of Australia, Bill Hayden, spoke in favor of his country taking the case to the ICJ. However, the Australian Prime Minister received a call from the US State Department urging him to overrule Hayden. Other countries were also approached, but any indicating interest were promptly asked not to file the case by the US State Department.

The Khmer Rouge were part of a coalition in Thailand and the Cambodian mountains that opposed the new Soviet and Vietnamese backed government in Phnom Penh. The coalition also included the non-communist resistance and the Royalist party. The US opposed the new government because of its Soviet support. Stanton likened the tripartite coalition to an alliance between a collie, a poodle, and a wolf.

To reverse State Department opposition to trials for the Khmer Rouge, Dr. Stanton, Dr. Kiernan, Sally Benson, and Dr. Craig Etcheson co-founded the Campaign to Oppose the Return of the Khmer Rouge.

[ 187 ] They drafted the Cambodian Genocide Justice Act, introduced by Senator Charles Robb. It ordered the State Department to make it US policy to try the Khmer Rouge, to create a State Department Office of Cambodian Investigations, to conduct a study by legal scholars to recommend how trials should be conducted, and it earmarked $800,000 to fund the effort.

In 1992, Dr. Stanton left his law professorship at Washington and Lee University to join the State Department Foreign Service. He realized that in order for the trials to take place, a committed advocate had to join the State Department to promote the project. In 1994, President Clinton signed the Cambodian Genocide Justice Act. That same year, the genocide of the Tutsis in Rwanda killed 800,000 Rwandans.

The Director General of the Foreign Service, Genta Hawkins Holmes, directed Dr. Stanton back to Washington, DC and assigned him to the Office of UN Political Affairs in the Bureau of International Organizations, with the mandate to deal with the aftermath of the Rwandan genocide. Stanton joined the UN Commission of Inquiry on Rwanda and drafted UN Security Council Resolutions 955 and 978 , which established the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda .

The Office of Cambodian Genocide Investigations was led by Ambassador Alphonse LaPorta and included Dr. Stanton. The Office issued a Request for Proposals to document the Khmer Rouge genocide. Stanton recused himself from any decision making on the bidding. Yale University's Cambodian Genocide Program, a successor to Stanton's Cambodian Genocide Project, won the contract. It was directed by Dr. Kiernan, Dr. Craig Etcheson, and Dr. Susan Cook. With Cambodian Youk Chang, they established the Documentation Center for Cambodia (DCCam). Dr. Helen Jarvis, working with DCCam, discovered thousands of pages of detailed records collected by the Khmer Rouge that documented their crimes. DCCam also conducted a survey of mass graves, and hundreds of eyewitness testimonies.

In 1997, Thomas Hammarberg, UN Human Rights chief in the UN Transitional Authority in Cambodia that followed the 1991 Paris Peace Accords, persuaded the two prime ministers of Cambodia to appeal to the UN to assist Cambodia in establishing a tribunal to try the senior leaders of the Khmer Rouge.

In 1997, Cambodia's two Co-Prime Ministers wrote a letter to the Secretary-General of the United Nations requesting assistance to set up trial proceedings against the senior leaders of the Khmer Rouge. In January 2001, the Cambodian National Assembly passed legislation to form a tribunal to try additional members of the Khmer Rouge regime.

[ 188 ] Following lengthy negotiations, an agreement between the Royal Government of Cambodia and the United Nations was reached and signed on 6 June 2003. The agreement was then endorsed by the United Nations General Assembly .

[ 189 ] Dr. Helen Jarvis became a senior advisor to Deputy Prime Minister Sok An. She established the Cambodian government Task Force to plan creation of the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC), commonly called the Khmer Rouge Tribunal. Dr. Stanton worked with the Task Force and drafted the Internal Rule of Procedure for the Tribunal. The rules established the first active participation by victims in an international tribunal and provided for a Victims Support Unit. The UN and government of Cambodia signed the agreement to establish the ECCC in 2003. Judges and other personnel were appointed by the government and the UN. Financing was pledged by UN members and the Tribunal was established in 2006.

The tribunal tried and convicted three of the senior Khmer Rouge leaders, Kang Kek Iew (Duch) chief of the Tuol Sleng extermination prison in Phnom Penh, Nuon Chea (Brother Number Two) chief ideologist, and Khieu Samphan Head of State. Pol Pot, Brother Number One, died before trials began. Ieng Sary, Khmer Rouge Foreign Minister was tried but died before his verdict. Although only a few Khmer Rouge leaders were tried, over 350,000 Cambodians attended the trials in person, and they received considerable publicity by radio and television. In polls of Cambodians taken by the International Republican Institute and the University of California at Berkeley over two thirds of Cambodians surveyed expressed their support for the ECCC and said it had contributed significantly to their understanding of the crimes of the Khmer Rouge.

In 1999, Duch was interviewed by Nic Dunlop and Nate Thayer and admitted his guilt for crimes carried out in Tuol Sleng prison, where up to 17,000 political prisoners were executed. He expressed sorrow for his actions, stating that he was willing to stand trial and give evidence against his former comrades. During his trial in February and March 2009, Duch admitted that he was responsible for the crimes carried out at Tuol Sleng. On 26 July 2010, he was found guilty on charges of crimes against humanity , torture, and murder and was sentenced to 35 years in prison.

[ 190 ] On 3 February 2012 his previous sentence was replaced with life imprisonment.

[ 191 ] Duch died of lung disease in September 2020.

[ 192 ] Nuon Chea ("Brother Number Two") was arrested on 19 September 2007.

[ 193 ] At the end of his 2013 trial he denied all charges, stating that he had not given orders "to mistreat or kill people to deprive them of food or commit any genocide." He was convicted in 2014 and sentenced to life imprisonment. He has expressed remorse and accepted moral responsibility for his crimes, stating "I would like to sincerely apologize to the public, the victims, the families, and all Cambodian people." [ 194 ] After being located in an opulent Phnom Penh villa, Ieng Sary was arrested on 12 November 2007 and indicted for crimes against humanity, as was his wife Ieng Thirith , who had been an unofficial adviser to the regime.

[ 195 ] On 17 November 2011, following evaluations from medical experts, Thirith was found to be unfit to stand trial due to a mental condition.

[ 196 ] Sary died of heart failure in 2013 while his trial was in progress.

[ 197 ] Another senior Khmer Rouge leader, Khieu Samphan, was arrested on 19 November 2007 and charged with crimes against humanity.

[ 198 ] He was convicted in 2014 and sentenced to life imprisonment. At a hearing on 23 June 2017, Samphan stated a desire to bow to the memory of his guiltless victims, while also claiming that he suffered for those who fought for their ideal to have a brighter future.

[ 199 ] Denial of the genocide [ edit ] Main article: Cambodian genocide denial In 1979, some members of the Canadian Workers' Communist Party published a pamphlet after their visit to Cambodia. The pamphlet stated that reports of mass killings and other atrocities were made up by the USA and it also stated that the reports were then used by the Soviet Union and Vietnam. According to them, a part of the death toll was made up by the US embassy in Thailand and then, it was popularized by François Ponchaud . They also claimed that the reports and images of the Khmer Rouge's atrocities were made up by Thai intelligence and supporters of Lon Nol.

[ 200 ] A few months before his death on 15 April 1998, [ 201 ] Pol Pot was interviewed by Nate Thayer. During the interview, he stated that he had a clear conscience and denied being responsible for the genocide. Pol Pot asserted that he "came to carry out the struggle, not to kill people." According to Alex Alvarez, Pol Pot "portrayed himself as a misunderstood and unfairly vilified figure".

[ 202 ] In 2013, Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen unanimously passed legislation that prohibits the denial of the Cambodian genocide and other war crimes committed by the Khmer Rouge; a bill that mirrors legislation passed in European nations after the conclusion of the Holocaust.

[ 203 ] The legislation was passed despite comments by opposition leader Kem Sokha , who is the deputy president of the Cambodian National Rescue Party . Sokha stated that exhibits at the Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum were fabricated and that the artifacts were faked by the Vietnamese following their invasion in 1979. Sokha's party has claimed that his comments were taken out of context.

[ 204 ] Cambodia scholar Ben Kiernan and Genocide Scholar Gregory Stanton personally saw the records and photographs at Tuol Sleng prison in 1980 and vouch for their authenticity.

Denial of support of the Khmer Rouge by China [ edit ] In 1988, Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen, who was once a member of the Khmer Rouge, described China as "the root of everything that was evil" in Cambodia.

[ 6 ] But after he ousted his domestic rivals in a bloody factional coup d'état in July 1997, prompting outrage in the West, China immediately recognized the status quo and offered military aid.

[ 6 ] New interests soon came into alignment. Then, in 2000, Jiang Zemin , who was the CCP General Secretary and Chinese President , arrived in Cambodia for an official visit, the first by a Chinese leader since 1963.

[ 6 ] In December 2000, while Jiang was visiting Cambodia, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of China issued a statement in which it claimed that Beijing never supported the wrong policies of the Khmer Rouge while it was governing Cambodia and it refused to apologize.

[ 205 ] [ 206 ] [ 207 ] Yang Yanyi (杨燕怡), then the Deputy Director of the Asian Department in the Foreign Ministry of China, claimed: "This is an internal affair to be addressed by the Cambodians themselves. China had never interfered in the internal affairs of another country. Our assistance and support during that certain historical period was to support Cambodia's effort to safeguard its sovereignty and national independence. We never support wrong policies of other countries." [ 205 ] During the visit, Jiang met with Norodom Sihanouk and Cambodian Prime Minister Hun Sen, signing an agreement to offer US$ 12 million in aid to Cambodia. Even though the Cambodian government never mentioned the issue of the Khmer Rouge during Jiang's visit, protesters asked for an apology and they even asked for restitution from China, and the said request still persists.

[ 205 ] [ 208 ] In 2015, Youk Chhang, the executive director of the Documentation Center of Cambodia, pointed out that "Chinese advisers were there with the prison guards and all the way to the top leader. China has never admitted or apologized for this." [ 10 ] In 2009, during the court trials of some of the former Khmer Rouge leaders, Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Jiang Yu claimed: "For a long time China has ... had normal and friendly relations with previous Cambodian governments, including that of Democratic Kampuchea. As everyone knows, the government of Democratic Kampuchea had a legal seat at the United Nations, and had established broad foreign relations with more than 70 countries." [ 209 ] Recognition of rescuers [ edit ] The Rescuers exhibition, which ran from 2011 to 2015, recognized individuals who risked their lives to save others. The Cambodian rescuers are paired alongside similar profiles of courage from other world genocides.

[ 210 ] Similar recognition to rescuers of the Cambodian Genocide by the Australian social harmony group, Courage to Care , which published an educational resource on the subject.

[ 211 ] In literature and media [ edit ] The book Cambodge année zéro ("Cambodia Year Zero") by François Ponchaud was published in French in 1977 and translated into English in 1978.

[ 212 ] Ponchaud was one of the first authors to bring the Cambodian genocide to the world's attention.

[ 213 ] Ponchaud has said that the genocide "was above all, the translation into action the particular vision of a man [ sic ]: A person who has been spoiled by a corrupt regime cannot be reformed, he must be physically eliminated from the brotherhood of the pure." [ 214 ] Murder of a Gentle Land: The Untold Story of a Communist Genocide in Cambodia by John Barron and Anthony Paul was published in 1977.

[ 215 ] The book drew on accounts from refugees, and an abridged version published in Reader's Digest was widely read.

[ 216 ] Filmmaker Rithy Panh , a survivor of the genocide, is "considered by many to be the cinematic voice of Cambodia." Panh has directed several documentaries on the genocide, including S-21: The Khmer Rouge Killing Machine , which has been noted by critics for "allow[ing] us to observe how memory and time may collapse to render the past as present and by doing so reveal the ordinary face of evil." [ 217 ] The genocide is portrayed in the 1984 Academy Award –winning film The Killing Fields [ 218 ] and in Patricia McCormick 's 2012 novel Never Fall Down .

[ 219 ] The genocide is also recounted by Loung Ung in her memoir First They Killed My Father (2000).

[ 220 ] [ 219 ] The book was adapted into a 2017 biographical film directed by Angelina Jolie . Set in 1975, the film depicts five-year-old Ung who is forced to be trained as a child soldier while her siblings are sent to labor camps by the Khmer Rouge regime.

[ 221 ] The film Year Zero: The Silent Death of Cambodia is a 1979 British television documentary written and presented by the Australian journalist John Pilger .

[ 222 ] [ 223 ] First broadcast on British television on 30 October 1979, the film recounts the extensive bombing of Cambodia by the United States in the 1970s as a secret chapter of the Vietnam War , the subsequent brutality and genocide that occurred when Pol Pot and his Khmer Rouge militia took over, the poverty and suffering of the people, and the limited aid since given by the West. Pilger's first report on Cambodia was published in a special issue of the Daily Mirror .

[ 223 ] [ 224 ] [ 225 ] See also [ edit ] Cambodia portal Communism portal Allegations of United States support for the Khmer Rouge Ba Chúc massacre Cambodian genocide denial Crimes against humanity under communist regimes Dangrek genocide Eastern Zone massacres Effects of genocide on youth Great Chinese Famine Great Leap Forward Intelligenzaktion Mass killings under communist regimes Operation Freedom Deal Genocides in history Rwandan genocide Gaza Genocide Notes [ edit ] ^ Khmer : ប្រល័យពូជសាសន៍នៅកម្ពុជា , lit.

'Genocide in Cambodia', or អំពើប្រល័យពូជសាសន៍ខ្មែរ , 'Khmer genocidal act(s)' ^ In 2010, the Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia ruled for the indictment of Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan that both former Khmer Rouge officials are guilty of committing ethnic cleansing exclusively against ethnic Vietnamese and Chams .

[ 2 ] ^ See: [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] ^ See: [ 5 ] [ 7 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] ^ See: [ 5 ] [ 7 ] [ 9 ] [ 16 ] ^ Estimates may vary according to scholars: [ 20 ] * 90,000 deaths ~ 36% (Kiernan's 1982 estimate).

* 500,000 to 560,000 deaths ~ 71,4% to 80% of total Cham population ( DC-Cam and UN estimates).

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] References [ edit ] ^ Heuveline, Patrick (2015).

"The Boundaries of Genocide: Quantifying the Uncertainty of the Death Toll During the Pol Pot Regime (1975-1979)" .

Population Studies .

69 (2): 201– 218.

doi : 10.1080/00324728.2015.1045546 .

PMC 4562795 .

PMID 26218856 .

^ a b "Trial Chamber Summary of Judgement Case 002/02" (PDF) .

United Nations Office of Legal Affairs .

^ Heuveline 2001 , pp. 102–105: "As best as can now be estimated, over two million Cambodians died during the 1970s because of the political events of the decade, the vast majority of them during the mere four years of the 'Khmer Rouge' regime. This number of deaths is even more staggering when related to the size of the Cambodian population, then less than eight million. ... Subsequent reevaluations of the demographic data situated the death toll for the [civil war] in the order of 300,000 or less." Kiernan 2003b , pp. 586–587: "We may safely conclude, from known pre- and post-genocide population figures and from professional demographic calculations, that the 1975–79 death toll was between 1.671 and 1.871 million people, 21 to 24 percent of Cambodia's 1975 population." Sullivan, Meg (16 April 2015).

"UCLA demographer produces best estimate yet of Cambodia's death toll under Pol Pot" .

UCLA . Retrieved 12 April 2024 .

Tyner, James A.; Molana, Hanieh Haji (1 March 2020).

"Ideologies of Khmer Rouge Family Policy: Contextualizing Sexual and Gender-Based Violence during the Cambodian Genocide" .

Genocide Studies International .

13 (2): 168– 189.

doi : 10.3138/gsi.13.2.03 .

ISSN 2291-1847 .

S2CID 216505042 .

Archived from the original on 9 April 2023 . Retrieved 31 May 2022 .

^ a b c d e f Locard, Henri (March 2005). "State Violence in Democratic Kampuchea (1975–1979) and Retribution (1979–2004)".

European Review of History .

12 (1): 121– 143.

doi : 10.1080/13507480500047811 .

S2CID 144712717 .

Between 17 April 1975 and 7 January 1979 the death toll was about 25% of a population of some 7.8 million; 33.5% of men were massacred or died unnatural deaths as against 15.7% of the women, and 41.9% of the population of Phnom Penh. ... Since 1979, the so-called Pol Pot regime has been equated to Hitler and the Nazis. This is why the word 'genocide' (associated with Nazism) has been used for the first time in a distinctly Communist regime by the invading Vietnamese to distance themselves from a government they had overturned. This 'revisionism' was expressed in several ways. The Khmer Rouge were said to have killed 3.3 million, some 1.3 million more people than they had in fact killed. There was one abominable state prison, S–21, now the Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum. In fact, there were more than 150 on the same model, at least one per district. ... For the United States in particular, denouncing the crimes of the Khmer Rouge was not at the top of their agenda in the early 1980s. Instead, as in the case of Afghanistan, it was still at times vital to counter what was perceived as the expansionist policies of the Soviets. The USA prioritised its budding friendship with the Democratic Republic of China to counter the 'evil' influence of the USSR in Southeast Asia, acting through its client state, revolutionary Vietnam. All the ASEAN countries shared that vision. So it became vital, with the military and financial help of China, to revive and develop armed resistance to the Vietnamese troops, with the resurrected KR at its core. ... [France] was instrumental in forcing the Sihanoukists and the Republicans to form an obscene alliance with its former tormentors, the KR, under the name of the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea (CGDK) in 1982. In so doing, the international community officially reintegrated some of the worst perpetrators of crimes against humanity into the world diplomatic sphere...

^ a b c d e f Chandler, David P. (2018).

Brother Number One: A Political Biography of Pol Pot .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-4299-8161-6 .

^ a b c d e Strangio, Sebastian (16 May 2012).

"China's Aid Emboldens Cambodia" .

Yale University .

Archived from the original on 17 December 2020 . Retrieved 26 November 2019 .

^ a b c d e f "The Chinese Communist Party's Relationship with the Khmer Rouge in the 1970s: An Ideological Victory and a Strategic Failure" .

Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars . 13 December 2018.

Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 November 2019 .

^ Hood, Steven J. (1990). "Beijing's Cambodia Gamble and the Prospects for Peace in Indochina: The Khmer Rouge or Sihanouk?".

Asian Survey .

30 (10): 977– 991.

doi : 10.2307/2644784 .

ISSN 0004-4687 .

JSTOR 2644784 .

^ a b c d "China-Cambodia Relations" .

Radio Free Asia .

Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 November 2019 .

^ a b c d Levin, Dan (30 March 2015).

"China Is Urged to Confront Its Own History" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 20 May 2022 . Retrieved 26 November 2019 .

^ a b Kiernan, Ben (2008).

The Pol Pot Regime: Race, Power, and Genocide in Cambodia Under the Khmer Rouge, 1975–79 . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-3001-4299-0 .

^ a b Laura, Southgate (2019).

ASEAN Resistance to Sovereignty Violation: Interests, Balancing and the Role of the Vanguard State . Policy Press. p.

84 .

ISBN 978-1-5292-0221-2 .

^ Jackson, Karl D (1989).

Cambodia, 1975–1978: Rendezvous with Death . Princeton University Press. p.

219 .

ISBN 978-0-6910-2541-4 .

^ Ervin Staub.

The roots of evil: the origins of genocide and other group violence.

Cambridge University Press , 1989.

p. 202 ^ David Chandler & Ben Kiernan, ed. (1983).

Revolution and its Aftermath . New Haven: Yale University Southeast Asia Studies.

ISBN 978-0-9386-9205-8 .

^ Wang, Youqin.

"2016: 张春桥幽灵" (PDF) (in Chinese). The University of Chicago.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 June 2020 . Retrieved 26 November 2019 .

^ Etcheson 2005 , p. 119.

^ Heuveline 1998 , pp. 49–65.

^ a b c Mayersan 2013 , p. 182.

^ Ben Kiernan, Wendy Lower, Norman Naimark, Scott Straus et al.

The Cambridge World History of Genocide: Volume 3. Genocide in the Contemporary Era, 1914–2020.

Cambridge University Press , 2023.

[1] ^ Kiernan 2003b .

^ Bruckmayr, Philipp (1 July 2006).

"The Cham Muslims of Cambodia: From Forgotten Minority to Focal Point of Islamic Internationalism" .

American Journal of Islam and Society .

23 (3): 1– 23.

doi : 10.35632/ajis.v23i3.441 .

^ "Cambodia: Holocaust and Genocide Studies" .

College of Liberal Arts.

University of Minnesota .

Archived from the original on 6 November 2019 . Retrieved 15 August 2022 .

^ "Genocide in Cambodia" .

Holocaust Memorial Day Trust .

Archived from the original on 2 May 2023 . Retrieved 15 August 2022 .

^ "Genocide in Cambodia" .

Holocaust Museum Houston .

Archived from the original on 13 June 2021 . Retrieved 15 August 2022 .

^ a b Philip Spencer (2012).

Genocide Since 1945 . Routledge. p.

69 .

ISBN 978-0-4156-0634-9 .

^ Zhang, Zhifeng (25 April 2014).

华侨忆红色高棉屠杀：有文化的华人必死 .

Renmin Wang (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 24 November 2020 . Retrieved 27 November 2019 .

^ "Mapping the Killing Fields" .

Documentation Center of Cambodia . Archived from the original on 26 March 2016 . Retrieved 6 June 2018 .

Through interviews and physical exploration, DC-Cam identified 19,733 mass burial pits, 196 prisons that operated during the Democratic Kampuchea (DK) period, and 81 memorials constructed by survivors of the DK regime.

^ Kiernan, Ben (2014).

The Pol Pot Regime: Race, Power, and Genocide in Cambodia Under the Khmer Rouge, 1975–79 .

Yale University Press . p. 464.

ISBN 978-0-3001-4299-0 .

Like all but seven of the twenty thousand Tuol Sleng prisoners, she was murdered anyway.

^ Landsiedel, Peter, "The Killing Fields: Genocide in Cambodia" Archived 21 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine , P&E World Tour , 27 March 2017. Retrieved 17 March 2019 ^ a b Southerland, D. (20 July 2006).

"Cambodia Diary 6: Child Soldiers – Driven by Fear and Hate" .

Archived from the original on 20 March 2018 . Retrieved 28 March 2018 .

^ a b Seybolt, Aronson & Fischoff 2013 , p. 238.

^ State of the World's Refugees, 2000 Archived 17 February 2019 at the Wayback Machine United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, p. 92. Retrieved 21 January 2019 ^ "Agreement between the United Nations and the Royal Government of Cambodia concerning the prosecution under Cambodian law of crimes committed during the period of Democratic Kampuchea" .

United Nations Assistance to the Khmer Rouge Trials . 11 April 2022 . Retrieved 14 November 2023 .

^ Mendes 2011 , p. 13.

^ "Judgement in Case 002/01 to be pronounced on 7 August 2014 | Drupal" .

www.eccc.gov.kh .

Archived from the original on 11 April 2023 . Retrieved 29 November 2019 .

^ Frey 2009 , pp. 266– 267 .

^ Shawcross, pp. 181–182, 194. See also Isaacs, Hardy, & Brown, p. 98.

^ Mosyakov, Dmitry. "The Khmer Rouge and the Vietnamese Communists: A History of Their Relations as Told in the Soviet Archives". In Cook, Susan E., ed. (2004). "Genocide in Cambodia and Rwanda".

Yale Genocide Studies Program Monograph Series .

1 : 54. "In April–May 1970, many North Vietnamese forces entered Cambodia in response to the call for help addressed to Vietnam not by Pol Pot, but by his deputy Nuon Chea." Nguyen Co Thach recalls: "Nuon Chea has asked for help and we have 'liberated' five provinces of Cambodia in ten days." ^ Sutsakhan, Lt. Gen. Sak, The Khmer Republic at War and the Final Collapse . Washington, D.C.: United States Army Center of Military History, 1987. p. 32.

^ "Dining with the Dear Leader" .

Asia Time . Archived from the original on 28 March 2007.

^ a b Sharp, Bruce.

"Counting Hell" .

Mekong.net .

Archived from the original on 15 November 2013 . Retrieved 17 August 2019 .

^ "Mass Atrocity Endings | Documenting declines in civilian fatalities" . sites.tufts.edu.

Archived from the original on 20 February 2023 . Retrieved 6 February 2018 .

^ a b c d e f "Cambodia: U.S. bombing, civil war, & Khmer Rouge" .

World Peace Foundation . 7 August 2015.

Archived from the original on 14 July 2019 . Retrieved 19 July 2019 .

On the higher end of estimates, journalist Elizabeth Becker writes that 'officially, more than half a million Cambodians died on the Lon Nol side of the war; another 600,000 were said to have died in the Khmer Rouge zones.' However, it is not clear how these numbers were calculated or whether they disaggregate civilian and soldier deaths. Others' attempts to verify the numbers suggest a lower number. Demographer Patrick Heuveline has produced evidence suggesting a range of 150,000 to 300,000 violent deaths from 1970 to 1975. In an article reviewing different sources about civilian deaths during the civil war, Bruce Sharp argues that the total number is likely to be around 250,000 violent deaths. ... Many attempts have been made to count or estimate the scale of deaths under the KR. While the KR officials claim that only around 20,000 civilians were killed, the true estimate likely falls somewhere between 1–3 million total deaths, with upper range estimates of those directly killed by the regime approaching 1 million. ... One of the more thorough demographic studies, conducted by Patrick Heuveline, also attempts to separate out violent civilian deaths from a general increase in mortality caused by famine, disease, working conditions, or other indirect causes. He does so by grouping deaths within different age and sex brackets and analyzing treatment of these age and sex groups by the Khmer Rouge and violent regimes in general. His conclusion is that an average of 2.52 million people (range of 1.17–3.42 million) died as a result of regime actions between 1970 and 1979, with an average estimate of 1.4 million (range of 1.09–2.16 million) directly violent deaths.

^ a b c Sliwinski, Marek (1995).

Le Génocide Khmer Rouge: Une Analyse Démographique .

L'Harmattan . pp.

42– 43, 48.

Le bilan humain de cette périod de guerre civile est difficile à établir. Les chiffres avancés ne sont pas irréfutables, et ils peuvent bien avoir été lancés à des fins de propagande ou d'intoxication. Ils oscillent, pour le nombre des morts, entre 600 000 et 700 000, soit entre 7.7% et 9.6% de la population du pays selon les évaluations les plus extrêmes. La cause principale de ces pertes serait les bombardements massifs de l'aviation américaine dont le but principal était l'anéantissement des pistes Ho-Chi-Minh et la destruction d'un mythique Q.G. du Viêt-cong. A cet égard, il est intéressant de rappeler que la population de toutes les régions traversées par les pistes Ho-Chi-Minh, régions situées sur la rive gauche du Mékong, ne comptait au total qu'environ 1 165 000 personnes, et que les trois plus grandes provinces longeant la frontiére laotienne et vietnamienne, Stung Treng, Ratanakiri et Mondolkiri, étaient pratiquement inhabitées. L'impact des bombardments américains sur l'état de la population du Cambodge durant les années 1970–1975 ne paraît donc pas aussi évident que certain auteurs le supposent. Nos propres statistiques sur les causes précises des décés ne situent d'ailleurs les victimes des bombardments qu'à la troisiéme place, loin derriére les victimes des armes à feu portatives et des assassinats. ... Pour la période de guerre civile, l'augmentation totale de la mortalité est donc de 7.5% Si l'on considére que la mortalité naturelle frappe chaque anné quelque 132 000 personnes, on pourrait facilement en déduire que la surmortalité due à la guerre se chiffre par un nombre de décés ne dépassant pas 50 000 personnes durant la périod allant de mars 1970 à avril 1975. Toutefois, en tenant compte du fait que la guerre a eu une forte incidence tant sur la dimunution de la mortalité naturelle que sur l'agumentation de la mortalité infantile, on peut estimer la proportion annuelle des victimes elles-mêmes de cette guerre à 0,64% de la population du pays, soit, pour toutes ces années, 240 000 personnes environ.

^ Banister, Judith; Johnson, E. Paige (1993).

"After the Nightmare: The Population of Cambodia" .

Genocide and Democracy in Cambodia: The Khmer Rouge, the United Nations and the International Community . Yale University Southeast Asia Studies. p.

87 .

ISBN 978-0-9386-9249-2 .

An estimated 275,000 excess deaths. We have modeled the highest mortality that we can justify for the early 1970s.

^ a b c Heuveline 2001 , pp. 102–105: "As best as can now be estimated, over two million Cambodians died during the 1970s because of the political events of the decade, the vast majority of them during the mere four years of the 'Khmer Rouge' regime. This number of deaths is even more staggering when related to the size of the Cambodian population, then less than eight million. ... Subsequent reevaluations of the demographic data situated the death toll for the [civil war] in the order of 300,000 or less." ^ William Shawcross, "1979 Sideshow: Kissinger, Nixon and the Destruction of Cambodia," (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1979) ^ Cultural Survival Quarterly Magazine, September 1990, "Roots of Genocide: New Evidence on the US Bombardment of Cambodia" Archived 18 September 2019 at the Wayback Machine ^ Valentino, Benjamin (2005).

Final Solutions: Mass Killing and Genocide in the 20th Century .

Cornell University Press . p. 84.

ISBN 978-0-8014-7273-2 .

^ James A. Tyner, The Killing of Cambodia: Geography, Genocide and the Unmaking of Space (Routledge, 2017) ^ Rummel, Rudolph .

"Statistics of Cambodian Democide: Estimates, Calculations, And Sources" .

Archived from the original on 4 January 2018 . Retrieved 6 February 2018 .

^ "FRONTLINE/WORLD . Cambodia – Pol Pot's Shadow . Chronicle of Survival . 1969–1974: Caught in the crossfire" . PBS.

Archived from the original on 16 December 2017 . Retrieved 29 December 2017 .

^ Kiernan, Ben (2004).

How Pol Pot Came to Power: Colonialism, Nationalism, and Communism in Cambodia, 1930–1975 .

Yale University Press . p. xxiii.

ISBN 978-0-3001-0262-8 .

^ Jones, Adam (2006).

Genocide: A Comprehensive Introduction (PDF) . Routledge. pp.

189– 190. Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 August 2019 . Retrieved 24 November 2019 .

^ Grandin, Greg (2015).

Kissinger's Shadow: The Long Reach of America's Most Controversial Statesman . Henry Holt and Company. pp.

179– 180.

ISBN 978-1-6277-9450-3 .

^ Kiernan, Ben (Winter 1989). "The American Bombardment of Kampuchea 1969–1973".

Vietnam Generation .

1 (1): 4–41.

^ Kiernan, Ben (2008).

The Pol Pot Regime: Race, Power, and Genocide in Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge, 1975–1979 .

Yale University Press . pp.

16– 19.

ISBN 978-0-3001-4299-0 .

^ Chandler, David (2000), Brother Number One: A Political Biography of Pol Pot , Revised Edition, Chiang Mai, Thailand: Silkworm Books, pp. 96–98.

^ Chandler, David (2005).

Cambodia 1884–1975 , in The Emergence of Modern Southeast Asia, edited by Norman Owen. University of Hawaii Press, p. 369.

^ Etcheson, Craig, The Rise and Demise of Democratic Kampuchea , Westview Press, 1984, p. 97.

^ Shawcross, pp. 92–100, 106–112.

^ a b c d Wang, Xiaolin.

"波尔布特：并不遥远的教训" [Pol Pot: Lessons from the Past].

Yanhuang Chunqiu (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 24 November 2020 . Retrieved 23 November 2019 .

^ a b c d "西哈努克、波尔布特与中国" [Sihanouk, Pol Pot and China].

Phoenix New Media (in Chinese). 10 April 2008.

Archived from the original on 30 October 2020 . Retrieved 26 November 2019 .

^ Song, Lianghe; Wu, Yijun (2013).

"中国对柬埔寨的援助：评价及建议" (PDF) .

Xiamen University Forum on International Development (in Chinese) (6): 54– 58.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 April 2019.

^ "人间正道：审判红色高棉" .

Phoenix New Media (in Chinese).

Archived from the original on 3 January 2021 . Retrieved 28 November 2019 .

^ "June 21, 1975. Conversation between Chinese leader Mao Zedong and Cambodian Leader Pol Pot" (PDF) .

Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 May 2022 . Retrieved 26 November 2019 .

^ a b "A Personal Reflection on Norodom Sihanouk and Zhou Enlai: An Extraordinary Friendship on the Fringes of the Cold War" (PDF) .

University of California, Berkeley . Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 October 2015.

^ a b Chang, Pao-min (1985).

Kampuchea Between China and Vietnam .

National University of Singapore Press .

ISBN 978-9-9716-9089-2 .

^ a b c Ciorciari, John D. (3 April 2014). "China and the Pol Pot regime".

Cold War History .

14 (2): 215– 235.

doi : 10.1080/14682745.2013.808624 .

ISSN 1468-2745 .

S2CID 153491712 .

^ Kurlantzick 2008 , p.

193 .

^ Kurlantzick 2008 , p.

193 .

^ Ruo, Gu (30 May 2016).

"老照片：七十年代波尔布特曾两度访华" .

Sohu (in Chinese).

Archived from the original on 4 June 2020 . Retrieved 24 November 2019 .

^ Xiap, Han.

" 'Dà zhài gōng' duì quánguó nóngcūn de èliè yǐngxiǎng" '大寨工' 对全国农村的恶劣影响 [The adverse impact of the "Dazhai Workers" on rural areas across the country].

Yanhuang Chunqiu (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 1 November 2020 . Retrieved 25 November 2019 .

^ a b Yu, Hongjun (13 January 2016).

"Hóngsè gāo mián yùndòng shǐmò" 红色高棉运动始末 [The Khmer Rouge Movement].

Boxun (in Chinese).

Archived from the original on 3 February 2018 . Retrieved 24 November 2019 .

^ "1978 Nián guójiā lǐngdǎo rén zhǔyào chūfǎng – lǎn biǎo" 1978年国家领导人主要出访 – 览表 [Major visits by state leaders in 1978 – List].

Sina (in Chinese). 26 November 2008.

Archived from the original on 5 November 2020 . Retrieved 24 November 2019 .

^ a b "Deng Xiaoping visited S'pore in 1978. Here's the impact it left on Sino-S'pore relations 40 years on" .

mothership.sg .

Archived from the original on 20 April 2020 . Retrieved 6 June 2020 .

^ a b "China Policy" .

United States Department of State .

Archived from the original on 1 January 2025 . Retrieved 11 January 2025 .

^ a b PoKempner 1995 , p.

106 .

^ SarDesai 1998 , p.

163 .

^ Brinkley 2011 , pp.

64 – 65 .

^ Haas 1991 , pp. 17–18, 28–29.

^ Thayer 1991 , pp. 180, 187–189.

^ Brinkley 2011 , pp.

58 , 65 .

^ "British SAS trained Khmer Rouge in land mines - an extract from a book of reporting" .

www.cambridgeclarion.org .

Archived from the original on 15 March 2023 . Retrieved 15 March 2023 .

^ "Butcher of Cambodia set to expose Thatcher's role" .

The Guardian . 9 January 2000.

Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 15 March 2023 .

^ PoKempner 1995 , pp.

107 – 108 .

^ "Pol Pot overthrown" .

HISTORY . Retrieved 29 September 2023 .

^ a b "Khmer Rouge" .

History.com . 21 August 2018.

Archived from the original on 17 November 2022 . Retrieved 8 October 2019 .

^ Alvarez 2001 , p. 50.

^ Alvarez 2007 , p. 16.

^ Hannum 1989 , pp. 88–89.

^ a b c Hunt, Michael H. (2014).

The World Transformed: 1945 to the Present . New York: Oxford University Press . p. 377.

ISBN 978-0-1993-7102-0 .

^ Chandler, David (2018).

A History of Cambodia .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-4299-6406-0 .

^ "Ambassador Kenneth M. Quinn" . The World Food Prize Foundation.

Archived from the original on 1 April 2023 . Retrieved 14 September 2020 .

^ a b Boshart, Rod (17 June 2019).

"Kenneth Quinn: From Cambodia's 'killing fields' to Iowa's Field of Dreams" .

The Gazette .

Archived from the original on 4 November 2020 . Retrieved 14 September 2020 .

^ Kiernan, Ben (2008). "Cleansing the Countryside: Race, Power, and the Party, 1973–75".

The Pol Pot Regime… 1975–79: Race, Power, and Genocide in Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press . pp.

65– 101.

ISBN 978-0-3001-4299-0 .

JSTOR j.ctt1npbv9 .

Archived from the original on 14 January 2023 . Retrieved 14 September 2020 .

^ a b "60h Anniversary of Diplomatic Relations between the United States and Cambodia" (PDF) .

U.S. Embassy in Cambodia . July 2016. p. 38.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 October 2020 . Retrieved 14 September 2020 .

^ Power 2002 , p. 96.

^ Hinton & Lifton 2004 , p. 23.

^ Kiernan 2003a , p. 29.

^ Heuveline, Patrick (28 July 2015).

"The Boundaries of Genocide: Quantifying the Uncertainty of the Death Toll During the Pol Pot Regime (1975–1979)" .

Population Studies . 69, 2015 (2): 201– 218.

doi : 10.1080/00324728.2015.1045546 .

PMC 4562795 .

PMID 26218856 .

^ Gaikwad, Nikhar; Lin, Erin; Zucker, Noah (15 March 2021). "Gender After Genocide: How Violence Shapes Long-Term Political Representation".

SSRN 3801980 .

S2CID 238081361 doi : 10.2139/ssrn.3801980 ^ William Branigin, Architect of Genocide Was Unrepentant to the End The Washington Post , 17 April 1998 ^ Theory of the Global State: Globality as Unfinished Revolution by Martin Shaw , Cambridge University Press , 2000, pp 141, ISBN 978-0-5215-9730-2 ^ Alvarez 2001 , p. 12.

^ MSN Encarta – Dictionary – autogenocide definition Archived 28 August 2009 at the Wayback Machine . 2009-10-31.

^ "The Cambodian 'auto-genocide' – musings on a concept that needn't exist | Heinrich Böll Stiftung | Phnom Penh Office – Cambodia" .

Heinrich-Böll-Stiftung .

Archived from the original on 10 January 2023 . Retrieved 10 January 2023 .

^ Vittal, Nalini (2001).

"Tribulation before Trial in Cambodia: Confronting Autogenocide" .

Economic and Political Weekly .

36 (3): 199– 203.

ISSN 0012-9976 .

JSTOR 4410192 .

Archived from the original on 20 February 2023 . Retrieved 10 January 2023 .

^ White, Matthew.

"20th Century death tolls larger than one million but fewer than 5 million people – Cambodia" .

necrometrics .

Archived from the original on 5 March 2011 . Retrieved 12 February 2023 .

^ Niewyk, Donald L.; Nicosia, Francis R. (2000).

The Columbia Guide to the Holocaust .

Columbia University Press . p.

47 .

ISBN 978-0-2315-0590-1 .

^ Žerjavić, Vladimir (1993).

Yugoslavia - Manipulations with the number of Second World War victims . Croatian Information Centre.

ISBN 0-919817-32-7 .

^ a b c Kiernan 2003a , pp.

313 –314.

^ "UN genocide adviser welcomes historic conviction of former Khmer Rouge leaders" .

UN News . 16 November 2018.

Archived from the original on 1 May 2023 . Retrieved 22 January 2021 .

^ Beech, Hannah (16 November 2018).

"Khmer Rouge's Slaughter in Cambodia Is Ruled a Genocide (Published 2018)" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 13 April 2019 . Retrieved 22 January 2021 .

^ Vickery 1984 .

^ Etcheson 2005 , pp. 45–47.

^ Kiernan, Ben (2002).

The Pol Pot Regime: Race, Power and Genocide in Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge, 1975–79 (2nd ed.). New Haven and London: Yale University Press . pp.

254– 255.

^ Etcheson 2005 , pp. 78–79.

^ Etcheson 2005 , pp. 84–85.

^ Etcheson 2005 , pp. 10–11.

^ ( Kiernan 2002 , p. 252; see also the footnote on Chandler's The Tragedy of Cambodian History , pp. 4, 263–265, 285) ^ Kiernan 2002 , p. 252; see Vickery 1984 , pp. 181–182, 255, 258, 264–265 ^ Kiernan, 2002:252; see Heder's From Pol Pot to Pen Sovan to the Villages , p. 1 ^ Beech, Hannah (16 November 2018).

"Khmer Rouge's Slaughter in Cambodia Is Ruled a Genocide Photographs of victims of the Khmer Rouge at the Tuol Sleng Genocide Museum in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, on Thursday. Credit Adam Dean for The New York Times Image" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 13 April 2019 . Retrieved 1 May 2019 .

^ Stanton, Gregory (2012).

"Why the Khmer Rouge Murdered Two Million People" (PDF) .

Genocide Watch .

^ Kiernan, Ben (2004).

How Pol Pot Came to Power: Colonialism, Nationalism, and Communism in Cambodia, 1930–1975 (2nd ed.). Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-3001-0262-8 .

^ Edward Kissi (2006).

Revolution and Genocide in Ethiopia and Cambodia . Lexington Books. p.

128 .

ISBN 978-0-7391-6037-4 .

^ Will Podmore (2008).

British Foreign Policy since 1870 . Xlibris Corporation. p.

176 .

ISBN 978-1-4628-3577-5 .

^ Rummel, R. J.

(2011).

Death by Government . Transaction Publishers. p.

191 .

ISBN 978-1-4128-2129-2 .

^ Spencer, Philip (2012).

Genocide Since 1945 .

Routledge . p.

71 .

ISBN 978-0-4156-0634-9 .

^ Brinkley 2011 , p.

56 .

^ SarDesai 1998 , pp.

161 – 163 .

^ a b Kiernan, Ben (2008).

The Pol Pot regime: Race, Power, and Genocide in Cambodia under the Khmer Rouge .

Yale University Press . p. 431.

^ a b Hinton & Lifton 2004 , pp. 54–58.

^ Chan, Yuk Wah; Haines, David; Lee, Jonathan (2014).

The Age of Asian Migration: Continuity, Diversity, and Susceptibility . Vol. 1. Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p.

244 .

ISBN 978-1-4438-6569-2 .

^ Chan, Sucheng (2003).

Remapping Asian American History .

Rowman & Littlefield . p. 189.

^ "The Chinese Communist Party's Relationship with the Khmer Rouge in the 1970s: An Ideological Victory and a Strategic Failure" .

Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars .

Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 December 2021 .

An examination of the available sources, then, suggests that the CCP did not raise with the Khmer Rouge, whether officially or privately, the issue of the ethnic Chinese and the Huayun members, who had served the CCP's cause for many years. ... It is ironic that the departure and ill-treatment of the ethnic Chinese in Vietnam turned out to be a much bigger issue than the developments in Cambodia. The ethnic Chinese issue in Vietnam notably generated tensions and undermined the Sino-Vietnamese relationship while the CCP turned a blind eye to the atrocities committed by the Khmer Rouge against the Huayun .

^ Kiernan 2003a , p. 30.

^ Totten, Samuel ; Bartrop, Paul R.

(2008).

Dictionary of Genocide: A–L .

ABC-CLIO . p.

64 .

ISBN 978-0-3133-4642-2 .

^ a b Kiernan 2002 , p. 258.

^ Kiernan 2002 , p. 259.

^ Kiernan 2002 , p. 57.

^ Kiernan 2002 , p. 256.

^ Vickery 1984 , p.

181 .

^ a b Kiernan 2003a , pp.

260 –261.

^ Kiernan 2003a , p.

262 .

^ "LAW ON THE ESTABLISHMENT OF EXTRAORDINARY CHAMBERS IN THE COURTS OF CAMBODIA FOR THE PROSECUTION OF CRIMES COMMITTED DURING THE PERIOD OF DEMOCRATIC KAMPUCHEA" (PDF) .

eccc.gov.kh . 27 October 2004 . Retrieved 3 December 2024 .

^ Kiernan 2003a , p.

263 .

^ Kiernan 2003a , pp.

263 –264.

^ Kiernan 2002 , p. 263.

^ Kiernan 2002 , p. 269.

^ Kiernan 2002 , p. 264.

^ Roasa, Dustin (3 November 2012).

"Cambodian families separated by Khmer Rouge reunite – on TV" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 29 September 2023 .

^ Le Coz, Clothilde (19 November 2015).

"The question of genocide and Cambodia's Muslims" . Al Jazeera.

Archived from the original on 19 September 2020 . Retrieved 7 March 2020 .

^ Perrin, Andrew (16 November 2010).

"Weakness in Numbers" .

Time . Archived from the original on 29 November 2010.

^ Kiernan, Ben (1988). "Orphans of genocide: The Cham muslims of Kampuchea under Pol Pot".

Bulletin of Concerned Asian Scholars .

20 (4): 2– 33.

doi : 10.1080/14672715.1988.10412580 .

^ "Khmer Rouge leader denies mass murder, blames Vietnam" .

Reuters . 23 June 2017 . Retrieved 29 September 2023 .

^ "The Cambodian Genocide – The Holocaust Explained: Designed for schools" . 13 September 1933 . Retrieved 29 September 2023 .

^ "Cambodia: Criminalizing Denial of Atrocities" .

Library of Congress, Washington, D.C . Retrieved 29 September 2023 .

^ Blainey, Geoffrey (2011).

A Short History of Christianity .

Viking Books . p. 543.

^ Salter, Richard C. (2000). "Time, Authority, and Ethics in the Khmer Rouge: Elements of the Millennial Vision in Year Zero". In Wessinger, Catherine (ed.).

Millennialism, Persecution, and Violence: Historical Cases .

Syracuse University Press . p. 282.

ISBN 978-0-8156-0599-7 .

^ Juergensmeyer, Mark.

The Oxford Handbook of Global Religions .

Oxford University Press . p. 495.

^ Westad, Odd Arne; Quinn-Judge, Sophie, eds. (2006).

The Third Indochina War: Conflict Between China, Vietnam and Cambodia, 1972–79 . Routledge. p.

189 .

ISBN 978-0-4153-9058-3 .

^ Philip Shenon, Phnom Penh Journal; Lord Buddha Returns, With Artists His Soldiers Archived 23 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine The New York Times (2 January 1992) ^ Rummel, Rudolph J.

(2001).

"Chapter 6: Freedom Virtually Ends Genocide and Mass Murder" .

Saving Lives, Enriching Life: Freedom as a Right And a Moral Good .

Archived from the original on 9 August 2016 . Retrieved 15 July 2016 .

^ Kiernan, Ben (1987).

Cambodia : the Eastern Zone massacres : a report on social conditions and human rights violations in the Eastern Zone of democratic Kampuchea under the role of Pol Pot's (Khmer Rouge) Communist Party of Kampuchea . New York: Columbia University , Center for the Study of Human Rights. p. Preface.

^ Coalition to Stop the Use of Child Soldiers (2001).

"Global Report on Child Soldiers" .

child-soldiers.org . Archived from the original on 25 May 2019 . Retrieved 16 May 2018 .

^ "Dealing with Cambodia's past and life nowadays" .

Now or never . 1 July 2015.

Archived from the original on 3 April 2023 . Retrieved 5 September 2019 .

^ Vannak 2010 , pp. 32–35.

^ "Westerner was burned alive, says Cambodia trial witness" .

The Guardian . Phnom Penh. Associated Press. 5 August 2009.

Archived from the original on 12 December 2022 . Retrieved 7 September 2019 .

^ Mydans, Seth (1 March 2009).

"For Khmer Rouge guard, it was kill or be killed" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 3 April 2023 . Retrieved 3 September 2019 .

^ a b c d Vilim, Laura (2012).

"Keeping Them Alive, One Gets Nothing; Killing Them, One Loses Nothing: Prosecuting Khmer Rouge Medical Practices as Crimes against Humanity" (PDF) .

dccam.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 April 2014 . Retrieved 29 September 2018 .

^ "Propaganda, Torture and French Colonial Heritage: Looking into the Methods of the Khmer Rouge | Cambodia Tribunal Monitor" .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2018 . Retrieved 29 September 2018 .

^ "Chilling Evidence in Khmer Rouge Trial" .

The Diplomat .

Archived from the original on 18 April 2023 . Retrieved 29 September 2018 .

^ "Barbarous KR medical experiments uncovered" . 23 June 2000.

Archived from the original on 3 April 2023 . Retrieved 29 September 2018 .

^ a b "Tribunal Hears of Secret Medical Experiments" . The Cambodia Daily. 22 September 2016.

Archived from the original on 18 May 2022 . Retrieved 4 August 2022 .

^ Kiernan 2003b , pp. 586–587: "We may safely conclude, from known pre- and post-genocide population figures and from professional demographic calculations, that the 1975–79 death toll was between 1.671 and 1.871 million people, 21 to 24 percent of Cambodia's 1975 population." ^ The New York Times .

Cambodian Day of Hate Marks Pol Pot's Victims Archived 20 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine ^ " 'Day of Anger' becomes Kingdom's latest national holiday" .

The Phnom Penh Post . 20 February 2018.

Archived from the original on 27 June 2022 . Retrieved 15 September 2021 .

^ "Cambodian sites of Khmer Rouge brutality added to UNESCO heritage list" .

AP News . 12 July 2025.

^ Etcheson 2005 , p. 14.

^ Donlon 2012 , p. 103.

^ Spooner, Andrew (2003).

Footprint Cambodia . London: Footprint Handbooks. p. 228.

ISBN 978-1-9034-7140-1 .

^ Becker, Elizabeth (17 April 1998).

"Death of Pol Pot: The Diplomacy; Pol Pot's End Won't Stop U.S. Pursuit of His Circle" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 2 September 2020 .

^ [2] ^ [3] ^ Stanton 2013 , p. 411.

^ "A/RES/57/228B" (PDF) . 2 May 2003. Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 July 2007 . Retrieved 5 March 2022 .

^ Bartrop 2012 , pp. 166–167.

^ ECCC-Kaing 2012 .

^ Mydans, Seth (2 September 2020).

"Duch, Prison Chief Who Slaughtered for the Khmer Rouge, Dies at 77" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 3 September 2020 . Retrieved 2 September 2020 .

^ Corfield 2011 , p. 855.

^ Nuon Chea 2013 .

^ MacKinnon 2007 .

^ de los Reyes et al. 2012 , p. 1.

^ Mydans, Seth (14 March 2013).

"Ieng Sary, Khmer Rouge Leader Tied to Genocide, Dies at 87" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 14 March 2013 . Retrieved 14 March 2013 .

^ Munthit 2007 .

^ Mydans, Seith (2017).

"Khmer Rouge Trial, Perhaps the Last, Nears End in Cambodia" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 3 April 2023 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

^ Canadian Communist League (Marxist-Leninist) (February 1979).

Kampuchea Will Win (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 February 2023 . Retrieved 17 May 2022 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Chan 2004 , p. 256.

^ Alvarez 2001 , p. 56.

^ Neuman, Scott (7 June 2013).

"Cambodia Moves To Outlaw Denial of Khmer Rouge Atrocities" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on 2 February 2023 . Retrieved 8 October 2019 .

^ Buncombe 2013 .

^ a b c "China Says It Won't Apologize For Supporting the Khmer Rouge" .

The New York Times .

Reuters . 7 November 2000.

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 11 July 2021 . Retrieved 27 November 2019 .

^ "Jiāngzémín dǐ jiǎn zhǎnkāi lìshǐ xìng fǎngwèn" 江泽民抵柬展开历史性访问 [Jiang Zemin Arrives in Cambodia for Historic Visit].

BBC News (in Chinese). 13 November 2000.

Archived from the original on 18 February 2003 . Retrieved 25 November 2019 .

^ "Zhōngguó shūyuǎn tóng hóngsè gāo mián de guānxì" 中国疏远同红色高棉的关系 [China distances itself from Khmer Rouge].

BBC News (in Chinese). 14 November 2000.

Archived from the original on 9 July 2021 . Retrieved 25 November 2019 .

^ Stanton, Gregory H.

"Seeking Justice in Cambodia" .

Genocide Watch . Archived from the original on 26 October 2009 . Retrieved 27 November 2019 .

^ "China defends its Khmer Rouge ties as trial opens" .

Reuters . 17 February 2009.

Archived from the original on 9 April 2023 . Retrieved 27 November 2019 .

^ "The Rescuers" .

proof.org .

Archived from the original on 22 December 2022 . Retrieved 4 October 2019 .

^ Strozek, Karolina; Seldowitz, Dovi (2019).

"Unknown Heroes of Cambodia" (PDF) .

Courage to Care NSW .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 March 2023 . Retrieved 4 October 2019 .

^ Beachler 2011 , p. 45.

^ Bartrop 2012 , p. 261.

^ Tyner 2012 , p. 145.

^ Barron & Paul 1977 .

^ Mayersan 2013 , pp. 183–184.

^ Boyle 2009 , p. 95.

^ "The Killing Fields: authentically good" .

The Guardian . London. 12 March 2009.

Archived from the original on 4 February 2023 . Retrieved 20 September 2017 .

^ a b Whelan, Debra Lau (10 October 2012).

"SLJ Speaks to National Book Award Finalists" .

School Library Journal .

Archived from the original on 10 February 2013 . Retrieved 15 November 2012 .

^ Loung, Ung (2000).

First They Killed My Father: A Daughter of Cambodia Remembers (1st ed.). New York: HarperCollins Publishers .

ISBN 978-0-0601-9332-4 .

OCLC 41482326 .

^ Debruge, Peter (3 September 2017).

"Telluride Film Review: 'First They Killed My Father: A Daughter of Cambodia Remembers' " .

Variety .

Archived from the original on 12 November 2020 . Retrieved 20 September 2017 .

^ Independent Movie Database (IMDB), "Year Zero: The Silent Death of Cambodia (1979)" Archived 12 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b "Year Zero: The Silent Death of Cambodia" .

johnpilger.com . 30 October 1979.

Archived from the original on 29 March 2023 . Retrieved 6 May 2023 .

^ Pilger, John (2001).

Heroes . London: South End Press. p.

417 .

ISBN 978-0-8960-8666-1 .

(Originally published by Jonathan Cape, London, 1986), p. 410 ^ Pilger, Joh (2011).

Tell Me No Lies: Investigative Journalism and its Triumphs .

Random House . p.

121 .

ISBN 978-1-4070-8570-8 .

Sources [ edit ] Alvarez, Alex (2001).

Governments, Citizens, and Genocide: A Comparative and Interdisciplinary Approach .

Indiana University Press .

ISBN 978-0-2533-3849-5 .

Alvarez, Alex (2007).

"The Prevention and Intervention of Genocide During the Cold War Years" . In Totten, Samuel (ed.).

The Prevention and Intervention of Genocide . Transaction Publishers. pp.

7–30 .

ISBN 978-0-7658-0384-9 .

Barron, John; Paul, Anthony (1977).

Murder of a gentle land: the untold story of a Communist genocide in Cambodia . Reader's Digest Press.

ISBN 978-0-8834-9129-4 .

Bartrop, Paul R.

(2012).

A Biographical Encyclopedia of Contemporary Genocide .

ABC-CLIO .

ISBN 978-0-3133-8678-7 .

"Khmer Rouge trial ends with defendants denying charges" .

BBC News . 31 October 2013.

Archived from the original on 28 December 2013 . Retrieved 5 January 2014 .

Beachler, Donald W. (2011).

The Genocide Debate: Politicians, Academics, and Victims .

Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 978-0-2301-1414-2 .

Boyle, Deirdre (2009). "Shattering Silence: Traumatic Memory and Reenactment in Rithy Panh's S-21: The Khmer Rouge Killing Machine".

Framework: The Journal of Cinema and Media .

50 (1/2): 95– 106.

doi : 10.1353/frm.0.0049 .

JSTOR 41552541 .

S2CID 194050428 .

Brinkley, Joel (2011).

Cambodia's Curse: The Modern History of a Troubled Land .

PublicAffairs .

ISBN 978-1-6103-9001-9 .

Buncombe, Andrew (7 June 2013).

"Cambodia passes law making denial of Khmer Rouge genocide illegal" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 25 January 2014 . Retrieved 2 January 2014 .

Chan, Sucheng (2004).

Survivors: Cambodian Refugees in the United States .

University of Illinois Press .

ISBN 978-0-2520-7179-9 .

Corfield, Justin J. (2011). "Nuon Chea". In Spencer C. Tucker (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of the Vietnam War A Political, Social, and Military History .

ABC-CLIO .

ISBN 978-1-8510-9961-0 .

de los Reyes, Faith Suzzette; Mattes, Daniel; Lee, Samantha B.; Van Tuyl, Penelope (2012).

KRT Trial Monitor (PDF) . Asian International Justice Initiative. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 7 January 2014 .

Donlon, Fidelma (2012). "Hybrid Tribunals". In Schabas, William A.

; Bernaz, Nadia (eds.).

Routledge Handbook of International Criminal Law .

Routledge . pp.

85– 106.

ISBN 978-0-4155-2450-6 .

Etcheson, Craig (2005).

After the Killing Fields: Lessons from the Cambodian Genocide .

Greenwood Press .

ISBN 978-0-2759-8513-4 .

Frey, Rebecca Joyce (2009).

Genocide and International Justice .

Facts on File .

ISBN 978-0-8160-7310-8 .

Haas, Michael (1991).

Cambodia, Pol Pot, and the United States: The Faustian Pact .

ABC-CLIO .

Hannum, Hurst (1989). "International Law and Cambodian Genocide: The Sounds of Silence".

Human Rights Quarterly .

11 (1): 82– 138.

doi : 10.2307/761936 .

JSTOR 761936 .

Heuveline, Patrick (1998). " 'Between One and Three Million': Towards the Demographic Reconstruction of a Decade of Cambodian History (1970–79)".

Population Studies .

52 (1): 49– 65.

doi : 10.1080/0032472031000150176 .

JSTOR 2584763 .

PMID 11619945 .

Heuveline, Patrick (2001). "The Demographic Analysis of Mortality Crises: The Case of Cambodia, 1970–1979".

Forced Migration and Mortality .

National Academies Press .

ISBN 978-0-3090-7334-9 .

Hinton, Alexander Laban ; Lifton, Robert Jay (2004). "In the Shadow of Genocide".

Why Did They Kill?: Cambodia in the Shadow of Genocide .

University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0-5202-4179-4 .

"KAING Guek Eav" .

Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC) . 2012.

Archived from the original on 2 March 2021 . Retrieved 19 August 2015 .

Kiernan, Ben (2003a).

"Twentieth-Century Genocides Underlying Ideological Themes from Armenia to East Timor" . In Gellately, Robert; Kiernan, Ben (eds.).

The Specter of Genocide: Mass Murder in Historical Perspective .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-5215-2750-7 – via Internet Archive .

Kiernan, Ben (2003b). "The Demography of Genocide in Southeast Asia: The Death Tolls in Cambodia, 1975–79, and East Timor, 1975–80".

Critical Asian Studies .

35 (4): 585– 597.

doi : 10.1080/1467271032000147041 .

S2CID 143971159 .

Kurlantzick, Joshua (2008). "China's Growing Influence in Southeast Asia".

China's Expansion into the Western Hemisphere: Implications for Latin America and the United States .

Brookings Institution Press.

ISBN 978-0-8157-7554-6 .

MacKinnon, Ian (12 November 2007).

"Leading Khmer Rouge figures arrested" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2014 . Retrieved 7 January 2014 .

Mayersan, Deborah (2013). " 'Never Again' or Again and Again". In Mayersen, Deborah; Pohlman, Annie (eds.).

Genocide and Mass Atrocities in Asia: Legacies and Prevention .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-4156-4511-9 .

Mendes, Errol (2011).

Peace and Justice at the International Criminal Court: A Court of Last Resort . Edward Elgar.

ISBN 978-1-8498-0382-3 .

Munthit, Ker (19 November 2007).

"Ex-Khmer Rouge Head of State Charged" .

Associated Press . Archived from the original on 10 June 2014 . Retrieved 7 January 2014 .

PoKempner, Dinah (1995).

Cambodia at War .

Human Rights Watch .

ISBN 978-1-5643-2150-3 .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2017 . Retrieved 2 August 2017 .

Power, Samantha (2002).

A Problem from Hell: America and the Age of Genocide .

Basic Books .

ISBN 978-0-4650-6150-1 .

SarDesai, D. R. (1998).

Vietnam, Past and Present .

Westview Press .

ISBN 978-0-8133-4308-2 .

Seybolt, Taylor B.; Aronson, Jay D.; Fischoff, Baruch (2013).

Counting Civilian Casualties: An Introduction to Recording and Estimating Nonmilitary Deaths in Conflict .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-1999-7731-4 .

Stanton, Gregory H.

(2013). "The Call". In Totten, Samuel ; Jacobs, Steven Leonard (eds.).

Pioneers of Genocide Studies . Transaction. pp.

401– 428.

ISBN 978-1-4128-4974-6 .

Thayer, Nate (1991). "Cambodia: Misperceptions and Peace".

The Washington Quarterly .

14 (2): 179– 191.

doi : 10.1080/01636609109477687 .

Tyner, James A. (2012).

Genocide and the Geographical Imagination: Life and Death in Germany, China, and Cambodia .

Rowman & Littlefield .

ISBN 978-1-4422-0898-8 .

Vannak, Huy (2010).

Bou Meng: A Survivor From Khmer Rouge Prison S-21, Justice for the Future Not Just for the Victims .

Documentation Center of Cambodia .

ISBN 978-9-9950-6019-0 .

Vickery, Michael (1984).

Cambodia: 1975–1982 . Boston: South End Press.

Further reading [ edit ] "Cambodia sentence two top Khmer Rouge leaders to life in prison" .

The Daily Telegraph .

Associated Press . 7 August 2014.

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022 . Retrieved 7 August 2014 .

DeMello, Margo (2013).

Body Studies: An Introduction .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-4156-9930-3 .

Dutton, Donald G. (2007).

The Psychology of Genocide, Massacres, and Extreme Violence: Why Normal People Come to Commit Atrocities . Praeger.

ISBN 978-0-2759-9000-8 .

Solarz, Stephen (1990).

"Cambodia and the International Community" .

Council on Foreign Relations .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

Terry, Fiona (2002).

Condemned to Repeat?: The Paradox of Humanitarian Action .

Cornell University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8014-8796-5 .

Tyner, James A. (2018).

The Politics of Lists: Bureaucracy and Genocide Under the Khmer Rouge . Morgantown: West Virginia University Press .

ISBN 978-1-9466-8442-4 .

Verkoren, Willemijn (2008).

The Owl and the Dove: Knowledge Strategies to Improve the Peacebuilding .

Amsterdam University Press .

ISBN 978-9-0562-9506-6 .

Waller, James. "Communist Mass Killings: Cambodia (1975–1979)". Keene State College. Cohen Center, Keene, NH. 17 February 2015. Powerpoint Lecture.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Cambodian genocide at Wikimedia Commons v t e Cambodian genocide Ideologies Ultranationalism Ethnonationalism New People Year Zero Khmer nationalism Totalitarianism Chinese-style socialism Marxism-Leninism (elements) Crimes Killing caves of Phnom Sampeau Killing Fields Ba Chúc massacre Thổ Chu Island massacre S-21 Eastern Zone massacres Choeung Ek Dangrek genocide Perpetrators " Angkar " Pol Pot Nuon Chea Ieng Sary Khieu Samphan Son Sen Ta Mok Khmer Rouge Communist Party of Kampuchea Liberation Army of Kampuchea Santebal Kang Kek Iew Mam Nai Tang Sin Hean Victims Bun Chanmol Chau Seng Chou Chet Hu Nim John Dawson Dewhirst Joseph Chhmar Salas Keo Meas Kerry Hamill Koy Thuon Ly Theam Teng Michael S. Deeds Ney Sarann Non Suon Phouk Chhay Tauch Phoeun Trinh Hoanh Paul Tep Im Sotha So Phim Tiv Ol Vorn Vet Survivors Bou Meng Chum Mey Dith Pran Haing S. Ngor Kim Sathavy Mengly Jandy Quach Prum Manh Vann Nath Investigations People's Revolutionary Tribunal Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia Documentation Center of Cambodia Bophana Center v t e Cambodia articles History Timeline Early history Nokor Phnom Chenla Khmer Empire Post-Angkor period French protectorate of Cambodia Japanese occupation Puppet state Sihanouk era (1953–70) Khmer Republic Civil War Democratic Kampuchea Cambodian genocide Cambodian–Vietnamese War People's Republic of Kampuchea Cambodian Conflict (1979–1998) State of Cambodia United Nations Administered Cambodia UNTAC Kingdom of Cambodia Geography Administrative divisions Borders Cities Climate change Deforestation Ecoregions Islands Lakes Tonlé Sap Protected areas Rivers Wildlife World Heritage Sites Politics Cabinet Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights LGBT Judiciary Law Law enforcement Military Monarchy Motto Parliament Political parties Prime Minister Economy Agriculture Banking Child labour Energy Economic history Mining Natural resources Riel (currency) Science and technology Special Economic Zones Telecommunications Tourism Transportation Society Crime Demographics Education Ethnic groups Gambling Health HIV/AIDS Hunting Human trafficking Languages Prostitution Religion Women Sex trafficking Social class Social organization Squatting Youth Culture Architecture Art Cinema Clothing Courtship, marriage, and divorce Cuisine ( royal cuisine ) Dance Epigraphy Jewellery Keyboard Literature Manuscripts Mat weaving Media Music Ornamentation Public holidays Sport Theatre Outline Index Category Portal v t e Genocide Genocides ( chronological list ) Before 1490 Destruction of Carthage (146 BCE) Asiatic Vespers (88 BCE) Gauls (50s BCE) Eburones Bar Kokhba (132–136) Ancestral Puebloans (800s) Harrying of the North (1069–1070) Mongol conquests (1200s–1360s) Cathars (1209–1229) Mongols in the Delhi Sultanate (1311) Timurid conquests (1393–1394) Guanches (1402–1496) 1490 to 1912 Taíno (1493–1550) Jaragua massacre (1503) Ainu (1500s–) Indigenous peoples in Brazil 11th Parallel massacre (1963) Tanaru (1970s–2009) Helmet massacre (1988) Akuntsu (1990) Haximu (1993) Yanomami (2019–2023) Aztecs (1521) Kashmiri Shias (1548–1872) Huguenots (1572) Kalinago (1626) Indigenous peoples in the United States Pequots (1636–1638) Beaver Wars (1609–1701) Huron Sullivan Expedition (1779) Indian removal (1830–1847) Trail of Tears (1830–1850) California (1846–1873) Dakota (1862) Osage Indian murders (1918–1931) Cultural genocide Indigenous peoples in Canada Beaver Wars (1609–1701) Beothuk (1700s–1800s) Residential school system (1874–1996) Sixties Scoop (1951–1985) Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women Jews in the Cossack Hetmanate (1648–1657) 1740 Batavia massacre (1740) Great Gypsy Round-up (1749) Dzungars (1750s) Rebellion of Túpac Amaru II (1780–1783) Chechens (1785–2017) French Hatians (1804) Meiteis (1819–1826) Indigenous peoples in Australia Black War (1825–1832) Stolen Generations (1869–1977) Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women Pacification of Algeria (1830–1875) El Ouffia Charrúa (1831) Moriori (1835) Assyrians in Hakkari (1843–1846) Manchus (1850–1864) Circassians (1860s) Mapuche (1870s–1884) Indigenous peoples in Putumayo (1879–1913) Congolese (1885–1908) Hazaras (1888–1893) Selknam (1890s–1900s) Hamidian massacres (1894–1896) Herero and Nama (1904–1907) Ukame (1905–1907) Persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction Albanians in the Balkan Wars (1912–1913) 1913 to 1945 Late Ottoman genocides Greeks (1913–1923) Pontic Greeks Thracian Bulgarians (1913) Assyrians (1915–1919) Armenians (1915–1917) Christians in Diyarbekir (1915) Kurds (1916–1934) Indigenous peoples in Venezuela Pemon Kyrgyz (1916–1917) Jews during the Russian Civil War (1917–1920) Russian White Terror Cossacks (1919–1933) Ingrian Finns (1920s–1930s) Volga Tatars and Germans (1921–1922) Kantō Massacre (1923) Napalpí massacre (1924) Swiss Yenish, Sinti, and Manouche (1926–1973) Japanese war crimes in the Pacific War Manchukuo (1931–1945) Nanjing Massacre (1937–1938) Three Alls policy (1940–1942) Sook Ching (1942) Nanshitou massacre (1942–1945) Libyan Arabs (1929–1934) Kazakhs (1930–1933) La Matanza (1932) Holodomor (1932–1933) Simele massacre (1933) Romani Holocaust (1935–1945) Spanish White Terror (1936–1947) Yekatit 12 (1937) Polish Operation (1937–1938) Alevi Kurds (1937–1938) Parsley massacre (1937) Generalplan Ost (1939–1945) Poland Baltic lands Croatia Czech lands Ukraine Hunger Plan The Holocaust (1941–1945) German atrocities committed against Soviet POWs (1941–1945) Serbs in Croatia (1941–1945) Muslims and Croats in Serbia (1941–1945) Volhynian and Eastern Galician Poles (1943–1945) Chechens and Ingush (1944–1948) Crimean Tatars (1944–1948) 1946 to 1999 Hyderabadi Muslims (1948) Indigenous peoples in Paraguay (1956–1989) Maya (1962–1996) Papua (1962–) Arab and Indian Zanzibaris (1964) 1966 anti-Igbo pogrom (1966) Biafra (1966–1970) Equatoguinean (1969–1979) Feyli Kurds (1970–2003) Bangladesh (1971) Acholi and Lango (1972–1979) Burundi 1972 1993 East Timor (1974–1999) Cambodian (1975–1979) Jummas (1977–1997) Afghans (1979–1989) Baganda (1981–1985) 1982 Hama massacre (1982) Sabra and Shatila massacre (1982) Sri Lankan Tamils (1983–2009) Gukurahundi (1983–1987) Anfal (1986–1989) Isaaq (1987–1989) National Population Program (1987–2002) Amhara (1990–) Ahwaris (1991–2003) Bosnian (1992–1995) Srebrenica massacre Rwandan (1994) Hutus during the First Congo War (1996–1997) 21st century Effacer le tableau (2002–2003) Darfur (2003–) Masalit massacres Iraqi Sunni Arabs (2003–) Southern Kaduna (2011–2023) Iraqi Turkmen (2014–2017) Yazidis (2014–2017) Shias under ISIS (2014–) Christians under ISIS (2014–) Rohingyas, Kachins, and Burmese Muslims (2017–) Tigrayans, Kunamas, and Irobs (2020–2022) Bucha massacre (2022) Gazans (2023–) Terms Cultural genocide Democide Autogenocide Domicide Ecocide Ethnocide Eugenics Gendercide Androcide Transgender genocide Genocide of indigenous peoples Memoricide Policide Politicide Classicide Eliticide Utilitarian genocide War of annihilation Methods Cultural genocide Death marches Death squades Ethnic cleansing Extermination camp Forced adoption Forced assimilation Forced conversion Incitement Massacres Killing Fields Pogroms Mass killing Rape Settler colonialism Urbicide Denial The Holocaust Trivialization Armenian Japanese history textbook controversies Nanjing Serbian Bosnian Rwandan Holodomor Cambodian Indigenous Issues Definitions Names of the Holocaust Terminology of the Armenian genocide Holocaust terminology Genocide law Prevention Effects on young survivors Politics of recognition Justification Mass killings under communist regimes Anti-communist mass killings Legal proceedings Holocaust trials (1943–2022) Krasnodar trial (1943) Kharkov trial (1943) Épuration légale (1944–1951) Majdanek trials (1944–1989) Chełmno trials (1945–2001) Dachau trials (1945–1947) Belsen trials (1945–1948) Euthanasia trials (1945–1949) Nuremberg trial (1945–1946) Minsk trial (1945–1946) Riga trial (1946) Stutthof trials (1946–1947) Post–World War II Romanian war crime trials (1946–1953) Supreme National Tribunal (1946–1948) Hamburg Ravensbrück trials (1946–1948) Nuremberg Military Tribunals (1946–1949) Erich von Manstein (1949) Ulm Einsatzkommando trial (1958) War crimes trials in Soviet Estonia (1961–1962) Eichmann trial (1961) Belzec trial (1963–1965) Frankfurt Auschwitz trials (1963–1989) Treblinka trials (1964–1970) Sobibor trial (1965–1966) Fedorenko trial (1986) Finta trial (1994) 20th century Budak trial (1945) International Military Tribunal for the Far East (1946–1948) Belgrade Process (1946) Nanjing War Crimes Tribunal (1946–1948) Bosnian genocide case (1993–2007) International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (1993–2017) Slobodan Milošević (2002–2006) Radovan Karadžić (2008–2016) Ratko Mladić (2011–2017) Trials of the Derg members (1994–2008) International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (1994–2015) Khmer Rouge Tribunal (1997–2022) Croatia–Serbia genocide case (1999–2015) 21st century International Criminal Court investigation in Darfur (2005–) Permanent Peoples' Tribunal on Sri Lanka (2010–2023) International Crimes Tribunal of Bangladesh (2012–) Mohammad Salimullah v. Union of India (2017) Rohingya genocide case (2019–) International Criminal Court investigation in Bangladesh/Myanmar (2019–) Uyghur Tribunal (2020–2021) International Criminal Court investigation in Ukraine (2022–) Ukraine v. Russian Federation (2022–) South Africa v. Israel (2023–) Defense for Children International – Palestine et al v. Biden et al (2023–2024) Nicaragua v. Germany (2024) v t e Cold War United States Soviet Union NATO Warsaw Pact ANZUS METO SEATO NEATO Rio Pact Non-Aligned Movement 1940s Morgenthau Plan Jamaican political conflict Dekemvriana Guerrilla war in the Baltic states Operation Priboi Operation Jungle Occupation of the Baltic states Cursed soldiers Operation Unthinkable Gouzenko Affair Division of Korea Chinese Civil War Chinese Communist Revolution Indonesian National Revolution Civil conflicts in Vietnam (1945–1949) Operation Beleaguer Operation Blacklist Forty Iran crisis of 1946 Greek Civil War Baruch Plan Corfu Channel incident Hukbalahap rebellion Turkish Straits crisis Restatement of Policy on Germany First Indochina War 1947 Polish parliamentary election Truman Doctrine Asian Relations Conference May 1947 crises Partition of India Indo-Pakistani war of 1947–1948 1947–1949 Palestine war 1947–1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine 1948 Arab–Israeli War 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight Marshall Plan Comecon 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état Incapacitation of the Allied Control Council Al-Wathbah uprising Tito–Stalin split Berlin Blockade Annexation of Hyderabad Madiun Affair Western betrayal Iron Curtain Eastern Bloc Western Bloc Malayan Emergency March 1949 Syrian coup d'état Operation Valuable 1950s Bamboo curtain McCarthyism First Indochina War Korean War Arab Cold War (1952–1979) 1952 Egyptian revolution Iraqi Intifada (1952) Mau Mau rebellion East German uprising of 1953 1953 Iranian coup d'état Pact of Madrid Bricker Amendment 1954 Syrian coup d'état Petrov Affair Domino theory 1954 Geneva Conference 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état Capture of the Tuapse First Taiwan Strait Crisis Jebel Akhdar War Algerian War Kashmir Princess Bandung Conference Geneva Summit (1955) Cyprus Emergency " On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences " 1956 Poznań protests Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Polish October Suez Crisis " We will bury you " Operation Gladio Syrian Crisis of 1957 Sputnik crisis Ifni War Iraqi 14 July Revolution 1958 Lebanon crisis Second Taiwan Strait Crisis 1959 Mosul uprising 1959 Tibetan uprising Kitchen Debate Cuban Revolution Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Sino-Soviet split Night Frost Crisis 1960s Congo Crisis Laotian Civil War Vietnam War Simba rebellion 1960 U-2 incident John F. Kennedy Bay of Pigs Invasion 1960 Turkish coup d'état Albanian–Soviet split Iraqi–Kurdish conflict First Iraqi–Kurdish War Berlin Crisis of 1961 Berlin Wall Annexation of Goa Papua conflict Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation Sand War Portuguese Colonial War Angolan War of Independence Guinea-Bissau War of Independence Mozambican War of Independence Cuban Missile Crisis El Porteñazo Sino-Indian War Communist insurgency in Sarawak Ramadan Revolution Eritrean War of Independence North Yemen civil war 1963 Syrian coup d'état Assassination of John F. Kennedy Lyndon B. Johnson Aden Emergency Cyprus crisis of 1963–1964 Shifta War Mexican Dirty War Tlatelolco massacre Guatemalan Civil War Colombian conflict 1964 Brazilian coup d'état Dominican Civil War Rhodesian Bush War Indonesian mass killings of 1965–1966 Transition to the New Order (Indonesia) ASEAN Declaration 1966 Syrian coup d'état Cultural Revolution Cambodian Civil War Argentine Revolution South African Border War Korean DMZ Conflict 12-3 incident Greek junta 1967 Hong Kong riots Years of Lead (Italy) Six-Day War War of Attrition Dhofar War Al-Wadiah War Nigerian Civil War Protests of 1968 May 68 Prague Spring USS Pueblo incident 1968 Polish political crisis Communist insurgency in Malaysia Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia 17 July Revolution 1968 Peruvian coup d'état Revolutionary Government 1969 Sudanese coup d'état 1969 Libyan revolution Goulash Communism Sino-Soviet border conflict New People's Army rebellion Note Crisis 1970s Détente Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Black September Alcora Exercise Corrective Movement (Syria) Western Sahara conflict Communist insurgency in Thailand 1970 Polish protests Koza riot Realpolitik Ping-pong diplomacy 1971 JVP insurrection Corrective revolution (Egypt) 1971 Turkish military memorandum 1971 Sudanese coup d'état 1971 Bolivian coup d'état Four Power Agreement on Berlin Bangladesh Liberation War 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972 First Yemenite War Munich massacre 1972–1975 Bangladesh insurgency Eritrean Civil Wars Paris Peace Accords 1973 Uruguayan coup d'état 1973 Afghan coup d'état 1973 Chilean coup d'état Yom Kippur War 1973 oil crisis Carnation Revolution Ethiopian Civil War Vietnam War Spanish transition to democracy Metapolitefsi Strategic Arms Limitation Talks Second Iraqi–Kurdish War Turkish invasion of Cyprus 15 August 1975 Bangladeshi coup d'état Siege of Dhaka (1975) Sipahi-Janata revolution Angolan Civil War Indonesian invasion of East Timor Cambodian genocide June 1976 protests Mozambican Civil War Oromo conflict Ogaden War 1978 Somali coup attempt Western Sahara War Lebanese Civil War Sino-Albanian split Third Indochina War Cambodian–Vietnamese War Cambodian conflict Operation Condor Dirty War (Argentina) 1976 Argentine coup d'état Egyptian–Libyan War German Autumn Korean Air Lines Flight 902 Nicaraguan Revolution Uganda–Tanzania War NDF Rebellion Chadian–Libyan War Second Yemenite War Grand Mosque seizure Iranian revolution Saur Revolution Sino-Vietnamese War New Jewel Movement 1979 Herat uprising Seven Days to the River Rhine Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union 1980s Salvadoran Civil War Soviet–Afghan War Eritrean Civil Wars 1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts Gera Demands Peruvian Revolution Gdańsk Agreement Solidarity 1980 Turkish coup d'état Ugandan Bush War Gulf of Sidra incident Martial law in Poland Casamance conflict Falklands War 1982 Ethiopian–Somali Border War Ndogboyosoi War United States invasion of Grenada Able Archer 83 Star Wars 1985 Geneva Summit Iran–Iraq War Somali Rebellion Reykjavík Summit 1986 Black Sea incident South Yemen civil war Toyota War 1987 Lieyu massacre Operation Denver 1987–1989 JVP insurrection Lord's Resistance Army insurgency 1988 Black Sea bumping incident 8888 Uprising Solidarity ( Soviet reaction ) Contras Central American crisis Operation RYAN Korean Air Lines Flight 007 People Power Revolution Glasnost Perestroika Bougainville conflict First Nagorno-Karabakh War Afghan Civil War United States invasion of Panama 1988 Polish strikes Polish Round Table Agreement 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre Revolutions of 1989 Fall of the Berlin Wall Fall of the inner German border Velvet Revolution Romanian Revolution Peaceful Revolution 1990s Mongolian Revolution of 1990 Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident Gulf War Min Ping Yu No. 5202 German reunification Yemeni unification Fall of communism in Albania Breakup of Yugoslavia Dissolution of the Soviet Union 1991 August Coup Dissolution of Czechoslovakia Frozen conflicts Abkhazia China-Taiwan Korea Kosovo South Ossetia Transnistria Sino-Indian border dispute North Borneo dispute Foreign policy Truman Doctrine Containment Eisenhower Doctrine Domino theory Hallstein Doctrine Kennedy Doctrine Peaceful coexistence Ostpolitik Johnson Doctrine Brezhnev Doctrine Nixon Doctrine Ulbricht Doctrine Carter Doctrine Reagan Doctrine Paasikivi–Kekkonen doctrine Rollback Kinmen Agreement Ideologies Capitalism Liberalism Chicago school Conservatism American conservatism Keynesianism Libertarianism Monetarism Neoclassical economics Reaganomics Supply-side economics Democratic capitalism Socialism Communism Marxism–Leninism Castroism Eurocommunism Guevarism Hoxhaism Juche Ho Chi Minh Thought Maoism Trotskyism Stalinism Titoism Other Imperialism Anti-imperialism Nationalism Ultranationalism Chauvinism Ethnic nationalism Racism Zionism Anti-Zionism Fascism Neo-Nazism Islamism Totalitarianism Authoritarianism Autocracy Liberal democracy Illiberal democracy Guided democracy Social democracy Third-worldism White supremacy White nationalism White separatism Apartheid Finlandization Organizations NATO SEATO METO EEC Warsaw Pact Comecon Non-Aligned Movement NN States ASEAN SAARC Safari Club Propaganda Pro-communist Active measures Izvestia Neues Deutschland Pravda Radio Moscow Rudé právo Trybuna Ludu TASS Soviet Life Pro-Western Amerika Crusade for Freedom Paix et Liberté Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Red Scare Voice of America Technological competition Arms race Nuclear arms race Space Race Historians Gar Alperovitz Thomas A. Bailey Michael Beschloss Archie Brown Warren H. Carroll Adrian Cioroianu John Costello Michael Cox Nicholas J. Cull Norman Davies Willem Drees Robert D. English Herbert Feis Robert Hugh Ferrell André Fontaine Anneli Ute Gabanyi John Lewis Gaddis Lloyd Gardner Timothy Garton Ash Gabriel Gorodetsky Fred Halliday Jussi Hanhimäki John Earl Haynes Patrick J. Hearden Tvrtko Jakovina Tony Judt Harvey Klehr Gabriel Kolko Walter LaFeber Walter Laqueur Melvyn P. Leffler Geir Lundestad Vojtech Mastny Jack F. Matlock Jr.

Thomas J. McCormick Timothy Naftali Marius Oprea David S. Painter William B. Pickett Ronald E. Powaski Yakov M. Rabkin M. E. Sarotte Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.

Ellen Schrecker Giles Scott-Smith Shen Zhihua Timothy Snyder Athan Theoharis Andrew Thorpe Vladimir Tismăneanu Patrick Vaughan Alex von Tunzelmann Odd Arne Westad William Appleman Williams Jonathan Reed Winkler Rudolph Winnacker Ken Young Espionage and intelligence List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States Soviet espionage in the United States Russian espionage in the United States American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation CIA and the Cultural Cold War CIA MI5 MI6 United States involvement in regime change Soviet involvement in regime change MVD KGB Stasi See also Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War Soviet Union–United States relations Soviet Union–United States summits Russia–NATO relations War on terror Brinkmanship Pax Atomica Second Cold War Russian Revolution Category List of conflicts Timeline v t e Anti-Chinese sentiment (Sinophobia) Background Anti-Han sentiment Coolie Yellow Peril Chinese emigration The Unparalleled Invasion Japanese nationalism Minzoku De-Sinicization By persecutor Adriaan Valckenier Andrew Jackson Bryant Denis Kearney Hideki Tojo Suharto Pol Pot Plaek Phibunsongkhram By country Hong Kong India Indonesia Japan Racism in Japan Korea Malaysia Racism in Malaysia Ketuanan Melayu Myanmar Nazi Germany Philippines Singapore Taiwan Thailand United States China Initiative Vietnam By institution Anti-Chinese Union Asiatic Exclusion League Canadian Brotherhood of Railway Employees Tsagaan Khas Uyoku dantai By incident 17th century Sangley Rebellion (1603) Sangley Rebellion (1639) Sangley Massacre (1662) 18th century 1740 Batavia massacre 1782 Saigon massacre 19th century Buckland riot (1857) Lambing Flat riots (1860–1861) Anti-Coolie Act (1862) Los Angeles Chinese massacre of 1871 Pigtail Ordinance (1873) Page Act of 1875 Trout Creek Outrage (1876) San Francisco riot of 1877 New Zealand head tax (1881–1944) Chinese Exclusion Act (1882–1943) Royal Commission on Chinese Immigration (1885) Chinese Immigration Act, 1885 Attack on Squak Valley Chinese laborers, 1885 Tacoma riot of 1885 Rock Springs massacre (1885) 1885 Chinese expulsion from Eureka Chinese head tax (1885–1923) Seattle riot of 1886 1886 Vancouver anti-Chinese riots Hells Canyon massacre (1887) Scott Act (1888) Geary Act (1892–1943) Union Colliery Co of British Columbia v Bryden (1899) 20th century White Australia policy (1901–1973) 1907 Vancouver anti-Asian riots Beipu uprising (1907) Torreón massacre (1911) 1918 Kudus riot Soviet deportations of Chinese people (1920s–1930s) Chinese Immigration Act, 1923 Wanpaoshan Incident (1931) Second Sino-Japanese War (1937–1945) Nanjing Massacre (1937–1938) Nanshitou massacre (1942–1945) Japanese war crimes Three Alls policy Sook Ching (1942) Changjiao massacre (1943) Home Office 213/926 (1945–1946) Bersiap (1945–1947) Mergosono massacre (1947) Legislation on Chinese Indonesians (1950s-) Chinese Confession Program (1956–1965) Internment of Chinese Indians (1962) 1964 race riots in Singapore Indonesian mass killings of 1965–66 1967 anti-Chinese riots in Burma Monosodium glutamate controversy (Chinese restaurant syndrome) 13 May incident (1969) 1969 race riots of Singapore Malari incident (1974) Cambodian genocide (1975–1979) 1997 Banjarmasin riot May 1998 riots of Indonesia 21st century 2006 Nukuʻalofa riots Abacus Bank prosecution 2008 Kunming bus bombings July 2009 Ürümqi riots 2011 Kashgar attacks Wolf Amendment 2013 Tiananmen Square attack 2014 Vietnam anti-China protests 2014 Kunming attack April 2014 Ürümqi attack May 2014 Ürümqi attack 2015 Plaza Low Yat riot 2015 Aksu colliery attack China Initiative COVID-19 pandemic incidents 2021 Atlanta spa shootings 2021 Solomon Islands unrest 2024 Papua New Guinean unrest Boycotts of Chinese products By victim 19th century Chae Chan Ping Fong Yue Ting Mary Tape Wong Kim Ark Yick Wo 20th century Vincent Chin Ita Martadinata Haryono Qian Xuesen Velma Demerson Wen Ho Lee 21st century Anming Hu Danny Chen Ee Lee Eileen Gu Feng "Franklin" Tao Gang Chen Haoyang Yu Jiansheng Chen Jiayang Fan Lee Chi-cheung Mi Gao Huang Chen Sherry Chen Teoh Beng Hock Xiaoxing Xi Yao Pan Ma Michelle Go Slurs Chinaman Chinaman's chance Chinese, Japanese, dirty knees Ching chong Chink Locust/Wongchung Shina/Zhina Sick man of Asia Related Anti-People's Republic of China Chinese imperialism Anti-Taiwanese sentiment Hong Kong nationalism Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐v5xzb
Cached time: 20250818105444
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.742 seconds
Real time usage: 3.074 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 19032/1000000
Revision size: 162709/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 700507/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 30943/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 43/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 754993/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.697/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21898489/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2535.042      1 -total
 40.84% 1035.331      2 Template:Reflist
 17.17%  435.259     73 Template:Cite_book
 14.37%  364.386     66 Template:Cite_web
 11.74%  297.525     75 Template:Sfn
  7.19%  182.394     15 Template:Cite_journal
  5.54%  140.470     21 Template:Cite_news
  4.85%  122.988      6 Template:Efn
  4.37%  110.858      3 Template:Langx
  3.98%  100.799      1 Template:History_of_Cambodia Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:40668394:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818105444 and revision id 1305793540. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cambodian_genocide&oldid=1305793540 " Categories : Cambodian genocide 1970s in Cambodia 1975 in Cambodia 1976 in Cambodia 1977 in Cambodia 1978 in Cambodia 1979 in Cambodia 1970s famines Anti-Christian sentiment in Cambodia Anti-Islam sentiment Anti-Buddhism Anti-Hindu sentiment Anti-Chinese violence in Asia Anti-Vietnamese sentiment War crimes in the Third Indochina War Anti-Thai sentiment Communist terrorism Cultural genocide Democratic Kampuchea Ethnic cleansing in Asia Politicides Genocide of indigenous peoples in Asia Genocides in Asia Human rights abuses in Cambodia Incidents of cannibalism Cannibalism in Asia Khmer Rouge Massacres in Cambodia Murder in Cambodia Religious persecution by communists Medical experimentation on prisoners of war Pol Pot Political and cultural purges Persecution of Buddhists Persecution of Hindus Persecution of Christians Persecution of Muslims Persecution of intellectuals War crimes in Cambodia Hidden categories: Articles containing Khmer-language text CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2020 Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from July 2024 Wikipedia articles needing translation Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2024 Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Articles containing French-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 03:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cambodian genocide 44 languages Add topic

