Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Typography 3 Charles Sanders Peirce 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Type–token distinction 14 languages العربية Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Русский Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Type (metaphysics) ) Distinguishing objects and classes of objects Although this flock is made of the same type of bird, each individual bird is a different token .

The type–token distinction is the difference between a type of objects (analogous to a class ) and the individual tokens of that type (analogous to instances ). Since each type may be instantiated by multiple tokens, there are generally more tokens than types of an object.

For example, the sentence "A Rose is a rose is a rose" contains three word types: three word tokens of the type a , two word tokens of the type is, and three word tokens of the type rose . The distinction is important in disciplines such as logic , linguistics , metalogic , typography , and computer programming .

Overview [ edit ] The type–token distinction separates types (abstract descriptive concepts) from tokens (objects that instantiate concepts). For example, in the sentence " the bicycle is becoming more popular " the word bicycle represents the abstract concept of bicycles and this abstract concept is a type, whereas in the sentence " the bicycle is in the garage ", it represents a particular object and this particular object is a token. Similarly, the word type 'letter' uses only four letter types: L , E , T and R . Nevertheless, it uses both E and T twice. One can say that the word type 'letter' has six letter tokens, with two tokens each of the letter types E and T . Whenever a word type is inscribed, the number of letter tokens created equals the number of letter occurrences in the word type.

Some logicians consider a word type to be the class of its tokens. Other logicians counter that the word type has a permanence and constancy not found in the class of its tokens. The type remains the same while the class of its tokens is continually gaining new members and losing old members.

[ citation needed ] Typography [ edit ] In typography , the type–token distinction is used to determine the presence of a text printed by movable type : [ 1 ] The defining criteria which a typographic print has to fulfill is that of the type identity of the various letter forms which make up the printed text. In other words: each letter form which appears in the text has to be shown as a particular instance ("token") of one and the same type which contains a reverse image of the printed letter .

Charles Sanders Peirce [ edit ] The distinctions between using words as types or tokens were first made by American logician and philosopher Charles Sanders Peirce in 1906 using terminology that he established.

[ 2 ] Peirce's type–token distinction applies to words, sentences, paragraphs and so on: to anything in a universe of discourse of character-string theory, or concatenation theory .

Peirce's original words are the following: A common mode of estimating the amount of matter in a ... printed book is to count the number of words. There will ordinarily be about twenty 'thes' on a page, and, of course, they count as twenty words. In another sense of the word 'word,' however, there is but one word 'the' in the English language; and it is impossible that this word should lie visibly on a page, or be heard in any voice .... Such a ... Form, I propose to term a Type. A Single ... Object ... such as this or that word on a single line of a single page of a single copy of a book, I will venture to call a Token. .... In order that a Type may be used, it has to be embodied in a Token which shall be a sign of the Type, and thereby of the object the Type signifies.

— Peirce 1906, also Ogden and Richards, 1923, 280-1.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Class (philosophy) – Philosophical term denoting a group of things derived from extensional or intensional definition Formalism (philosophy) – Concept of focusing on form over concept Haecceity – Term from medieval scholastic philosophy Hypernymy and hyponymy – Semantic relations involving the type-of property Identity (philosophy) – Relation each thing bears to itself alone Identity of indiscernibles – Impossibility for separate objects to have all their properties in common Is-a – Subsumption relationship between abstractions Map–territory relation – Relationship between an object and a representation of that object Mental model – Mental representation of the external world Problem of universals § Peirce Platonic ideal – Philosophical theory attributed to Plato Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Use–mention distinction – Distinction between using a word and mentioning it Type theory – Mathematical theory of data types Type physicalism – Theory in the philosophy of mind References [ edit ] ^ Brekle, Herbert E.

: Die Prüfeninger Weiheinschrift von 1119. Eine paläographisch-typographische Untersuchung , Scriptorium Verlag für Kultur und Wissenschaft, Regensburg 2005, ISBN 3-937527-06-0 , p. 23 ^ Charles Sanders Peirce, Prolegomena to an apology for pragmaticism, Monist, vol.16 (1906), pp. 492–546.

^ Ogden, C. K. & Richards, I. A. (1923). The meaning of meaning. London: Kegan Paul.

Sources [ edit ] Baggin J. and Fosl P. (2003) The Philosopher's Toolkit . Blackwell: 171-73.

ISBN 978-0-631-22874-5 .

Peper F., Lee J., Adachi S., Isokawa T. (2004) Token-Based Computing on Nanometer Scales , Proceedings of the ToBaCo 2004 Workshop on Token Based Computing, Vol.1 pp. 1–18.

External links [ edit ] Linda Wetzel .

"Types and Tokens" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Metalogic and metamathematics Cantor's theorem Entscheidungsproblem Church–Turing thesis Consistency Effective method Foundations of mathematics of geometry Gödel's completeness theorem Gödel's incompleteness theorems Soundness Completeness Decidability Interpretation Löwenheim–Skolem theorem Metatheorem Satisfiability Independence Type–token distinction Use–mention distinction v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Formal semantics (natural language) Central concepts Compositionality Denotation Entailment Extension Generalized quantifier Intension Logical form Presupposition Proposition Reference Scope Speech act Syntax–semantics interface Truth conditions Topics Areas Anaphora Ambiguity Binding Conditionals Definiteness Disjunction Evidentiality Focus Indexicality Lexical semantics Modality Negation Propositional attitudes Tense–aspect–mood Quantification Vagueness Phenomena Antecedent-contained deletion Cataphora Coercion Conservativity Counterfactuals Crossover effects Cumulativity De dicto and de re De se Deontic modality Discourse relations Donkey anaphora Epistemic modality Exhaustivity Faultless disagreement Free choice inferences Givenness Homogeneity (linguistics) Hurford disjunction Inalienable possession Intersective modification Logophoricity Mirativity Modal subordination Opaque contexts Performatives Polarity items Privative adjectives Quantificational variability effect Responsive predicate Rising declaratives Scalar implicature Sloppy identity Subsective modification Subtrigging Telicity Temperature paradox Veridicality Formalism Formal systems Alternative semantics Categorial grammar Combinatory categorial grammar Discourse representation theory (DRT) Dynamic semantics Generative grammar Glue semantics Inquisitive semantics Intensional logic Lambda calculus Mereology Montague grammar Segmented discourse representation theory (SDRT) Situation semantics Supervaluationism Type theory TTR Concepts Autonomy of syntax Context set Continuation Conversational scoreboard Downward entailing Existential closure Function application Meaning postulate Monads Plural quantification Possible world Quantifier raising Quantization Question under discussion Semantic parsing Squiggle operator Strawson entailment Strict conditional Type shifter Universal grinder See also Cognitive semantics Computational semantics Distributional semantics Formal grammar Inferentialism Logic translation Linguistics wars Philosophy of language Pragmatics Semantics of logic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐wvq8s
Cached time: 20250814225041
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.435 seconds
Real time usage: 0.580 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3641/1000000
Revision size: 5946/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 70104/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4521/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 34996/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.277/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16303154/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  485.963      1 -total
 36.72%  178.462     13 Template:Annotated_link
 22.84%  111.002      5 Template:Navbox
 12.06%   58.611      1 Template:Metalogic
 10.82%   52.577      1 Template:Reflist
 10.50%   51.037      1 Template:Short_description
  9.14%   44.435      2 Template:ISBN
  8.88%   43.132      1 Template:Metaphysics
  6.16%   29.921      1 Template:Fact
  5.35%   25.999      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:14934822:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814225041 and revision id 1304131131. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Type–token_distinction&oldid=1304131131 " Categories : Abstraction Charles Sanders Peirce Concepts in logic Concepts in metaphysics Conceptual distinctions Identity (philosophy) Knowledge representation Linguistics Metalogic Ontology Philosophical logic Philosophy of logic Philosophy of language Semantics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2022 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 05:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Type–token distinction 14 languages Add topic

