Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Modern mutuality 3 Conversion 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Mutual organization 10 languages Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Dansk Español Euskara Norsk bokmål Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Mutualization ) "Mutuals" redirects here. For other uses, see Mutual (disambiguation) .

Organization based on mutual benefit This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Mutual organization" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A mutual organization , also mutual society or simply mutual , is an organization (which is often, but not always, a company or business ) based on the principle of mutuality and governed by private law. Unlike a cooperative , members usually do not directly contribute to the capital of the organization, but derive their right to profits and votes through their customer relationship.

A mutual exists with the purpose of raising funds from its membership or customers (collectively called its members ), which can then be used to provide common services to all members of the organization or society. A mutual is therefore owned by, and run for the benefit of, its members – it has no external shareholders to pay in the form of dividends , and as such does not usually seek to maximize and make large profits or capital gains . Mutuals exist for the members to benefit from the services they provide and often do not pay income tax .

[ 1 ] Surplus revenue made will usually be re-invested in the mutual to sustain or grow the organization, though some mutuals operate a dividend scheme similar to a cooperative.

[ 2 ] Background [ edit ] The primary form of financial business set up as a mutual company in the United States has been mutual insurance .  Some insurance companies are set up as stock companies and then mutualized, their ownership passing to their policy owners.  In mutual insurance companies, what would have been profits are instead rebated to the clients in the form of dividend distributions, reduced future premiums or paid up additions to the policy value.

This is a competitive advantage to such companies—the idea of owning a piece of the company could be more attractive to some potential clients than the idea of being a source of profits for investors. In the typical stock company, profits go to shareholders. In contrast, a mutual manages the company in the best interests of the customers.  Furthermore, a mutual company is able to focus on a longer horizon than a typical company. Some mutual insurance companies make this claim explicitly.

In more general terms, mutual organizations are able to minimize the principal–agent problem by removing one stakeholder, the investor-owner, in favor of one of the other stakeholders, usually the customer, who becomes both user and joint owner of the business.

[ 3 ] However, the mutual form of ownership also has disadvantages.  One example is that mutual companies have no shares to sell and hence no access to equity markets .

At one time, [ when?

] most major U.S. life insurers were mutual companies. For many years, the tax status of such organizations was open to dispute, as they were technically nonprofit organizations. Eventually, [ when?

] it was agreed that federal taxation would be based on their share of business: for instance, in years in which mutual companies represented half of the business, they would be responsible for half of the taxes paid by the industry.

Many savings and loan associations were also mutual companies, owned by their depositors.

As a form of corporate ownership the mutual has fallen out of favor in the U.S. since the 1980s. Savings and loan industry deregulation and the late 1980s savings and loan crisis led many to change to stock ownership, or in some cases into banks . Many large U.S.-based insurance companies, such as the Prudential Insurance Company of America and the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company have demutualized , with shares of stock being distributed to their policyholders to represent the ownership interest they formerly had in the form of their interest as mutual policyholders.

The Mutual of Omaha Insurance Company has also investigated demutualization, even though its form of ownership is embedded in its name. It is noted that other formerly mutual companies such as Washington Mutual , a former savings and loan association , have been allowed to demutualize and yet retain their names.

The approximate British equivalent of the savings and loan is the building society . Building societies also went through an era of demutualisation in the 1980s and 1990s, leaving only one large national building society and around forty smaller regional and local ones. Significant demutualisation also occurred in Australia and South Africa in the same era.

Cooperatives are very similar to mutual companies. They tend to deal in primarily tangible goods and services such as agricultural commodities or utilities rather than intangible products such as financial services . Nevertheless, banking institutions with close ties to the co-operative movement are usually known as credit unions or cooperative banks rather than mutuals.

Modern mutuality [ edit ] Various types of financial institutions around the world are mutuals, and examples include: Mutual building societies Nationwide Building Society – United Kingdom Coventry Building Society – United Kingdom Nelson Building Society – New Zealand Mutual banks and mutual savings banks Greater Bank – Australia SBS Bank – New Zealand Mutual healthcare providers Benenden Healthcare Society – United Kingdom Mutual insurance companies Shepherds Friendly Society – United Kingdom Protection and indemnity insurance Some mutual financial institutions offer services very similar to (if not the same as) those of a commercial bank . In some markets, mutuals offer very competitive interest rates and fee tariffs on savings and deposit accounts , mortgages and loans . The members who save and borrow with the mutual ultimately own the business.

Conversion [ edit ] Mutualization or mutualisation is the process by which a joint stock company changes legal form to a mutual organization or a cooperative , so that the majority of the stock is owned by employees or customers, thereafter known as members.

[ 4 ] Demutualization or demutualisation is the reverse process, whereby a mutual may convert itself to a joint-stock company. In the United States, this process became increasingly common in the 1980s as a result of deregulation. Conversion may be full, to a public company , or in many states, partial, to a mutual holding company .

See also [ edit ] Consumer cooperative Cooperative Corporatization Employee ownership Market socialism Mutualism (economic theory) Mutualism (movement) Producer cooperative References [ edit ] ^ Simpson, Steven D.

Multistate Guide to Regulation and Taxation of Nonprofits.

CCH, 2005. Print.

ISBN 978-0-8080-8930-8 .

^ "Nationwide Fairer Share | Nationwide" .

www.nationwide.co.uk . Retrieved 2024-03-17 .

^ Birchall, Johnston (2001).

The New Mutualism in Public Policy . Psychology Press. p. 272.

ISBN 0415241308 .

^ [1] . Dictionary.com External links [ edit ] Are mutuals an endangered species?

— Swiss RE article on the result of demutualization activity.

Mutual insurance in the 21st century: back to the future?

– Swiss RE Report on the near collapse of the Equitable Life Assurance Society (Commissioned by the UK House of Commons, 2001) v t e Cooperatives and mutual organizations Organizations By governance Primary cooperative ( list ) Consumer Worker ( list ) Purchasing Retailer Federation ( list ) International Co-operative Alliance Cooperative wholesale society By product Banking Credit union Mutual savings bank Savings and loan association Building society Housing Building Cohousing Student housing Housing society egalitarian commune Agricultural Collective farming Reforestation Winemaking Wheat pool Utility ( list ) Community wind energy Electric Telephone Broadband Insurance Health insurance cooperative Mutual insurance Independent practice association Other Food list Recycling Platform Media Social services Other Friendly society Agent-owned company Stokvel Artel Topics Identity Rochdale Principles ICA Statement on the Cooperative Identity Political and economic theories Co-operative economics Cooperative federalism Distributism Economic democracy Guild socialism Mutualism Neo-capitalism Owenism Social enterprise Socialism Socially responsible investing Solidarity economy Key theorists G. D. H. Cole Charles Gide David Griffiths William King Robert Owen Friedrich Wilhelm Raiffeisen David Schweickart Rochdale Pioneers Beatrice Webb By region Canada Ukraine United Kingdom United States Political parties Co-operative Commonwealth Federation (Canada) United Farmers of Alberta (Canada) Co-operative Party (UK) Nepal Co-operative Party History of the cooperative movement .coop v t e Insurance Types of insurance Health Accident Accidental death and dismemberment Dental Disability Total permanent disability Business overhead expense Income protection Long-term care National health Payment protection Life Longevity insurance Mortgage life Term life Unitised fund Universal life Variable universal life Whole life Business Bond Business interruption Business owner Collateral protection Directors and officers liability Fidelity Over-redemption Payment protection Pollution Professional liability Protection and indemnity Surety Trade credit Umbrella Residential Boiler Builder's risk Contents Earthquake Flood Home Landlords' Lenders mortgage Mortgage Property Renters' Title Transport/ Communication Aviation GAP insurance Inland marine Public auto Marine Satellite Shipping Travel Vehicle Other Reinsurance Catastrophe bond Insurance-linked securities Casualty Climate risk Crime Crop Catastrophic Multi-peril Cyber Deposit Expatriate Extended warranty Group Index-based Parametric Interest rate Kidnap and ransom Legal expenses Liability No-fault Pet Political risk Prize indemnity Takaful Terrorism Tuition War risk Weather Workers' compensation Insurance policy and law Act of God Actuarial science Actuary Adverse selection Risk Risk assessment Risk management Uncertainty / Knightian Value of life Actual cash value Cash value Broker Cancellation Pro rata Short rate table Claim Claims adjuster Deductible Co-insurance Copayment Out-of-pocket expense Explanation of benefits Force majeure General average Indemnity Insurability Insurable interest Insurance fraud Proximate cause Replacement value Risk pool Self-insurance Total loss Underinsurance Underwriting Profit Insurance by country Australia China India Pakistan Serbia United Kingdom United States Climate change Health insurance Health insurance costs Health insurance coverage Vehicle insurance History Mesopotamian banker Code of Hammurabi §100–105; §126 ; §234 ; §235–238; §240 ; §275–277 Collegium Burial society Guild Corpus Juris Civilis Digesta Syndicate Benefit / Friendly society Cooperative Cooperative banking Credit union Fraternal order Mutual organization Mutual savings bank Rochdale Principles Savings and loan association Social insurance Trade union Insurance cycle Category List of topics Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mutual_organization&oldid=1276949049#Conversion " Category : Mutual organizations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2009 All articles needing additional references All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from August 2022 This page was last edited on 21 February 2025, at 18:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mutual organization 10 languages Add topic

