Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 Views on prayer 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Thomas Chubb 3 languages 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English Deist writer (1679–1747) For the American businessman, see Thomas Caldecot Chubb .

Thomas Chubb Portrait of Thomas Chubb, by Thomas Gainsborough Born 29 September 1679 near Salisbury Died 8 February 1747 Genre Theology Literary movement Deism Thomas Chubb (29 September 1679 – 8 February 1747) was a lay English Deist writer born near Salisbury . He saw Christ as a divine teacher, but held reason to be sovereign over religion. He questioned the morality of religions, while defending Christianity on rational grounds. Despite little schooling, Chubb was well up on the religious controversies.

[ 1 ] His The True Gospel of Jesus Christ, Asserted sets out to distinguish the teaching of Jesus from that of the Evangelists .

[ 2 ] Chubb's views on free will and determinism, expressed in A Collection of Tracts on Various Subjects (1730), were extensively criticised by Jonathan Edwards in Freedom of the Will (1754).

[ 3 ] Life [ edit ] Chubb, the son of a maltster , was born at East Harnham , near Salisbury . The death of his father in 1688 cut short his education, and in 1694 he was apprenticed to a glover in Salisbury, but subsequently entered the employment of a tallow-chandler . He picked up a fair knowledge of mathematics and geography, but theology was his favourite study. His habit of committing his thoughts to writing gave him a clear and fluent style.

[ 4 ] Chubb spent some years living and working in London at the house of Joseph Jekyll , Master of the Rolls . However, he was drawn back to Salisbury, where by the kindness of friends he was enabled to devote the rest of his days to his studies.

[ 4 ] Works [ edit ] Chubb made his first appearance as an author in the Arian controversy . A dispute having arisen about William Whiston 's argument in favour of the supremacy of the one God and Father, he wrote an essay, The Supremacy of the Father Asserted , which Whiston pronounced worthy of publication, and it was printed in 1715.

[ 4 ] Another of his published tracts, The Previous Question with Regard to Religion , went through four editions, three in 1725. His tracts were collected in a quarto volume in 1730 and attracted wide notice. (A second, two-volume edition in 1754 included 35 tracts.) Chubb was encouraged to write further tracts. A disciple of Samuel Clarke , he gradually moved from Arianism into a modified Deism.

[ 5 ] In 1731 he published a Discourse concerning Reason ... [showing that] reason is, or else that it ought to be, a sufficient guide in matters of Religion . Some "reflections" upon "moral and positive duty" were added, as suggested by Clarke's Exposition of the Catechism . In 1732 The Sufficiency of Reason further considered...

was appended to an "enquiry" against a recent sermon by Samuel Croxall arguing that to celebrate Charles I's martyrdom was inconsistent with celebrating William III's arrival.

[ 5 ] In 1734 came four tracts of his attacking the common theory of inspiration , arguing that the resurrection of Christ was no proof of his divine mission and criticising the story of Abraham's sacrifice of Isaac. The whole argument showed increasing scepticism, and the assertion about Abraham led to some controversy. He returned to the question in 1735, in some "Observations" on Thomas Rundle 's nomination to the Diocese of Gloucester , Rundle having been accused of disbelieving the story. Three tracts were added that continued the former discussion.

[ 5 ] In 1738 Chubb published The True Gospel of Jesus Christ asserted , which provoked various attacks, including one from Ebenezer Hewlett .

[ 6 ] It was followed by The True Gospel of Jesus vindicated , and An Enquiry into the Ground and Foundation of Religion, wherein it is shown that Religion is founded on Nature . He persisted in stating that true Christianity consisted of a belief that morality alone could make men acceptable to God, that repentance for sin would secure God's mercy, and that there would be future retribution. His Enquiry into the Ground and Foundation of Religion (1740) includes a controversy with Henry Stebbing . Chubb argues against interpreting literally the command to give all to the poor, noting that Stebbing himself was a pluralist with two livings, a preachership and an archdeaconry, and due to be chancellor of the Diocese of Salisbury , so that he could hardly interpret the command literally to himself.

[ 5 ] Chubb's 1741 Discourse on Miracles states that they could at most afford a "probable proof" of a revelation . In 1743 his Enquiry concerning Redemption is a defence of himself against some sneers by William Warburton . "The Ground and Foundation of Morality considered" (1745) is an attack on Thomas Rutherforth 's theory of self-love. The last work that Chubb published himself was Four Dissertations (1746), attacking some Old Testament passages with a freedom that gave wide offence.

[ 5 ] Views on prayer [ edit ] Deism Origins Deus ( Deus otiosus ) Logos § Ancient Greek philosophy Neoplatonism § The One Chinese theology § Confucian theology Averroism Socinianism Unmoved mover Watchmaker God Movements 18th-century England and France Christian Deism Pandeism ( in Asia ) ( and Christianity ) ( criticism ) Spinozism Cult of the Supreme Being Theophilanthropy Deistic evolution Natural theology Congregationalism in the US § Disinterested benevolence Polydeism Notable figures Edward Herbert, 1st Baron Herbert of Cherbury Henry St John, 1st Viscount Bolingbroke Matthew Tindal Voltaire Charles Blount Thomas Chubb Thomas Jefferson Thomas Paine Guido von List Cayetano Ripoll False equivalencies Ceremonial deism Moralistic therapeutic deism Opposition Catholic Church John Leland Edward Stillingfleet § Philosophical controversy Anthony Bliss John Jackson Johann Georg Hamann Charles Jennens Religious thought of Edmund Burke Richard Blackmore § Non-epic writing James McGready Valentin Ernst Löscher Continental prophecies § Themes Friedrich Julius Stahl v t e Joseph Waligore states in a 2012 article, "The Piety of the English Deists", that Chubb discussed prayer more than any other deist.

[ 7 ] Chubb's longest writing on the subject was a 30-page pamphlet, "An Enquiry Concerning Prayer", where he began by insisting that prayer was a duty God required for achieving a closer relationship with him. The purpose of prayer was to render someone "a suitable and proper object of God's special care and love. For as prayer is an address or application of a dependent being to his supreme governour, and original benefactor.... It naturally draws forth our souls in filial fear, in hope and trust, in love, delight, and joy in God; and creates in us a just concern to please him, and to approve ourselves in his sight; and consequently to put on that purity and piety, humility and charity which is the spirit and practice of true Christianity." [ 8 ] Chubb said we should pray often and "it is when we forget God, when God is not in all our thoughts, that we do amiss; then our minds and lives are corrupted and defiled." He also discussed whom we should pray to. First he said we should not pray to dead human souls, as we have no reason to think they hear our prayers or have any power to help us. Then he discussed whether we should pray to angels. Unlike Morgan – who thought we should pray to both God and angels – Chubb thought we probably should not pray to angels. He said even though they were "ministering spirits", we could not be sure they heard our prayers, and they might not be at liberty to help us without God's direct guidance. He spent a final ten pages wondering whether we should pray to Jesus or just to God the Father, concluding we should pray to God the Father "in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ".

[ 8 ] Chubb was sure that God heard all our petitions, but he did not think God answered them all in the way we wished. God answered only if they were for lawful things and people prayed earnestly "with a modest resignation to God's will".[vi] Chubb thought that God sometimes gave us harmful things we had prayed for, but then God acted "in displeasure".

[ 8 ] In another tract, he was more pessimistic about God's positive response rate to our prayers. He cited evidence that God did not often answer our prayers: over the previous 200 years, millions of sincere, fervent prayers had petitioned God for the defeat of the Antichrist , but the Roman Catholic hierarchy or other interests ostensibly bent on defeating God's kingdom still existed.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Higher criticism References [ edit ] ^ Wood 1907 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 October 2007 . Retrieved 20 September 2008 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ See Thuesen, ed., The Works of Jonathan Edwards, Vol. 26, p. 324 .

^ a b c One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Chubb, Thomas ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 322.

^ a b c d e Stephen 1887 .

^ Levin, Adam Jacob. "Hewlett, Ebenezer".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/13152 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ Waligore, Joseph (July 2012). "The Piety of the English Deists".

Intellectual History Review .

22 (2): 181– 197.

doi : 10.1080/17496977.2012.693742 .

S2CID 170532446 .

^ a b c Thomas Chubb, "An Enquiry Concerning Prayer", in A Collection of Tracts on Various Subjects , 2nd ed., 2 vols. (London: 1754), 1:277-289, as cited in Waligore, p. 191.

^ Thomas Chubb, The True Gospel of Jesus Christ Vindicated (London, 1739), pp. 68–70, as cited in Waligore, p. 191.

Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Stephen, Leslie (1887). " Chubb, Thomas ". In Stephen, Leslie (ed.).

Dictionary of National Biography . Vol. 10. London: Smith, Elder & Co. pp.

297– 298.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Wood, James , ed. (1907). " Chubb, Thomas ".

The Nuttall Encyclopædia . London and New York: Frederick Warne.

External links [ edit ] Thomas Chubb, A Collection of Tracts on Various Subjects (London, 1730).

On Google Books .

Joseph Waligore, " The Piety of the English Deist s," Intellectual History Review, July 2012, Vol. 22, 2.

v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Vatican Israel Belgium Artists KulturNav People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thomas_Chubb&oldid=1291831199 " Categories : 1679 births 1747 deaths British deists Deist philosophers People from Salisbury Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Pages using cite ODNB with id parameter Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from April 2021 Use dmy dates from October 2019 Articles incorporating Cite DNB template Articles incorporating DNB text with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Nuttall Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the Nuttall Encyclopedia This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 17:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thomas Chubb 3 languages Add topic

