Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Organization 2 Milestones 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents International Commission on Illumination 23 languages العربية Asturianu Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Français Galego 한국어 Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia International authority on light, illumination, color, and color spaces International Commission on Illumination Commission Internationale de l'éclairage Internationale Beleuchtungskommission Abbreviation CIE Formation 1913 ; 112 years ago ( 1913 ) Type INGO Location Vienna , Austria Region served Worldwide Official language English, French, German President Jennifer Veitch Canada Website cie .co .at The CIE 1931 colour space chromaticity diagram with wavelengths in nanometers .  The colors depicted depend on the color space of the device on which the image is viewed.

The International Commission on Illumination (usually abbreviated CIE for its French name Commission internationale de l'éclairage ) is the international authority on light , illumination , colour , and colour spaces . It was established in 1913 as a successor to the Commission Internationale de Photométrie, which was founded in 1900, and is today based in Vienna, Austria .

Organization [ edit ] The CIE has six active divisions, [ 1 ] each of which establishes technical committees [ 2 ] to carry out its program: Division 1: Vision and Colour [ 3 ] Division 2: Physical Measurement of Light and Radiation [ 4 ] Division 3: Interior Environment and Lighting Design [ 5 ] Division 4: Transportation and Exterior Applications [ 6 ] Division 6: Photobiology and Photochemistry [ 7 ] Division 8: Image Technology [ 8 ] Two divisions are no longer active.

Division 5: Exterior Lighting and Other Applications [ 9 ] Division 7: General Aspects of Lighting [ 10 ] The President of the CIE from 2023 is Jennifer Veitch from Canada.

[ 11 ] CIE publishes Technical Reports (TRs), International Standards (ISs) and Technical Notes (TNs). International Standards (ISs) are often further developed as dual standards with the ISO or IEC .

[ 12 ] Milestones [ edit ] In 1924 it established the standard photopic observer defined by the spectral luminous efficiency function V ( λ ), followed in 1951 by the standard scotopic observer defined by the function V ’( λ ).

A chromaticity plot in three dimensions of the CIELUV color space Building on the Optical Society of America 's report on colorimetry in 1922, [ 13 ] the CIE convened its eighth session in 1931, with the intention of establishing an international agreement on colorimetric specifications and updating the OSA's 1922 recommendations based on the developments during the past decade.

[ 14 ] The meeting, held in Cambridge , United Kingdom , concluded with the formalization of the CIE 1931 XYZ color space & RGB color space and definitions of the 1931 CIE 2° standard observer with the corresponding color matching functions , and standard illuminants A, B, and C.

In 1964 the 10° CIE standard observer and its corresponding color matching functions as well as the new standard daylight illuminant D6500 were added, as well as a method for calculating daylight illuminants at correlated color temperatures other than 6500 kelvins .

In 1976, the commission developed the CIELAB and CIELUV color spaces, which are widely used today.

Based on CIELAB, color difference formulas CIEDE94 and CIEDE2000 were recommended in the corresponding years.

See also [ edit ] International Color Consortium (ICC) International Colour Association International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) International Organization for Standardization (ISO) References [ edit ] ^ "Divisions" . Retrieved 14 October 2021 .

^ "Technical Committees" . Retrieved 14 October 2021 .

^ "Division 1: Vision and Colour" .

cie.co.at . CIE.

^ "Division 2: Physical Measurement of Light and Radiation" .

cie.co.at . CIE.

^ "Division 3: Interior Environment and Lighting Design" .

cie.co.at . CIE.

^ "Division 4: Transportation and Exterior Applications" .

cie.co.at . CIE.

^ "Division 6: Photobiology and Photochemistry" .

cie.co.at . CIE.

^ "Division 8: Image Technology" .

cie.co.at . CIE.

^ International Commission on Illumination (2019).

Proceedings of the 29th Session of the CIE, Volume 2 . CIE. p. 5.

ISBN 978-3-902842-74-9 .

^ International Commission on Illumination (1999).

Proceedings of the 24th Session of the CIE, Volume 2 . CIE. p. 8.

ISBN 3-900-734-93-3 .

^ CIE Board of Administration Archived 2016-04-16 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 07/07/2015.

^ "CIE Publications - Premium Source for Knowledge on Light and Lighting | CIE" .

cie.co.at . Retrieved 25 June 2022 .

^ Troland, L. T.

(August 1922).

"Report of Committee on Colorimetry for 1920–21" .

Journal of the Optical Society of America .

6 (6): 527– 96.

Bibcode : 1922JOSA....6..527T .

doi : 10.1364/JOSA.6.000527 .

The report defined colour as follows: "Color is the general name for all sensations arising from the activity of the retina of the eye and its attached nervous mechanisms, this activity  being, in nearly every case in the normal individual, a specific response to radiant energy of certain wave-lengths and intensities." ^ Jones, L. A.

(1943). "Historical background and evolution of the colorimetry report".

Journal of the Optical Society of America .

33 (10): 534– 43.

Bibcode : 1943JOSA...33..534J .

doi : 10.1364/JOSA.33.000534 .

External links [ edit ] CIE Website CIE 082-1990: History of the CIE, 1913–1988 Inter-Society Color Council v t e Color topics Color science Color physics Electromagnetic spectrum Light Rainbow Visible Spectral colors Chromophore Structural coloration Animal coloration Color of chemicals Water Spectral power distribution Colorimetry Color perception Chromesthesia Sonochromatism Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Color calibration Color constancy Color task Color code Color temperature Color vision test Evolution of color vision Impossible colors Metamerism Opponent process Afterimage Unique hues Tetrachromacy The dress Color psychology Color symbolism Color preferences Lüscher color test Kruithof curve Political color National colors Chromophobia Chromotherapy Color reproduction Color photography Color balance Color cast Digital image processing Color management Color printing Multi-primary color display Quattron Color model additive RGB subtractive CMYK Color space Color mapping Color philosophy Color scheme Color tool Monochromatic colors Black-and-white Grisaille Complementary colors Analogous colors Achromatic colors (Neutral) Polychromatic colors Light-on-dark Web colors Tinctures in heraldry Color theory Color mixing Primary color Secondary color Chromaticity Color solid Color wheel Color triangle Color analysis (fashion) Color realism (art style) On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer) Theory of Colours (Goethe) Color terms Basic English terms Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Purple Pink Brown White Gray Black Cultural differences Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate Blue–green distinction in language Color history Black-and-white dualism Blue in culture Color in Chinese culture Traditional colors of Japan Human skin color Color dimensions Hue Dichromatism Colorfulness Pastel colors Luminance Lightness Darkness Brightness Iridescence Fluorescence Grayscale Tint, shade and tone Color organizations Pantone Color Marketing Group Color Association of the United States International Colour Authority International Commission on Illumination (CIE) International Color Consortium International Colour Association Names Lists List of colors: A–F List of colors: G–M List of colors: N–Z List of colors (compact) List of colors by shade List of color palettes List of color spaces List of Crayola crayon colors history Color chart List of RAL colors List of web colors Shades of: Red Orange Yellow Green Cyan Blue Violet Purple Magenta Pink Brown White Gray Black Related Vision Contrast Qualia Lighting Category Index v t e International Science Council (ISC) National members Albania Angola Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Benin Bolivia Bosnia & Herzegovina Republika Srpska Botswana Brazil ANPOCS Bulgaria Burkina Faso Cameroon Canada SSHRC Chile China CASS Colombia Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Cuba Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Egypt El Salvador Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Finland France Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Guatemala Honduras Hungary India ICSSR Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya North Korea South Korea KSSRC KAST Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Mauritius Mexico COMECSO Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Namibia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nigeria North Macedonia Norway UB Oman Pakistan PAS PCSIR Panama Peru Philippines PSSC Poland Portugal Romania Russia Rwanda Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Singapore Slovak Republic Slovenia South Africa HSRC Spain Sri Lanka Sudan SNAS Sweden Switzerland Switzerland Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Togo Tunisia Turkey Science Academy TÜBİTAK Uganda Ukraine United Kingdom British Academy ESRC United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Zambia Zimbabwe RCZ Transnational members ACSS AASSREC CASS CLACSO CODESRIA FLACSO UAI OSSREA USP Unions and associations 4S IALS IASSA IAU ICA IEA IFSM IGU IMU INQUA IPRA IPSA ISA ISEE ISPRS IUBMB IUBS IUCr IUFoST IUFRO IUGG IUGS IUHPST IUIS IUMRS IUMS IUNS IUPAB IUPAC IUPAP IUPESM IUPHAR IUPS IUPsyS IUSS IUSSP IUTAM IUTOX URSI WAPOR WAU Affiliated members AAS AASSA ACSS ASTC CIE EADI ECPR FIG GYA IAAP IAHR IASC ICA ICIAM ICLAS ICO ICSTI IFDO IFIP IFLA IFS IIASA ISA ISDE IUVSTA IWA PSA SSRC TNI TWAS UIS Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Portugal Norway Croatia Israel Academics CiNii Artists Museum of Modern Art Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Commission_on_Illumination&oldid=1296921097 " Categories : Lighting organizations Color organizations Members of the International Council for Science Organisations based in Vienna Scientific organisations based in Austria Standards organisations in Austria Vision Members of the International Science Council Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2024 This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 03:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International Commission on Illumination 23 languages Add topic

