Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Role of forests 2 Aims 3 Monitoring and planning Toggle Monitoring and planning subsection 3.1 Forest inventory 3.2 Wildlife considerations 3.3 Management intensity 3.4 Monitoring 3.5 Effects of climate change on forests 4 Methods for creating or recreating forests Toggle Methods for creating or recreating forests subsection 4.1 Tree breeding 4.2 Tree planting 4.3 Reforestation 4.3.1 Forest restoration 4.4 Afforestation 5 Types Toggle Types subsection 5.1 Plantation forestry 5.2 Silviculture 5.3 Bamboo forestry 5.4 Hardwood timber production 5.5 Energy forestry 5.6 Forest farming 6 Sustainable forest management Toggle Sustainable forest management subsection 6.1 Definition 6.2 Criteria and indicators 6.3 Ecosystem approach 6.4 Methods 6.4.1 Ecoforestry 6.4.2 Continuous cover forestry 6.4.3 Mycoforestry 6.4.3.1 Assisted natural regeneration 6.4.4 Alternative harvesting methods 6.4.5 Preserving forest genetic resources 7 Problems Toggle Problems subsection 7.1 Wildfires 7.2 Forest degradation 7.3 Deforestation 7.3.1 Deforestation and climate change 7.4 Checkerboarding 7.5 Unsustainable practices 7.5.1 Clear-cutting 7.5.2 Even-aged timber management 7.5.3 Illegal logging 8 Certification systems 9 Forest governance Toggle Forest governance subsection 9.1 Community forestry 9.2 Forestry law 10 Mitigation of deforestation and climate change Toggle Mitigation of deforestation and climate change subsection 10.1 Forest protection 10.1.1 Tropical rainforest conservation 10.2 Proforestation 10.2.1 Increasing Forest and Community Resilience 11 Workers 12 History Toggle History subsection 12.1 13th to 16th century 12.2 Mechanization in 19th century 12.3 Forest conservation and early globalization 12.4 21st century 12.5 Journals 13 Society and culture Toggle Society and culture subsection 13.1 Public input and awareness 14 By region Toggle By region subsection 14.1 Developing world 14.2 European Union 14.3 Great Britain 14.4 America 14.4.1 Canada 14.4.2 United States 14.5 Asia 14.5.1 Russia 14.5.2 Indonesia 14.6 Africa 14.6.1 Congo 14.6.2 Kenya 15 See also 16 References Toggle References subsection 16.1 Sources 17 External links Toggle the table of contents Forest management 21 languages العربية Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 پښتو Polski Português Slovenščina Svenska தமிழ் ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Forestation ) Branch of forestry Sustainable forest management balances local socioeconomic, cultural, and ecological needs and constraints.

Forest management is a branch of forestry concerned with overall administrative, legal, economic, and social aspects, as well as scientific and technical aspects, such as silviculture , forest protection , and forest regulation . This includes management for timber, aesthetics , recreation , urban values, water , wildlife , inland and nearshore fisheries, wood products , plant genetic resources , and other forest resource values .

[ 1 ] Management objectives can be for conservation, utilisation, or a mixture of the two. Techniques include timber extraction, planting and replanting of different species , building and maintenance of roads and pathways through forests, and preventing fire .

Many tools like remote sensing, GIS and photogrammetry [ 2 ] [ 3 ] modelling have been developed to improve forest inventory and management planning.

[ 4 ] Scientific research plays a crucial role in helping forest management. For example, climate modeling , [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] biodiversity research, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] carbon sequestration research, [ 6 ] [ 5 ] [ 10 ] GIS applications, [ 8 ] [ 11 ] and long-term monitoring [ 7 ] [ 9 ] help assess and improve forest management, ensuring its effectiveness and success.

Role of forests [ edit ] Main article: Forest The forest is a natural system that can supply different products and services. Forests supply water, mitigate climate change , provide habitats for wildlife including many pollinators which are essential for sustainable food production, provide timber and fuelwood, serve as a source of non-wood forest products including food and medicine, and contribute to rural livelihoods.

[ 12 ] Forests include market and non-market products. Marketable products include goods that have a market price.

Timber is the main one, with prices that range from a few hundred dollars per thousand board feet (MBF) to several thousand dollars for a veneer log. Others include grazing and fodder, specialty crops such as mushrooms or berries, usage fees for recreation or hunting, and biomass for bioenergy production. Forests also provide some non-market values which have no current market price. Examples of non-market goods would be improving water quality, air quality, aesthetics, and carbon sequestration .

The working of this system is influenced by the natural environment: climate, topography, soil, etc., and also by human activity. The actions of humans in forests constitute forest management.

[ 13 ] In developed societies, this management tends to be elaborated and planned in order to achieve the objectives that are considered desirable.

[ citation needed ] Aims [ edit ] Some forests have been and are managed to obtain traditional forest products such as firewood, fiber for paper, and timber, with little thinking for other products and services. Nevertheless, as a result of the progression of environmental awareness, management of forests for multiple use is becoming more common.

[ 14 ] Forests provide a variety of ecosystem services : cleaning the air, accumulating carbon, filtering water, and reducing flooding and erosion.

[ 15 ] Forests are the most biodiverse land-based ecosystem, and provide habitat for a vast array of animals, birds, plants and other life. They can provide food and material and also opportunities for recreation and education. Research has found that forest plantations "may result in reduced diversity and abundance of pollinators compared with natural forests that have greater structural and plant species diversity." [ 16 ] Monitoring and planning [ edit ] Foresters develop and implement forest management plans relying on mapped resources, inventories showing an area's topographical features as well as its distribution of trees (by species) and other plant covers. Plans also include landowner objectives, roads, culverts , proximity to human habitation, water features and hydrological conditions, and soil information. Forest management plans typically include recommended silvicultural treatments and a timetable for their implementation. Application of digital maps in Geographic Information systems (GIS) that extracts and integrates different information about forest terrains, soil type and tree covers, etc. using, e.g. laser scanning enhances forest management plans in modern systems.

[ 17 ] Forest management plans include recommendations to achieve the landowner's objectives and desired future conditions for the property subject to ecological, financial, logistical (e.g. access to resources), and other constraints.  On some properties, plans focus on producing quality wood products for processing or sale. Hence, tree species, quantity, and form, all central to the value of harvested products quality and quantity, tend to be important components of silvicultural plans.

Good management plans include consideration of future conditions of the stand after any recommended harvests treatments, including future treatments (particularly in intermediate stand treatments), and plans for natural or artificial regeneration after final harvests.

The objectives of landowners and leaseholders influence plans for harvest and subsequent site treatment. In Britain, plans featuring "good forestry practice" must always consider the needs of other stakeholders such as nearby communities or rural residents living within or adjacent to woodland areas. Foresters consider tree felling and environmental legislation when developing plans. Plans instruct the sustainable harvesting and replacement of trees.

[ 18 ] They indicate whether road building or other forest engineering operations are required.

Agriculture and forest leaders are also trying to understand how the climate change legislation will affect what they do. The information gathered will provide the data that will determine the role of agriculture and forestry in a new climate change regulatory system.

[ 19 ] Forest inventory [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Forest inventory .

[ edit ] Forest inventory is the systematic collection of data and forest information for assessment or analysis. An estimate of the value and possible uses of timber is an important part of the broader information required to sustain ecosystems .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] When taking forest inventory the following are important things to measure and note: species, diameter at breast height (DBH), height, site quality , age, and defects. From the data collected one can calculate the number of trees per acre, the basal area , the volume of trees in an area, and the value of the timber. Inventories can be done for other reasons than just calculating the value. A forest can be cruised to visually assess timber and determine potential fire hazards and the risk of fire.

[ 22 ] The results of this type of inventory can be used in preventive actions and also awareness. Wildlife surveys can be undertaken in conjunction with timber inventory to determine the number and type of wildlife within a forest.

The aim of the statistical forest inventory is to provide comprehensive information about the state and dynamics of forests for strategic and management planning. Merely looking at the forest for assessment is called taxation .

Wildlife considerations [ edit ] The abundance and diversity of birds, mammals, amphibians and other wildlife are affected by strategies and types of forest management.

[ 23 ] Forests are important because they provide these species with food, space and water.

[ 24 ] Forest management is also important as it helps in conservation and utilization of the forest resources.Forest clearing to aid specific species of wildlife has been criticized because it can fragment forests leading to deleterious effects.

[ 25 ] [ citation needed ] Approximately 50 million hectares (or 24%) of European forest land is protected for biodiversity and landscape protection. Forests allocated for soil, water, and other ecosystem services encompass around 72 million hectares (32% of European forest area).

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] Over 90% of the world's forests regenerate organically, and more than half are covered by forest management plans or equivalents.

[ 26 ] [ 29 ] Management intensity [ edit ] Proportion of forest area with long-term management plans, by region, 2020 [ 30 ] Forest management varies in intensity from a leave alone, natural situation to a highly intensive regime with silvicultural interventions. Forest Management is generally increased in intensity to achieve either economic criteria (increased timber yields, non-timber forest products , ecosystem services ) or ecological criteria (species recovery, fostering of rare species, carbon sequestration).

[ 31 ] Most of the forests in Europe have management plans; on the other hand, management plans exist for less than 25 percent of forests in Africa and less than 20 percent in South America. The area of forest under management plans is increasing in all regions – globally, it has increased by 233 million ha since 2000, reaching 2.05 billion ha in 2020.

[ 30 ] Monitoring [ edit ] Long-term monitoring studies are conducted to track forest dynamics over extended periods.

[ 9 ] [ 7 ] These studies involve monitoring factors such as tree growth, mortality rates, and species composition. By observing forest changes over time, scientists can assess the health of forests and their responses to environmental shifts. Long-term monitoring is invaluable for informing sustainable forest management practices.

[ 8 ] [ 5 ] Yet such monitoring is usually of the type that provide "early warning" only, while a more valuable approach would be to combine long-term monitoring and long-term experiments, thereby revealing causality [ 32 ] Scientific research employs remote sensing technologies and geographic information systems (GIS) to monitor changes in forest cover, deforestation rates, and forest health over time.

[ 8 ] [ 11 ] These tools provide valuable data for forest assessments and support evidence-based decision making in forest management and conservation. By remotely monitoring forest changes, scientists can respond more effectively to threats and challenges facing forests.

[ 8 ] [ 11 ] Researchers conduct biodiversity assessments to gain insights into the diversity and distribution of plant and animal species in various forest ecosystems.

[ 9 ] [ 8 ] These studies are essential for identifying areas of high conservation value and understanding the ecological importance of different habitats. By studying biodiversity patterns, scientists can recommend targeted approaches to forest management that protect and promote the richness of forest life.

[ 6 ] [ 5 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Effects of climate change on forests [ edit ] Further information: Effects of climate change on biomes Research explores the specific impacts of climate change on forest ecosystems , including extreme heat and drought events.

[ 9 ] [ 5 ] Understanding these effects is vital for developing adaptive strategies to mitigate climate change impacts on forests. By recognizing the vulnerabilities of forests to changing climatic conditions, scientists can implement conservation methods that enhance their resilience.

[ 10 ] [ 6 ] [ 5 ] Scientific research plays a crucial role in forest management by utilizing climate modeling to project future climate scenarios .

[ 5 ] [ 7 ] [ 6 ] These models help scientists understand potential changes in temperature, precipitation patterns, and extreme weather events, enabling them to assess the impact of these changes on forest ecosystems. By predicting climate trends, researchers can develop more effective strategies for forest management and conservation.

[ 8 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Methods for creating or recreating forests [ edit ] The term forestation is sometimes used as an umbrella term to include afforestation and reforestation . Both of those are processes for establishing and nurturing forests on lands that either previously had forest cover or were subjected to deforestation or degradation.

[ 9 ] Tree breeding [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Tree breeding .

[ edit ] Tree breeding is the application of genetic, reproductive biology and economics principles to the genetic improvement and management of forest trees. In contrast to the selective breeding of livestock, arable crops, and horticultural flowers over the last few centuries, the breeding of trees, with the exception of fruit trees, is a relatively recent occurrence.

Pinus radiata grafts in preparation for the establishment of a seed orchard in New Zealand Isolation bags for controlled pollination in a Pinus radiata seed orchard.

A typical forest tree breeding program starts with selection of superior phenotypes (plus trees) [ clarification needed ] in a natural or planted forest, often based on growth rate, tree form and site adaptation traits. This application of mass selection improves the mean performance of the forest. Offspring is obtained from selected trees and grown in test plantations that act as genetic trials. Based on such tests the best genotypes among the parents can be selected. Selected trees are typically propagated either by seeds or by grafting , and seed orchards are established when the preferred output is improved seed. Alternatively, the best genotypes can be directly propagated by cuttings or in-vitro methods and used directly in clonal plantations. The first system is frequently used for pines and other conifers, while the second is typical in some broadleaves (poplars, eucalypts and others). The objectives of a tree breeding program range from yield improvement and adaptation to particular conditions, to pest- and disease-resistance, wood properties, etc. Currently, [ when?

] tree breeding is starting to take advantage of the fast development in plant genetics and genomics.

Tree planting [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Tree planting .

[ edit ] Tree planting is an aspect of habitat conservation . In each plastic tube, a hardwood tree has been planted.

Tree planting in Ghana Tree planting is the process of transplanting tree seedlings , generally for forestry , land reclamation , or landscaping purposes. It differs from the transplantation of larger trees in arboriculture and from the lower-cost but slower and less reliable distribution of tree seeds . Trees contribute to their environment over long periods of time by improving air quality, climate amelioration, conserving water, preserving soil, and supporting wildlife. During the process of photosynthesis, trees take in carbon dioxide and produce oxygen .

Because trees remove carbon dioxide from the air as they grow, tree planting can be used to help limit climate change .

Desert greening projects are also motivated by improved biodiversity and reclamation of natural water systems, as well as improved economic and social welfare due to an increased number of jobs in farming and forestry.

Reforestation [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Reforestation .

[ edit ] A forest, six years after reforestation efforts in Panama .

Reforestation in progress: Direct-sowing of seed in a burned area (after a wildfire ) in the Idaho Panhandle National Forest , United States.

Reforestation is the practice of restoring previously existing forests and woodlands that have been destroyed or damaged. The prior forest destruction might have happened through deforestation , clearcutting or wildfires . Three important purposes of reforestation programs are for harvesting of wood , for climate change mitigation , and for ecosystem and habitat restoration purposes. One method of reforestation is to establish tree plantations , also called plantation forests. They cover about 131 million ha worldwide, which is 3% of the global forest area and 45% of the total area of planted forests.

[ 33 ] Globally, planted forests increased from 4.1% to 7.0% of the total forest area between 1990 and 2015.

[ 34 ] Plantation forests made up 280 million ha ( hectare ) in 2015, an increase of about 40 million ha in the previous ten years.

[ 35 ] Of the planted forests worldwide, 18% of that area consists of exotic or introduced species while the rest consist of species native to the country where they are planted.

[ 36 ] There are limitations and challenges with reforestation projects, especially if they are in the form of tree plantations. Firstly, there can be competition with other land uses and displacement risk. Secondly, tree plantations are often monocultures which comes with a set of disadvantages, for example biodiversity loss . Lastly, there is also the problem that stored carbon is released at some point.

The effects of reforestation will be farther in the future than those of proforestation (the conservation of intact forests).

[ 37 ] Instead of planting entirely new areas, it might be better to reconnect forested areas and restore the edges of forest. This protects their mature core and makes them more resilient and longer-lasting.

[ 38 ] It takes much longer − several decades − for the carbon sequestration benefits of reforestation to become similar to those from mature trees in tropical forests . Therefore, reducing deforestation is usually more beneficial for climate change mitigation than is reforestation.

[ 39 ] Many countries carry out reforestation programs. For example, in China, the Three Northern Protected Forest Development Program – informally known as the " Great Green Wall " – was launched in 1978 and scheduled to last until 2050. It aims to eventually plant nearly 90 million acres of new forest in a 2,800-mile stretch of northern China.

[ 40 ] Such programs often blur the boundaries between reforestation and afforestation (the latter being the establishment of a forest in an area where there was no forest before).

Forest restoration [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Forest restoration .

[ edit ] In the 1980s, conservation organizations warned that, once destroyed, tropical forests could never be restored. Thirty years of restoration research now challenge this: a) This site in Doi Suthep-Pui National Park, N. Thailand was deforested, over-cultivated and then burnt. The black tree stump was one of the original forest trees. Local people teamed up with scientists to repair their watershed.

b) Fire prevention, nurturing natural regeneration and planting framework tree species resulted in trees growing above the weed canopy within a year.

c) After 12 years, the restored forest overwhelmed the black tree stump.

Forest restoration is defined as "actions to re-instate ecological processes, which accelerate recovery of forest structure, ecological functioning and biodiversity levels towards those typical of climax forest ", [ 41 ] i.e. the end-stage of natural forest succession . Climax forests are relatively stable ecosystems that have developed the maximum biomass, structural complexity and species diversity that are possible within the limits imposed by climate and soil and without continued disturbance from humans (more explanation here) . Climax forest is therefore the target ecosystem, which defines the ultimate aim of forest restoration. Since climate is a major factor that determines climax forest composition, global climate change may result in changing restoration aims.

[ 42 ] Additionally, the potential impacts of climate change on restoration goals must be taken into account, as changes in temperature and precipitation patterns may alter the composition and distribution of climax forests.

[ 43 ] Forest restoration is a specialized form of reforestation , but it differs from conventional tree plantations in that its primary goals are biodiversity recovery and environmental protection .

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Forest and landscape restoration (FLR) is defined as a process that aims to regain ecological functionality and enhance human well-being in deforested or degraded landscapes .

[ 46 ] FLR has been developed as a response to the growing degradation and loss of forest and land, which resulted in declined biodiversity and ecosystem services .

[ 46 ] Effective FLR will support the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals .

[ 46 ] The United Nations Decade on Ecosystem Restoration (2021–2030) provides the opportunity to restore hundreds of millions of hectares of degraded forests and other ecosystems.

[ 46 ] Successful ecosystem restoration requires a fundamental understanding of the ecological characteristics of the component species, together with knowledge of how they assemble, interact and function as communities [ 47 ] Afforestation [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Afforestation .

[ edit ] An afforestation project in Rand Wood, Lincolnshire , England (this patch was open ground before) Afforestation is the establishment of a forest or stand of trees in an area where there was no recent tree cover.

[ 48 ] There are three types of afforestation: natural regeneration , agroforestry and tree plantations .

[ 49 ] Afforestation has many benefits. In the context of climate change , afforestation can be helpful for climate change mitigation through the route of carbon sequestration . Afforestation can also improve the local climate through increased rainfall and by being a barrier against high winds. The additional trees can also prevent or reduce topsoil erosion (from water and wind), floods and landslides. Finally, additional trees can be a habitat for wildlife, and provide employment and wood products.

[ 49 ] Annual afforestation in 2015 In comparison, reforestation means re-establishing forest that have either been cut down or lost due to natural causes, such as fire, storm, etc. Nowadays, the boundaries between afforestation and reforestation projects can be blurred as it may not be so clear what was there before at what point in time.

An essential aspect of successful afforestation efforts lies in the careful selection of tree species that are well-suited to the local climate and soil conditions. By choosing appropriate species, afforested areas can better withstand the impacts of climate change.

[ 50 ] Earth offers enough room to plant an additional 0.9 billion ha of tree canopy cover.

[ 51 ] Planting and protecting them would sequester 205 billion tons of carbon [ 51 ] which is about 20 years of current global carbon emissions.

[ 52 ] This level of sequestration would represent about 25% of the atmosphere's current carbon pool.

[ 51 ] However, there has been debate about whether afforestation is beneficial for the sustainable use of natural resources, [ 53 ] [ 54 ] with some researchers pointing out that tree planting is not the only way to enhance climate mitigation and CO 2 capture.

[ 53 ] Non-forest areas, such as grasslands and savannas , also benefit the biosphere and humanity, and they need a different management strategy - they are not supposed to be forests.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] Afforestation critics argue that ecosystems without trees are not necessarily degraded, and many of them can store carbon as they are; for example, savannas and tundra store carbon underground.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] Carbon sequestration estimates in these areas often do not include the total amount of carbon reductions in soils and slowing tree growth over time. Afforestation can also negatively affect biodiversity by increasing fragmentation and edge effects on the habitat outside the planted area.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] [ 61 ] Australia, Canada, China, India, Israel, United States and Europe have afforestation programs to increase carbon dioxide removal in forests and in some cases to reduce desertification .

Types [ edit ] Plantation forestry [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Tree plantation .

[ edit ] A pine plantation in the United States A tree plantation, forest plantation , plantation forest, timber plantation, or tree farm is a forest planted for high volume production of wood, usually by planting one type of tree as a monoculture forest. The term tree farm also is used to refer to tree nurseries and Christmas tree farms . Plantation forestry can produce a high volume of wood in a short period of time. Plantations are grown by state forestry authorities (for example, the Forestry Commission in Britain) and/or the paper and wood industries and other private landowners (such as Weyerhaeuser , Rayonier , and Sierra Pacific Industries in the United States or Asia Pulp & Paper in Indonesia).

Christmas trees are often grown on plantations, and in southern and southeastern Asia, teak plantations have replaced the natural forest.

A plantation of Douglas-fir in Washington , U.S.

Industrial plantations are actively managed for the commercial production of forest products. Industrial plantations are usually large-scale. Individual blocks are usually even-aged and often consist of just one or two species. These species can be exotic or indigenous. The plants used for the plantation are often genetically altered for desired traits such as growth and resistance to pests and diseases in general and specific traits, for example in the case of timber species, volumic wood production and stem straightness.

Forest genetic resources are the basis for genetic alteration. Selected individuals grown in seed orchards are a good source for seeds to develop adequate planting material.

Wood production on a tree plantation is generally higher than that of natural forests. While forests managed for wood production commonly yield between 1 and 3 cubic meters per hectare per year, plantations of fast-growing species commonly yield between 20 and 30 cubic meters or more per hectare annually; a Grand Fir plantation in Scotland has a growth rate of 34 cubic meters per hectare per year, [ 62 ] and Monterey Pine plantations in southern Australia can yield up to 40 cubic meters per hectare per year.

[ 63 ] In 2000, while plantations accounted for 5% of global forest, it is estimated that they supplied about 35% of the world's roundwood.

[ 64 ] The highest share of plantation forest is in South America, where this forest type represents 99 percent of the total planted-forest area and 2 percent of the total forest area. The lowest share of plantation forest is in Europe, where it represents 6 percent of the planted forest estate and 0.4 percent of the total forest area. Globally, 44 percent of plantation forests are composed mainly of introduced species. There are large differences between regions: for example, plantation forests in North and Central America mostly comprise native species and those in South America consist almost entirely of introduced species.

[ 65 ] Silviculture [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Silviculture .

[ edit ] Silviculture is the practice of controlling the growth, composition/structure, as well as quality of forests to meet values and needs, specifically timber production.
The name comes from the Latin silvi- ('forest') and culture ('growing'). The study of forests and woods is termed silvology . Silviculture also focuses on making sure that the treatment(s) of forest stands are used to conserve and improve their productivity.

[ 66 ] The professional is known as silviculturist .

Generally, silviculture is the science and art of growing and cultivating forest crops based on a knowledge of silvics, the study of the life history and general characteristics of forest trees and stands, with reference to local/regional factors.

[ 67 ] The focus of silviculture is the control, establishment and management of forest stands. The distinction between forestry and silviculture is that silviculture is applied at the stand-level , while forestry is a broader concept.

Adaptive management is common in silviculture, while forestry can include natural/conserved land without stand-level management and treatments being applied.

Bamboo forestry [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Bamboo cultivation .

[ edit ] African Bamboo Product Innovation Lab where bamboo farming techniques and industrial uses are tested inside the company's facility in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia Bamboo forestry (also known as bamboo farming, cultivation, agriculture or agroforestry) is a cultivation and raw material industry that provides the raw materials for the broader bamboo industry, worth over 72 billion dollars globally in 2019.

[ 68 ] Historically a dominant raw material in South and South East Asia, the global bamboo industry has significantly grown in recent decades in part because of the high sustainability of bamboo as compared to other biomass cultivation strategies, such as traditional timber forestry . For example, as of 2016, the U.S. Fiber corporation Resource Fiber is contracting farmers in the United States for bamboo cultivation.

[ 69 ] [ 68 ] Or in 2009, United Nations Industrial Development Organization published guidelines for cultivation of bamboo in semi-arid climates in Ethiopia and Kenya.

[ 70 ] Because bamboo can grow on otherwise marginal land , bamboo can be profitably cultivated in many degraded lands.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] Moreover, because of the rapid growth, bamboo is an effective climate change mitigation and carbon sequestration crop, absorbing between 100 and 400 tonnes of carbon per hectare (40–160 tonnes per acre).

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] In 1997, an international intergovernmental organization was established to promote the development of bamboo cultivation, the International Bamboo and Rattan Organisation .

[ 75 ] Bamboo is harvested from both cultivated and wild stands, and some of the larger bamboos, particularly species in the genus Phyllostachys , are known as "timber bamboos". Bamboo is typically harvested as a source material for construction, food, crafts and other manufactured goods.

[ 76 ] Bamboo cultivation in South, South East Asia and East Asia stretches back thousands of years. One practice, in South Korea, has been designated as a Globally Important Agricultural Heritage Systems .

[ citation needed ] Hardwood timber production [ edit ] Hardwood timber production is the process of managing stands of deciduous trees to maximize woody output. The production process is not linear because other factors must be considered, including marketable and non-marketable goods, financial benefits, management practices, and the environmental implications, of those management practices.

[ 77 ] The more biodiverse the hardwood-forest ecosystem, the more challenges and opportunities its managers face. Managers aim for sustainable forest management to keep their cash crop renewing itself, using silvicultural practices that include growing, selling, controlling insects and most diseases, providing manure, applying herbicide treatments, and thinning.

[ 77 ] But management can also harm the ecosystem; for example, machinery used in a timber harvest can compact the soil, stress the root system, reduce tree growth, lengthen the time needed for a stand to mature to harvestability. Machinery can also damage the understory , disturbing wildlife habitat and prevent regeneration.

[ 77 ] Energy forestry [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Energy forestry .

[ edit ] Energy forestry is a form of forestry in which a fast-growing species of tree or woody shrub is grown specifically to provide biomass or biofuel for heating or power generation.

The two forms of energy forestry are short rotation coppice and short rotation forestry : Short rotation coppice may include tree crops of poplar , willow or eucalyptus, grown for two to five years before harvest.

[ 78 ] Short rotation forestry are crops of alder , ash , birch , eucalyptus, poplar, and sycamore , grown for eight to twenty years before harvest.

Forest farming [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Agroforestry .

[ edit ] Alley cropping of maize and sweet chestnut , Dordogne , France Maize grown under Faidherbia albida and Borassus akeassii near Banfora , Burkina Faso Agroforestry (also known as agro-sylviculture or forest farming) is a land use management system that integrates trees with crops or pasture . It combines agricultural and forestry technologies. As a polyculture system, an agroforestry system can produce timber and wood products, fruits , nuts , other edible plant products, edible mushrooms , medicinal plants , ornamental plants , animals and animal products , and other products from both domesticated and wild species.

[ 79 ] Agroforestry can be practiced for economic, environmental, and social benefits, and can be part of sustainable agriculture.

[ 80 ] Apart from production, benefits from agroforestry include improved farm productivity, [ 81 ] healthier environments, reduction of risk for farmers, [ 82 ] beauty and aesthetics, increased farm profits, reduced soil erosion, creating wildlife habitat, less pollution, managing animal waste, increased biodiversity, improved soil structure, and carbon sequestration .

Agroforestry practices are especially prevalent in the tropics, especially in subsistence smallholdings areas, with particular importance in sub-Saharan Africa.

[ 83 ] Due to its multiple benefits, for instance in nutrient cycle benefits and potential for mitigating droughts, it has been adopted in the US and Europe.

Contour planting integrated with animal grazing on Taylor's Run farm, Australia Sustainable forest management [ edit ] Sustainable forest management (SFM) is the management of forests according to the principles of sustainable development . Sustainable forest management must keep a balance between the three main pillars: ecological , economic and socio-cultural . The goal of sustainable forestry is to allow for a balance to be found between making use of trees while maintaining natural patterns of disturbance and regeneration.

[ 84 ] The forestry industry mitigates climate change by boosting carbon storage in growing trees and soils and improving the sustainable supply of renewable raw materials via sustainable forest management.

[ 85 ] Successfully achieving sustainable forest management will provide integrated benefits to all, ranging from safeguarding local livelihoods to protecting biodiversity and ecosystems provided by forests, reducing rural poverty and mitigating some of the effects of climate change .

[ 86 ] Forest conservation is essential to stop climate change .

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] Sustainable forest management also helps with climate change adaptation by increasing forest ecosystems' resistance to future climatic hazards and lowering the danger of additional land degradation by repairing and stabilizing soils and boosting their water-retention capacity.

[ 89 ] [ 29 ] It contributes to the provision of a wide range of vital ecosystem services and biodiversity conservation, such as wildlife habitats , recreational amenity values, and a variety of non-timber forest products .

[ 26 ] [ 90 ] Conservation of biodiversity is the major management aim in around 13% of the world's forests, while preservation of soil and water resources is the primary management goal in more than 30%.

[ 26 ] [ 91 ] Feeding humanity and conserving and sustainably using ecosystems are complementary and closely interdependent goals. Forests supply water, mitigate climate change and provide habitats for many pollinators, which are essential for sustainable food production. It is estimated that 75 percent of the world's leading food crops, representing 35 percent of global food production, benefit from animal pollination for fruit, vegetable or seed production.

[ 12 ] The " Forest Principles " adopted at the Earth Summit (United Nations Conference on Environment and Development) in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 captured the general international understanding of sustainable forest management at that time. A number of sets of criteria and indicators have since been developed to evaluate the achievement of SFM at the global, regional, country and management unit level. These were all attempts to codify and provide for assessment of the degree to which the broader objectives of sustainable forest management are being achieved in practice. In 2007, the United Nations General Assembly adopted the Non-Legally Binding Instrument on All Types of Forests .  The instrument was the first of its kind that reflected the strong international commitment to promote implementation of sustainable forest management through a new approach bringing all stakeholders together.

[ 92 ] The Sustainable Development Goal 15 is also a global initiative aimed at promoting the implementation of sustainable forest management.

[ 93 ] Definition [ edit ] A definition of SFM was developed by the Ministerial Conference on the Protection of Forests in Europe (FOREST EUROPE) and has since been adopted by the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).

[ 94 ] It defines sustainable forest management as: The stewardship and use of forests and forest lands in a way, and at a rate, that maintains their biodiversity, productivity, regeneration capacity, vitality and their potential to fulfill, now and in the future, relevant ecological, economic and social functions, at local, national, and global levels, and that does not cause damage to other ecosystems.

In simpler terms, the concept can be described as the attainment of balance: balance between society's increasing demands for forest products and benefits, and the preservation of forest health and diversity. This balance is critical to the survival of forests, and to the prosperity of forest-dependent communities.

[ 26 ] [ 90 ] [ 95 ] For forest managers, sustainably managing a particular forest tract means determining, in a tangible way, how to use it today to ensure similar benefits, health and productivity in the future. Forest managers must assess and integrate a wide array of sometimes conflicting factors: commercial and non-commercial values, environmental considerations, community needs, [ 96 ] even global impact to produce sound forest plans. In most cases, forest managers develop their forest plans in consultation with citizens, businesses, organizations and other interested parties in and around the forest tract being managed. The tools and visualization have been recently evolving for better management practices.

[ 4 ] The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, at the request of Member States, developed and launched the Sustainable Forest Management Toolbox in 2014, an online collection of tools , best practices and examples of their application to support countries implementing sustainable forest management.

[ 97 ] Because forests and societies are in constant flux, the desired outcome of sustainable forest management is not a fixed one. What constitutes a sustainably managed forest will change over time as values held by the public change.

[ 98 ] Criteria and indicators [ edit ] Deforestation in Europe , 2020. France is the most deforested country in Europe, with only 15% of the native vegetation remaining.

Deforestation in Bolivia .

Main article: Criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management Criteria and indicators are tools which can be used to conceptualise, evaluate and implement sustainable forest management.

[ 99 ] Criteria define and characterize the essential elements, as well as a set of conditions or processes, by which sustainable forest management may be assessed. Periodically measured indicators reveal the direction of change with respect to each criterion.

[ citation needed ] Criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management are widely used and many countries produce national reports that assess their progress toward sustainable forest management.  There are nine international and regional criteria and indicators initiatives, which collectively involve more than 150 countries.

[ 100 ] Three of the more advanced initiatives are those of the Working Group on Criteria and Indicators for the Conservation and Sustainable Management of Temperate and Boreal Forests (also called the Montréal Process ), [ 101 ] Forest Europe , [ 102 ] and the International Tropical Timber Organization .

[ 103 ] Countries who are members of the same initiative usually agree to produce reports at the same time and using the same indicators. Within countries, at the management unit level, efforts have also been directed at developing local level criteria and indicators of sustainable forest management. The Center for International Forestry Research , the International Model Forest Network [ 104 ] and researchers at the University of British Columbia have developed a number of tools and techniques to help forest-dependent communities develop their own local level criteria and indicators.

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] Criteria and Indicators also form the basis of third-party forest certification programs such as the Canadian Standards Association 's [ 107 ] Sustainable Forest Management Standards and the Sustainable Forestry Initiative .

[ 108 ] There appears to be growing international consensus on the key elements of sustainable forest management.  Seven common thematic areas of sustainable forest management have emerged based on the criteria of the nine ongoing regional and international criteria and indicators initiatives.  The seven thematic areas are: Extent of forest resources Biological diversity Forest health and vitality Productive functions of forest resources Protective functions of forest resources Socio-economic functions Legal, policy and institutional framework.

This consensus on common thematic areas (or criteria) effectively provides a common and implicit definition of sustainable forest management.  The seven thematic areas were acknowledged by the international forest community at the fourth session of the United Nations Forum on Forests and the 16th session of the Committee on Forestry.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] These thematic areas have since been enshrined in the Non-Legally Binding Instrument on All Types of Forests as a reference framework for sustainable forest management to help achieve the purpose of the instrument.

[ citation needed ] In 2012, the Montréal Process, Forest Europe, the International Tropical Timber Organization, and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations , acknowledging the seven thematic areas, endorsed a joint statement of collaboration to improve global forest-related data collection and reporting and avoiding the proliferation of monitoring requirements and associated reporting burdens.

[ 111 ] Sustainable forestry operations must also adhere to the International Labour Organization 's 18 criteria on human and social rights.

Gender equality , health and well-being and community consultation are examples of such rights.

[ 26 ] [ 112 ] Ecosystem approach [ edit ] The ecosystem approach has been prominent on the agenda of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) since 1995. The CBD definition of the Ecosystem Approach and a set of principles for its application were developed at an expert meeting in Malawi in 1995, known as the Malawi Principles.

[ 113 ] The definition, 12 principles and 5 points of "operational guidance" were adopted by the fifth Conference of Parties (COP5) in 2000. The CBD definition is as follows: The ecosystem approach is a strategy for the integrated management of land, water and living resources that promotes conservation and sustainable use in an equitable way. Application of the ecosystem approach will help to reach a balance of the three objectives of the Convention. An ecosystem approach is based on the application of appropriate scientific methodologies focused on levels of biological organization, which encompasses the essential structures, processes, functions and interactions among organisms and their environment. It recognizes that humans, with their cultural diversity , are an integral component of many ecosystems.

Sustainable forest management was recognized by parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity in 2004 (Decision VII/11 of COP7) to be a concrete means of applying the Ecosystem Approach to forest ecosystems.  The two concepts, sustainable forest management and the ecosystem approach, aim at promoting conservation and management practices which are environmentally, socially and economically sustainable, and which generate and maintain benefits for both present and future generations. In Europe, the MCPFE and the Council for the Pan-European Biological and Landscape Diversity Strategy (PEBLDS) jointly recognized sustainable forest management to be consistent with the Ecosystem Approach in 2006.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] [ 116 ] [ 117 ] Methods [ edit ] Ecoforestry [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Ecoforestry .

[ edit ] Ecoforestry has been defined as selection forestry or restoration forestry. The main idea of ecoforestry is to maintain or restore the forest to standards where the forest may still be harvested for products on a sustainable basis.

[ 118 ] Ecoforestry is forestry that emphasizes holistic practices which strive to protect and restore ecosystems rather than maximize economic productivity .

[ 119 ] Sustainability of the forest also comes with uncertainties. There are other factors that may affect the forest furthermore than that of the harvesting. There are internal conditions such as effects of soil compaction , tree damage, disease, fire, and blow down that also directly affect the ecosystem.

[ 120 ] These factors have to be taken into account when determining the sustainability of a forest. If these factors are added to the harvesting and production that comes out of the forest, then the forest will become less likely to survive, and will then become less sustainable.

[ citation needed ] Since the forest is considered an ecosystem, it is dependent on all of the living and non-living factors within itself. This is a major part of why the forest needs to be sustainable before it is harvested. For example, a tree, by way of photosynthesis , converts sunlight to sugars for respiration to keep the tree alive. The remains of the converted sugars is left in roots for consumption by the organisms surrounding the tree in the habitat. This shows the productivity of an ecosystem with its inhabitants.

[ 121 ] Productivity within the ecosystem cannot come to fruition unless the forest is sustainable enough to be harvested. If most individual organisms of the ecosystem vanish, the ecosystem itself is at risk. Once that happens, there is no longer any forest to harvest from. The overall productivity of a system can be found in an equation where the Net Primary Production , or NPP, is equal to the Gross Primary Production , or GPP, minus the Respiration , or R. The formula is the NPP = GPP - R.

[ 121 ] The NPP is the overall efficiency of the plants in the ecosystem. Through having a constant efficiency in NPP, the ecosystem is then more sustainable. The GPP refers to the rate of energy stored by photosynthesis in plants. The R refers to the maintenance and reproduction of plants from the energy expended.

[ citation needed ] Ecoforestry has many principles within the existence of itself. It covers sustainable development and the fair harvesting of the organisms living within the forest ecosystem. There have been many proposals of principles outlined for ecoforestry. They are covered over books, articles, and environmental agencies. All of the principles relate to the idea that in ecoforestry, less should be harvested, and diversity must be managed. Through harvesting less, there is enough biomass left in the forest, so that the forest may stay healthy and still stay maintained. It will grow at a sustainable level annually, and thus it will be able to still be harvested the following year. Through management of the diversity, species may cohabitate in an ecosystem where the forest may feed off of other species in its growth and production.

[ 118 ] The Principles of Ecoforestry may be found below.

Continuous cover forestry [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Continuous cover forestry .

[ edit ] 85-year-old stand of Douglas fir in the process of transformation to a continuous cover forest Continuous cover forestry (commonly referred to as "CCF") is an approach to the sustainable management of forests whereby forest stands are maintained in a permanently irregular structure, which is created and sustained through the selection and harvesting of individual trees.

[ 122 ] The term "continuous cover forestry" does not equate exactly to any one particular silvicultural system , but is typified by selection systems . For example, coppice with standards and Reiniger's target diameter harvesting are also continuous cover forestry. Different existing forest stands may require different silvicultural interventions to achieve a continuously productive irregular structure. Crucially, clearcutting and other rotational forest management systems are avoided.

Mycoforestry [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Mycoforestry .

[ edit ] Amanita species are ectomycorrhizal with many trees.

Mycoforestry is an ecological forest management system implemented to enhance forest ecosystems and plant communities, by introducing the mycorrhizal and saprotrophic fungi . Mycoforestry is considered a type of permaculture [ 123 ] and can be implemented as a beneficial component of an agroforestry system. It can enhance the yields of tree crops and produce edible mushrooms , an economically valuable product. By integrating plant-fungal associations into a forestry management system, native forests can be preserved, wood waste can be recycled back into the ecosystem, carbon sequestration can be increased, planted restoration sites are enhanced, and the sustainability of forest ecosystems are improved.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] Mycoforestry is an alternative to the practice of clearcutting , which removes dead wood from forests, thereby diminishing nutrient availability and reducing soil depth.

[ 126 ] Assisted natural regeneration [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Assisted natural regeneration .

[ edit ] Deer fence and gate on the Tubeg track . This part of the south side of Loch Assynt has been fenced off to assist natural regeneration of the tree cover. So far, there are few trees showing, despite the OS mapping showing this as a wooded area.

Assisted natural regeneration (ANR) (also termed managed regrowth) is the human protection and preservation of natural tree seedlings in forested areas. Seedlings are, in particular, protected from undergrowth and extremely flammable plants such as Imperata grass. Though there is no formal definition or methodology, the overall goal of ANR is to create and improve forest productivity. It typically involves the reduction or removal of barriers to natural regeneration such as soil degradation , competition with weeds, grasses or other vegetation, and protection against disturbances, which can all interfere with growth.

[ 127 ] In addition to protection efforts, new trees are planted when needed or wanted ( enrichment planting ). With ANR, forests grow faster than they would naturally, resulting in a significant contribution to carbon sequestration efforts. It also serves as a cheaper alternative to reforestation due to decreased nursery needs.

The most effective way to implement ANR is very site-specific, and many nations provide guidebooks on how to select and maintain an ANR project.

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] Alternative harvesting methods [ edit ] Reduced impact logging (RIL) is a sustainable forestry method as it decreases the forest and canopy damages by approximately 75% compared to the conventional logging methods.

[ 130 ] Additionally, a 120-year regression model found that RIL would have a significantly higher reforestation in 30 years ("18.3 m 3 ha −1 ") in relation to conventional logging ("14.0 m 3 ha −1 ").

[ 131 ] Furthermore, it is essential that RIL should be practiced as soon as possible to improve reforestation in the future. For instance, a study concluded that logging would have to reduce by 40% in Brazil if the current logging measures stay of " 6 trees/hectare with a 30-year cutting cycle" stay in place. This would be to ensure that future ground biomass to have regeneration of the original ground biomass prior to harvesting.

[ 132 ] Preserving forest genetic resources [ edit ] See also: Deforestation and climate change Appropriate use and long-term conservation of forest genetic resources (FGR) is a part of sustainable forest management.

[ 133 ] In particular when it comes to the adaptation of forests and forest management to climate change .

[ 134 ] Genetic diversity ensures that forest trees can survive, adapt and evolve under changing environmental conditions. Genetic diversity in forests also contributes to tree vitality and to the resilience towards pests and diseases. Furthermore, FGR has a crucial role in maintaining forest biological diversity at both species and ecosystem levels.

[ 135 ] Selecting carefully the forest reproductive material with emphasis on getting a high genetic diversity rather than aiming at producing a uniform stand of trees, is essential for sustainable use of FGR. Considering the provenance is crucial as well. For example, in relation to climate change, local material may not have the genetic diversity or phenotypic plasticity to guarantee good performance under changed conditions. A different population from further away, which may have experienced selection under conditions more like those forecast for the site to be reforested , might represent a more suitable seed source.

[ 136 ] Problems [ edit ] Wildfires [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Wildfire .

[ edit ] Wildfire burning in the Kaibab National Forest , Arizona , United States, in 2020. The Mangum Fire burned more than 70,000 acres (280 km 2 ) of forest .

Naturally occurring wildfires can have beneficial effects on those ecosystems that have evolved with fire.

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] [ 139 ] In fact, many plant species depend on the effects of fire for growth and reproduction.

[ 140 ] Forest degradation [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Forest degradation .

[ edit ] Degraded forest in Lahnberge , Germany: the soil is being washed out due to lack of vegetal cover, some trees are losing ground and they appear to be sick (photo by Andreas Trepte).

Forest degradation is a process in which the biological wealth of a forest area is permanently diminished by some factor or by a combination of factors. "This does not involve a reduction of the forest area, but rather a quality decrease in its condition." The forest is still there, but with fewer trees, or fewer species of trees, plants or animals, or some of them affected by plagues.

[ 141 ] This degradation makes the forest less valuable and may lead to deforestation . Forest degradation is a type of the more general issue of land degradation . Deforestation and forest degradation continue to take place at alarming rates, which contributes significantly to the ongoing loss of biodiversity .

[ 142 ] Deforestation [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Deforestation .

[ edit ] Deforestation of the Amazon rainforest in Brazil's Maranhão state, 2016 Deforestation in Riau province, Sumatra, Indonesia to make way for an oil palm plantation in 2007.

Deforestation in the city of Rio de Janeiro in Brazil's Rio de Janeiro state, 2009 Deforestation or forest clearance is the removal and destruction of a forest or stand of trees from land that is then converted to non-forest use.

[ 143 ] Deforestation can involve conversion of forest land to farms , ranches , or urban use. About 31% of Earth's land surface is covered by forests at present.

[ 144 ] This is one-third less than the forest cover before the expansion of agriculture, with half of that loss occurring in the last century.

[ 145 ] Between 15 million to 18 million hectares of forest, an area the size of Bangladesh , are destroyed every year. On average 2,400 trees are cut down each minute.

[ 146 ] Estimates vary widely as to the extent of deforestation in the tropics .

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] In 2019, nearly a third of the overall tree cover loss, or 3.8 million hectares, occurred within humid tropical primary forests . These are areas of mature rainforest that are especially important for biodiversity and carbon storage .

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] The direct cause of most deforestation is agriculture by far.

[ 151 ] More than 80% of deforestation was attributed to agriculture in 2018.

[ 152 ] Forests are being converted to plantations for coffee , palm oil , rubber and various other popular products.

[ 153 ] Livestock grazing also drives deforestation. Further drivers are the wood industry ( logging ), urbanization and mining . The effects of climate change are another cause via the increased risk of wildfires (see deforestation and climate change ).

Deforestation results in habitat destruction which in turn leads to biodiversity loss . Deforestation also leads to extinction of animals and plants, changes to the local climate, and displacement of indigenous people who live in forests. Deforested regions often also suffer from other environmental problems such as desertification and soil erosion .

Another problem is that deforestation reduces the uptake of carbon dioxide ( carbon sequestration ) from the atmosphere. This reduces the potential of forests to assist with climate change mitigation . The role of forests in capturing and storing carbon and mitigating climate change is also important for the agricultural sector.

[ 154 ] The reason for this linkage is because the effects of climate change on agriculture pose new risks to global food systems .

[ 154 ] Since 1990, it is estimated that some 420 million hectares of forest have been lost through conversion to other land uses , although the rate of deforestation has decreased over the past three decades. Between 2015 and 2020, the rate of deforestation was estimated at 10 million hectares per year, down from 16 million hectares per year in the 1990s. The area of primary forest worldwide has decreased by over 80 million hectares since 1990. More than 100 million hectares of forests are adversely affected by forest fires, pests, diseases, invasive species , drought and adverse weather events.

[ 155 ] Deforestation and climate change [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Deforestation and climate change .

[ edit ] Deforestation in the tropics – given as the annual average between 2010 and 2014 – was responsible for 2.6 billion tonnes of CO 2 per year. That was 6.5% of global CO 2 emissions .

Deforestation is a primary contributor to climate change , [ 156 ] [ 157 ] and climate change affects the health of forests.

[ 158 ] Land use change , especially in the form of deforestation, is the second largest source of carbon dioxide emissions from human activities, after the burning of fossil fuels .

[ 159 ] [ 160 ] Greenhouse gases are emitted from deforestation during the burning of forest biomass and decomposition of remaining plant material and soil carbon . Global models and national greenhouse gas inventories give similar results for deforestation emissions.

[ 160 ] As of 2019 [update] , deforestation is responsible for about 11% of global greenhouse gas emissions .

[ 161 ] Carbon emissions from tropical deforestation are accelerating.

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] When forests grow they are a carbon sink and therefore have potential to mitigate the effects of climate change . Some of the effects of climate change , such as more wildfires , [ 164 ] invasive species, and more extreme weather events can lead to more forest loss.

[ 165 ] [ 166 ] The relationship between deforestation and climate change is one of a positive (amplifying) climate feedback .

[ 167 ] The more trees that are removed equals larger effects of climate change which, in turn, results in the loss of more trees.

[ 168 ] Forests cover 31% of the land area on Earth. Every year, 75,700 square kilometers (18.7 million acres) of the forest is lost.

[ 169 ] There was a 12% increase in the loss of primary tropical forests from 2019 to 2020.

[ 170 ] Deforestation has many causes and drivers. Examples include agricultural clearcutting , livestock grazing , logging for timber, and wildfires .

Checkerboarding [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Checkerboarding (land) .

[ edit ] Map of the Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Mountains National Monument showing examples of checkerboarding Checkerboarding refers to the intermingling of land ownership between two or more owners resulting in a checkerboard pattern. Checkerboarding is prevalent in the Western United States and Western Canada because of extensive use in railroad grants for western expansion , although it had its beginnings in the canal land grant era.

[ 171 ] Checkerboard pattern alongside the Priest River in northern Idaho Checkerboarding can create problems for access and ecological management. It is one of the major causes of inholdings within the boundaries of national forests . As is the case in northwestern California , checkerboarding has resulted in issues with managing national forest land.

[ 172 ] Checkerboarding was previously applied to these areas during the period of western expansion, and they are now commercial forest land. Conflicting policies establishing the rights of the private owners of this land have caused some difficulties in the local hardwood timber production economy.

While relieving this land from its checkerboard ownership structure could benefit the timber production economy of the region, checkerboards can allow government to extend good forestry practices over intermingled private lands, by demonstration or applying pressure via economy of scale or the right of access.

[ 173 ] Unsustainable practices [ edit ] Clear-cutting [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Clearcutting .

[ edit ] After a century of clearcutting, this forest, near the source of the Lewis and Clark River in Clatsop County, Oregon , is a patchwork. In each patch, most of the trees are the same age.

A forest before and after clearcutting Clearcutting ,  clearfelling or clearcut logging is a forestry / logging practice in which most or all trees in an area are uniformly cut down. Along with shelterwood and seed tree harvests , it is used by foresters to create certain types of forest ecosystems and to promote select species [ 174 ] that require an abundance of sunlight or grow in large, even-age stands .

[ 175 ] Clearcutting is a forestry practice that mimics the stand initiation stage of forest succession after a natural disturbance such as stand replacing fire or wind-throw , and is successful for regeneration of fast growing, sun tolerant tree species and wildlife species that readily regenerate in post-stand replacing sites.

[ 176 ] Logging companies and forest-worker unions in some countries support the practice for scientific, safety and economic reasons, while detractors consider it a form of deforestation that destroys natural habitats [ 177 ] and contributes to climate change .

[ 178 ] Environmentalists, traditional owners, local residents and others have regularly campaigned against clearcutting, including through the use of blockades and nonviolent direct action.

[ 179 ] Clearcutting is the most economically efficient method of logging.

[ citation needed ] It also may create detrimental side effects, such as the loss of topsoil , the costs of which are intensely debated by economic, environmental and other interests. In addition to the purpose of harvesting wood, clearcutting is used to create land for farming .

[ 180 ] Ultimately, the effects of clearcutting on the land will depend on how well or poorly the forest is managed, [ 181 ] and whether it is converted to non-forest land uses after clearcuts.

[ 182 ] While deforestation of both temperate and tropical forests through clearcutting has received considerable media attention in recent years, the other large forests of the world, such as the taiga , also known as boreal forests, are also under threat of rapid development. In Russia, North America and Scandinavia, creating protected areas and granting long-term leases to tend and regenerate trees—thus maximizing future harvests—are among the means used to limit the harmful effects of clearcutting.

[ 183 ] Long-term studies of clearcut forests, such as studies of the Pasoh Rainforest in Malaysia, are also important in providing insights into the conservation of forest resources worldwide.

[ 184 ] Even-aged timber management [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Even-aged timber management § Wildlife considerations .

[ edit ] Ecological analysis indicates that even aged timber management can produce inferior outcomes for wildlife biodiversity and abundance.

[ 185 ] Some species thrive on uneven or natural forest tree distribution. For example, the wild turkey thrives when uneven heights and canopy variations exist and its numbers are diminished by even aged timber management.

[ 186 ] Illegal logging [ edit ] These paragraphs are an excerpt from Illegal logging .

[ edit ] Illegal logging is the harvest, transportation, purchase, or sale of timber in violation of laws . The harvesting procedure itself may be illegal, including using corrupt means to gain access to forests; extraction without permission, or from a protected area; the cutting down of protected species ; or the extraction of timber in excess of agreed limits. Illegal logging is a driving force for a number of environmental issues such as deforestation , soil erosion and biodiversity loss which can drive larger-scale environmental crises such as climate change and other forms of environmental degradation .

Illegality may also occur during transport, such as illegal processing and export (through fraudulent declaration to customs ); the avoidance of taxes and other charges, and fraudulent certification.

[ 187 ] These acts are often referred to as "wood laundering".

[ 188 ] Illegal logging is driven by a number of economic forces, such as demand for raw materials, land grabbing and demand for pasture for cattle. Regulation and prevention can happen at both the supply side, with better enforcement of environmental protections, and at the demand side, such as an increasing regulation of trade as part of the international lumber industry .

Certification systems [ edit ] Main article: Certified wood Forest certification is a globally recognized system for encouraging sustainable forest management and assuring that forest-based goods are derived from sustainably managed forests.

[ 26 ] [ 189 ] [ 190 ] This is a voluntary procedure in which an impartial third-party organization evaluates the quality of forest management and output against a set of criteria established by a governmental or commercial certification agency.

[ 26 ] [ 189 ] Growing environmental awareness and consumer demand for more socially responsible businesses helped third-party forest certification emerge in the 1990s as a credible tool for communicating the environmental and social performance of forest operations.

There are many potential users of certification, including: forest managers, scientists, policy makers, investors, environmental advocates, business consumers of wood and paper, and individuals.

[ citation needed ] With third-party forest certification , an independent standards setting organization (SSO) develops standards of good forest management, and independent auditors issue certificates to forest operations that comply with those standards . Forest certification verifies that forests are well-managed – as defined by a particular standard – and chain-of-custody certification tracks wood and paper products from the certified forest through processing to the point of sale.

[ citation needed ] This rise of certification led to the emergence of several different systems throughout the world. As a result, there is no single accepted forest management international standard worldwide.

ISO members [ 191 ] rejected a proposal for a forestry management system as requirements standard, with a consensus that a management system for certification would not be effective. Instead ISO members voted for a chain of custody of wood and wood-based products with ISO 38200 published in 2018. Without an international standard each system takes a somewhat different approach with scheme owners defining private standards for sustainable forest management.

In its 2009–2010 Forest Products Annual Market Review United Nations Economic Commission for Europe/Food and Agriculture Organization stated: "Over the years, many of the issues that previously divided the (certification) systems have become much less distinct. The largest certification systems now generally have the same structural programmatic requirements." [ 192 ] Third-party forest certification is an important tool for those seeking to ensure that the paper and wood products they purchase and use come from forests that are well-managed and legally harvested. Incorporating third-party certification into forest product procurement practices can be a centerpiece for comprehensive wood and paper policies that include factors such as the protection of sensitive forest values, thoughtful material selection and efficient use of products.

[ 193 ] The Forest Stewardship Council is one of many forest certification programs.

Without a single international standard , there are a proliferation of private standards , [ 194 ] with more than fifty scheme owners offering certification worldwide, addressing the diversity of forest types and tenures. Globally, the two largest umbrella certification programs are: Programme for the Endorsement of Forest Certification (PEFC) Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) The Forest Stewardship Council's Policy on Conversion states that land areas converted from natural forests to round wood production after November 1994 are ineligible for Forest Stewardship Council certification.

[ 26 ] [ 195 ] The area of forest certified worldwide is growing slowly. PEFC is the world's largest forest certification system, with more than two-thirds of the total global certified area certified to its Sustainability Benchmarks.

[ 196 ] [ 197 ] In 2021, PEFC issued a position statement [ 198 ] defending their use of private standards in response to the Destruction: Certified report from Greenpeace .

[ 199 ] In North America, there are three certification standards endorsed by PEFC – the Sustainable Forestry Initiative, [ 200 ] the Canadian Standards Association's Sustainable Forest Management Standard, [ 107 ] and the American Tree Farm System.

[ 201 ] SFI is the world's largest single forest certification standard by area.

[ 202 ] FSC has five standards in North America – one in the United States [ 203 ] and four in Canada.

[ 204 ] While certification is intended as a tool to enhance forest management practices throughout the world, to date most certified forestry operations are located in Europe and North America. A significant barrier for many forest managers in developing countries is that they lack the capacity to undergo a certification audit and maintain operations to a certification standard.

[ 205 ] Forest governance [ edit ] Pandani ( Richea pandanifolia ) near Lake Dobson, Mount Field National Park , Tasmania, Australia Although a majority of forests continue to be owned formally by government, the effectiveness of forest governance is increasingly independent of formal ownership.

[ 206 ] Since neo-liberal ideology in the 1980s and the emanation of the climate change challenges, evidence that the state is failing to effectively manage environmental resources has emerged.

[ 207 ] Under neo-liberal regimes in the developing countries, the role of the state has diminished and the market forces have increasingly taken over the dominant socio-economic role.

[ 208 ] The shifting of natural resource management responsibilities from central to state and local governments, where this is occurring, is usually a part of broader decentralization process.

[ 209 ] The development of National Forest Funds is one way to address the issue of financing sustainable forest management.

[ 210 ] National forest funds (NFFs) are dedicated financing mechanisms managed by public institutions designed to support the conservation and sustainable use of forest resources.

[ 211 ] As of 2014, there are 70 NFFs operating globally.

[ 211 ] Community forestry [ edit ] Community-based forest management (CBFM) is a scheme that links governmental forest agencies and the local community in efforts to regenerate degraded forests, reforest deforested areas, and decrease carbon emissions that contribute to climate change. This partnership is done with the intent of not only repairing damage to the environment but also providing economic and social benefits to the affected area.

[ 212 ] [ 213 ] In principle, the benefits for the local community involvement in the management and protection of their forests would be to provide employment and to supplement income from both the wage labor and additional agriculture which would then strength the entire local economy while improving environmental conditions and mitigating climate change. Therefore, implementing a CBFM system can provide rural development while mitigating climate change and sustaining biodiversity within the region. It is important to engage the local community members, many of which are indigenous since presumably, they would have a deeper knowledge of the local ecosystems as well as the life cycles of those ecosystems over time. Their involvement also helps to ensure that their cultural practices remain intact.

[ 212 ] This section is an excerpt from Community forestry § History .

[ edit ] Logs from a community forest in Oaxaca , Mexico Community forestry is a branch of forestry that deals with the communal management of forests for generating income from timber and non-timber forest products on one hand, and managing for ecosystem services such as watershed conservation, carbon sequestration and aesthetic values on the other hand. It has been considered one of the most promising options of combining forest conservation with rural development, community empowerment and poverty reduction objectives.

The concept of community forestry first came to prominence in the mid-1970s but is rooted in historical land management systems that prioritized collective stewardship. For example, in pre-colonial Africa, community-managed forests served as critical sources of food, medicine, and cultural heritage, governed through traditional norms and local leadership structures.

[ 214 ] Similarly, before enclosure or other land privatization efforts, European commons allowed communities to access forests for grazing, fuelwood, and construction materials under shared use. Around the world, colonial governance and widespread land privatization disrupted these practices by replacing communal systems with centralized or private control. In regions such as India, colonial forestry policies prioritized timber extraction and commercial gains, often displacing indigenous communities and undermining traditional knowledge. This widespread alienation of local populations from forest resources led to widespread degradation and social unrest, prompting calls for reform in Africa and other continents.

[ 215 ] The re-emergence of community forestry in the 20th century was driven by growing recognition of the ecological and social failures of centralized forest policy efforts.

[ 216 ] Early movements, such as India’s Joint Forest Management in the 1970s and Nepal’s Forest User Groups in the 1980s, attempted to improve the management of forest resources and address environmental issues due to the countries failing centralized forest policy.

[ 217 ] These early efforts illustrated the potential of participatory governance to address resource depletion and empower marginalized communities. In 1978, FAO’s seminal work, Forestry for Local Community Development, laid the foundation for integrating scientific forestry with traditional practices in the modern period, arguing that empowering local communities not only conserved resources but also improved socio-economic outcomes.

[ 218 ] More recently, in the past few decades, community forestry has been implemented in developing countries and has been modestly successful in its aims of sustainable forest management, climate change adaptation, and securing socio-economic benefits for local communities.

[ 219 ] However, a study by the Overseas Development Institute has shown that the technical, managerial and financial requirements stipulated by community forestry frameworks are often incompatible with local realities and interests. A successful legal and institutional framework must incorporate the strengthening of existing institutions and enable the dissemination of locally appropriate practices as well as the local capacity for regulation and control.

[ 220 ] In practice, successful models have combined adaptive management with community-driven initiatives. For example, Mexico’s community forest enterprises (CFEs) demonstrated that decentralized governance could generate substantial economic benefits while maintaining ecological integrity. Similarly, Nepal’s participatory forest management made progress in reducing poverty and restoring forest cover.

[ 217 ] [ 221 ] As of 2016, FAO estimated that almost one-third of the world's forest area is under some form of community-based management.

[ 222 ] Forestry law [ edit ] These paragraphs are an excerpt from Forestry law .

[ edit ] Forestry laws govern activities in designated forest lands, most commonly with respect to forest management and timber harvesting.

[ 223 ] [ 224 ] Forestry laws generally adopt management policies for public forest resources, such as multiple use and sustained yield.

[ 225 ] Forest management is split between private and public management, with public forests being sovereign property of the State. Forestry laws are now considered an international affair.

[ 226 ] [ 227 ] Governmental agencies are generally responsible for planning and implementing forestry laws on public forest lands, and may be involved in forest inventory, planning, and conservation, and oversight of timber sales.

[ 228 ] Forestry laws are also dependent on social and economic contexts of the region in which they are implemented.

[ 229 ] The development of scientific forestry management is based on the precise measurement of the distribution and volume of wood in a given parcel, the systematic felling of trees, and their replacement by standard, carefully aligned rows of mono-cultural plantations that could be harvested at set times.

[ 230 ] Mitigation of deforestation and climate change [ edit ] Countries participating in the UNREDD program and/or Forest Carbon Partnership Facility.

UN-REDD participants Forest Carbon Partnership Facility participants participants in both See also: Deforestation and climate change Scientific studies investigate the ability of forests to absorb carbon dioxide from the atmosphere ( carbon sequestration ). Through such analysis, researchers can quantify the carbon stocks present in different types of forests and assess their effectiveness as carbon sinks . Understanding the capacity of forests to sequester carbon is crucial for climate change mitigation efforts.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 10 ] Forest protection [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Forest protection .

[ edit ] Forest security in Lithuania Forest protection is  a branch of forestry which is concerned with the preservation or improvement of a forest and prevention and control of damage to forest by natural or man made causes like forest fires , plant pests , and adverse climatic conditions ( global warming ).

Forest protection also has a legal status and rather than protection from only people damaging the forests is seen to be broader and include forest pathology too. Due to the different emphases there exist widely different methods forest protection.

In German-speaking countries, forest protection would focus on the biotic and abiotic factors that are non-crime related. A protected forest is not the same as a protection forest . These terms can lead to some confusion in English, although they are clearer in other languages. As a result, reading English literature can be problematic for non-experts due to localization and conflation of meanings.

The types of man-induced abuse that forest protection seeks to prevent include: Aggressive or unsustainable intensive farming and logging Pollution of the forest soil Expanding city development caused by population explosion and the resulting urban sprawl There is considerable debate over the effectiveness of forest protection methods. Enforcement of laws regarding purchased forest land is weak or non-existent in most parts of the world. In the increasingly dangerous South America, home of major rainforests , officials of the Brazilian National Agency for the Environment (IBAMA) have recently been shot during their routine duties.

[ 231 ] Tropical rainforest conservation [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Tropical rainforest conservation .

[ edit ] Tropical rainforest in Agumbe, India Amazon rainforest Tropical rainforest map Building blocks for tropical rainforest conservation include ecotourism and rehabilitation .

Reforestation and restoration are common practices in certain areas to try to increase tropical rainforest density. By communicating with the local people living in, and around, the rainforest, conservationists can learn more about what might allow them to best focus their efforts.

[ 232 ] Rainforests are globally important to sustainability and preservation of biodiversity . Although they may vary in location and inhabited species of plants and animals, they remain important worldwide for their abundance of natural resources and for the ecosystem services . It is important to take into consideration the differing species and the biodiversity that exists across different rainforest types in order to accurately implement methods of conservation .

[ 233 ] Proforestation [ edit ] Proforestation is the practice of protecting existing natural forests to foster continuous growth, carbon accumulation, and structural complexity.

[ 234 ] [ 235 ] It is recognized as an important forest based strategy for addressing the global crises in climate and biodiversity .

[ 235 ] [ 236 ] Forest restoration can be a strategy for climate change mitigation .

[ 237 ] : 37 Proforestation complements other forest-based solutions like afforestation , reforestation and improved forest management.

Allowing proforestation in some secondary forests will increase their accumulated carbon and biodiversity over time. Strategies for proforestation include rewilding , [ 238 ] such as reintroducing apex predators and keystone species as, for example, predators keep the population of herbivores in check (which reduce the biomass of vegetation ). Another strategy is establishing wildlife corridors connecting isolated protected areas.

[ 239 ] [ 240 ] Proforestation refers specifically to enabling continuous forest growth uninterrupted by active management or timber harvesting, a term coined by scientists William Moomaw , Susan Masino, and Edward Faison.

[ 241 ] [ 234 ] Proforestation differs from agroforestry or the cultivation of forest plantations , the latter consisting of similarly aged trees of just one or two species. Plantations can be an efficient source of wood but often come at the expense of natural forests and cultivate little habitat for biodiversity, such as dead and fallen trees or understory plants. Further, once factoring in emissions from clearing the land and the decay of plantation waste and products at the end of their often brief lifecycles (e.g. paper products), plantations sequester 40 times less carbon than natural forests.

[ 242 ] Proforestation is specifically recommended in “World Scientists’ Warning of a Climate Emergency, as a means to “quickly curtail habitat and biodiversity loss ” and protect "high carbon stores" and areas "with the capacity to rapidly sequester carbon." [ 243 ] Increasing Forest and Community Resilience [ edit ] 1.6 billion people worldwide depend on forests for their livelihoods, including 300–350 million (half of whom are Indigenous peoples) who live near or within "dense forests" and depend almost entirely on these ecosystems for their survival.

[ 244 ] Rural households in Asia, Africa, and Latin America also depend on forests for about a quarter of their total incomes, with about half of this in the form of food, fodder, energy, building materials and medicine.

[ 244 ] Proforestation can protect full native biodiversity and support the forests and other land types that provide resources we need. For example, research has found that old growth and complex forests are more resistant to the effects of climate change. One study found that taller trees had increased drought resistance, being able to capture and retain water better, due to their deeper root system and larger biomass. This means that even in dry conditions, these trees continued to photosynthesize at a higher rate than smaller trees.

[ 245 ] Further, old-growth forests have been shown to be more resistant to fires compared to young forests with trees that have thinner bark and with more fuel available for increasing temperatures and fire damage.

[ 246 ] Proforestation can help to reduce fire risks to forests and the surrounding communities. They can also help absorb water and prevent flooding to surrounding communities.

[ 244 ] Considering the variety of ecosystem services complex forests provide, sustaining healthy forests means adjacent communities will be better off as well.

Workers [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Forester .

[ edit ] Foresters of Southern University of Chile in the Valdivian forests of San Pablo de Tregua, Chile .

A forester is a person who practises forest management and forestry , the science, art, and profession of managing forests . Foresters engage in a broad range of activities including ecological restoration and management of protected areas . Foresters manage forests to provide a variety of objectives including direct extraction of raw material , outdoor recreation , conservation, hunting and aesthetics. Emerging management practices include managing forestlands for biodiversity , carbon sequestration and air quality.

Foresters work for the timber industry , government agencies, conservation groups , local authorities, urban parks boards, citizens' associations, and private landowners . The forestry profession includes a wide diversity of jobs, with educational requirements ranging from college bachelor's degrees to PhDs for highly specialized work.

Industrial foresters plan forest regeneration starting with careful harvesting. Urban foresters manage trees in urban green spaces . Foresters work in tree nurseries growing seedlings for woodland creation or regeneration projects. Foresters improve tree genetics . Forest engineers develop new building systems. Professional foresters measure and model the growth of forests with tools like geographic information systems . Foresters may combat insect infestation, disease, forest and grassland wildfire , but increasingly allow these natural aspects of forest ecosystems to run their course when the likelihood of epidemics or risk of life or property are low. Increasingly, foresters participate in wildlife conservation planning and watershed protection. Foresters have been mainly concerned with timber management, especially reforestation ,  forests at prime conditions, and fire control.

History [ edit ] The preindustrial age has been dubbed by Werner Sombart and others as the 'wooden age', as timber and firewood were the basic resources for energy, construction and housing. The development of modern forestry is closely connected with the rise of capitalism , the economy as a science and varying notions of land use and property.

[ 247 ] Roman Latifundiae , large agricultural estates, were quite successful in maintaining the large supply of wood that was necessary for the Roman Empire.

[ 248 ] Large deforestations came with the decline of the Romans.

[ 248 ] However  already in the 5th century, monks in the then Byzantine Romagna on the Adriatic coast, were able to establish stone pine plantations to provide fuelwood and food .

[ 249 ] This was the beginning of the massive forest mentioned by Dante Alighieri in his 1308 poem Divine Comedy .

[ 249 ] Similar sustainable formal forestry practices were developed by the Visigoths in the 7th century when, faced with the ever-increasing shortage of wood, they instituted a code concerned with the preservation of oak and pine forests.

[ 249 ] The use and management of many forest resources has a long history in China as well, dating back to the Han dynasty and taking place under the landowning gentry . A similar approach was used in Japan. It was also later written about by the Ming dynasty Chinese scholar Xu Guangqi (1562–1633).

In Europe, land usage rights in medieval and early modern times allowed different users to access forests and pastures.

Plant litter and resin extraction were important, as pitch (resin) was essential for the caulking of ships, falking and hunting rights, firewood and building, timber gathering in wood pastures , and grazing animals in forests. The notion of " commons " (German "Allmende") refers to the underlying traditional legal term of common land . The idea of enclosed private property came about during modern times. However, most hunting rights were retained by members of the nobility which preserved the right of the nobility to access and use common land for recreation, like fox hunting .

13th to 16th century [ edit ] Forestry work in Austria Exploitation of brushwood at the Golden Steinrueck , Vogelsberg Hans Carl von Carlowitz , German miner Systematic management of forests for a sustainable yield of timber began in Portugal in the 13th century when King Afonso III planted the Pinhal do Rei (King's Pine Forest) near Leiria to prevent coastal erosion and soil degradation , and as a sustainable source for timber used in naval construction.

[ 250 ] His successor King Denis of Portugal continued the practice and the forest exists still today.

[ 251 ] Forest management also flourished in the German states in the 14th century, e.g. in Nuremberg , [ 252 ] and in 16th-century Japan .

[ 253 ] Typically, a forest was divided into specific sections and mapped; the harvest of timber was planned with an eye to regeneration. As timber rafting allowed for connecting large continental forests, as in south western Germany, via Main, Neckar, Danube and Rhine with the coastal cities and states, early modern forestry and remote trading were closely connected. Large firs in the black forest were called „Holländer“, as they were traded to the Dutch ship yards. Large timber rafts on the Rhine were 200 to 400m in length, 40m in width and consisted of several thousand logs. The crew consisted of 400 to 500 men, including shelter, bakeries, ovens and livestock stables.

[ 254 ] Timber rafting infrastructure allowed for large interconnected networks all over continental Europe and is still of importance in Finland.

Starting with the 16th century, enhanced world maritime trade , a boom in housing construction in Europe, and the success and further Berggeschrey (rushes) of the mining industry increased timber consumption sharply. The notion of 'Nachhaltigkeit', sustainability in forestry, is closely connected to the work of Hans Carl von Carlowitz (1645–1714), a mining administrator in Saxony . His book Sylvicultura oeconomica, oder haußwirthliche Nachricht und Naturmäßige Anweisung zur wilden Baum-Zucht (1713) was the first comprehensive treatise about sustainable yield forestry.

[ 255 ] In the UK, and, to an extent, in continental Europe, the enclosure movement and the Clearances favored  strictly enclosed private property.

[ 256 ] The Agrarian reformers, early economic writers and scientists tried to get rid of the traditional commons.

[ 257 ] At the time, an alleged tragedy of the commons together with fears of a Holznot , an imminent wood shortage played a watershed role in the controversies about cooperative land use patterns.

[ 258 ] The practice of establishing tree plantations in the British Isles was promoted by John Evelyn , though it had already acquired some popularity.

Louis XIV 's minister Jean-Baptiste Colbert 's oak Forest of Tronçais , planted for the future use of the French Navy , matured as expected in the mid-19th century: "Colbert had thought of everything except the steamship," Fernand Braudel observed.

[ 259 ] Colbert's vision of forestry management was encoded in the French forestry Ordinance of 1669 , which proved to be an influential management system throughout Europe.

[ 260 ] In parallel, schools of forestry were established beginning in the late 18th century in Hesse , Russia , Austria-Hungary , Sweden , France and elsewhere in Europe.

Mechanization in 19th century [ edit ] Forestry mechanization was always in close connection to metal working and the development of mechanical tools to cut and transport timber to its destination.

[ 261 ] Rafting belongs to the earliest means of transport. Steel saws came up in the 15th century. The 19th century widely increased the availability of steel for whipsaws and introduced forest railways and railways in general for transport and as forestry customer. Further human induced changes, however, came since World War II, respectively in line with the "1950s syndrome".

[ 262 ] The first portable chainsaw was invented in 1918 in Canada , but large impact of mechanization in forestry started after World War II.

[ 263 ] Forestry harvesters are among the most recent developments. Although drones, planes , laser scanning , satellites and robots also play a part in forestry.

Forest conservation and early globalization [ edit ] Further information: forest conservation Starting from the 1750s modern scientific forestry was developed in France and the German speaking countries in the context of natural history scholarship and state administration inspired by physiocracy and cameralism .

[ 264 ] Its main traits were centralized management by professional foresters, the adherence to sustainable yield concepts with a bias towards fuelwood and timber production, artificial afforestation, and a critical view of pastoral and agricultural uses of forests.

[ 265 ] During the late 19th and early 20th centuries, forest preservation programs were established in British India , the United States , and Europe. Many foresters were either from continental Europe (like Sir Dietrich Brandis ), or educated there (like Gifford Pinchot ). Sir Dietrich Brandis is considered the father of tropical forestry, European concepts and practices had to be adapted in tropical and semi-arid climate zones. The development of plantation forestry was one of the (controversial) answers to the specific challenges in the tropical colonies. The enactment and evolution of forest laws and binding regulations occurred in most Western nations in the 20th century in response to growing conservation concerns and the increasing technological capacity of logging companies.

Tropical forestry is a separate branch of forestry which deals mainly with equatorial forests that yield woods such as teak and mahogany .

21st century [ edit ] A strong body of research exists regarding the management of forest ecosystems and the genetic improvement of tree species and varieties . Forestry studies also include the development of better methods for the planting, protecting, thinning , controlled burning , felling , extracting, and processing of timber . One of the applications of modern forestry is reforestation , in which trees are planted and tended in a given area.

A deciduous beech forest in Slovenia A modern sawmill A comparison of employment In agriculture, forestry and fishing by region Trees provide numerous environmental, social and economic benefits for people.

[ 266 ] In many regions, the forest industry is of major ecological, economic, and social importance, with the United States producing more timber than any other country in the world.

[ 267 ] Third-party certification systems that provide independent verification of sound forest stewardship and sustainable forestry have become commonplace in many areas since the 1990s. These certification systems developed as a response to criticism of some forestry practices, particularly deforestation in less-developed regions along with concerns over resource management in the developed world . Sustainable forestry operations must also adhere to the International Labour Organization's 18 criteria on human and social rights.

Gender equality , health and well-being and community consultation are examples of mentioned rights.

[ 112 ] [ 26 ] In topographically severe forested terrain, proper forestry is important for the prevention or minimization of serious soil erosion or even landslides . In areas with a high potential for landslides, forests can stabilize soils and prevent property damage or loss, human injury, or loss of life.

Global production of roundwood rose from 3.5 billion m ³ in 2000 to 4 billion m ³ in 2021. In 2021, wood fuel was the main product with a 49 percent share of the total (2 billion m ³ ), followed by coniferous industrial roundwood with 30 percent (1.2 billion m ³ ) and non-coniferous industrial roundwood with 21 percent (0.9 billion m ³ ). Asia and the Americas are the two main producing regions, accounting for 29 and 28 percent of the total roundwood production, respectively; Africa and Europe have similar shares of 20–21 percent, while Oceania produces the remaining 2 percent.

[ 268 ] Many lower- and middle-income countries rely on wood for energy purposes (notably cooking). The largest producers are all in these income groups and have large populations with a high reliance on wood for energy: in 2021, India ranked first with 300 million m ³ (15 percent of total production), followed by China with 156 million m3 and Brazil with 129 million m ³ (8 percent and 7 percent of global production).

[ 268 ] Journals [ edit ] Sylwan first published in 1820 [ 269 ] Schweizerische Zeitschrift für Forstwesen first published in 1850.

[ 269 ] [ 270 ] Erdészeti Lapok first published in 1862. (Hungary, 1862–present) [ 271 ] The Indian Forester first published in 1875.

[ 269 ] [ 272 ] Šumarski list (Forestry Review, Croatia) was published in 1877 by Croatian Forestry Society .

[ 269 ] [ 273 ] Montes (Forestry, Spain) first published in 1877.

[ 269 ] [ 274 ] Revista pădurilor (Journal of Forests, Romania, 1881–1882; 1886–present), the oldest extant magazine in Romania [ 269 ] [ 275 ] Forestry Quarterly , first published in 1902 by the New York State College of Forestry .

Šumarstvo [ 276 ] (Forestry, Serbia) first published in 1948 by the Ministry of Forestry of Democratic Federal Yugoslavia, and since 1951 by Organ of Society of Forestry Engineers and Technicians of the Republic of Serbia (succeeding the former Šumarski glasnik published from 1907 to 1921) [ 277 ] Society and culture [ edit ] Public input and awareness [ edit ] Deforestation and increased road-building in the Amazon Rainforest are a significant concern because of increased human encroachment upon wild areas, increased resource extraction and further threats to biodiversity .

There has been increased public awareness of natural resource policy, including forest management.

[ citation needed ] Public concern regarding forest management may have shifted from the extraction of timber for economic development, to maintaining the flow of the range of ecosystem services provided by forests, including provision of habitat for wildlife , protecting biodiversity , watershed management, and opportunities for recreation . Increased environmental awareness may contribute to an increased public mistrust of forest management professionals.

[ 278 ] But it can also lead to greater understanding about what professionals do for forests for nature conservation and ecological services.

By region [ edit ] Developing world [ edit ] See also: Deforestation In December 2007, at the Climate Change Conference in Bali , the issue of deforestation in the developing world in particular was raised and discussed. The foundations of a new incentive mechanism for encouraging sustainable forest management measures was therefore laid in hopes of reducing world deforestation rates. This mechanism was formalized and adopted as REDD in November 2010 at the Climate Change Conference in Cancun by UNFCCC COP 16.  Developing countries who are signatories of the CBD were encouraged to take measure to implement REDD activities in the hope of becoming more active contributors of global efforts aimed at the mitigation greenhouse gas, as deforestation and forest degradation account for roughly 15% of total global greenhouse gas emissions.

[ 279 ] The REDD activities are formally tasked with "reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation; and the role of conservation, sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing countries".  REDD+ works in 3 phases. The first phase consists of developing viable strategies, while the second phase begins work on technology development and technology transfer to the developing countries taking part in REDD+ activities. The last phase measures and reports the implementation of the action taken.

[ 280 ] In 2021 the LEAF coalition was created, aiming to provide 1 billion dollars to countries that will protect their tropical and subtropical forests.

[ 281 ] European Union [ edit ] In 2022 the European parliament approved a bill aiming to stop the import linked with deforestation. The bill may cause to Brazil, for example, to stop deforestation for agricultural production and begun to "increase productivity on existing agricultural land".

[ 282 ] The legislation was adopted with some changes by the European Council in May 2023 and is expected to enter into force several weeks after. The bill requires companies who want to import certain types of products to the European Union to prove the production of those commodities is not linked to areas deforested after 31 of December 2020. It prohibits also import of products linked with Human rights abuse. The list of products includes: palm oil , cattle , wood , coffee , cocoa , rubber and soy . Some derivatives of those products are also included: chocolate , furniture , printed paper and several palm oil based derivates.

[ 283 ] [ 284 ] Great Britain [ edit ] The Forestry Commission was founded in 1919 to restore forests to Great Britain after World War 1 . The commission regulates both private and public forests, as well as manages private forests. Agricultural land was bought and transformed, totalling 35% of the British woodland area having been possessed at one point in time [ 285 ] America [ edit ] Canada [ edit ] Canada's significant contribution to global sustainable forest management with its 166 million hectares of forest land independently certified as sustainably managed, representing 40% of the world's certified forests, which is more than any other country.

[ 286 ] Approximately 94% of Canada's forest land is publicly owned. Sustainable forest management strategies aim to reconcile various immediate demands while ensuring that forests continue to provide benefits for future generations.

[ 287 ] The province of Ontario has its own sustainable forest management measures in place. A little less than half of all the publicly owned forests of Ontario are managed forests, required by The Crown Forest Sustainability Act to be managed sustainably. Sustainable management is often done by forest companies who are granted Sustainable Forest Licenses which are valid for 20 years. The main goal of Ontario's sustainable forest management measures is to ensure that the forest are kept healthy and productive, conserving biodiversity, all whilst supporting communities and forest industry jobs. All management strategies and plans are highly regulated, arranged to last for a 10-year period, and follow the strict guidelines of the Forest Management Planning Manual. Alongside public sustainable forest management, the government of Ontario encourages sustainable forest management of Ontario's private forests as well through incentives.

[ 288 ] So far, 44% of Ontario's crown forests are managed.

[ 288 ] In order for logging to begin, the forestry companies must present a plan to the government who will then communicate to the public, First Nations and other industries in order to protect forest values. The plan must include strategies on how the forest values will be protected, assessing the state of the forest and whether it is capable of recovering from human activity, and presenting strategies on regeneration.  After the harvest begins, the government monitors if the company is complying within the planned restrictions and also monitors the health of the ecosystem [ 289 ] (soil depletion and erosion, water contamination, wildlife...). Failure to comply may result in fines, suspensions, removal of harvesting rights, confiscation of harvested timber and possible imprisonment.

[ 289 ] United States [ edit ] In the beginning of the year 2020 the "Save the Redwoods League" after a successful crowdfunding campaign bought " Alder Creek" a piece of land 583 acres large, with 483 big Sequoia trees including the 5th largest tree in the world. The organizations plan to make there forest thinning [ 290 ] that is a controversial operation [ 291 ] This section is an excerpt from Forest conservation in the United States .

[ edit ] Mariposa Grove of Giant Sequoias , Yosemite National Park In the United States, forest conservation is the practice of planning and maintaining forested areas for the benefit and sustainability of future generations . Forest conservation involves the upkeep of the natural resources within a forest that are beneficial for both humans and the ecosystem . Forests provide wildlife with a suitable habitat for living which allows the ecosystem to be biodiverse and benefit other natural processes. Forests also filter groundwater and prevent runoff keeping water safe for human consumption.

[ 292 ] There are many types of forests to consider and various techniques to preserve them. Of the types of forests in the United States , they each face specific threats. But, there are various techniques to implement that will protect and preserve them.

Different types of forests have adapted throughout history, allowing them to thrive in specific habitats. Forests in the United States can be categorized into three main forest biomes, they are boreal, temperate, or sub-tropical based on the location and climate of the forest. Each of these biomes faces various threats of deforestation , urban development, [ 293 ] soil compaction , species extinction, unmanaged recreational use, invasive species , or any combination of these threats. But there are many techniques that can be implemented for forest conservation efforts.

[ 294 ] This includes methods such as afforestation , reforestation , selective logging, [ 295 ] controlled burns , wildland fire use, laws and policies, [ 296 ] advocacy groups, and wildlife management areas . Additionally, multiple United States government programs support forest conservation efforts.

Asia [ edit ] Russia [ edit ] In 2019 after severe wildfires and public pressure the Russian government decided to take a number of measures for more effective forest management, what is considered as a big victory for the Environmental movement [ 297 ] Indonesia [ edit ] In August 2019, a court in Indonesia stopped the construction of a dam that could heavily hurt forests and villagers in the area [ 298 ] In 2020 the rate of deforestation in Indonesia was the slowest since 1990. It was 75% lower than in 2019. This is because the government stopped issuing new licences to cut forests, including for palm oil plantations. The falling price of palm oil facilitated making it. Very wet weather reduced wildfires what also contributed to the achievement.

[ 299 ] Africa [ edit ] Congo [ edit ] In August 2021 UNESCO removed the Salonga National Park from its list of threatened sites. Forbidding oil drilling, reducing poaching played crucial role in the  achievement. The event is considered as a big win to Democratic Republic of the Congo as the Salonga forest is the biggest protected rainforest in Africa.

[ 300 ] Kenya [ edit ] In accordance with Article 10 of the Kenyan Constitution, which mandates the incorporation of sustainable development into all laws and decisions regarding public policy, including forest conservation and management. Kenya responds to continued deforestation, forest degradation, and forest encroachment, which results in conversion of land uses to settlement and agriculture, by taking action.

[ 301 ] See also [ edit ] Conservation biology Coppicing Environmental protection Forest farming Forest inventory Forest plans Outline of forestry Sustainable land management Category:Forest conservation References [ edit ] ^ "Glossary of Forestry Terms in British Columbia" (PDF) . Ministry of Forests and Range (Canada). March 2008 . Retrieved 2009-04-06 .

^ "I. Balenovich, A. Seletkovich, et al. Comparison of Classical Terrestrial and Photogrammetric Method in Creating Management Division. FORMEC. Croatia 2012. pp. 1-13" .

^ "I. Balenović, D. Vuletić, et al. Digital Photogrammetry – State of the Art and Potential for Application in Forest Management in Croatia. SEEFOR. South-East European Forestry. #2, 2011. pp. 81–93" (PDF) .

^ a b Mozgeris, G. (30 May 2009).

"The continuous field view of representing forest geographically: from cartographic representation towards improved management planning" .

S.A.P.I.EN.S .

2 (2) . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Anderegg, William R. L.; Wu, Chao; Acil, Nezha; Carvalhais, Nuno; Pugh, Thomas A. M.; Sadler, Jon P.; Seidl, Rupert (2 September 2022).

"A climate risk analysis of Earth's forests in the 21st century" (PDF) .

Science .

377 (6610): 1099– 1103.

Bibcode : 2022Sci...377.1099A .

doi : 10.1126/science.abp9723 .

PMID 36048937 .

S2CID 252010508 .

^ a b c d e f g Windisch, Michael G.; Davin, Edouard L.; Seneviratne, Sonia I. (October 2021). "Prioritizing forestation based on biogeochemical and local biogeophysical impacts".

Nature Climate Change .

11 (10): 867– 871.

Bibcode : 2021NatCC..11..867W .

doi : 10.1038/s41558-021-01161-z .

S2CID 237947801 .

ProQuest 2578272675 .

^ a b c d Benedek, Zsófia; Fertő, Imre (2013). "Development and application of a new Forestation Index: global forestation patterns and drivers" (Document). IEHAS Discussion Papers.

hdl : 10419/108304 .

ProQuest 1698449297 .

^ a b c d e f g Zhang, Mingfang; Wei, Xiaohua (5 March 2021). "Deforestation, forestation, and water supply".

Science .

371 (6533): 990– 991.

Bibcode : 2021Sci...371..990Z .

doi : 10.1126/science.abe7821 .

PMID 33674479 .

S2CID 232124649 .

^ a b c d e f g Prevedello, Jayme A.; Winck, Gisele R.; Weber, Marcelo M.; Nichols, Elizabeth; Sinervo, Barry (20 March 2019).

"Impacts of forestation and deforestation on local temperature across the globe" .

PLOS ONE .

14 (3): e0213368.

Bibcode : 2019PLoSO..1413368P .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0213368 .

PMC 6426338 .

PMID 30893352 .

Gale A579457448 .

^ a b c d Portmann, Raphael; Beyerle, Urs; Davin, Edouard; Fischer, Erich M.; De Hertog, Steven; Schemm, Sebastian (4 October 2022).

"Global forestation and deforestation affect remote climate via adjusted atmosphere and ocean circulation" .

Nature Communications .

13 (1): 5569.

Bibcode : 2022NatCo..13.5569P .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-022-33279-9 .

PMC 9532392 .

PMID 36195588 .

^ a b c AbdulBaqi, Faten Khalid (June 2022).

"The effect of afforestation and green roofs techniques on thermal reduction in Duhok city" .

Trees, Forests and People .

8 : 100267.

Bibcode : 2022TFP.....800267A .

doi : 10.1016/j.tfp.2022.100267 .

S2CID 248646593 .

^ a b "The State of the World's Forests 2020. In brief".

The State of the World's Forests 2020. Forests, biodiversity and people – In brief . Rome: FAO & UNEP. 2020.

doi : 10.4060/ca8985en .

ISBN 978-92-5-132707-4 .

S2CID 241416114 .

^ "Natural Forest Management" .

www.fao.org . Archived from the original on 2022-12-26 . Retrieved 2022-10-24 .

^ Young, Raymond (1982).

Introduction to Forest Science . John Wiley & sons. p. 207.

ISBN 978-0471064381 .

^ "Ecosystem Services" .

Climate Change Resource Center . USDA and US Forest Service . Retrieved 21 April 2021 .

^ Brockerhoff, Eckehard; et, al (4 November 2017).

"Forest biodiversity, ecosystem functioning and the provision of ecosystem services" .

Biodiversity and Conservation .

26 (13): 3005– 3035.

Bibcode : 2017BiCon..26.3005B .

doi : 10.1007/s10531-017-1453-2 .

^ eugene (2022-09-20).

"What is Geographic Information System Analysis In Forestry?" .

Tall Pines Forest Management . Retrieved 2023-01-23 .

^ Garcia-Grant, Ian (Dec 20, 2021).

"Planning For Long Term Forest Management" .

Tall Pines Forest Management .

Archived from the original on Dec 2, 2022 . Retrieved Jan 23, 2023 .

^ "PowerSearch Logout" . Find.galegroup.com.

Archived from the original on 2013-05-10 . Retrieved 2014-03-15 .

^ L. J. Moores; B. Pittman; G. Kitchen (1996), "Forest ecological classification and mapping: their application for ecosystem management in Newfoundland", Environmental Monitoring and Assessment , 39 ( 1– 3): 571– 577, doi : 10.1007/bf00396169 , PMID 24198030 , S2CID 206779166 ^ "An Introduction To The Business Of Small-scale Forestry. Private Forestry Guidance Materials Report 2023" . 2024-06-14 . Retrieved 2025-02-06 .

^ "Scopus preview - Scopus - Welcome to Scopus" . Archived from the original on 2013-02-02.

^ *Philip Joseph Burton. 2003.

Towards sustainable management of the boreal forest 1039 pages ^ "Home | Ohio Woodland Stewards Program" .

woodlandstewards.osu.edu . Retrieved 2022-10-24 .

^ Kellett, Michael J.; Maloof, Joan E.; Masino, Susan A.; Frelich, Lee E.; Faison, Edward K.; Brosi, Sunshine L.; Foster, David R. (2023-01-09).

"Forest-clearing to create early-successional habitats: Questionable benefits, significant costs" .

Frontiers in Forests and Global Change .

5 .

Bibcode : 2023FrFGC...573677K .

doi : 10.3389/ffgc.2022.1073677 .

ISSN 2624-893X .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Bank, European Investment (2022-12-08).

Forests at the heart of sustainable development: Investing in forests to meet biodiversity and climate goals . European Investment Bank.

ISBN 978-92-861-5403-4 .

^ "Forests - Environment - European Commission" .

ec.europa.eu . Retrieved 2023-01-30 .

^ "Protected Forests in Europe" (PDF) .

^ a b Martin.

"Forests, desertification and biodiversity" .

United Nations Sustainable Development . Retrieved 2024-04-06 .

^ a b Global Forest Resources Assessment 2020 – Key findings . Rome: FAO. 2020.

doi : 10.4060/ca8753en .

ISBN 978-92-5-132581-0 .

S2CID 130116768 .

^ Classification of Forest Management Approaches: A New Conceptual Framework and Its Applicability to European Forestry

Philipp S. Duncker 1, Susana M. Barreiro 2, Geerten M. Hengeveld 3, Torgny Lind 4, William L. Mason 5, Slawomir Ambrozy 6 and Heinrich Spiecker 1| http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol17/iss4/art51/ ^ Nichols, J.D & Williams, B.K. (2006). Monitoring for conservation. Trends in Ecology 21: 668-673.

^ "Global Forest Resource Assessment 2020" .

www.fao.org . Retrieved 20 September 2020 .

^ Payn, Tim; Carnus, Jean-Michel; Freer-Smith, Peter; Kimberley, Mark; Kollert, Walter; Liu, Shirong; Orazio, Christophe; Rodriguez, Luiz; Silva, Luis Neves; Wingfield, Michael J. (2015).

"Changes in planted forests and future global implications" .

Forest Ecology and Management .

352 : 57– 67.

Bibcode : 2015ForEM.352...57P .

doi : 10.1016/j.foreco.2015.06.021 .

ISSN 0378-1127 .

^ FAO, ed. (2016).

Global forest resources assessment 2015: how are the world's forests changing?

. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

ISBN 978-92-5-109283-5 .

^ Ennos, Richard; Cottrell, Joan; Hall, Jeanette; O'Brien, David (2019).

"Is the introduction of novel exotic forest tree species a rational response to rapid environmental change? – A British perspective" .

Forest Ecology and Management .

432 : 718– 728.

Bibcode : 2019ForEM.432..718E .

doi : 10.1016/j.foreco.2018.10.018 .

hdl : 20.500.11820/725af6fe-4ef8-4345-8f06-634eb59414ff .

ISSN 0378-1127 .

^ "Why Keeping Mature Forests Intact Is Key to the Climate Fight" .

Yale E360 . Retrieved 28 September 2020 .

^ Mackey, Brendan; Dooley, Kate (6 August 2019).

"Want to beat climate change? Protect our natural forests" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 28 September 2020 .

^ Bank, European Investment (2022-12-08).

Forests at the heart of sustainable development: Investing in forests to meet biodiversity and climate goals . European Investment Bank.

ISBN 978-92-861-5403-4 .

^ Harrell, Stevan (2023).

An Ecological History of Modern China . Seattle: University of Washington Press .

ISBN 9780295751719 .

^ Elliott, S., D. Blakesley and K. Hardwick, in press. Restoring Tropical Forests: a Practical Guide. Kew Publications, London ^ Sgró, C.M., A. J. Lowe and A. A. Hoffmann, 2011. Building evolutionary resilience for conserving biodiversity under climate change. Evolutionary Applications 4 (2): 326-337 ^ Hoegh-Guldberg, Ove; Bruno, John F. (2010-06-18).

"The Impact of Climate Change on the World's Marine Ecosystems" .

Science .

328 (5985): 1523– 1528.

Bibcode : 2010Sci...328.1523H .

doi : 10.1126/science.1189930 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 20558709 .

S2CID 206526700 .

^ Lamb, David (2011).

Regreening the Bare Hills . World Forests. Springer. p. 547.

ISBN 978-90-481-9870-2 .

^ Stanturf, John A. (2005).

"What is forest restoration?" .

Restoration of boreal and temperate forests . Boca Raton: CRC Press. pp.

3– 11. Archived from the original on 2017-07-04 . Retrieved 2012-06-17 .

^ a b c d "Restoring the Earth – The next decade" .

Unasylva . 71 2020/1 (252). FAO. 2020.

doi : 10.4060/cb1600en .

ISBN 978-92-5-133506-2 .

S2CID 241374524 .

^ Pywell, Richard F.; Bullock, James M.; Roy, David B.; Warman, Liz; Walker, Kevin J.; Rothery, Peter (February 2003).

"Plant traits as predictors of performance in ecological restoration: Plant traits as predictors of performance" .

Journal of Applied Ecology .

40 (1): 65– 77.

doi : 10.1046/j.1365-2664.2003.00762.x .

^ Terms and definitions – FRA 2020 (PDF) . Rome: FAO. 2018.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2019-08-09.

^ a b Lark, Rachel (2023-10-02).

"The Importance of Afforestation" .

Environment Co .

Archived from the original on 4 January 2024 . Retrieved 2024-01-04 .

^ Windisch, Michael G.; Davin, Edouard L.; Seneviratne, Sonia I. (October 2021). "Prioritizing forestation based on biogeochemical and local biogeophysical impacts".

Nature Climate Change .

11 (10): 867– 871.

Bibcode : 2021NatCC..11..867W .

doi : 10.1038/s41558-021-01161-z .

S2CID 237947801 .

ProQuest 2578272675 .

^ a b c Bastin, Jean-Francois; Finegold, Yelena; Garcia, Claude; Mollicone, Danilo; Rezende, Marcelo; Routh, Devin; Zohner, Constantin M.; Crowther, Thomas W. (2019-07-05).

"The global tree restoration potential" .

Science .

365 (6448): 76– 79.

Bibcode : 2019Sci...365...76B .

doi : 10.1126/science.aax0848 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 31273120 .

Archived from the original on 3 January 2020 . Retrieved 4 January 2024 .

^ Tutton, Mark (2019-07-04).

"Restoring forests could capture two-thirds of the carbon humans have added to the atmosphere" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 23 March 2020 . Retrieved 2024-07-15 .

^ a b Lewis, Simon L.; Mitchard, Edward T. A.; Prentice, Colin; Maslin, Mark; Poulter, Ben (2019-10-18).

"Comment on "The global tree restoration potential" " .

Science .

366 (6463).

doi : 10.1126/science.aaz0388 .

hdl : 10044/1/74650 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 31624179 .

^ Dasgupta, Shreya (2021-06-01).

"Many Tree-Planting Campaigns Are Based on Flawed Science" .

The Wire Science .

Archived from the original on 12 June 2021 . Retrieved 2021-06-12 .

^ Veldman, Joseph W.; Aleman, Julie C.; Alvarado, Swanni T.; Anderson, T. Michael; Archibald, Sally; Bond, William J.; Boutton, Thomas W.; Buchmann, Nina; Buisson, Elise; Canadell, Josep G.; Dechoum, Michele de Sá; Diaz-Toribio, Milton H.; Durigan, Giselda; Ewel, John J.; Fernandes, G. Wilson (2019-10-18).

"Comment on "The global tree restoration potential" " .

Science .

366 (6463).

doi : 10.1126/science.aay7976 .

hdl : 10261/208421 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 31624182 .

^ Staver, A. Carla; Archibald, Sally; Levin, Simon A. (2011-10-14).

"The Global Extent and Determinants of Savanna and Forest as Alternative Biome States" .

Science .

334 (6053): 230– 232.

Bibcode : 2011Sci...334..230S .

doi : 10.1126/science.1210465 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 21998389 .

^ Veldman, Joseph W.; Overbeck, Gerhard E.; Negreiros, Daniel; Mahy, Gregory; Le Stradic, Soizig; Fernandes, G. Wilson; Durigan, Giselda; Buisson, Elise; Putz, Francis E.; Bond, William J. (2015-09-09).

"Where Tree Planting and Forest Expansion are Bad for Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services" .

BioScience .

65 (10): 1011– 1018.

doi : 10.1093/biosci/biv118 .

ISSN 1525-3244 .

^ Staver, A. Carla; Archibald, Sally; Levin, Simon A. (2011-10-14).

"The Global Extent and Determinants of Savanna and Forest as Alternative Biome States" .

Science .

334 (6053): 230– 232.

Bibcode : 2011Sci...334..230S .

doi : 10.1126/science.1210465 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 21998389 .

^ Brockerhoff, Eckehard G.; Jactel, Hervé; Parrotta, John A.; Quine, Christopher P.; Sayer, Jeffrey (2008-05-01).

"Plantation forests and biodiversity: oxymoron or opportunity?" .

Biodiversity and Conservation .

17 (5): 925– 951.

Bibcode : 2008BiCon..17..925B .

doi : 10.1007/s10531-008-9380-x .

ISSN 1572-9710 .

^ Vasconcelos, Sasha; Pina, Sílvia; Reino, Luís; Beja, Pedro; Moreira, Francisco; Sánchez-Oliver, Juan S.; Catry, Inês; Faria, João; Rotenberry, John T.; Santana, Joana (2019-08-01).

"Long-term consequences of agricultural policy decisions: How are forests planted under EEC regulation 2080/92 affecting biodiversity 20 years later?" .

Biological Conservation .

236 : 393– 403.

Bibcode : 2019BCons.236..393V .

doi : 10.1016/j.biocon.2019.05.052 .

ISSN 0006-3207 .

^ Franks, Samantha E.; Douglas, David J. T.; Gillings, Simon; Pearce-Higgins, James W. (2017-07-03).

"Environmental correlates of breeding abundance and population change of Eurasian Curlew Numenius arquata in Britain" .

Bird Study .

64 (3): 393– 409.

Bibcode : 2017BirdS..64..393F .

doi : 10.1080/00063657.2017.1359233 .

ISSN 0006-3657 .

S2CID 89966879 .

^ Aldhous, J. R.; Low, A. J. (1974).

The potential of Western hemlock, Western red cedar, Grand fir and Noblefir in Britain (PDF) (Report). London: H.M. Stationery Office.

^ Everard, J.E.; Fourt, D.F. (1974). "Monterey Pine and Bishop Pine as plantation trees in southern Britain".

Quarterly Journal of Forestry .

68 (2).

Royal Forestry Society : 111– 125.

^ "Forest loss" .

United Nations System-wide Earthwatch . United Nations Environment Programme. Archived from the original on January 6, 2010 . Retrieved October 27, 2011 .

^ "Global Forest Resource Assessment 2020" .

www.fao.org . Retrieved 20 September 2020 .

^ Hawley, Ralph C; Smith, David Martyn (1954).

The Practice of Silviculture (6th ed.). New York: Wiley.

OCLC 976898179 .

^ International Union of Forestry Research Organizations (1971).

Terminology of Forest Science, Technology Practice and Products: English-Language Version . F. C. Ford-Robertson. Washington, D.C.: Society of American Foresters.

ISBN 978-0-939970-16-2 .

OCLC 223725063 .

^ a b Gray, Audrey (2021-01-11).

"The Radical Case for Growing Huge Swaths of Bamboo in North America" .

Inside Climate News . Retrieved 2021-01-13 .

^ Bennet, Chris (Oct 31, 2016).

"Bamboo Set to go Big on U.S. Farmland" .

Farm Journal .

^ Bamboo Cultivation Manual Guidelines for Cultivating Ethiopian Lowland Bamboo (PDF) . UNIDO. 2009.

^ Dwivedi, Arun Kumar; Kumar, Anil; Baredar, Prashant; Prakash, Om (2019-05-01).

"Bamboo as a complementary crop to address climate change and livelihoods – Insights from India" .

Forest Policy and Economics .

102 : 66– 74.

Bibcode : 2019ForPE.102...66D .

doi : 10.1016/j.forpol.2019.02.007 .

ISSN 1389-9341 .

S2CID 159340063 .

^ "New Report Reveals the Benefits of Bamboo for Land Restoration" .

International Bamboo and Rattan Organisation . 29 June 2018.

^ "Understanding Bamboo's Climate Change Potential" .

International Bamboo and Rattan Organisation . 5 June 2018.

^ The Poor Man's Carbon Sink Bamboo in Climate Change and Poverty Alleviation (PDF) . FAO Forestry Department. 2009.

^ "About International Network for Bamboo and Rattan" .

INBAR . Retrieved 2020-07-31 .

^ "Bamboo: A Multipurpose Agroforestry Crop" .

Small Farmer's Journal . 2016-07-21 . Retrieved 2020-07-30 .

^ a b c Nyland, Ralph D. (2002).

Silviculture: concepts and applications . McGraw-Hill series in forest resources (2nd ed.). Boston: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 978-0-07-366190-2 .

^ "Establishing an SRC plantation" . Archived from the original on 2006-12-20 . Retrieved 2006-12-08 .

^ Mudge, Ken; Gabriel, Steve (2014).

Farming the Woods: an integrated permaculture approach to growing food and medicinals in temperate forests . White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green Publishing. p. 9.

ISBN 978-1-60358-507-1 .

^ "What is agroforestry?" .

www.aftaweb.org . Retrieved 2018-04-29 .

^ Bizzo, Eduardo; Michener, Gregory (March 17, 2024).

"Fostering sustainable production via the Amazon Fund collaborative platform" .

Sustainable Development .

32 (5): 5129– 5143.

doi : 10.1002/sd.2956 – via CrossRef.

^ MacDicken, Kenneth G.; Vergara, Napoleon T. (1990).

Agroforestry: classification and management . John Wiley & Sons, Inc. p. 2.

ISBN 0-471-83781-4 .

^ Jamnadass, R.H.; Dawson, I.K.; Franzel, S.; Leakey, R.R.B.; Mithöfer, D.; Akinnifesi, F.K.; Tchoundjeu, Z. (2011-09-01).

"Improving livelihoods and nutrition in sub-Saharan Africa through the promotion of indigenous and exotic fruit production in smallholders' agroforestry systems: a review" .

International Forestry Review .

13 (3): 338– 354.

doi : 10.1505/146554811798293836 .

^ "What is Sustainable Forestry?" .

Rainforest Alliance . 2016-07-28 . Retrieved 2022-03-31 .

^ MÜLLER, Ulrike.

"REPORT on a new EU Forest Strategy for 2030 – Sustainable Forest Management in Europe | A9-0225/2022 | European Parliament" .

www.europarl.europa.eu . Retrieved 2023-01-30 .

^ "LEDS GP Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use Working Group factsheet" (PDF) .

Low Emission Development Strategies Global Partnership (LEDS GP) . Retrieved 23 March 2016 .

^ Law, Beverly; Moomaw, William (24 February 2021).

"Keeping Trees in the Ground: An Effective Low-Tech Way to Slow Climate Change" . Ecowatch . Retrieved 28 February 2021 .

^ Dennehymarch, Kevin (31 March 2014).

"Using more wood for construction can slash global reliance on fossil fuels" .

Yale News . Yale School of Forestry & Environmental Studies (F&ES), University of Washington's College of the Environment . Retrieved 15 August 2021 .

^ "Climate Challenge" .

forests.org . Retrieved 2024-04-06 .

^ a b "FOREST EUROPE | Sustainable Forest Management" .

foresteurope.org . 17 December 2021 . Retrieved 2023-01-30 .

^ Martin.

"Forests, desertification and biodiversity" .

United Nations Sustainable Development . Retrieved 2023-01-30 .

^ Antony, J R., Lal, S.B. (2013).

Forestry Principles And Applications . p. 166.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Goal 15 targets" .

UNDP . Archived from the original on 4 September 2017 . Retrieved 2020-09-24 .

^ "Ministerial Conference on the Protection of Forests in Europe" . Mcpfe.org . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "sustainable forest management — European Environment Agency" .

www.eea.europa.eu . Retrieved 2023-01-30 .

^ Evans, K.; De Jong, W.; Cronkleton, P. (1 October 2008).

"Future Scenarios as a Tool for Collaboration in Forest Communities" .

S.A.P.I.EN.S .

1 (2) . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "Sustainable Forest Management Toolbox" (PDF) . Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations . Retrieved 24 June 2014 .

^ Rametsteiner, Ewald; Simula, Markku (2003).

"Forest certification—an instrument to promote sustainable forest management?" .

Journal of Environmental Management .

67 (1): 87– 98.

Bibcode : 2003JEnvM..67...87R .

doi : 10.1016/S0301-4797(02)00191-3 .

PMID 12659807 . Retrieved 20 April 2020 .

^ Guidelines for Developing, Testing and Selecting Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management Ravi Prabhu, Carol J. P. Colfer and Richard G. Dudley. 1999. CIFOR. The Criteria & Indicators Toolbox Series.

^ Criteria and Indicators for Sustainable Forest Management: A Compendium . Paper compiled by Froylán Castañeda, Christel Palmberg-Lerche and Petteri Vuorinen, May 2001. Forest Management Working Papers, Working Paper 5. Forest Resources Development Service, Forest Resources Division. FAO, Rome (unpublished).

^ "Montréal Process Indicators" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 April 2012 . Retrieved 3 March 2024 .

^ "MCPFE indicators" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2010.

^ "ITTO" .

^ "International Model Forest Network" . Imfn.net . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "CIFOR Criteria and Indicators Toolbox Series" . Cifor.cgiar.org . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "International Model Forest Network Criteria and Indicators" . Archived from the original on 23 October 2006.

^ a b "Canadian Standards Association" . Csa-international.org. Archived from the original on 18 November 2011 . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "Sustainable Forestry Initiative Introduction Page 1" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 January 2012 . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "United Nations Forum on Forests" .

www.un.org . Retrieved 2023-03-16 .

^ "FAO PROGRAMMES IN FORESTRY" .

www.fao.org . Retrieved 2023-03-16 .

^ "Joint statement" .

^ a b "What is sustainable forest management?" .

www.pefc.org . Retrieved 2023-01-30 .

^ "Malawi Principles" . Archived from the original on 23 December 2007 . Retrieved 3 March 2024 .

^ "MCPFE" . MCPFE . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "Council" . Strategyguide.org . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "Pan-European Biological and Landscape Diversity Strategy" . Strategyguide.org . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "PEBLD Strategy" (PDF) . Strategyguide.org . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ a b Rastogi J. (Summer 2003).

An introduction to ecoforestry Archived 2007-08-03 at the Wayback Machine .

Ecoforestry, 18(2), 1–4.

^ Hammond H. (Fall 2003).

Ecosystem-based management is high-yield forestry [ permanent dead link ] .

Ecoforestry, 18(3), 6–8.

^ Copland M. (Spring 2003).

[1] Archived 2007-06-28 at the Wayback Machine .

Ecoforestry, 18(1), 3–10.

^ a b Dregson, A. R., & Taylor, D. M. (1997). Ecoforestry. Gabriola Island, BC : New Society Publishers.

^ Helliwell, R.; E. R. Wilson. (2012).

"Continuous cover forestry in Britain: challenges and opportunities" . Quarterly Journal of Forestry 106(3): 214-224 . Retrieved 24 October 2015 .

^ Friedman, Zev.

Digging In.

New Life Journal.

1 May 2009.

^ Stamets, Paul (2005).

Mycelium running: how mushrooms can help save the world .

Ten Speed Press . p.

65 .

ISBN 1-58008-579-2 .

mycoforestry.

^ Thomas, Paul W.; Jump, Alistair S. (2023-03-21).

"Edible fungi crops through mycoforestry, potential for carbon negative food production and mitigation of food and forestry conflicts" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

120 (12): e2220079120.

Bibcode : 2023PNAS..12020079T .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.2220079120 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 10041105 .

PMID 36913576 .

^ Dahlgren, R. A.; Driscoll, C. T.

The effects of whole-tree clear-cutting on soil processes at the Hubbard Brook Experimental Forest, New Hampshire, USA.

Plant and Soil.

Volume 158, Number 2 / January 1994.

^ Yang, Yusheng; Wang, Lixin; Yang, Zhijie; Xu, Chao; Xie, Jingsheng; Chen, Guangshui; Lin, Chengfang; Guo, Jianfen; Liu, Xiaofei; Xiong, Decheng; Lin, Weisheng (2018).

"Large Ecosystem Service Benefits of Assisted Natural Regeneration" .

Journal of Geophysical Research: Biogeosciences .

123 (2): 676– 687.

doi : 10.1002/2017JG004267 .

hdl : 1805/17196 .

ISSN 2169-8961 .

S2CID 59360292 .

^ "Chapter 5: Assisted Natural Regeneration" (PDF) .

^ "3. Assisted Natural Regeneration*".

Guidelines for Site Selection and Tree Planting in Cambodia (PDF) . Forestry Administration/Cambodia Tree Seed Project/DANIDA. 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-01-06 . Retrieved 2009-06-03 .

Source: Kathleen et al, 1999.

^ Pereira, Rodrigo; Zweede, Johan; Asner, Gregory P.; Keller, Michael (2001). "Forest canopy damage and recovery in reduced-impact and conventional selective logging in eastern Para, Brazil".

Forest Ecology and Management .

168 ( 1– 3): 77– 89.

doi : 10.1016/s0378-1127(01)00732-0 .

ISSN 0378-1127 .

S2CID 85014787 .

^ Macpherson, Alexander J.; Schulze, Mark D.; Carter, Douglas R.; Vidal, Edson (November 2010). "A Model for comparing reduced impact logging with conventional logging for an Eastern Amazonian Forest".

Forest Ecology and Management .

260 (11): 2010.

Bibcode : 2010ForEM.260.2002M .

doi : 10.1016/j.foreco.2010.08.050 .

ISSN 0378-1127 .

^ Mazzei, Lucas; Sist, Plinio; Ruschel, Ademir; Putz, Francis E.; Marco, Phidias; Pena, Wagner; Ferreira, Josué Evandro Ribeiro (2010). "Above-ground biomass dynamics after reduced-impact logging in the Eastern Amazon".

Forest Ecology and Management .

259 (3): 367– 373.

Bibcode : 2010ForEM.259..367M .

doi : 10.1016/j.foreco.2009.10.031 .

ISSN 0378-1127 .

^ Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations ( FAO ) (2014).

"The State of the World's Forest Genetic Resources" (PDF) .

Commission on Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture .

^ Koskela, J., Buck, A. and Teissier du Cros, E. (eds) (2007).

"Climate change and forest genetic diversity: Implications for sustainable forest management in Europe" (PDF) .

European Forest Genetic Resources Programme .

Bioversity International , Rome, Italy.

{{ cite journal }} : |last1= has generic name ( help ) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ de Vries, S.M.G., Alan, M., Bozzano, M., Burianek, V., Collin, E., Cottrell, J., Ivankovic, M., Kelleher, C.T., Koskela, J., Rotach, P., Vietto, L. and Yrjänä, L (2015).

"Pan-European strategy for genetic conservation of forest trees and establishment of a core network of dynamic conservation units" (PDF) .

European Forest Genetic Resources Programme, Bioversity International . Rome, Italy.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Konnert, M., Fady, B., Gömöry, D., A'Hara, S., Wolter, F., Ducci, F., Koskela, J., Bozzano, M., Maaten, T. and Kowalczyk, J. (2015).

"Use and transfer of forest reproductive material in Europe in the context of climate change" (PDF) .

European Forest Genetic Resources Programme, Bioversity International, Rome, Italy.

: xvi and 75 p.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Heidari, Hadi; Arabi, Mazdak; Warziniack, Travis (August 2021).

"Effects of Climate Change on Natural-Caused Fire Activity in Western U.S. National Forests" .

Atmosphere .

12 (8): 981.

Bibcode : 2021Atmos..12..981H .

doi : 10.3390/atmos12080981 .

^ DellaSalla, Dominick A.; Hanson, Chad T. (2015).

The Ecological Importance of Mixed-Severity Fires .

Elsevier .

ISBN 978-0-12-802749-3 .

^ Hutto, Richard L. (1 December 2008).

"The Ecological Importance of Severe Wildfires: Some Like It Hot" .

Ecological Applications .

18 (8): 1827– 1834.

Bibcode : 2008EcoAp..18.1827H .

doi : 10.1890/08-0895.1 .

ISSN 1939-5582 .

PMID 19263880 .

Archived from the original on 9 July 2023 . Retrieved 27 August 2019 .

^ Stephen J. Pyne.

"How Plants Use Fire (And Are Used By It)" . NOVA online.

Archived from the original on 8 August 2009 . Retrieved 30 June 2009 .

^ "Plague" .

www.who.int . Retrieved 2023-08-04 .

^ The State of the World's Forests 2020. In brief – Forests, biodiversity and people . Rome: FAO & UNEP. 2020. p. 9.

doi : 10.4060/ca8985en .

ISBN 978-92-5-132707-4 .

^ SAFnet Dictionary|Definition For [deforestation] Archived 25 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Dictionary of forestry.org (29 July 2008). Retrieved 15 May 2011.

^ Deforestation|Threats|WWF . Worldwildlife.org. Retrieved 13 November 2016.

^ Ritchie, Hannah ; Roser, Max (2021-02-09).

"Forests and Deforestation" .

Our World in Data .

^ "On Water" .

European Investment Bank . Retrieved 2020-10-13 .

^ Teja Tscharntke; Christoph Leuschner; Edzo Veldkamp; Heiko Faust; Edi Guhardja, eds. (2010).

Tropical Rainforests and Agroforests Under Global Change . Springer. pp.

270– 271.

ISBN 978-3-642-00492-6 .

^ Watson, Robert T.; Noble, Ian R.; Bolin, Bert; Ravindranath, N. H.; Verardo, David J.; Dokken, David J. (2000).

Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry (Report). Cambridge University Press.

^ Guy, Jack; Ehlinger, Maija (2 June 2020).

"The world lost a football pitch-sized area of tropical forest every six seconds in 2019" .

CNN . Retrieved 2020-06-02 .

^ Weisse, Mikaela; Goldman, Elizabeth Dow (2020-06-02).

"We Lost a Football Pitch of Primary Rainforest Every 6 Seconds in 2019" .

World Resources Institute . Retrieved 2020-06-04 .

^ "Investment and financial flows to address climate change" (PDF) .

unfccc.int . UNFCCC. 2007. p. 81.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2008-05-10.

^ "Agriculture is the direct driver for worldwide deforestation" .

ScienceDaily . Retrieved 2018-04-29 .

^ "Forest Conversion" .

WWF . Retrieved 22 October 2020 .

^ a b The State of the World's Forests 2020. Forests, biodiversity and people – In brief . Rome: FAO & UNEP. 2020.

doi : 10.4060/ca8985en .

ISBN 978-92-5-132707-4 .

S2CID 241416114 .

^ The State of the World's Forests 2020. In brief – Forests, biodiversity and people . Rome: FAO & UNEP. pp.

9– 10.

ISBN 978-92-5-132707-4 .

^ Sutter, John D. (13 August 2015).

"10 climate change villains" .

CNN . Retrieved 2020-03-20 .

^ Heidari, Hadi; Warziniack, Travis; Brown, Thomas C.; Arabi, Mazdak (February 2021).

"Impacts of Climate Change on Hydroclimatic Conditions of U.S. National Forests and Grasslands" .

Forests .

12 (2): 139.

doi : 10.3390/f12020139 .

^ US EPA, OAR (2022-10-19).

"Climate Change Impacts on Forests" .

www.epa.gov . Retrieved 2023-03-03 .

^ "Main sources of carbon dioxide emissions | CO 2 Human Emissions" .

www.che-project.eu . Retrieved 2020-03-20 .

^ a b Climate Change and Land: Summary for Policymakers (PDF) (Report).

IPCC . August 2019.

^ "How the UK contributes to global deforestation" .

BBC News . 2020-08-26 . Retrieved 2020-08-26 .

^ Feng, Yu; Zeng, Zhenzhong; Searchinger, Timothy D.; Ziegler, Alan D.; Wu, Jie; Wang, Dashan; He, Xinyue; Elsen, Paul R.; Ciais, Philippe; Xu, Rongrong; Guo, Zhilin (2022-02-28).

"Doubling of annual forest carbon loss over the tropics during the early twenty-first century" .

Nature Sustainability .

5 (5): 444– 451.

Bibcode : 2022NatSu...5..444F .

doi : 10.1038/s41893-022-00854-3 .

hdl : 2346/92751 .

ISSN 2398-9629 .

S2CID 247160560 .

^ Greenfield, Patrick (2022-02-28).

"Deforestation emissions far higher than previously thought, study finds" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 2022-03-02 .

^ Heidari, Hadi; Arabi, Mazdak; Warziniack, Travis (August 2021).

"Effects of Climate Change on Natural-Caused Fire Activity in Western U.S. National Forests" .

Atmosphere .

12 (8): 981.

Bibcode : 2021Atmos..12..981H .

doi : 10.3390/atmos12080981 .

^ Seymour, Frances; Gibbs, David (2019-08-08).

"Forests in the IPCC Special Report on Land Use: 7 Things to Know" .

World Resources Institute . Retrieved 2020-03-20 .

^ "U.S. Environmental Protection Agency | US EPA" .

www.epa.gov . Retrieved 2023-04-08 .

^ Bajželj, Bojana; Richards, Keith S. (2014).

"The Positive Feedback Loop between the Impacts of Climate Change and Agricultural Expansion and Relocation" .

Land .

3 (3): 898– 916.

Bibcode : 2014Land....3..898B .

doi : 10.3390/land3030898 .

ISSN 2073-445X .

^ Allen, Craig D.; Macalady, Alison K.; Chenchouni, Haroun; Bachelet, Dominique; McDowell, Nate; Vennetier, Michel; Kitzberger, Thomas; Rigling, Andreas; Breshears, David D.; Hogg, E.H. (Ted); Gonzalez, Patrick; Fensham, Rod; Zhang, Zhen; Castro, Jorge; Demidova, Natalia (February 2010).

"A global overview of drought and heat-induced tree mortality reveals emerging climate change risks for forests" .

Forest Ecology and Management .

259 (4): 660– 684.

Bibcode : 2010ForEM.259..660A .

doi : 10.1016/j.foreco.2009.09.001 .

S2CID 4144174 .

^ "Deforestation and Forest Degradation" .

World Wildlife Fund . Retrieved 2018-04-18 .

^ Seymour, Frances (2021-03-31).

"2021 Must Be a Turning Point for Forests. 2020 Data Shows Us Why" .

World Resources Institute .

^ Draffan, George (1998).

"Taking Back Our Land" (PDF) . United States: www.landgrant.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 July 2011 . Retrieved 28 February 2011 .

^ Poli, Adon (1956). "Ownership and Use of Forest Land in Northwestern California".

Land Economics .

32 (2). University of Wisconsin Press: 144– 151.

Bibcode : 1956LandE..32..144P .

doi : 10.2307/3159757 .

JSTOR 3159757 .

^ Ballaine, Wesley C. (1953). "The Revested Oregon and California Railroad Grand Lands: A Problem in Land Management".

Land Economics .

29 (3). University of Wisconsin Press: 219– 232.

Bibcode : 1953LandE..29..219B .

doi : 10.2307/3144830 .

JSTOR 3144830 .

^ Merivale, William (2013-08-14).

"Budget for a €2,500/ha reforestation cost after clearfelling mature forest" .

FarmIreland.ie . Retrieved 2018-05-12 .

^ Dr. J. Bowyer; K. Fernholz; A. Lindburg; Dr. J. Howe; Dr. S. Bratkovich (2009-05-28).

"The Power of Silviculture: Employing Thinning, Partial Cutting Systems and Other Intermediate Treatments to Increase Productivity, Forest Health and Public Support for Forestry" (PDF) . Dovetail Partners Inc. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-10-29 . Retrieved 2009-06-06 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Administrator.

"SFA Silviculture - 2.3. Stand Dynamics: Stand Structure" .

www.sfasilviculture.com . Retrieved 2025-02-26 .

^ U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Washington, DC (1992).

"Clear cut." Terms of Environment: Glossary, Abbreviations and Acronyms.

p. 6. Document no. EPA-175-B-92-001. Accessed 2011-10-12.

^ Center for Biological Diversity, Tucson, AZ.

"Clearcutting and Climate Change." Archived 2018-06-26 at the Wayback Machine Accessed 2011-10-12.

^ McIntyre, Iain (2020-11-04).

"Environmental Blockading in Australia and Around the World – Timeline 1974–1997" .

The Commons Social Change Library . Retrieved 2023-07-07 .

^ "Global Environmental Governance Project: Forests" . Archived from the original on 2012-11-18 . Retrieved 2012-11-08 .

^ Rodney J. Keenan, & J.P. (Hamish) Kimmins (1993).

"The ecological effects of clear-cutting" Environmental Reviews , 1(2), 121–144. Retrieved September 16, 2020.

^ FAO (2016).

"State of the World's Forests 2016" ^ Kunganavolok (June 25, 1998).

"Taiga! taiga! burning bright." The Economist . Retrieved: 2013-08-06.

^ Khan, Madeline (February 9, 2004).

"Clear cut forests in Malaysia offer lessons for logging worldwide." The Varsity , University of Toronto. Retrieved: 2013-08-06.

^ Burton, P.J.; C. Messier; D.W. Smith; W.L. Adamowicz (2003).

Towards Sustainable Management of the Boreal Forest . National Research Council Canada Research Press. p. 1039.

ISBN 978-0-660-18762-4 . Archived from the original on 2007-12-25 . Retrieved 2009-08-25 .

^ Hogan, C. Michael (2008-09-09).

"Wild Turkey Meleagris gallopavo " . Global Twitcher. Archived from the original on 2017-07-25 . Retrieved 2009-08-25 .

^ Jonathan Watts (24 August 2015).

"Dawn timber-laundering raids cast doubt on 'sustainable' Brazilian wood" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 24 August 2015 .

Most of the laundering was reportedly done through the creation of fake or inflated creditos florestais, a document that defines how much timber a landowner is entitled to extract from his property.

^ "Wood laundering brings illegal Amazon timber to Europe — report | DW | 21.03.2018" .

DW.COM . Deutsche Welle . Retrieved 2021-05-11 .

^ a b "What is certification?" .

pefc.org . Retrieved 2023-01-30 .

^ "An Introduction to Forest Certification | NC State Extension Publications" .

content.ces.ncsu.edu . Retrieved 2023-01-30 .

^ "Members" .

so.org . International Organization for Standardization. 20 October 2022.

^ "2009–2010 Forest Products Annual Market Review Page 121" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 August 2010 . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ Erin Malec (5 October 2011).

"Forest Certification Resource Center" . Metafore.org . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ International standards and private standards . International Organization for Standardization. 2010.

ISBN 978-92-67-10518-5 .

^ "FSC Policy on Conversion" (PDF) .

FSC .

^ "Sorry, We didn't find what you were looking for | UNECE" .

unece.org . Retrieved 3 March 2024 .

^ "PEFC" . PEFC . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "PEFC response to the Greenpeace report, "Destruction: Certified" " .

pefc.org . PEFC. 11 March 2021.

^ "Destruction: Certified" .

greenpeace.org . Greenpeace International. 10 March 2021.

^ "Sustainable Forest Initiative" . Sfiprogram.org . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "American Tree Farm System" . Treefarmsystem.org. 22 November 2011 . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "SFI Inc. Launches New Standard, Leads Forest Certification Forward" (PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-10-18. Retrieved 2013-02-19 ^ "Forest Stewardship Council (US)" . Fscus.org . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ "Forest Stewardship Council (Canada)" . Fsccanada.org . Retrieved 30 November 2011 .

^ Auer, M. (2012). 'Group forest certification for smallholders in Vietnam: An early test and future prospects'.

Human ecology 40(1): 5–14.

^ Agrawal, A., Chhatre, A, and Hardin, R. (2008). 'Changing Governance of the World's Forest'.

Science 320: 1460–1462 ^ Lutz, E, and Caldecott, J. (1996). Decentralization and biodiversity: a world bank symposium. Washington: The World Bank.

^ Hague, M. (1999). 'The Fate of sustainable development under neo-liberal regime in developing countries', International political review 20(2): 197–218.

^ Margulis, S.

[ date missing ] . 'Decentralized environmental management', Annual World Bank Report.

^ 2012 STUDY ON FOREST FINANCING (PDF) . Advisory Group on Finance Collaborative Partnership on Forests. June 2012.

^ a b Matta, Rao (2015).

Towards effective national forest funds, FAO Forestry Paper 174 (PDF) . Rome, Italy: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

ISBN 978-92-5-108706-0 .

^ a b Singh, P (August 2008). "Exploring biodiversity and climate change benefits of community-based forest management".

Global Environmental Change .

18 (3): 468– 478.

Bibcode : 2008GEC....18..468S .

doi : 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2008.04.006 .

^ Mahanty, Sango; Gronow, Jane; Nurse, Mike; Malla, Yam (2009-06-24).

"Reducing Poverty through Community Based Forest Management in Asia" .

Journal of Forest and Livelihood .

5 (1): 78– 89.

doi : 10.3126/jfl.v5i1.1983 .

hdl : 10535/8464 .

ISSN 1684-0186 .

^ Wily, Liz Alden (2004).

"Can We Really Own the Forest? A Critical Examination of Tenure Development in Community Forestry in Africa" .

Tenth Biennial Conference, International Association for the Study of Common Property .

^ Hughes, David McDermott (2000).

"Cadastral Politics: The Making of Community Forestry in Mozambique and Zimbabwe" .

Biennial Conference of the International Association for the Study of Common Property .

^ Pandit, Ram; Bevilacqua, Eddie (20 September 2010). "Social Heterogeneity and Community Forestry Processes: Reflections from Forest Users of Dhading District, Nepal".

Small-scale Forestry .

10 (1): 97– 113.

doi : 10.1007/s11842-010-9136-9 .

S2CID 20932172 .

^ a b Baynes, Jack; Herbohn, John; Smith, Carl; Fisher, Robert; Bray, David (2015-11-01).

"Key factors which influence the success of community forestry in developing countries" .

Global Environmental Change .

35 : 226– 238.

Bibcode : 2015GEC....35..226B .

doi : 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2015.09.011 .

ISSN 0959-3780 .

^ Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, FAO. 1978. Forestry for local community development. Forestry Paper 7. Rome.

^ Roberts, E.H.; Gautam, M.K.

"Community Forestry Lessons for Australia: A review of international case studies" (PDF) .

School of Resources, Environment & Society; The Australian National University . Archived from the original (PDF) on March 20, 2012 . Retrieved September 24, 2011 .

^ "Community Forestry in the Amazon: the unsolved challenge of forests and the poor" .

Overseas Development Institute . February 2008. Archived from the original on 2010-06-14 . Retrieved 2010-07-21 .

^ Klooster, Daniel James (2002).

"Toward Adaptive Community Forest Management: Integrating Local Forest Knowledge with Scientific Forestry*" .

Economic Geography .

78 (1): 43– 70.

doi : 10.1111/j.1944-8287.2002.tb00175.x .

ISSN 0013-0095 .

^ Don, Gilmour (2016).

FAO Forestry Paper 176: Forty years of community-based forestry: A review of its extent and effectiveness (PDF) . FAO.

ISBN 978-92-5-109095-4 . Retrieved 5 April 2016 .

^ "Forestry regulation" .

www.dpi.nsw.gov.au . 2018 . Retrieved 2021-12-09 .

^ "What is Forestry Law? - Becoming a Forestry Lawyer" . Retrieved 2021-12-09 .

^ CIFOR (2006).

Justice in the forest: rural livelihoods and forest law enforcement . Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR).

doi : 10.17528/cifor/001939 .

^ Schmithüsen, Franz Josef (2007).

Multifunctional forestry practices as a land use strategy to meet increasing private and public demands in modern societies . ETH, Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich, Department of Environmental Sciences, Institute for Human-Environmental Sciences.

OCLC 730303720 .

^ KAIMOWITZ, D. (2003). Forest law enforcement and rural livelihoods. The International Forestry Review, 5(3), 199–210.

http://www.jstor.org/stable/43740118 ^ Enters, Thomas; B. Durst, Patrick; B. Applegate, Grahame; C.S. Kho, Peter; Man, Gary (2001). "29. Policies, strategies and technologies for forest resource protection - William B. Magrath* and Richard Grandalski".

Applying Reduced Impact Logging to Advance Sustainable Forest Management . Kuching, Malaysia: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.

^ "Principles of sustainable tropical forest management where wood production is the primary objective".

Guidelines for the management of tropical forests 1. The production of wood (FAO forestry paper 135) . Rome, Italy: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 1998.

^ "Why Is There No International Forestry Law?: An Examination of International Forestry Regulation, both Public and Private [eScholarship]" .

Escholarship.org .

doi : 10.5070/L5191019219 . Retrieved 2016-11-30 .

^ Schmitt, C.; Burgess, N. (2009). "Global analysis of the protection status of the world's forests".

Biological Conservation .

142 (10): 2122– 2130.

Bibcode : 2009BCons.142.2122S .

doi : 10.1016/j.biocon.2009.04.012 .

^ Eissing, Stefanie; Amend, Thora (2008).

La protección de la naturaleza es divertida: manejo de áreas protegidas y comunicación ambiental : ideas procedentes de Panamá . Eschborn: GTZ.

ISBN 978-3-925064-52-4 .

^ Shapcott, Alison; Liu, Yining; Howard, Marion; Forster, Paul I.; Kress, W. John; Erickson, David L.; Faith, Daniel P.; Shimizu, Yoko; McDonald, William J. F. (2017). "Comparing Floristic Diversity and Conservation Priorities across South East Queensland Regional Rain Forest Ecosystems Using Phylodiversity Indexes".

International Journal of Plant Sciences .

178 (3). University of Chicago Press: 211– 229.

doi : 10.1086/690022 .

ISSN 1058-5893 .

S2CID 89852455 .

^ a b Moomaw, William R.; Masino, Susan A.; Faison, Edward K. (2019).

"Intact Forests in the United States: Proforestation Mitigates Climate Change and Serves the Greatest Good" .

Frontiers in Forests and Global Change .

2 : 27.

Bibcode : 2019FrFGC...2...27M .

doi : 10.3389/ffgc.2019.00027 .

^ a b Di Sacco, Alice; Hardwick, Kate A.; Blakesley, David; Brancalion, Pedro H. S.; Breman, Elinor; Cecilio Rebola, Loic; Chomba, Susan; Dixon, Kingsley; Elliott, Stephen; Ruyonga, Godfrey; Shaw, Kirsty; Smith, Paul; Smith, Rhian J.; Antonelli, Alexandre (25 January 2021).

"Ten golden rules for reforestation to optimize carbon sequestration, biodiversity recovery and livelihood benefits" .

Global Change Biology .

27 (7): 1328– 1348.

Bibcode : 2021GCBio..27.1328D .

doi : 10.1111/gcb.15498 .

hdl : 20.500.11937/88524 .

ISSN 1354-1013 .

PMID 33494123 .

S2CID 225324365 .

^ Mackey, Brendan; Kormos, Cyril F.; Keith, Heather; Moomaw, William R.; Houghton, Richard A.; Mittermeier, Russell A.; Hole, David; Hugh, Sonia (1 May 2020).

"Understanding the importance of primary tropical forest protection as a mitigation strategy" .

Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change .

25 (5): 763– 787.

Bibcode : 2020MASGC..25..763M .

doi : 10.1007/s11027-019-09891-4 .

hdl : 10072/394944 .

ISSN 1573-1596 .

S2CID 212681305 .

^ IPCC (2022) Summary for policy makers in Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA ^ "Protecting 50% of our Lands and Oceans" .

One Earth . 23 May 2024.

^ "The natural world can help save us from climate catastrophe | George Monbiot" .

The Guardian . 3 April 2019.

^ Wilmers, Christopher C.; Schmitz, Oswald J. (October 19, 2016).

"Effects of gray wolf-induced trophic cascades on ecosystem carbon cycling" .

Ecosphere .

7 (10).

Bibcode : 2016Ecosp...7E1501W .

doi : 10.1002/ecs2.1501 .

^ Fen Montaigne, Why Keeping Mature Forests Intact Is Key to the Climate Fight , Yale Environment 360 , 15 October 2019.

^ Lewis, Simon; Wheeler, Charlotte; Mitchard, Edward; Koch, Alexander (4 April 2019).

"Restoring natural forests is the best way to remove atmospheric carbon" .

Nature .

568 (7750): 25– 28.

Bibcode : 2019Natur.568...25L .

doi : 10.1038/d41586-019-01026-8 .

PMID 30940972 .

S2CID 91190309 .

^ Ripple, William; Wolf, Christopher; Newsome, Thomas; Barnard, Phoebe; Moomaw, William (January 2020).

"World Scientists' Warning of a Climate Emergency" .

BioScience .

70 (1): 8– 12.

doi : 10.1093/biosci/biz088 .

hdl : 2445/151800 . Retrieved 12 November 2020 .

^ a b c Jenkins, Michael; Schaap, Brian (April 2018).

Background Analytical Study 1: Forest Ecosystem Services (PDF) . United Nations Forum on Forests . Retrieved 21 April 2021 .

^ Giardina, Francesco; et, al (28 May 2018).

"Tall Amazonian forests are less sensitive to precipitation variability" .

Nature Geoscience .

11 (6): 405– 409.

Bibcode : 2018NatGe..11..405G .

doi : 10.1038/s41561-018-0133-5 .

S2CID 47004415 . Retrieved 21 April 2021 .

^ Binkley, Daniel; Sisk, Tom; Chambers, Carol; Springer, Judy; Block, William (2007).

"The Role of Old-growth Forests in Frequent-fire Landscapes" (PDF) .

Ecology and Society .

12 (2): 18.

doi : 10.5751/ES-02170-120218 .

^ compare Joachim Radkau Wood: A History, 2011 ^ a b The Nature of Mediterranean Europe: An Ecological History, by Alfred Thomas Grove , Oliver Rackham , Yale University Press, 2003, review at Yale university press Archived 2014-10-06 at the Wayback Machine Nature of Mediterranean Europe: An Ecological History (review) Brian M. Fagan , Journal of Interdisciplinary History, Volume 32, Number 3, Winter 2002, pp. 454-455 | Archived 2014-10-06 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c T. Mirov, Nicholas; Hasbrouck, Jean (1976).

"6" .

The story of pines . Bloomington and London: Indiana University Press. p.

111 .

ISBN 978-0-253-35462-4 .

^ H. V. Livermore (2004).

Portugal: A Traveller's History . Boydell Press. p. 15.

ISBN 978-1-84383-063-4 .

Archived from the original on 2017-12-11.

^ "PGF - Mata Nacional de Leiria — ICNF" .

www.icnf.pt . Archived from the original on 2019-12-10 . Retrieved 2017-10-17 .

^ Buttinger, Sabine (2013). "Idee der Nachhaltigkeit" [The Idea of Sustainability].

Damals (in German).

45 (4): 8.

^ "Forestry in Yashino" . City of Nara, Nara . Archived from the original on 2011-06-28 . Retrieved 2010-10-12 .

^ "Abbildungen der verschiedenen Gattungen von Fahrzeugen, wie man sie auf dem Rheine sieht / von H. Herman" .

www.dilibri.de . October 3, 1820. Archived from the original on November 29, 2014.

^ Dangel, Ulrich (2016-12-05).

Turning Point in Timber Construction: A New Economy . Birkhäuser.

ISBN 978-3-0356-0863-2 .

^ Radkau, Joachim. Nature and Power. A Global History of the Environment. Cambridge University Press. 2008.

^ Nature and Power, A Global History of the Environment, by Joachim Radkau, 2008, p. 72 ^ The end of the commons as a watershed' The Age of Ecology , Joachim Radkau, John Wiley & Sons, 03.04.2014, [ clarification needed ] p. 15 ff ^ Braudel, Fernand (1979).

The Wheels of Commerce: Civilization and Capitalism: 15th-18th Century (Volume II) . University of California Press. p. 240.

ISBN 978-0-520-08115-4 .

^ Kohler, Yann & Tissot, Wilfried. (2013). Integration of Nature Protection in Forest Policy in France - INTEGRATE Country Report.

^ Sundberg, B.; Silversides, C. R. (1988-04-30).

Operational Efficiency in Forestry: Vol. 1: Analysis . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 978-90-247-3683-6 .

^ Christian Pfister (Hrsg.), Das 1950er Syndrom: Der Weg in die Konsumgesellschaft, Bern 1995 ^ Silversides, C. R. (1984-08-01).

"Mechanized Forestry, World War II to the Present" .

The Forestry Chronicle .

60 (4): 231– 235.

doi : 10.5558/tfc60231-4 .

ISSN 0015-7546 .

^ Oosthoek, K. Jan; Hölzl, Richard (2018-02-19).

Managing Northern Europe's Forests: Histories from the Age of Improvement to the Age of Ecology . Berghahn Books.

ISBN 978-1-78533-601-0 .

^ Hölzl, Richard (2010-12-01). "Historicizing Sustainability: German Scientific Forestry in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries".

Science as Culture .

19 (4): 431– 460.

doi : 10.1080/09505431.2010.519866 .

ISSN 0950-5431 .

S2CID 143441568 .

^ "Department of environmental conservation" . New York State Department.

Archived from the original on 2015-02-21 . Retrieved 2014-11-29 .

^ Casanova, Vanessa; Hamilton, James (2019-04-03). "Non-Timber Forest Products in the Southeastern United States: Implications for Worker Safety and Health".

Journal of Agromedicine .

24 (2): 121– 124.

doi : 10.1080/1059924X.2019.1578141 .

ISSN 1059-924X .

PMID 30712502 .

S2CID 73422895 .

^ a b World Food and Agriculture – Statistical Yearbook 2023 . FAO. 2023-11-29.

doi : 10.4060/cc8166en .

ISBN 978-92-5-138262-2 .

^ a b c d e f Petru-Ioan Becheru (Aug 2012).

"Revista pădurilor online" .

Rev. pădur.

(in Romanian).

127 (4): 46– 53.

ISSN 1583-7890 . 16819 . Retrieved 2012-10-21 .

[ permanent dead link ] (webpage has a translation button) ^ "Swiss Forestry Society" .

www.szf-jfs.org .

^ "Hungarian Forestry Society" .

www.oee.hu .

^ "indianforester.org" . indianforester.org. Archived from the original on 2013-05-17 . Retrieved 2014-03-15 .

^ Šumarski list (Forestry Review), with full digital archive since 1877 ^ "Revista Montes, with 12.944 free downloadable digital files from 1868" . Revistamontes.net. Archived from the original on 2013-11-27 . Retrieved 2014-03-15 .

^ Victor Giurgiu (Nov 2011).

"Revista pădurilor (Journal of forests) 125 years of existence" .

Rev. pădur.

126 (6): 3– 7.

ISSN 1583-7890 . Archived from the original on 2016-05-17 . Retrieved 2012-04-06 .

(webpage has a translation button) ^ "Časopis" . SCIndeks. Archived from the original on 2013-12-12 . Retrieved 2014-03-15 .

^ "Udruženje šumarskih inženjera i tehničara Srbije - Istorijat" . Srpskosumarskoudruzenje.org.rs. Archived from the original on 2013-12-12 . Retrieved 2014-03-15 .

^ Shindler, Bruce; Lori A. Cramer (January 1999).

"Shifting Public Values for Forest Management: Making Sense of Wicked Problems" .

Western Journal of Applied Forestry .

14 (1): 28– 34.

doi : 10.1093/wjaf/14.1.28 .

ISSN 0885-6095 . Retrieved 2008-08-25 .

^ "What is REDD+?" .

The Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF) . Forest Carbon Partnership Facility . Retrieved 4 March 2020 .

^ "REDD+ and Biodiversity Benefits" .

Convention on Biological Diversity . United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity. 15 June 2012 . Retrieved 4 March 2020 .

^ Marchant, Natalie (21 May 2021).

"Can this billion-dollar initiative save the world's tropical forests?" .

World Economic Forum . Retrieved 28 May 2021 .

^ Schröder, André (15 September 2022).

"European bill passes to ban imports of deforestation-linked commodities" .

Mongabay . Retrieved 18 September 2022 .

^ "Council adopts new rules to cut deforestation worldwide" .

European Counsil . European Union . Retrieved 22 May 2023 .

^ Téllez Chávez, Luciana (16 May 2023).

"EU Approves Law for 'Deforestation-Free' Trade" .

Human Rights Watch . Retrieved 22 May 2023 .

^ Aldhous, J. (1997).

"British forestry: 70 years of achievement" .

Forestry .

70 (4): 283– 292.

doi : 10.1093/forestry/70.4.283 .

^ ostrnrcan-dostrncan.canada.ca https://ostrnrcan-dostrncan.canada.ca/handle/1845/250554 . Retrieved 2024-04-10 .

{{ cite web }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) ^ Canada, Natural Resources (2022-06-03).

"Sustainable forest management in Canada" .

natural-resources.canada.ca . Retrieved 2024-04-12 .

^ a b "Sustainable forest management" .

Ontario.ca . Government of Ontario . Retrieved 3 March 2020 .

^ a b Canada, Natural Resources (2015-05-25).

"Canada's forest laws" .

www.nrcan.gc.ca . Retrieved 2022-03-31 .

^ Rosane, Olivia (10 January 2020).

"World's Fifth-Largest Tree Now Safe From Loggers in an 'Inspiring Outpouring of Generosity' " . Ecowatch . Retrieved 12 January 2020 .

^ "Stop Thinning Forests" .

Stop Thinning Forests . Archived from the original on 12 January 2020 . Retrieved 12 January 2020 .

^ Pfefferle, Mark.

"Forest Conservation Program" .

Montgomery Planning .

^ Nowak, David J.; Walton, Jeffrey T. (2005).

"Projected Urban Growth (2000 - 2050) and Its Estimated Impact on the US Forest Resource" .

Journal of Forestry : 383– 389.

^ Golladay, S.W.; Martin, K.L.; Vose, J.M.; Wear, D.N.; Covich, A.P.; Hobbs, R.J.; Klepzig, K.D.; Likens, G.E.; Naiman, R.J.; Shearer, A.W. (January 2016).

"Achievable future conditions as a framework for guiding forest conservation and management" .

Forest Ecology and Management .

360 : 80– 96.

doi : 10.1016/j.foreco.2015.10.009 .

ISSN 0378-1127 .

^ Repetto, Robert (1988-09-30), "Overview" , Public Policies and the Misuse of Forest Resources , Cambridge University Press, pp.

1– 42, doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511601125.002 , ISBN 978-0-521-33574-4 , retrieved 2023-10-19 ^ Cubbage, Frederick W.; Newman, David H. (December 2006).

"Forest policy reformed: A United States perspective" .

Forest Policy and Economics .

9 (3): 261– 273.

doi : 10.1016/j.forpol.2005.07.008 .

ISSN 1389-9341 .

^ Vasilieva, Tatiana.

"Life in the Siberian haze" .

Greenpeace International . Retrieved 3 September 2019 .

^ Hanafiah, Junaidi (2 September 2019).

"Indonesian court cancels dam project in last stronghold of tigers, rhinos" . Mongabay . Retrieved 9 September 2019 .

^ "Deforestation In Indonesia Has Hit A Record Low" .

World Economic Forum . Retrieved 16 July 2021 .

^ "UNESCO Removes Salonga National Park From World Heritage 'Danger' List" . VOI. 8 August 2021. Archived from the original on 15 August 2021 . Retrieved 15 August 2021 .

^ "EMC Forest Management and Tree Growing Policy" (PDF) .

UNDP . Retrieved 3 March 2024 .

Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 ( license statement/permission ). Text taken from Global Forest Resources Assessment 2020 Key findings​ , FAO, FAO.

This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 IGO ( license statement/permission ). Text taken from The State of the World’s Forests 2020. Forests, biodiversity and people – In brief​ , FAO & UNEP, FAO & UNEP.

External links [ edit ] Scholia has a profile for forest management (Q372561) .

Why does this forest look like a fingerprint? We set out to solve why a forest in the middle of Uruguay looked like that — and wound up discovering something much bigger.

Vox – explores issues surrounding commercial monoculture forest management and its impact upon the economy, previously existing habitats, wildlife, and people.

California fires are so severe some forests might vanish forever LA Times – a serious forest management issue, in which industrial forest management practices are increasing high-severity fire risk.

The checkerboard effect OSU Press – explores how the effects of forest management decisions can last for centuries, and the value of forest history in understanding current forest management problems.

Proforestation by Project Regeneration v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline Authority control databases National Japan Czech Republic 2 Latvia Other NARA Portals : Trees Environment Ecology Earth sciences Biology Media related to Sustainable forest management at Wikimedia Commons NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐jt22h
Cached time: 20250817233428
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.818 seconds
Real time usage: 4.174 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 19833/1000000
Revision size: 114572/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 779888/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12968/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 56/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1048140/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.931/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18268084/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3694.671      1 -total
 46.63% 1722.910      1 Template:Reflist
 40.13% 1482.785     29 Template:Excerpt
 17.02%  628.653    120 Template:Cite_web
 15.55%  574.491     82 Template:Cite_journal
  5.76%  212.947     43 Template:Cite_book
  2.73%  100.821     15 Template:Fix
  2.60%   96.031      1 Template:Forestry
  2.60%   95.991     11 Template:Citation_needed
  2.50%   92.366      1 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:7484714:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817233428 and revision id 1303332882. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Forest_management&oldid=1303332882#Methods_for_creating_or_recreating_forests " Categories : Forest management Ecological processes Habitat management equipment and methods Sustainable forest management Forest certification Forest governance Forest conservation Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 errors: generic name CS1 errors: missing periodical CS1 German-language sources (de) Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2017 CS1 Romanian-language sources (ro) Articles with dead external links from December 2017 CS1 errors: missing title CS1 errors: bare URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2016 Articles with excerpts Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2018 Free-content attribution Free content from FAO Free content from FAO & UNEP Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 10:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Forest management 21 languages Add topic

