Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Topics Toggle Topics subsection 2.1 Jury selection or voir dire 2.2 Opening statement 2.3 Direct examination 2.4 Cross examination 2.5 Closing argument 2.6 Persuasion 2.7 Mock trial 2.8 Basic trial strategy 2.9 Advanced trial strategy 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Trial advocacy Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Improving effectiveness of advocates The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( March 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Trial advocacy is the branch of knowledge concerned with making attorneys and other advocates more effective in trial proceedings. Trial advocacy is an essential trade skill for litigators and is taught in law schools and continuing legal education programs. It may also be taught in primary, secondary, and undergraduate schools, usually as a mock trial elective.

[ 1 ] The skills of trial advocacy can be broken into two categories: skills that accomplish individual tasks ( tactical skills ) such as selecting jurors, delivering opening statements and closing arguments, and examining witnesses, and those skills that integrate the individual actions to achieve greater effects and to drive unfolding events toward the advocate's desired outcome ( strategy ) .

[ 2 ] Most law school trial advocacy courses focus on tactical skills, though some integrate basic strategic planning methods. Some academics have expressed disfavor with advanced strategic techniques because of the imbalance they create, especially against attorneys who are unaware of them. Proponents of advanced strategic techniques argue that these methods are the only effective means to counter the already-existing imbalances in the system, as between indigent defendants and the state, and between working-class plaintiffs and well-resourced, wealthy corporations .

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Like most legal skills, trial advocacy evolved through the apprenticeship and practice of attorneys. Even after 1900 (when the education of attorneys shifted to law schools , [ 4 ] ) most law schools offered little education in advocacy.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In 1969, in response to criticism within the judicial system that law schools were not properly preparing attorneys for trial practice, a group of lawyers and law professors combined to form the National Institute for Trial Advocacy (NITA).

[ 7 ] Since then, many law schools have added or improved their instruction in trial advocacy, and numerous Continuing Legal Education organizations have offered classes surveying the subject area, and on specific topics within the field. Nearly one dozen law schools in the United States offer Master of Law (LL.M.) degrees in trial advocacy.

[ 8 ] Trial advocacy originally focused on individual actions within the trial, proposing improved juror selection, argument delivery, and direct and cross-examination methods. However, in the 1970s, NITA advanced the concepts of theme and theory as methods of integrating the various components into a cohesive whole.

[ 9 ] More recently, litigation strategy has blossomed with the importation of concepts from economic game theory , complexity theory , Gestalt psychology , and the application of maneuver warfare as a means not only of integrating the various actions within the trial into a comprehensive case but also as a means of gaining a decisive advantage over opposing counsel.

[ 10 ] Topics [ edit ] The topics commonly encompassed within Trial Advocacy are: Jury selection or voir dire [ edit ] Main articles: Jury selection and Voir dire The selection of jurors that will be receptive to the argument the attorney intends to make.

[ 11 ] Opening statement [ edit ] Main article: Opening statement Presenting a non-argumentative overview of what the jury will see, often in the context of the attorney's theme, theory, and story.

[ 12 ] Direct examination [ edit ] Main article: Direct examination Eliciting evidence from one's witnesses through non- leading questions . Because studies have shown that people best remember the first and the most recent (last) information heard (methods referred to as primacy and recency ), the preferred method is to start with an engaging and favorable topic, move through more mundane matters, and to finish on a strong, favorable point.

[ 13 ] Cross examination [ edit ] Main article: Cross examination Working with witnesses offered by the opposing party who may be hostile or uncooperative.

[ 14 ] Closing argument [ edit ] Main article: Closing argument Using argument to create within the jurors a perception of what they have seen and heard that influences them to find in favor of the attorney's client.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Persuasion [ edit ] Main article: Persuasion The general principles that enable an advocate to make the jurors more receptive to his or her claims.

[ 17 ] Mock trial [ edit ] Main article: Mock trial In mock trials, students take responsibility for the prosecution / plaintiff or defense case in a trial presented using fabricated evidence, and role-players as witnesses and faculty or volunteers as judge or jury. It evaluates the participants' skills in argument, evidence handling, and examination of witnesses but omits jury selection and strategic matters. Mock trial differs from moot court in that moot court practices appellate argument and so involves no handling of witnesses or evidence, but instead is an exercise in legal research and oral advocacy.

[ 18 ] Basic trial strategy [ edit ] Main article: Litigation strategy The means of organizing a case into a clear and complete presentation.

Case Diagrams: The attorney charts the elements they intend to prove (or attack) and the evidence supporting each. These ensures the case is comprehensively addressed.

[ 19 ] Theme and Theory: The theme is a sound bite that captures the emotional appeal of the case, and the theory is an explanation of events. These serve as strategic focal points, allowing individual actions (opening, examination of each witness, etc.) to be united with a common focus and in a way that clarifies and reinforces the perception of the case the attorney wants the jury or judge to adopt.

[ 20 ] Advanced trial strategy [ edit ] Main article: Litigation strategy The means of organizing a case to maximize the combined impact of every element and to overwhelm or outmaneuver the opposing counsel while presenting a clear, decisive argument to the jury (or judge, in the case of bench trials).

[ 21 ] Advanced strategic skills, based upon psychology and military maneuver philosophy , are generally learned outside the classroom, as few law schools teach them. In fact, academics have criticized advanced strategic techniques for tipping verdicts through means unrelated to the merits of the case . For example, these techniques may cause an unfamiliar advocate to take actions that unwittingly undermine his client's interests. There is particular concern regarding the use of advanced strategic techniques by prosecutors , who already wield the substantial power of the state against often poorly resourced defendants.

The counterargument is that strategy can correct already-existing imbalances in the justice system, such as when inexperienced advocates must face highly experienced ones, when small firms oppose large ones, and when poor clients must litigate their rights against wealthy ones. Under the current system, without a well-developed strategy, a small firm with an impoverished client stands almost no chance of success against a large firm with more significant resources, regardless of the case's merits.

Maneuver strategy : An alternative to arguing the evidence or the law, maneuver strategies pursue solutions such as redirecting the focus of the trial, reshaping the way events are perceived, or disrupting or surprising the opposing counsel, rendering him ineffective at responding to unfolding events.

[ 22 ] While these methods are practiced widely, even by advocates not educated in strategy, some object to this as improper even when practiced ethically, as it subordinates the importance of the evidence and the law in determining a trial's outcome. One proponent of maneuver strategy, however, has noted that regardless of whether the attorney intends to leverage the tools of maneuver strategy, the attorney must understand the methods, or they will be ill-equipped to identify and counter them.

[ 23 ] Gestalt psychology : This branch of psychology focuses on how things are perceived as a whole instead of how individual components appear. It aids in ensuring the jury (or judge in bench trials) perceives events as the attorney desires. It also offers a way of shaping how witnesses and opposing counsel will perceive the problems an attorney raises for them during the trial. When coupled with game theory, shaping perception allows an attorney to influence or shape the hostile witness or counsel's actions.

[ 24 ] Game theory : Game theory offers models of how people make decisions. In trial practice, game theory is useful in predicting witnesses' likely actions when presented with a decision. Because decisions are framed according to how they perceive a situation, when game theory is coupled with Gestalt psychology, attorneys can present problems to witnesses or opposing counsel to increase the likelihood of them making decisions about their responses that improve the attorney's strategic position.

[ 25 ] Lines of effort: In the way a case diagram matches evidence to elements, the line of effort matches actions to specific effects the attorney intends to the various results that achieve their goal.

[ 26 ] References [ edit ] ^ Adamson, John E.

Law for Business and Personal Use p. 104 ^ Dreier, A.S., Strategy, Planning & Litigating to Win , pp. 1–2 ^ Selby-Dreier Debate on Advocacy Teaching ^ Harno, Albert James (2004), Legal Education in the United States p. 95 ^ Kutcher, Edward A.; Lee, Robert B. (1962) The Deterioration of Trial Advocacy-Are the Laws Schools Responsible?

^ American Bar Association (1967) The Law School Curriculum and Advocacy Training ^ NITA website ^ Owens, Eric, Princeton Review (2013) The Best 168 Law Schools ^ Lubet, Steven (2004) Modern Trial Advocacy ^ Dreier, A.S. (2012) Strategy, Planning & Litigating to Win ^ see e.g. Lubet, p. 529 et. Seq.

^ see e.g. Lubet, p. 8 et. Seq.

^ see e.g. Lubet, p. 45 et. Seq.

^ see e.g. Lubet, p. 83 et. Seq.

^ see e.g. Lubet, p. 467 et. Seq.

^ Dreier, A.S. (2012) Strategy, Planning & Litigating to Win p. 79 ^ See e.g. Lubet, p. 16, 32 et. Seq.

^ Korzen, John (2010) Make Your Argument: Succeeding in Moot Court and Mock Trial ^ see, e.g. Indiana Law School web site [1] , accessed March 8, 2013 ^ see e.g. Lubet, p. 411 et. Seq.

^ Dreier, A.S. (2012) Strategy, Planning & Litigating to Win pp. 1–7 ^ Dreier p. 20 ^ Dreier, pp. 86–8 ^ Dreier pp. 37–40, 83–4 ^ Dreier pp. 62–8 ^ Dreier pp. 47–65 Bibliography [ edit ] Dreier, A.S.

Strategy, Planning & Litigating to Win . Boston MA: Conatus, 2012.

ISBN 9780615676951 Korzen, John Make Your Argument: Succeeding in Moot Court and Mock Trial . New York NY: Kaplan 2010.

ISBN 9781607144953 Lubet, Steven Modern Trial Advocacy .  South Bend IN. NITA, 2004.

ISBN 1556818866 v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐8vwcw
Cached time: 20250812054520
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.270 seconds
Real time usage: 0.346 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 990/1000000
Revision size: 11516/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 36622/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 537/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 30267/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.161/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 3448622/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  264.620      1 -total
 30.79%   81.474      1 Template:Law
 30.17%   79.827      1 Template:Navbox
 19.85%   52.531      1 Template:Short_description
 17.69%   46.799      3 Template:ISBN
 13.47%   35.644      1 Template:Globalize
 12.18%   32.232      1 Template:Ambox
 10.74%   28.414      2 Template:Pagetype
  9.69%   25.638      9 Template:Main
  5.89%   15.599      3 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:7801734:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812054520 and revision id 1225363100. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trial_advocacy&oldid=1225363100 " Category : Legal education Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from March 2016 This page was last edited on 23 May 2024, at 23:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trial advocacy Add languages Add topic

