Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Design 2 Projection 3 Literary analysis 4 Popular culture 5 See also 6 Footnotes 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Rei Toei Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fictional character in the Bridge trilogy novels Rei Toei is a fictional character in the Bridge trilogy of speculative fiction novels by William Gibson . Rei is introduced as the title character in Gibson's 1995 novel Idoru , as an artificial intelligence , an embodied agent simulating a human female idol singer .

[ 1 ] A personality construct which adapts and learns from her interaction with humans, she irresistibly attracts data analyst protagonist Colin Laney.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Design [ edit ] Toei is an internationally well-known Japanese media company. William Gibson imagined that by the time his Bridge Trilogy is set in, Japanese companies with a determined research direction would be producing products much like Rei Toei, given suitable funding through customer demand.

Rei Toei is a database composite from the wireless broadband internet of Japan, and the world. She has been programmed to remind viewers of their favourite J-pop idols, which in Japanese are known as aidoru ( アイドル ) (sounding like the English Idol ). Her singing voice and performance styles are composites as well, giving her the ability to encompass the viewer's preference as well. In this way, her AI agent form is very similar to user accounts on a group-sharing mainframe .

Implicit in her design is that she is not one Idoru, but many . Individual viewers and fans will have a personalised Rei Toei album, video, and collection of images, as 'she' can be and is customised according to the tastes of viewers.

Projection [ edit ] By the time Rei Toei has become a commercial entity, commercial in-space animated full-colour holography is also a commercial reality. As noted above, a personalised Rei Toei exist for individual viewers with Net access. However, for public concerts, Rei will take on an appearance that is a group consensus based on the membership of her audience.

Literary analysis [ edit ] The character has been described as one of Gibson's "most original, interesting characters".

[ 3 ] Popular culture [ edit ] In Deus Ex: Invisible War , the fictional game character NG Resonance is an international pop star who uses a network of AI kiosks to attract customers, so as to appear very empathetic and personable. However, the game portrays the “real" NG Resonance as being an extremely arrogant and entitled person, for whom the AI is nothing more than a gimmick designed to increase profits.

See also [ edit ] Sharon Apple Ananova Hatsune Miku Eguchi Aimi Virtual influencer Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b Matrix, Sidney (2006).

Cyber Pop . New York: Routledge. p. 105.

ISBN 0-415-97677-4 .

^ Rapatzikou, Tatiana (2004).

Gothic Motifs in the Fiction of William Gibson . Amsterdam: Rodopi. p. 200.

ISBN 90-420-1761-9 .

^ Tom Henthorne (29 July 2011).

William Gibson: A Literary Companion . McFarland. pp.

117– 119.

ISBN 978-0-7864-8693-9 .

External links [ edit ] Bolton, Christopher (November 2002).

"Editorial Introduction: The Borders of Japanese Science Fiction" .

Science Fiction Studies .

29 (88, part 3): 321– 322.

doi : 10.1525/sfs.29.3.0321 . Archived from the original on 2009-10-15.

v t e William Gibson List of works List of awards and nominations Novels Sprawl trilogy Neuromancer (1984) Count Zero (1986) Mona Lisa Overdrive (1988) Bridge trilogy Virtual Light (1993) Idoru (1996) All Tomorrow's Parties (1999) Blue Ant trilogy Pattern Recognition (2003) Spook Country (2007) Zero History (2010) Jackpot series The Peripheral (2014) Agency (2020) Other The Difference Engine (with Bruce Sterling ) (1990) Archangel (2016) Short stories " Fragments of a Hologram Rose " " Johnny Mnemonic " " The Gernsback Continuum " " Hinterlands " " New Rose Hotel " " The Belonging Kind " " Burning Chrome " " Red Star, Winter Orbit " " The Winter Market " " Dogfight " " Skinner's Room " Burning Chrome collection Nonfiction Agrippa (A Book of the Dead) " Disneyland with the Death Penalty " No Maps for These Territories Distrust That Particular Flavor Television " Kill Switch " " First Person Shooter " Characters Molly Millions Bobby Newmark Rei Toei Cayce Pollard Hubertus Bigend Story elements Cyberspace Megacorporation Locative art Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics Raygun Gothic Derivative works Neuromancer video game Johnny Mnemonic film New Rose Hotel film Node Magazine William Gibson: A Literary Companion The Peripheral TV series Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rei_Toei&oldid=1295046958 " Categories : Fictional artificial intelligences William Gibson characters Anthropomorphic objects Personifications Literary characters introduced in 1993 Characters in American novels of the 20th century Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Japanese-language text This page was last edited on 11 June 2025, at 10:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rei Toei Add languages Add topic

