Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Research interests 3 Research areas Toggle Research areas subsection 3.1 Regionalism 3.2 Economic and social change 3.3 Consumer and tourism services 3.4 Mobility 3.5 Complexity theory 4 Books published 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents John Urry (sociologist) 14 languages Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano مصرى 日本語 Русский Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British sociologist (1946–2016) For other people named John Urry, see John Urry (disambiguation) .

John Urry FAcSS John Urry in 2013.

Born ( 1946-06-01 ) 1 June 1946 London , United Kingdom Died 18 March 2016 (2016-03-18) (aged 69) Lancaster , United Kingdom Spouse Sylvia Walby Academic background Alma mater Christ's College, Cambridge ( BA , PhD ) Academic work Discipline Sociologist Institutions Lancaster University John Richard Urry FAcSS ( / ˈ ʊər i / ; 1 June 1946, London – 18 March 2016, Lancaster ) was a British sociologist who served as a professor at Lancaster University . He is noted for work in the fields of the sociology of tourism and mobility.

He wrote books on many other aspects of modern society including the transition away from "organised capitalism", the sociology of nature and environmentalism , and social theory in general.

Background [ edit ] Born in London and educated at the Haberdashers' Aske's Boys' School , Urry gained his first degrees from Christ's College, Cambridge in 1967, a 'double first' BA and MA in Economics, before going on to gain his PhD in Sociology from the same institution in 1972. He arrived at Lancaster University Sociology department as a lecturer in 1970, becoming head of department in 1983 and a professor in 1985.

Urry was a Fellow of the Royal Society of Arts , a Founding Academician of the UK Academy of Learned Societies for the Social Sciences , [ 1 ] and was a visiting professor at both Bristol and Roskilde Geography Departments.

His partner was the sociologist Sylvia Walby .

Research interests [ edit ] His original research interests were in the sociology of power and revolution and this resulted in the publication of Reference Groups and the Theory of Revolution (1973) and Power in Britain (1973).

Early work at Lancaster was in the area of social theory and the philosophy of the social sciences.

Social Theory as Science , (1975, 1982), co-written with his colleague Russell Keat, set out the main features of the realist philosophy of science. Critical confrontation with a number of Marxist traditions , of Althusserian structuralism , German state theory, and neo- Gramscian theory, resulted in the Anatomy of Capitalist Societies (1981).

Research areas [ edit ] Research until his death focused on five main areas.

Regionalism [ edit ] First, there was the urban and regional research mainly associated with the Lancaster Regionalism Group. Collaborative research resulted in Localities, Class and Gender (1985) and Restructuring. Place, Class and Gender (1990) Two particular themes were pursued: the relationship between society and space (as in the Social Relations and Spatial Structures , co-edited with Derek Gregory, 1985); and the possibilities of developing local economic policies (as in Place, Policy and Politics , 1990).

Economic and social change [ edit ] The second area of research was the more general dimensions of economic and social change in western capitalist societies. This resulted in three jointly written books, Capital, Labour and the Middle Classes (1983); The End of Organized Capitalism (1987); and Economies of Signs and Space (1994; latter two with Scott Lash ).

Consumer and tourism services [ edit ] Thirdly, research focused upon one particular set of industries that are of particular significance in contemporary western societies, namely consumer services and especially tourist-related services. The economic, social, environmental and cultural implications of such developments can be seen in The Tourist Gaze (1990, 2002: 2nd edn.), Consuming Places (1995), Touring Cultures (1997, edited with Chris Rojek), Tourism Mobilities (2004, edited with Mimi Sheller), and Performing Tourist Places (with J-O Barenholdt, M Haldrup, J. Larsen). This concern was extended to issues of environmental change and the 'sociology of nature' see Contested Natures (1998), Bodies of Nature (2001) (both with Phil Macnaghten) and Climate Change and Society (2011).

Mobility [ edit ] Fourthly, Urry had various research projects and publications relating to the changing nature of mobility. Publications include: Sociology Beyond Societies (2000), a special issue of Theory, Culture and Society, (August 2004 on Automobilities coedited with Mike Feathersone, Nigel Thrift); Mobile Technologies of the city (2006); coedited with Mimi Sheller . John Urry also directed the Centre for Mobilities Research between 2003 and 2015 and was later the co-director of the Institute for Social Futures.

Complexity theory [ edit ] Finally, John Urry had been exploring some implications of complexity theory for the social sciences . Publications here include Global Complexity (2003), and "Complexity", a special double issue of Theory, Culture & Society (2005).

He was also one of the founding editors of the new journal Mobilities , and served as editor of the International Library of Sociology since 1990 (Routledge).

Books published [ edit ] (excluding foreign language editions; books translated into 10+ languages) 1973 Reference Groups and the Theory of Revolution , Routledge and Kegan Paul Power in Britain, Heinemann Education (co edited with John Wakeford) 1975 Social Theory as Science , Routledge and Kegan Paul (with Russell Keat) 1981 The Anatomy of Capitalist Societies , Macmillan 1982 Social Theory as Science , Second Edition, Routledge and Kegan Paul (with Russell Keat) 1983 Capital, Labour and the Middle Classes , Allen and Unwin (with Nick Abercrombie) 1985 Social Relations and Spatial Structures , Macmillan (co edited with Derek Gregory) Localities, Class, and Gender , Pion (with Lancaster Regionalism Group) 1987 The End of Organized Capitalism, Polity (with Scott Lash) 1988 Contemporary British Society, Polity (with Nick Abercrombie, Alan Warde, Keith Soothill, Sylvia Walby).

1989–96 Schools of Thought in Sociology , General Editor of 18 vols, Edward Elgar.

1990 Localities, Policies, Politics. Do Localities Matter?

, Hutchinson (co edited with Michael Harloe, Chris Pickvance).

Restructuring.  Place, Class and Gender , Sage (with other members of the Lancaster Regionalism Group).

The Tourist Gaze , Sage.

1994 Economies of Signs and Space , Sage (with Scott Lash) Contemporary British Society , Second Edition, Polity (with Nick Abercrombie, Alan Warde, Keith Soothill, Sylvia Walby ) Leisure Landscapes, Main Report and Background Papers , CPRE (with Gordon Clark, Jan Darrall, Robin Grove-White, Phil Macnaghten) 1995 Consuming Places , Routledge 1997 Touring Cultures , Routledge (co edited with Chris Rojek) 1998 Contested Natures , Sage (with Phil Macnaghten) 2000 "Sociology for the New Millennium." Special issue of the British Journal of Sociology (commissioned: contributors include Castells, Wallerstein, Beck, Sassen, Therborn) Sociology beyond Societies , Routledge Contemporary British Society , Third Edition, Polity (with Nick Abercrombie, Alan Warde et al.) "Bodies of Nature". Special issue of Body and Society 6 (commissioned: co edited with Phil Macnaghten) 2001 Bodies of Nature . Sage (co edited with Phil Macnaghten) 2002 The Tourist Gaze . Second Edition, London: Sage 2003 Global Complexity , Cambridge: Polity 2004 "Presence-Absence." Special issue of Environment and Planning A: Society and Space 22 (co edited with Michel Callon and John Law) "Automobilities." Special issue of Theory, Culture and Society 21 (co edited with Mike Featherstone and Nigel Thrift) Tourism Mobilities. Places to Play, Places in Play , Routledge (co edited with Mimi Sheller) Performing Tourist Places , Ashgate (with Bærenholdt, J. O., Haldrup, M., Larsen, J.) 2005 "Complexity." Special Issue of Theory, Culture and Society 22 1- 270 Automobilities . London: Sage (co edited with Featherstone, M., Thrift, N.) 285 pp.

Sociologie de Mobilités: Une nouvelle frontiére pour la sociologie?

,  Paris, Armand Colin, 251pp.

2006 "Mobilities and Materialities." Special issue of Environment and Planning A (co-edited with M. Sheller) Mobile Technologies of the City , London: Routledge (coedited with M. Sheller) Mobilities, Geographies, Networks , London: Ashgate (with J. Larsen, K.Axhausen) 2007 Mobilities , Cambridge: Polity 2010 Mobile Lives , London: Routledge (with Anthony Elliott) 2011 Climate Change and Society , Cambridge: Polity 2013 Societies Beyond Oil , London: Zed 2014 Offshoring , Cambridge: Polity 2016 What is the Future?

, Cambridge: Polity References [ edit ] ^ "Professor John Urry FAcSS" .

Academy of Social Sciences . Archived from the original on 6 August 2017 . Retrieved 5 August 2017 .

Lancaster University Staff pages Curriculum Vitae Publishers External links [ edit ] Lectures Lecture (video/audio): Mobility Futures Archived 19 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine Lecture (video/audio): Mobility Futures at World-Information City conference in Paris 2009 Interview (video/audio): Mobilities and Societies Beyond Oil Archived 19 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal v t e Lancaster University Colleges Bowland Cartmel County Furness Fylde Graduate Grizedale Lonsdale Pendle People Chancellor: Alan Milburn Vice-Chancellor: Andy Schofield Academics Alumni Vice-Chancellor of the County Palatine of Lancaster Buildings Bailrigg InfoLab21 The Ruskin: Library, Museum and Research Centre Chaplaincy Centre Departments Lancaster Environment Centre Lancaster Institute for the Contemporary Arts Management School Medical School Lancaster Arts Richardson Institute Student life Lancaster University Students' Union Bailrigg FM LA1TV SCAN International Volunteers (InterVol) Boat Club Roses Tournament Symbols Coat of arms Red Rose of Lancaster Category Commons Portals : United Kingdom Biography Society Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Google Scholar People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Urry_(sociologist)&oldid=1272412752 " Categories : People educated at Haberdashers' Boys' School British sociologists Environmental sociologists Fellows of the Academy of Social Sciences Alumni of Christ's College, Cambridge Academics of Lancaster University 1946 births 2016 deaths Writers about globalization Academics from London Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from May 2019 Use dmy dates from September 2014 Articles with hCards Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 28 January 2025, at 14:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Urry (sociologist) 14 languages Add topic

