Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theology as the oldest academic discipline 2 Etymology Toggle Etymology subsection 2.1 Classical philosophy 2.2 Later usage 3 In religion Toggle In religion subsection 3.1 Abrahamic religions 3.1.1 Judaism 3.1.2 Christianity 3.1.3 Islam 3.2 Indian religions 3.2.1 Buddhism 3.2.2 Hinduism 3.3 Other religions 3.3.1 Shinto 3.3.2 Modern Paganism 4 Topics 5 History of academic discipline Toggle History of academic discipline subsection 5.1 Ministerial training 5.2 As an academic discipline in its own right 5.3 Religious studies 6 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 6.1 Pre-20th century 6.2 20th and 21st centuries 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Theology 132 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Arpetan Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Furlan Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Li Niha Ligure Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Napulitano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Papiamentu پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Walon 文言 Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Theological ) Study of the nature of deities and religious beliefs Not to be confused with Religious studies .

This article is about the study of the nature of deities and religious beliefs. For Sinéad O'Connor's album, see Theology (album) . For the academic journal, see Theology (journal) .

Part of a series on Theism Types of faith Agnosticism Apatheism Atheism Classical theism Deism Henotheism Ietsism Ignosticism Monotheism Monism Dualism Monolatry Kathenotheism Omnism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Specific conceptions Brahman Creator Demiurge Deus Father Form of the Good God Great Architect Monad Mother Summum bonum Supreme The Lord Trinity Tawhid Ditheism Monism Personal Unitarianism In particular religions Abrahamic Judaism Christianity Islam Baháʼí Faith Mormonism Mandaeism Samaritanism Indo-Iranian Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Sikhism Yungdrung Bon Zoroastrianism Chinese Tian Shangdi Hongjun Laozu Attributes Eternalness Existence Gender Names ( "God" ) Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Aseity Transcendence Experiences Practices Belief Esotericism Faith Fideism Gnosis Hermeticism Metaphysics Mysticism Prayer Revelation Worship Related topics Euthyphro dilemma God complex God gene Theology Ontology Problem of evil ( theodicy ) Religion philosophy texts Portrayals of God in popular media Religion portal v t e Theology is the study of religious belief from a religious perspective, with a focus on the nature of divinity and the history behind religion . It is taught as an academic discipline , typically in universities and seminaries .

[ 1 ] It occupies itself with the unique content of analyzing the supernatural , but also deals with religious epistemology , asks and seeks to answer the question of revelation . Revelation pertains to the acceptance of God , gods , or deities , as not only transcendent or above the natural world, but also willing and able to interact with the natural world and to reveal themselves to humankind.

Theologians use various forms of analysis and argument ( experiential , philosophical , ethnographic , historical , and others) to help understand , explain , test, critique , defend or promote any myriad of religious topics . As in philosophy of ethics and case law , arguments often assume the existence of previously resolved questions, and develop by making analogies from them to draw new inferences in new situations.

The study of theology may help a theologian more deeply understand their own religious tradition , [ 2 ] another religious tradition, [ 3 ] or it may enable them to explore the nature of divinity without reference to any specific tradition. Theology may be used to propagate , [ 4 ] reform, [ 5 ] or justify a religious tradition; or it may be used to compare , [ 6 ] challenge (e.g.

biblical criticism ), or oppose (e.g.

irreligion ) a religious tradition or worldview . Theology might also help a theologian address some present situation or need through a religious tradition, [ 7 ] or to explore possible ways of interpreting the world.

[ 8 ] Theology as the oldest academic discipline [ edit ] The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the Western world and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate.

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Theology is often considered one of the oldest academic disciplines, rooted in early human attempts to understand the divine, moral order, and existence. In the Western tradition, theology held a central place in medieval intellectual life.

[ citation needed ] Many of the first European universities, such as the University of Paris (established c. 1150), the University of Oxford (c. 1096), and the University of Bologna (1088), were founded primarily to educate clergy and focused initially on theological studies, with faculties in philosophy, law, and medicine developing later.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Theology was traditionally regarded as the "queen of the sciences", with philosophy often described as its "handmaiden", due to its guiding role in the search for ultimate truth.

[ 11 ] Etymology [ edit ] Main article: History of theology The term "theology" derives from the Greek theologia (θεολογία), a combination of theos (Θεός, ' god ') and logia (λογία, 'utterances, sayings, oracles ')—the latter word relating to Greek logos (λόγος, 'word, discourse , account, reasoning ').

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] The term would pass on to Latin as theologia , then French as théologie , eventually becoming the English theology .

Through several variants (e.g., theologie , teologye ), the English theology had evolved into its current form by 1362.

[ 14 ] The sense that the word has in English depends in large part on the sense that the Latin and Greek equivalents had acquired in patristic and medieval Christian usage although the English term has now spread beyond Christian contexts.

Plato (left) and Aristotle in Raphael 's 1509 fresco The School of Athens Classical philosophy [ edit ] Greek theologia (θεολογία) was used with the meaning 'discourse on God' around 380 BC by Plato in The Republic .

Greek English translation by Shorey (1969) … ὀρθῶς, ἔφη· ἀλλʼ αὐτὸ δὴ τοῦτο, οἱ τύποι περὶ θεολογίας τίνες ἂν εἶεν; τοιοίδε πού τινες, ἦν δʼ ἐγώ· οἷος τυγχάνει ὁ θεὸς ὤν, ἀεὶ δήπου ἀποδοτέον, ἐάντέ τις αὐτὸν ἐν ἔπεσιν ποιῇ ἐάντε ἐν μέλεσιν ἐάντε ἐν τραγῳδίᾳ.

… Right, he said; but this very thing—the patterns or norms of right speech about the gods , what would they be?

Something like this, I said. The true quality of God we must always surely attribute to him whether we compose in epic, melic, or tragic verse.

—Plato, Republic 379a.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] (emphasis added) —Plato, Republic 379a.

[ 15 ] [ 17 ] (emphasis added) Plato develops his rational theology ( natural theology ) in Book 10 of the Laws . In the dialogue, he opposes atheism and argues that the heavenly bodies are moved by the divine souls of the gods and their intelligence ( nous ). He also maintains that these gods care for humans and aim for the good of the universe as a whole.

Aristotle divided theoretical philosophy into mathematike , physike , and theologike , with the latter corresponding roughly to metaphysics , which, for Aristotle, included discourse on the nature of the divine.

[ 18 ] Drawing on Greek Stoic sources, the Latin writer Varro distinguished three forms of such discourse: [ 19 ] mythical , concerning the myths of the Greek gods; rational, philosophical analysis of the gods and of cosmology; and civil, concerning the rites and duties of public religious observance.

Later usage [ edit ] Some Latin Christian authors, such as Tertullian and Augustine , followed Varro's threefold usage.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] However, Augustine also defined theologia as "reasoning or discussion concerning the Deity".

[ 21 ] The Latin author Boethius , writing in the early 6th century, used theologia to denote a subdivision of philosophy as a subject of academic study, dealing with the motionless, incorporeal reality; as opposed to physica , which deals with corporeal , moving realities.

[ 22 ] Boethius' definition influenced medieval Latin usage.

[ 23 ] In patristic Greek Christian sources, theologia could refer narrowly to devout and/or inspired knowledge of and teaching about the essential nature of God.

[ 24 ] In scholastic Latin sources, the term came to denote the rational study of the doctrines of the Christian religion , or (more precisely) the academic discipline that investigated the coherence and implications of the language and claims of the Bible and of the theological tradition (the latter often as represented in Peter Lombard 's Sentences , a book of extracts from the Church Fathers ).

[ citation needed ] In the Renaissance , especially with Florentine Platonist apologists of Dante 's poetics, the distinction between 'poetic theology' ( theologia poetica ) and 'revealed' or Biblical theology serves as stepping stone for a revival of philosophy as independent of theological authority.

[ citation needed ] It is in the last sense, theology as an academic discipline involving rational study of Christian teaching, that the term passed into English in the 14th century, [ 25 ] although it could also be used in the narrower sense found in Boethius and the Greek patristic authors, to mean rational study of the essential nature of God, a discourse now sometimes called theology proper .

[ 26 ] From the 17th century onwards, the term theology began to be used to refer to the study of religious ideas and teachings that are not specifically Christian or correlated with Christianity (e.g., in the term natural theology , which denoted theology based on reasoning from natural facts independent of specifically Christian revelation) [ 27 ] or that are specific to another religion (such as below).

Theology can also be used in a derived sense to mean "a system of theoretical principles; an (impractical or rigid) ideology".

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] In religion [ edit ] The term theology has been deemed by some as only appropriate to the study of religions that worship a supposed deity (a theos ), i.e. more widely than monotheism ; and presuppose a belief in the ability to speak and reason about this deity (in logia ). They suggest the term is less appropriate in religious contexts that are organized differently (i.e., religions without a single deity, or that deny that such subjects can be studied logically).

Hierology has been proposed, by such people as Eugène Goblet d'Alviella (1908), as an alternative, more generic term.

[ 30 ] Abrahamic religions [ edit ] Illustration of the Jewish theologian Maimonides .

Judaism [ edit ] Main article: Jewish theology In Jewish theology, the historical absence of political authority after the destruction of the Second Temple has meant that most theological reflection has happened within the context of the Jewish community and synagogue , including through rabbinical discussion of Jewish law and Midrash (rabbinic biblical commentaries). Jewish theology is also linked to ethics , as it is the case with theology in other religions, and therefore has implications for how one behaves.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Christianity [ edit ] Thomas Aquinas , an influential 13th century theologian.

Main articles: Christian theology and Neoplatonism Further information: Diversity in early Christian theology , Great Apostasy , Nontrinitarianism , Son of God (Christianity) , and Trinity As defined by Thomas Aquinas , theology is constituted by a triple aspect: what is taught by God, teaches of God, and leads to God ( Latin : Theologia a Deo docetur, Deum docet, et ad Deum ducit ).

[ 33 ] This indicates the three distinct areas of God as theophanic revelation , the systematic study of the nature of divine and, more generally, of religious belief , and the spiritual path . Christian theology as the study of Christian belief and practice concentrates primarily upon the texts of the Old Testament and the New Testament as well as on Christian tradition. Christian theologians use biblical exegesis, rational analysis and argument. Theology might be undertaken to help the theologian better understand Christian tenets, to make comparisons between Christianity and other traditions, to defend Christianity against objections and criticism, to facilitate reforms in the Christian church, to assist in the propagation of Christianity, to draw on the resources of the Christian tradition to address some present situation or need, or for a variety of other reasons.

Islam [ edit ] Islamic scholar, jurist and theologian Malik ibn Anas .

Main article: Aqidah Further information: Kalam , List of Muslim theologians , and Schools of Islamic theology Islamic theological discussion that parallels Christian theological discussion is called Kalam ; the Islamic analogue of Christian theological discussion would more properly be the investigation and elaboration of Sharia or Fiqh .

[ 34 ] Kalam...does not hold the leading place in Muslim thought that theology does in Christianity. To find an equivalent for 'theology' in the Christian sense it is necessary to have recourse to several disciplines, and to the usul al-fiqh as much as to kalam.

— translated by L. Gardet Some Universities in Germany established departments of islamic theology (e.g., the Deutsche Islamkonferenz [ de ] ).

[ 35 ] Indian religions [ edit ] Buddhism [ edit ] Further information: Buddhist philosophy and Trikāya Some academic inquiries within Buddhism , dedicated to the investigation of a Buddhist understanding of the world, prefer the designation Buddhist philosophy to the term Buddhist theology , since Buddhism lacks the same conception of a theos or a Creator God . Jose Ignacio Cabezon, who argues that the use of theology is in fact appropriate, can only do so, he says, because "I take theology not to be restricted to discourse on God.... I take 'theology' not to be restricted to its etymological meaning. In that latter sense, Buddhism is of course atheological, rejecting as it does the notion of God." [ 36 ] Whatever the case, there are various Buddhist theories and discussions on the nature of Buddhahood and the ultimate reality / highest form of divinity , which has been termed "buddhology" by some scholars like Louis de La Vallée-Poussin .

[ 37 ] This is a different usage of the term than when it is taken to mean the academic study of Buddhism , and here would refer to the study of the nature of what a Buddha is. In Mahayana Buddhism , a central concept in its buddhology is the doctrine of the three Buddha bodies (Sanskrit: Trikāya ).

[ 37 ] This doctrine is shared by all Mahayana Buddhist traditions.

Hinduism [ edit ] See also: Vedanta , Vaishnavism , Shaivism , and Shaktism Within Hindu philosophy , there are numerous traditions of philosophical speculation on the nature of the universe, of God (termed Brahman , Paramatma , Ishvara , and/or Bhagavan in some schools of Hindu thought) and of the ātman (soul). The Sanskrit word for the various schools of Hindu philosophy is darśana ('view, viewpoint'), the most influential one in terms of modern Hindu religion is Vedanta and its various sub-schools, each of which presents a different theory of Ishvara (the Supreme lord, God).

Vaishnava theology has been a subject of study for many devotees, philosophers and scholars in India for centuries. A large part of its study lies in classifying and organizing the manifestations of thousands of gods and their aspects. In recent decades the study of Hinduism has also been taken up by a number of academic institutions in Europe, such as the Oxford Centre for Hindu Studies and Bhaktivedanta College .

[ 38 ] There are also other traditions of Hindu theology, including the various theologies of Shaivism (which include dualistic and non-dualistic strands) as well as the theologies of the Goddess centered Shakta traditions which posit a feminine deity as the ultimate.

Other religions [ edit ] Shinto [ edit ] In Japan, the term theology ( 神学 , shingaku ) has been ascribed to Shinto since the Edo period with the publication of Mano Tokitsuna's Kokon shingaku ruihen ( 古今神学類編 , 'categorized compilation of ancient theology'). In modern times, other terms are used to denote studies in Shinto—as well as Buddhist—belief, such as kyōgaku ( 教学 , 'doctrinal studies') and shūgaku ( 宗学 , 'denominational studies').

Modern Paganism [ edit ] English academic Graham Harvey has commented that Pagans "rarely indulge in theology".

[ 39 ] Nevertheless, theology has been applied in some sectors across contemporary Pagan communities, including Wicca , Heathenry , Druidry and Kemetism . As these religions have given precedence to orthopraxy , theological views often vary among adherents. The term is used by Christine Kraemer in her book Seeking The Mystery: An Introduction to Pagan Theologies and by Michael York in Pagan Theology: Paganism as a World Religion .

Topics [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Further information: Outline of theology Richard Hooker defines theology as "the science of things divine".

[ 40 ] The term can, however, be used for a variety of disciplines or fields of study.

[ 41 ] Theology considers whether the divine exists in some form, such as in physical , supernatural , mental , or social realities , and what evidence for and about it may be found via personal spiritual experiences or historical records of such experiences as documented by others. The study of these assumptions is not part of theology proper , but is found in the philosophy of religion , and increasingly through the psychology of religion and neurotheology . Theology's aim, then, is to record, structure and understand these experiences and concepts; and to use them to derive normative prescriptions for the right way to live life .

History of academic discipline [ edit ] See also: Divinity (academic discipline) This article focuses too much on specific examples .

Please help improve it by adding sources that evaluate within broader context . Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .

( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The history of the study of theology in institutions of higher education is as old as the history of such institutions themselves. For instance: Taxila was an early centre of Vedic learning , possible from the 6th-century BC or earlier; [ 42 ] [ 43 ] : 140–142 the Platonic Academy founded in Athens in the 4th-century BC seems to have included theological themes in its subject matter; [ 44 ] the Chinese Taixue delivered Confucian teaching from the 2nd century BC; [ 45 ] the School of Nisibis was a centre of Christian learning from the 4th century AD; [ 46 ] [ 47 ] Nalanda in India was a site of Buddhist higher learning from at least the 5th or 6th century AD; [ 43 ] : 149 and the Moroccan University of Al-Karaouine was a centre of Islamic learning from the 10th century, [ 48 ] as was Al-Azhar University in Cairo.

[ 49 ] The earliest universities were developed under the aegis of the Latin Church by papal bull as studia generalia and perhaps from cathedral schools . It is possible, however, that the development of cathedral schools into universities was quite rare, with the University of Paris being an exception.

[ 50 ] Later they were also founded by kings ( University of Naples Federico II , Charles University in Prague , Jagiellonian University in Kraków ) or by municipal administrations ( University of Cologne , University of Erfurt ).

In the early medieval period , most new universities were founded from pre-existing schools, usually when these schools were deemed to have become primarily sites of higher education. Many historians state that universities and cathedral schools were a continuation of the interest in learning promoted by monasteries.

[ 51 ] Christian theological learning was, therefore, a component in these institutions, as was the study of church or canon law : universities played an important role in training people for ecclesiastical offices, in helping the church pursue the clarification and defence of its teaching, and in supporting the legal rights of the church over against secular rulers.

[ 52 ] At such universities, theological study was initially closely tied to the life of faith and of the church: it fed, and was fed by, practices of preaching , prayer and celebration of the Mass .

[ 53 ] During the High Middle Ages, theology was the ultimate subject at universities, being named "The Queen of the Sciences". It served as the capstone to the Trivium and Quadrivium that young men were expected to study. This meant that the other subjects (including philosophy ) existed primarily to help with theological thought.

[ 54 ] In this context, medieval theology in the Christian West could subsume fields of study which would later become more self-sufficient, such as metaphysics (Aristotle's " first philosophy ", [ 55 ] [ 56 ] or ontology (the science of being).

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] Christian theology's preeminent place in the university started to come under challenge during the European Enlightenment , especially in Germany.

[ 59 ] Other subjects gained in independence and prestige, and questions were raised about the place of a discipline that seemed to involve a commitment to the authority of particular religious traditions in institutions that were increasingly understood to be devoted to independent reason.

[ 60 ] Since the early 19th century, various different approaches have emerged in the West to theology as an academic discipline. Much of the debate concerning theology's place in the university or within a general higher education curriculum centres on whether theology's methods are appropriately theoretical and (broadly speaking) scientific or, on the other hand, whether theology requires a pre-commitment of faith by its practitioners, and whether such a commitment conflicts with academic freedom.

[ 59 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] Ministerial training [ edit ] In some contexts, theology has been held to belong in institutions of higher education primarily as a form of professional training for Christian ministry. This was the basis on which Friedrich Schleiermacher , a liberal theologian, argued for the inclusion of theology in the new University of Berlin in 1810.

[ 64 ] [ 59 ] : ch. 14 For instance, in Germany , theological faculties at state universities are typically tied to particular denominations, Protestant or Roman Catholic, and those faculties will offer denominationally-bound (konfessionsgebunden) degrees, and have denominationally bound public posts amongst their faculty; as well as contributing "to the development and growth of Christian knowledge" they "provide the academic training for the future clergy and teachers of religious instruction at German schools." [ 65 ] In the United States, several prominent colleges and universities were started in order to train Christian ministers.

Harvard , [ 66 ] Georgetown , [ 67 ] Boston University , Yale , [ 68 ] Duke University , [ 69 ] and Princeton [ 70 ] all had the theological training of clergy as a primary purpose at their foundation.

Seminaries and bible colleges have continued this alliance between the academic study of theology and training for Christian ministry. There are, for instance, numerous prominent examples in the United States, including Phoenix Seminary , Catholic Theological Union in Chicago, [ 71 ] The Graduate Theological Union in Berkeley, [ 72 ] Criswell College in Dallas, [ 73 ] The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary in Louisville, [ 74 ] Trinity Evangelical Divinity School in Deerfield, Illinois, [ 75 ] Dallas Theological Seminary , [ 76 ] North Texas Collegiate Institute in Farmers Branch, Texas, [ 77 ] and the Assemblies of God Theological Seminary in Springfield, Missouri. The only Judeo-Christian seminary for theology is the 'Idaho Messianic Bible Seminary' which is part of the Jewish University of Colorado in Denver .

[ 78 ] As an academic discipline in its own right [ edit ] In some contexts, scholars pursue theology as an academic discipline without formal affiliation to any particular church (though members of staff may well have affiliations to churches), and without focussing on ministerial training. This applies, for instance, to the Department of Theological Studies at Concordia University in Canada , and to many university departments in the United Kingdom , including the Faculty of Divinity at the University of Cambridge , the Department of Theology and Religion at the University of Exeter , and the Department of Theology and Religious Studies at the University of Leeds .

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] Traditional academic prizes, such as the University of Aberdeen 's Lumsden and Sachs Fellowship , tend to acknowledge performance in theology (or divinity as it is known at Aberdeen) and in religious studies.

Religious studies [ edit ] In some contemporary contexts, a distinction is made between theology, which is seen as involving some level of commitment to the claims of the religious tradition being studied, and religious studies , which by contrast is normally seen as requiring that the question of the truth or falsehood of the religious traditions studied be kept outside its field. Religious studies involves the study of historical or contemporary practices or of those traditions' ideas using intellectual tools and frameworks that are not themselves specifically tied to any religious tradition and that are normally understood to be neutral or secular.

[ 81 ] In contexts where 'religious studies' in this sense is the focus, the primary forms of study are likely to include: Anthropology of religion Comparative religion History of religions Philosophy of religion Psychology of religion Sociology of religion Sometimes, theology and religious studies are seen as being in tension, [ 82 ] and at other times, they are held to coexist without serious tension.

[ 83 ] Occasionally it is denied that there is as clear a boundary between them.

[ 84 ] Criticism [ edit ] See also: Criticism of religion Pre-20th century [ edit ] Whether or not reasoned discussion about the divine is possible has long been a point of contention.

Protagoras , as early as the fifth century BC , who is reputed to have been exiled from Athens because of his agnosticism about the existence of the gods, said that "Concerning the gods I cannot know either that they exist or that they do not exist, or what form they might have, for there is much to prevent one's knowing: the obscurity of the subject and the shortness of man's life." [ 85 ] [ 86 ] Baron d'Holbach Since at least the eighteenth century, various authors have criticized the suitability of theology as an academic discipline.

[ 87 ] In 1772, Baron d'Holbach labeled theology "a continual insult to human reason" in Le Bon sens .

[ 87 ] Lord Bolingbroke , an English politician and political philosopher, wrote in Section IV of his Essays on Human Knowledge , "Theology is in fault not religion. Theology is a science that may justly be compared to the Box of Pandora . Many good things lie uppermost in it; but many evil lie under them, and scatter plagues and desolation throughout the world." [ 88 ] Thomas Paine , a Deistic American political theorist and pamphleteer , wrote in his three-part work The Age of Reason (1794, 1795, 1807): [ 89 ] The study of theology, as it stands in Christian churches, is the study of nothing; it is founded on nothing; it rests on no principles; it proceeds by no authorities; it has no data; it can demonstrate nothing; and it admits of no conclusion. Not anything can be studied as a science, without our being in possession of the principles upon which it is founded; and as this is the case with Christian theology, it is therefore the study of nothing.

The German atheist philosopher Ludwig Feuerbach sought to dissolve theology in his work Principles of the Philosophy of the Future : "The task of the modern era was the realization and humanization of God – the transformation and dissolution of theology into anthropology." [ 90 ] This mirrored his earlier work The Essence of Christianity (1841), for which he was banned from teaching in Germany, in which he had said that theology was a "web of contradictions and delusions".

[ 91 ] The American satirist Mark Twain remarked in his essay " The Lowest Animal ", originally written in around 1896, but not published until after Twain's death in 1910, that: [ 92 ] [ 93 ] [Man] is the only animal that loves his neighbor as himself and cuts his throat if his theology isn't straight. He has made a graveyard of the globe in trying his honest best to smooth his brother's path to happiness and heaven.... The higher animals have no religion. And we are told that they are going to be left out in the Hereafter. I wonder why? It seems questionable taste.

20th and 21st centuries [ edit ] A. J. Ayer , a British former logical-positivist , sought to show in his essay "Critique of Ethics and Theology" that all statements about the divine are nonsensical and any divine-attribute is unprovable. He wrote: "It is now generally admitted, at any rate by philosophers, that the existence of a being having the attributes which define the god of any non-animistic religion cannot be demonstratively proved.... [A]ll utterances about the nature of God are nonsensical." [ 94 ] Jewish atheist philosopher Walter Kaufmann , in his essay "Against Theology", sought to differentiate theology from religion in general: [ 95 ] Theology, of course, is not religion; and a great deal of religion is emphatically anti-theological.... An attack on theology, therefore, should not be taken as necessarily involving an attack on religion. Religion can be, and often has been, untheological or even anti-theological.

However, Kaufmann found that "Christianity is inescapably a theological religion." [ 95 ] English atheist Charles Bradlaugh believed theology prevented human beings from achieving liberty, [ 96 ] although he also noted that many theologians of his time held that, because modern scientific research sometimes contradicts sacred scriptures, the scriptures must therefore be wrong.

[ 97 ] Robert G. Ingersoll , an American agnostic lawyer, stated that, when theologians had power, the majority of people lived in hovels, while a privileged few had palaces and cathedrals. In Ingersoll's opinion, it was science that improved people's lives, not theology. Ingersoll further maintained that trained theologians reason no better than a person who assumes the devil must exist because pictures resemble the devil so exactly.

[ 98 ] The British evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins has been an outspoken critic of theology.

[ 87 ] [ 99 ] In an article published in The Independent in 1993, he severely criticizes theology as entirely useless, [ 99 ] declaring that it has completely and repeatedly failed to answer any questions about the nature of reality or the human condition.

[ 99 ] He states, "I have never heard any of them [i.e. theologians] ever say anything of the smallest use, anything that was not either platitudinously obvious or downright false." [ 99 ] He then states that, if all theology were completely eradicated from the earth, no one would notice or even care. He concludes: [ 99 ] The achievements of theologians don't do anything, don't affect anything, don't achieve anything, don't even mean anything. What makes you think that 'theology' is a subject at all?

See also [ edit ] Thealogy References [ edit ] ^ "theology" . Wordnetweb.princeton.edu.

Archived from the original on 4 August 2012 . Retrieved 11 November 2012 .

^ See, e.g., Migliore, Daniel L.

2004.

Faith Seeking Understanding: An Introduction to Christian Theology (2nd ed.) Grand Rapids: Eerdmans .

^ See, e.g., Kogan, Michael S. 1995. " Toward a Jewish Theology of Christianity ." Journal of Ecumenical Studies 32(1):89–106. Archived from the online on 15 June 2006.

^ See, e.g., Dormor, Duncan, et al., eds. 2003.

Anglicanism, the Answer to Modernity . London: Continuum.

^ See, e.g., Spong, John Shelby . 2001.

Why Christianity Must Change or Die . New York: Harper Collins.

^ See, e.g., Burrell, David. 1994.

Freedom and Creation in Three Traditions . Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press .

^ See, e.g., Gorringe, Timothy . 2004.

Crime , ( Changing Society and the Churches Series ). London: Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge .

^ See e.g., Anne Hunt Overzee's gloss upon the view of Ricœur (1913–2005) as to the role and work of 'theologian': "Paul Ricœur speaks of the theologian as a hermeneut, whose task is to interpret the multivalent, rich metaphors arising from the symbolic bases of tradition so that the symbols may 'speak' once again to our existential situation."

Overzee, Anne Hunt. 1992.

The Body Divine: The Symbol of the Body in the Works of Teilhard de Chardin and Ramanuja Archived 26 March 2023 at the Wayback Machine , ( Cambridge Studies in Religious Traditions 2). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521385169 . Retrieved 5 April 2010. p. 4.

^ Rüegg, Walter (ed.).

A History of the University in Europe: Volume 1, Universities in the Middle Ages . Cambridge University Press, 1992.

^ Leff, Gordon.

Paris and Oxford Universities in the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries: An Institutional and Intellectual History . Wiley-Blackwell, 1968.

^ Gilson, Étienne.

The Spirit of Medieval Philosophy . University of Notre Dame Press, 1991.

^ The accusative plural of the neuter noun λόγιον; cf.

Bauer, Walter , William F. Arndt, F. Wilbur Gingrich , and Frederick W. Danker . 1979.

A Greek–English Lexicon of the New Testament (2nd ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press . p. 476.

For examples of λόγια in the New Testament , cf.

Acts 7 :38; Romans 3 :2; 1 Peter 4 :11.

^ Scouteris, Constantine B.

[1972] 2016.

Ἡ ἔννοια τῶν ὅρων 'Θεολογία', 'Θεολογεῖν', 'Θεολόγος', ἐν τῇ διδασκαλίᾳ τῶν Ἑλλήνων Πατέρων καί Ἐκκλησιαστικῶν συγγραφέων μέχρι καί τῶν Καππαδοκῶν [ The Meaning of the Terms 'Theology', 'to Theologize' and 'Theologian' in the Teaching of the Greek Fathers up to and Including the Cappadocians ] (in Greek). Athens. pp. 187.

^ Langland, Piers Plowman A ix 136 ^ a b Plato, Republic , Book 2, Section 379 (2.379) ^ Plato.

Platonis Opera , ed. John Burnet. Oxford University Press. 1903.

^ Plato.

Plato in Twelve Volumes , Vols. 5 & 6 translated by Paul Shorey. Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press; London, William Heinemann Ltd. 1969.

^ Aristotle, Metaphysics , Book Epsilon.

Archived 16 February 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Augustine , City of God VI Archived 13 December 2006 at the Wayback Machine , ch. 5.

^ Tertullian , Ad Nationes II Archived 13 May 2007 at the Wayback Machine , ch. 1.

^ Augustine of Hippo .

City of God Book VIII. i.

.

Archived 4 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine : "de divinitate rationem sive sermonem." ^ "Boethius, On the Holy Trinity" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 February 2012 . Retrieved 11 November 2012 .

^ Evans, G. R. 1980.

Old Arts and New Theology: The Beginnings of Theology as an Academic Discipline . Oxford: Clarendon Press . pp. 31–32.

^ McGukin, John. 2001.

Saint Gregory of Nazianzus: An Intellectual Biography . Crestwood, NY: St. Vladimir's Seminary Press . p. 278: Gregory of Nazianzus uses the word in this sense in his 4th-century Theological Orations Archived 7 August 2006 at the Wayback Machine . After his death, he was called "the Theologian" at the Council of Chalcedon and thereafter in Eastern Orthodoxy either because his Orations were seen as crucial examples of this kind of theology or in the sense that he was (like the author of the Book of Revelation ) seen as one who was an inspired preacher of the words of God. (It is unlikely to mean, as claimed in the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers Archived 16 July 2006 at the Wayback Machine introduction to his Theological Orations , that he was a defender of the divinity of Christ the Word.) ^ "Theology." Oxford English Dictionary . note.

^ See, e.g., Hodge, Charles . 1871.

Systematic Theology 1, part 1.

^ Oxford English Dictionary , sense 1 ^ "Theology, 1(d)" and "Theological, A.3." Oxford English Dictionary . 1989.

^ Times Literary Supplement 329/4. 5 June 1959: "The 'theological' approach to Soviet Marxism ...proves in the long run unsatisfactory." ^ Jones, Alan H. 1983.

Independence and Exegesis: The Study of Early Christianity in the Work of Alfred Loisy (1857–1940), Charles Guignebert (1857 [i.e. 1867]–1939), and Maurice Goguel (1880–1955) .

Mohr Siebeck . p. 194.

^ Libenson, Dan and Lex Rofeberg, hosts. 5 October 2018. " God and Gender – Rachel Adler Archived 11 October 2018 at the Wayback Machine ." Ep. 138 in Judaism Unbound (podcast).

^ Rashkover, Randi. 1999. " A Call for Jewish Theology ." CrossCurrents . "Frequently the claim is made that, unlike Christianity, Judaism is a tradition of deeds and maintains no strict theological tradition. Judaism's fundamental beliefs are inextricable from their halakhic observance (that set of laws revealed to Jews by God), embedded and presupposed by that way of life as it is lived and learned." ^ Kapic, Kelly M. Kapic (2012).

A Little Book for New Theologians. Why and How to Study Theology .

Downers Grove, Illinois : InterVarsity Press . p.

36 .

ISBN 978-0830866700 .

^ Gardet, L. 1999. " Ilm al-kalam Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine ." The Encyclopedia of Islam , edited by P. J. Bearman , et al. Leiden: Koninklijke Brill NV .

^ "Speech by State Secretary Dr Markus Kerber at the official opening ceremony for the Islamkolleg Deutschland" .

DIK – Deutsche Islam Konferenz .

Archived from the original on 31 January 2023 . Retrieved 31 January 2023 .

^ Cabezon, Jose Ignacio. 1999. "Buddhist Theology in the Academy." pp. 25–52 in Buddhist Theology: Critical Reflections by Contemporary Buddhist Scholars , edited by R. Jackson and J. J. Makransky . London: Routledge.

^ a b de la Vallée Poussin, Louis. (1906).

"XXXI. Studies in Buddhist Dogma. The Three Bodies of a Buddha (Trikāya).

" Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain & Ireland, 38(4), 943–977.

doi:10.1017/S0035869X0003522X ^ King, Anna S. 2006. "For Love of Krishna: Forty Years of Chanting." pp. 134–67 in The Hare Krishna Movement: Forty Years of Chant and Change , edited by G. Dwyer and R. J. Cole. London: I.B. Tauris . p. 163:

Describes developments in both institutions, and speaks of Hare Krishna devotees "studying Vaishnava theology and practice in mainstream universities." ^ Harvey, Graham (2007).

Listening People, Speaking Earth: Contemporary Paganism (2nd ed.). London: Hurst & Company. p. 1.

ISBN 978-1850652724 .

^ " Of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity , 3.8.11" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 March 2012 . Retrieved 11 November 2012 .

^ McGrath, Alister . 1998.

Historical Theology: An Introduction to the History of Christian Thought . Oxford: Blackwell Publishers . pp. 1–8.

^ An earlier date is provided in:

Reagan, Timothy. 2004.

Non-Western Educational Traditions: Alternative Approaches to Educational Thought and Practice (3rd ed.).

Lawrence Erlbaum . p. 185; and

Chitnis, Sunna. 2003. "Higher Education." pp. 1032–56 in The Oxford India Companion to Sociology and Social Anthropology , edited by V. Das . New Delhi: Oxford University Press . p. 1036.

^ a b Scharfe, Hartmut. 2002.

Education in Ancient India . Leiden: Brill.

^ Dillon, John. 2003.

The Heirs of Plato: A Study in the Old Academy, 347–274 BC.

Oxford: Oxford University Press .

^ Yao, Xinzhong . 2000.

An Introduction to Confucianism . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . p. 50.

^ Becker, Adam H. (2006).

The Fear of God and the Beginning of Wisdom: The School of Nisibis and the Development of Scholastic Culture in Late Antique Mesopotamia .

University of Pennsylvania Press .

^ "The School of Nisibis" .

Nestorian.org . Archived from the original on 3 March 2016.

^ Lulat, Y. G. 2005.

A History of African Higher Education from Antiquity to the Present: A Critical Synthesis . Greenwood. p. 71:

The Al-Qarawiyyin mosque was founded in 859 AD, but "While instruction at the mosque must have begun almost from the beginning, it is only...by the end of the tenth-century that its reputation as a center of learning in both religious and secular sciences...must have begun to wax." ^ Beattie, Andrew. 2005.

Cairo: A Cultural History . New York: Oxford University Press . p. 101.

^ Leff, Gordon. 1968.

Paris and Oxford Universities in the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Centuries. An Institutional and Intellectual History .

Wiley .

^ Johnson, Paul . 2000.

The Renaissance: A Short History , ( Modern Library Chronicles ). New York: Modern Library . p. 9.

^ Rüegg, Walter. 2003. "Themes." pp. 3–34 in A History of the University in Europe , edited by W. Rüegg and H. de Ridder-Symoens, ( Universities in the Middle Ages 1). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . pp. 15–16.

^ See D'Costa, Gavin . 2005.

Theology in the Public Square: Church, Academy and Nation . Oxford: Blackwell . ch. 1.

^ Howard, Thomas Albert . 2006.

Protestant Theology and the Making of the Modern German University Archived 15 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine .

Oxford: Oxford University Press . p. 56: "philosophy, the scientia scientarum in one sense, was, in another, portrayed as the humble "handmaid of theology'." ^ DeFilippo, Joseph G. (1991).

Theology and First Philosophy in Aristotle's "Metaphysics" . U.M.I., Dissertation Information Service . Retrieved 16 October 2023 .

^ Ontology - "In the 13th century, appropriating Aristotle's threefold division of the speculative sciences (physics, mathematics, and what Aquinas variously calls 'first philosophy' or 'metaphysics' or 'theology'), Aquinas argues that primary being and being in general are the subject of the same science ( eadem enim est scientia primi entis et entis communis ) inasmuch as primary being (s) are principles of the others ( nam prima entia sunt principia aliorum ; cf. Aquinas' In Boeth. de Trin . 5.1, In 10 meta . 6 and 11, and the Proemium to the latter)." ^ Rutherford, J. Alexander (2021).

The Gift of Seeing: A Biblical Perspective on Ontology . Volume 3 of God's Gifts for the Christian Life – Part 1. Airdrie, Alberta: Teleioteti. p. 3.

ISBN 9781989560198 . Retrieved 16 October 2023 .

[...] Scripture has implications for ontology [...]. [...] the theology we proclaim is deeply intertwined with ontology [...].

^ Ontology – "In the sixth book [of the Metaphysics ] (1026a16–32), Aristotle refers to a first philosophy that is concerned with being as being, but in contrast to physics and mathematics, precisely as the speculative science of what is separate from matter and motion. First philosophy in this context is labeled 'theology' inasmuch as the divine would only be present in something of this nature, i.e., some immutable being ( ousia akinetos )." ^ a b c Howard, Thomas Albert . 2006.

Protestant Theology and the Making of the Modern German University Archived 15 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine .

Oxford: Oxford University Press .

^ See the discussion of, for instance, Immanuel Kant's Conflict of the Faculties (1798), and J.G. Fichte's Deduzierter Plan einer zu Berlin errichtenden höheren Lehranstalt (1807) in Howard, Thomas Albert . 2006.

Protestant Theology and the Making of the Modern German University Archived 15 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine .

Oxford: Oxford University Press .

^ Frei, Hans W. 1992.

Types of Christian Theology , edited by W. C. Placher and G. Hunsinger . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press .

^ D'Costa, Gavin . 2005.

Theology in the Public Square: Church, Academy and Nation . Oxford: Blackwell.

^ McClendon, James W.

2000. "Theology and the University." Ch. 10 in Systematic Theology 3: Witness . Nashville, TN: Abingdon.

^ Schleiermacher, Friedrich . 1990.

Brief Outline of Theology as a Field of Study (2nd ed.), translated by T. N. Tice. Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen .

^ Kratz, Reinhard G.

2002. "Academic Theology in Germany." Religion 32(2):113–116.

^ Marsden, George M.

1994.

The Soul of the American University: From Protestant Establishment to Established Nonbelief . New York: Oxford University Press . p. 41:

"The primary purpose of Harvard College was, accordingly, the training of clergy.' But 'the school served a dual purpose, training men for other professions as well." ^ Curran, Robert Emmett, and Leo J. O'Donovan . 1961.

The Bicentennial History of Georgetown University: From Academy to University 1789–1889 , Part 1. Georgetown: Georgetown University Press :

Georgetown was a Jesuit institution founded in significant part to provide a pool of educated Catholics some of whom who could go on to full seminary training for the priesthood.

^ Dexter, Franklin Bowditch . 1916. " The Charter of the Collegiate School, October 1701 ." In Documentary History of Yale University, Under the Original Charter of the Collegiate School of Connecticut 1701–1745 . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press:

Yale's original 1701 charter speaks of the purpose being "Sincere Regard & Zeal for upholding & Propagating of the Christian Protestant Religion by a succession of Learned & Orthodox" and that "Youth may be instructed in the Arts and Sciences (and) through the blessing of Almighty God may be fitted for Publick employment both in Church and Civil State." ^ Duke University Libraries (11 July 2013).

"Duke University: A Brief Narrative History" . Duke University Libraries.

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 10 April 2020 .

^ At Princeton, one of the founders (probably Ebeneezer Pemberton) wrote in c.

1750 , 'Though our great Intention was to erect a seminary for educating Ministers of the Gospel, yet we hope it will be useful in other learned professions – Ornaments of the State as Well as the Church. Therefore we propose to make the plan of Education as extensive as our Circumstances will admit.' Quoted in Alexander Leitch, A Princeton Companion Archived 26 August 2015 at the Wayback Machine (Princeton University Press, 1978).

^ "The CTU Story" .

Catholic Theological Union . Archived from the original on 7 March 2013 . Retrieved 16 March 2013 .

lay men and women, religious sisters and brothers, and seminarians have studied alongside one another, preparing to serve God's people ^ See 'About the GTU' Archived 19 August 2009 at the Wayback Machine at The Graduate Theological Union website (Retrieved 29 August 2009): 'dedicated to educating students for teaching, research, ministry, and service.' ^ "The Criswell Vision" .

Criswell College . Archived from the original on 26 April 2010 . Retrieved 29 August 2009 .

Criswell College exists to serve the churches of our Lord Jesus Christ by developing God-called men and women in the Word (intellectually and academically) and by the Word (professionally and spiritually) for authentic ministry leadership ^ "Mission Statement" .

Southern Baptist Theological Seminary . Archived from the original on 29 March 2015 . Retrieved 29 August 2009 .

the mission of The Southern Baptist Theological Seminary is ... to be a servant of the churches of the Southern Baptist Convention by training, educating, and preparing ministers of the gospel for more faithful service ^ "About Trinity Evangelical Divinity School" .

Trinity Evangelical Divinity School . Archived from the original on 30 August 2011 . Retrieved 29 August 2009 .

Trinity Evangelical Divinity School (TEDS) is a learning community dedicated to the development of servant leaders for the global church, leaders who are spiritually, biblically, and theologically prepared to engage contemporary culture for the sake of Christ's kingdom ^ "About" at the Dallas Theological Seminary website: "At Dallas, the scholarly study of biblical and related subjects is inseparably fused with the cultivation of the spiritual life. All this is designed to prepare students to communicate the Word of God in the power of the Spirit of God." Retrieved 29 August 2009.

Archived 20 February 2006 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "North Texas Collegiate Institute" .

ntcollege.org .

Archived from the original on 24 November 2016 . Retrieved 23 November 2016 .

^ "Jewish University of Colorado" .

jewish-university.org .

Archived from the original on 8 October 2022 . Retrieved 31 October 2022 .

^ "Undergraduate Study – Why study Theology?" .

Department of Theology, University of Exeter, UK . Archived from the original on 9 August 2009 . Retrieved 1 September 2009 .

^ "About us" .

University of Leeds – Department of Theology and Religious Studies . Archived from the original on 5 May 2008.

^ See, e.g., Wiebe, Donald. 2000.

The Politics of Religious Studies: The Continuing Conflict with Theology in the Academy . New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

^ Noll, K. L.

27 July 2009. " The Ethics of Being a Theologian Archived 27 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine ." Chronicle of Higher Education .

^ Ford, David. 2009. "Theology and Religious Studies for a Multifaith and Secular Society." In Theology and Religious Studies in Higher Education , edited by D. L. Bird and S. G. Smith. London: Continuum.

^ Fitzgerald, Timothy. 2000.

The Ideology of Religious Studies . Oxford: Oxford University Press .

^ Protagoras . "On the Gods", translated by M. J. O'Brien. In The Older Sophists , edited by R. K. Sprague. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press. 1972. p. 20 (fr.4). (emphasis added).

^ Poster, Carol. " Protagoras (fl. 5th C. BCE) Archived 10 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine ." Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 6 October 2008.

^ a b c Loughlin, Gerard (2009).

"11 – Theology in the university" . In Ker, John; Merrigan, Terrance (eds.).

The Cambridge Companion to John Henry Newman . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. pp.

221– 240.

doi : 10.1017/CCOL9780521871860.011 .

ISBN 978-0521871860 .

^ The Philosophical Works of Lord Bolingbroke 3. p. 396.

^ Paine, Thomas . [1794/1795/1807] 1945. " The Age of Reason ." The Life and Major Writings of Thomas Paine , edited by P. S. Foner . New York: Citadel Press . p. 601.

^ Feuerbach, Ludwig . 1986.

Principles of the Philosophy of the Future , translated by M. H. Vogel. Indianapolis, Hackett Publishing Company. p. 5.

^ Feuerbach, Ludwig . [1841] 1989. "Preface, XVI." The Essence of Christianity , translated G. Eliot . Amherst, New York: Prometheus Books .

^ Twain, Mark (1896).

"The Lowest Animal" .

thoughtco.com .

Archived from the original on 10 July 2018 . Retrieved 10 July 2018 .

^ "Directory of Mark Twain's maxims, quotations, and various opinions" . Twainquotes.com. 28 November 1902.

Archived from the original on 3 June 2012 . Retrieved 11 November 2012 .

^ Ayer, A. J.

, 1936.

Language, Truth and Logic . New York: Dover Publications. pp. 114–115.

^ a b Kaufmann, Walter . 1963.

The Faith of a Heretic . Garden City, NY: Anchor Books. pp. 114, 127–28, 130.

^ "Charles Bradlaugh (1833–1891)" . Positiveatheism.org. Archived from the original on 1 May 2013 . Retrieved 11 November 2012 .

^ "Humanity's Gain from Unbelief" . Positiveatheism.org. Archived from the original on 17 July 2012 . Retrieved 11 November 2012 .

^ "Robert Green Ingersoll" . Positiveatheism.org. 11 August 1954. Archived from the original on 5 August 2012 . Retrieved 11 November 2012 .

^ a b c d e Dawkins, Richard (20 March 1993).

"Letter: Scientific versus theological knowledge" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 7 May 2022.

External links [ edit ] Library resources about Theology Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Look up theology in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

At Wikiversity , you can learn more and teach others about Theology at the School of Theology .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Theology .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Theology .

"Theology" on Encyclopædia Britannica Chattopadhyay, Subhasis.

"Reflections on Hindu Theology" in Prabuddha Bharata or Awakened India 120(12): 664–672 (2014).

ISSN 0032-6178 . Edited by Swami Narasimhananda.

Theology public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal v t e Creationism General Biblical cosmology Creation myth Creationism Creationist museum Genesis creation narrative History of creationism Book of Genesis Adam and Eve Allegorical interpretations of Genesis Flood geology Genesis flood narrative Noah Noah's Ark Tower of Babel Ussher chronology Types Creation science Gap creationism Hindu creationism Intelligent design Islamic creationism Neo-creationism Old Earth creationism Progressive creationism Theistic evolution Young Earth creationism Controversies Outline Creation–evolution controversy Creation and evolution in public education Edwards v. Aguillard Kansas evolution hearings Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District Teach the Controversy Related Anthropic principle Biblical inerrancy Biblical literalism Created kind Creation science Nephilim Omphalos hypothesis Category:Creationism Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Latvia Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐6sms8
Cached time: 20250817222443
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.315 seconds
Real time usage: 1.615 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7809/1000000
Revision size: 63821/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 449531/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8905/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 35/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 221804/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.703/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19769960/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1206.666      1 -total
 25.69%  310.014      1 Template:Reflist
 15.27%  184.236     20 Template:Cite_web
  8.80%  106.241      2 Template:Lang
  8.45%  101.934      2 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.42%  101.551      1 Template:God
  8.18%   98.677      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.54%   78.904      5 Template:Side_box
  5.60%   67.556      1 Template:Short_description
  5.24%   63.213      4 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:30503:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817222443 and revision id 1302145506. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theology&oldid=1302145506 " Category : Theology Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2025 Articles with limited geographic scope from July 2025 Western culture-centric All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles needing additional references from July 2025 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing context from October 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 17:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Theology 132 languages Add topic

