Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of science fiction television in Canada 2 Actors and creative staff 3 Toronto to Vancouver 4 Foreign control and co-production 5 References Toggle the table of contents Canadian science fiction television Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Main articles: Canadian science fiction and Science fiction on television See also: List of science fiction TV and radio shows produced in Canada and Television in Canada This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Canadian science fiction television" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Canadian science fiction television was produced by the CBC as early as the 1950s. In the 1970s, CTV produced The Starlost . In the 1980s, Canadian animation studios including Nelvana , began producing a growing proportion of the world market in animation.

In the 1990s, Canada became an important player in live action speculative fiction on television, with dozens of series like Forever Knight , Robocop , and most notably The X-Files and Stargate SG-1 . Many series have been produced for youth and children's markets, including Deepwater Black and MythQuest .

In the first decade of the 21st century, changes in provincial tax legislation prompted many production companies to move from Toronto to Vancouver . Recent series produced in Vancouver include The Dead Zone , Smallville , Andromeda , Stargate Atlantis , Stargate Universe , The 4400 , Sanctuary and the reimagined Battlestar Galactica .

Because of the small size of the domestic television market, most Canadian productions involve partnerships with production studios based in the United States and Europe. However, in recent years, new partnership arrangements are allowing Canadian investors a growing share of control of projects produced in Canada and elsewhere.

History of science fiction television in Canada [ edit ] Science fiction in Canada was produced by the CBC in its early years, notably the series Space Command (1953–1954). Actors such as James Doohan and William Shatner first appeared on Canadian television, before finding success in the United States. In the 1970s, CTV produced The Starlost in its Scarborough studios. In the 1980s, many animation houses, most notably Nelvana , began producing a growing proportion of the world market in animation; Canada has become the world leader in 3D animation with shows like ReBoot and Tripping the Rift . Only in the 1990s, with changes in exchange rates and tax legislation, plus a growing skills set among local production companies which had had success in local production and in producing films for American and international markets, that Canada became an important player in live action speculative fiction on television, with shows like Forever Knight , RoboCop , and most notably The X-Files and Stargate SG-1 . The merger that produced Alliance Atlantis found itself with a large stable of science fiction shows, while Lions Gate Television , Fireworks Entertainment , CanWest Global , and CHUM Television produced shows of their own. American-based companies like Fox , Warner Bros.

, Paramount , and Universal also built substantial operations in Canada for their productions. During the 1990s and early 2000s, dozens of science fiction shows were produced in Canada, taking large market shares in American and international markets. A large body of shows have been produced for youth and children's markets, including Deepwater Black , 2030 CE , and MythQuest ; many of these are mainly distributed outside North America.

Actors and creative staff [ edit ] Famous Canadian actors who played popular science fiction roles include Dan Aykroyd , John Candy , Jim Carrey , James Doohan , Nathan Fillion , Michael J. Fox , Lorne Greene , Michael Ironside , Leslie Nielsen , Walter Pidgeon , Christopher Plummer , Michael Shanks , William Shatner , Martin Short , Marc Singer , Donald Sutherland , Kiefer Sutherland , Amanda Tapping , Lexa Doig , Laura Bertram , Keanu Reeves , Kristin Kreuk and Carrie-Anne Moss .

Well-known Canadian filmmakers who have produced science fiction include James Cameron , David Cronenberg , Lex Gigeroff and Norman Jewison .

Canada's science fiction television industry is closely related to the United States. Many Canadian-born actors like Nicole de Boer , Amanda Tapping , Tricia Helfer , and Anthony Michael Hall are immediately recognizable to American SF fans, while some American-born actors and producers like Christopher Judge and Peter DeLuise have spent most of their working lives in Canada.

The Constellation Awards are awarded annually in Canada to honour the best science fiction or fantasy television or film works of the previous year.

After coming to Canada as a guest at Toronto Trek in 1994 and 1995, Majel Barrett Roddenberry chose Toronto as a base for producing Earth: Final Conflict , based on a concept created by her late husband, Gene Roddenberry ; her son Rod became a Canadian resident for three years to work with the production team.

Toronto to Vancouver [ edit ] In the early 2000s, changes in provincial tax legislation prompted many production companies to move from Toronto to Vancouver , which already had a strong television production industry. Recent popular shows produced in Vancouver include The Dead Zone , The 4400 , Andromeda , Stargate Atlantis , and the remake of Battlestar Galactica . Since 1995, more than half a billion dollars a year is spent on media production in Vancouver, with $1.4 billion in 2003 alone.

[ 1 ] Production also began growing in Alberta, Saskatchewan, and elsewhere, such as the production of Lexx in Halifax . However, Toronto continued to be a base for shows like Odyssey 5 , Jake 2.0 , and Mutant X .

Foreign control and co-production [ edit ] Because of the small size of the domestic television market, most Canadian productions involve partnerships with production studios based in the United States and Europe. This sometimes create long preparation cycles for many shows, with years of delay between initial creative development and actual production. Although American management was a common model for Canadian production in the 1990s, more complex partnership arrangements are allowing Canadian investors a growing share of control of projects produced in Canada. This trend has also resulted in outflowing investment to projects produced in other countries, including Doctor Who , a co-production between the CBC and BBC, and Charlie Jade , developed in Canada but produced in South Africa .

References [ edit ] ^ "Canadian vs. Foreign Spent in British Columbia" (PDF) . British Columbia Film. 2005 . Retrieved 2007-01-11 .

[ dead link ] v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Canadian_science_fiction_television&oldid=1283666940 " Categories : Canadian science fiction Canadian science fiction television series History of science fiction Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2010 Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles needing additional references from September 2015 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 2 April 2025, at 22:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Canadian science fiction television Add languages Add topic

