Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Career 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Eugen Ehrlich 19 languages العربية Беларуская Čeština Deutsch فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مصرى 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Austrian lawyer (1862–1922) Eugen Ehrlich Born ( 1862-09-14 ) 14 September 1862 Czernowitz , Bukovina , Austrian Empire Died 2 May 1922 (1922-05-02) (aged 59) Vienna , Austria Nationality Austrian Occupation Jurist Website www .eugen-ehrlich .com Eugen Ehrlich (14 September 1862 – 2 May 1922) was an Austrian legal scholar and sociologist of law . He is widely regarded as one of the primary founders of the modern field of sociology of law .

Biography [ edit ] Ehrlich was born in Czernowitz (now Chernivtsi ) in the Duchy of Bukovina , at that time a province of the Austro-Hungarian empire . Ehrlich studied law in Lemberg, then in Vienna, where he taught and practised as a lawyer before returning to Czernowitz to teach at the university there, a bastion of Germanic culture at the eastern edge of the Empire.

Ehrlich remained there for the rest of his teaching career and was Rector of the University in 1906–7. During the turmoil of World War I, when Czernowitz was occupied several times by Russian forces, he moved to Switzerland. After the break-up of the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the ceding of the Bukovina to Romania, Ehrlich planned to return to Czernowitz, where he would have been required to teach in Romanian, but he died of diabetes in Vienna, Austria in 1922.

Career [ edit ] Ehrlich's experience of the Bukovina's legal culture, where Austrian law and sharply contrasting local custom seemed to co-exist, caused him to question the hierarchical notions of law propounded by such theorists as his fellow countryman, the jurist Hans Kelsen . Ehrlich noted that legal theories that recognized law only as a sum of statutes and court decisions gave an inadequate view of the legal reality of a community. Law, if understood sociologically, embraces much more than just state legislation and court decisions. He drew a distinction between norms for decision (Entscheidungsnormen) and social norms or norms of conduct (Lebendes Recht).

[ 1 ] The latter are created in the social interaction of people. They are rules that make everyday social association possible and stable. Such rules actually govern the life of a society and, under certain conditions, the most important of them can justifiably be regarded in popular consciousness, if not necessarily by lawyers, as law. In addition, these social norms, or "living law", as Ehrlich called them, are frequently adopted and incorporated in state law. For example, commercial usage and custom may develop and be recognized and respected by courts of law and other agencies as having normative force and legal significance.

Ehrlich claimed that the living law that regulates social life may be very different from the norms for decision applied by courts, and may sometimes attract far greater cultural authority which lawyers cannot safely ignore. Norms for decision regulate only those disputes that are brought before a judicial or other tribunal. Living law is a necessary framework for the routine structuring of social relationships. Its source is in the many different kinds of social associations in which people co-exist. Its essence is not dispute and litigation, but peace and co-operation. What counts as law (again, from a sociological perspective) depends on what kind of authority exists to give it legal significance among those it is supposed to regulate.

Ehrlich's teaching is that the sources of law's authority are plural. Some sources are political and others are cultural. As such, political and cultural sources may conflict. But not all social norms should be thought of as 'law', in Ehrlich's view. Legal norms (again, understood sociologically, rather than juristically) are typically distinguished from merely moral or customary ones by powerful feelings of revulsion which typically attach to breach of them. They are, thus, regarded as socially fundamental. In addition, legal norms are recognisable as such because they concern certain kinds of relationships, transactions and circumstances which he described as 'facts of the law' (Tatsachen des Rechts) — specially important topics or considerations for social regulation.

See also [ edit ] Hugo Sinzheimer Otto von Gierke Otto Kahn-Freund Karl Marx Notes [ edit ] ^ Ehrlich, Eugen (2001) [1913].

Fundamental Principles of the Sociology of Law – via Internet Archive .

References [ edit ] Rehbinder, Manfred (1986).

Die Begrundung der Rechtssoziologie durch Eugen Ehrlich, 2nd edn . Berlin: Duncker & Humblot .

Hertogh, Marc, ed. (2009).

Living Law: Reconsidering Eugen Ehrlich . Oxford: Hart .

ISBN 978-1-84113-897-8 .

Cotterrell, Roger (1992).

The Sociology of Law : An Introduction. 2nd edn . Oxford: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-406-51770-8 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) Cotterrell, Roger (2008).

Living Law: Studies in Legal and Social Theory . Abingdon: Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-7546-2710-4 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) Cotterrell, Roger (2024).

Jurisprudence and Socio-Legal Studies: Intersecting Fields . Abingdon: Routledge . ISBN 978-1-032-37463-5.

Nezhurbida, Sergiy and Maria Diachuk (2018).

Eugen Ehrlich : Bibliographic Index (Series in Law). With Introductory article of Manfred Rehbider, edited by Slavka Tomascikova . Vernon Press, 352 p.

ISBN 978-1-62273-377-4 Nezhurbida, Sergiy (2024) Lebensspuren Eugen Ehrlichs, in: Eugen Ehrlich – Kontexte und Rezeptionen, hrsg. v. Marietta Auer u. Ralf Seinecke, Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, S. 41–143 Ерліх, Євген. Монтеск’є та соціологічна юриспруденція / Пер. з анг. і передмова С.І. Нежурбіди // Науковий вісник Чернівецького університету: Збірник наук. праць. Вип. 728: Правознавство. - Чернівці: ЧНУ, 2014. – C. 5-14.

Sergij Neshurbida , Manfred Rehbinder (2021).

Eugen Ehrlich an der Franz‐Josephs‐Universität in Czernowitz.

Beiträge zur Rechtsgeschichte Österreichs 11(1).

Papendorf, Knut; Machura, Stefan; Hellum, Anne (2014).

Eugen Ehrlich's sociology of law . Zürich.

ISBN 978-3-643-90494-2 .

OCLC 873763740 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) .

External links [ edit ] Works by or about Eugen Ehrlich at the Internet Archive v t e Jurisprudence Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Brożek Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Maistre Marx Montesquieu Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Plato Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Waldron Walzer Weber Works Laws (c. 355 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1270) The Spirit of Law (1748) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Pure Theory of Law (1934) The Concept of Law (1961) Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) Law's Empire (1986) Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Constitutional amendment Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Judicial reform Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Korea Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eugen_Ehrlich&oldid=1304034059 " Categories : 1862 births 1922 deaths Scientists from Chernivtsi Academic staff of Chernivtsi University People from the Duchy of Bukovina Bukovina Jews Sociologists of law Rectors of Franz Joseph University (Czernowitz) 19th-century Austrian jurists Austrian sociologists Sociologists from Austria-Hungary Lawyers from Austria-Hungary Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2023 Articles with hCards CS1 maint: publisher location CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 15:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eugen Ehrlich 19 languages Add topic

