Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Professional career 3 Contributions to personality theory Toggle Contributions to personality theory subsection 3.1 Situation and behavior 3.2 Self-control 4 Media appearances 5 Personal life 6 Selected bibliography Toggle Selected bibliography subsection 6.1 Scientific publications 6.2 Autobiography 6.3 Popular press 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Walter Mischel 19 languages العربية تۆرکجه Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مصرى Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English ไทย 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Austrian-born Jewish American psychologist Walter Mischel Born ( 1930-02-22 ) February 22, 1930 Vienna , First Austrian Republic Died September 12, 2018 (2018-09-12) (aged 88) New York City , New York , U.S.

Nationality American Alma mater New York University Ohio State University Known for Stanford marshmallow experiment Awards Grawemeyer Award in Psychology (2011) Scientific career Fields Delayed gratification , personality psychology , social psychology Institutions Columbia University Stanford University Harvard University Thesis Variables Influencing the Generalization of Expectancy Statements (1956) Doctoral advisor Julian Rotter Walter Mischel ( German: [ˈvaltɐ ˈmɪʃl̩] ; February 22, 1930 – September 12, 2018) was an Austrian-born American psychologist specializing in personality theory and social psychology .  He was the Robert Johnston Niven Professor of Humane Letters in the Department of Psychology at Columbia University . A Review of General Psychology survey, published in 2002, ranked Mischel as the 25th most cited psychologist of the 20th century.

[ 1 ] Early life [ edit ] Mischel was born on February 22, 1930 [ 2 ] in Vienna , Austria, to Salomon Mischel and the former Lola Leah Schreck.  He was the brother of Theodore Mischel, who became an American philosopher.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] When he was 8 years old his Jewish family fled with him to the United States after the Nazi occupation in 1938.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] He grew up in Brooklyn , New York City where he attended New York University and received his bachelor's degree (1951) and master's degree (1953).

[ 8 ] He continued his studies under George Kelly and Julian Rotter at Ohio State University , where he received his Ph.D. in clinical psychology in 1956.  He spent much of his career studying delayed gratification and life outcomes of those who were able to maintain self-control when studied.

Professional career [ edit ] Mischel taught at the University of Colorado from 1956 to 1958, at Harvard University from 1958 to 1962, and at Stanford University from 1962 to 1983.  Since 1983, Mischel was in the Department of Psychology at Columbia University .

Mischel was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 2004 and to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1991.  In 2007, Mischel was elected president of the Association for Psychological Science .  Mischel's other honors include the Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award from the American Psychological Association , the Distinguished Scientist Award of the Society of Experimental Social Psychologists, the Distinguished Contributions to Personality Award of the Society of Social and Personality Psychologists, and the Distinguished Scientist Award of American Psychological Association's Division of Clinical Psychology.  He was editor of Psychological Review and was president of the American Psychological Association Division of Social and Personality Psychology and of the Association for Research in Personality .

Mischel was the recipient of the 2011 University of Louisville Grawemeyer Award in Psychology for his studies in self-control.

[ 9 ] Contributions to personality theory [ edit ] In 1968, Mischel published the controversial book, Personality and Assessment , [ 10 ] which created a paradigm crisis in personality psychology. The book touched upon the problem in trait assessment that was first identified by Gordon Allport in 1937. Mischel found that empirical studies often failed to support the fundamental traditional assumption of personality theory, that an individual's behavior with regard to an inferred trait construct (e.g. conscientiousness; sociability) remained highly consistent across diverse situations. Instead, Mischel cautioned that an individual's behavior was highly dependent upon situational cues, rather than expressed consistently across diverse situations that differed in meaning. Mischel maintained that behavior is shaped largely by the exigencies of a given situation and that the notion that individuals act in consistent ways across different situations, reflecting the influence of underlying personality traits, is a myth.

[ 11 ] Situation and behavior [ edit ] Main article: Person–situation debate Mischel made the case that the field of personality psychology was searching for consistency in the wrong places.  Instead of treating situations as the noise or "error of measurement", Mischel's work proposed that by including the situation as it is perceived by the individual and by analyzing behavior in its situational context, the consistencies that characterize the individual would be found. He argued that these individual differences would not be expressed in consistent cross-situational behavior, but instead, he suggested that consistency would be found in distinctive but stable patterns of if-then, situation-behavior relations that form contextualized, psychologically meaningful "personality signatures" (e.g., "s/he does A when X, but does B when Y").

These signatures of personality have been in fact revealed in a large observational study of social behavior across multiple repeated situations over time.

[ 12 ] Contradicting the classic assumptions, the data showed that individuals who were similar in average levels of behavior, for example in their aggression, nevertheless differed predictably and dramatically in the types of situations in which they exhibited aggression. As predicted by Mischel, they were characterized by highly psychologically informative if-then behavioral signatures. Collectively, this work has allowed a new way to conceptualize and assess both the stability and variability of behavior that is produced by the underlying personality system and has opened a window into the dynamic processes within the system itself.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Self-control [ edit ] In a second direction, beginning in the late 1960s and early 1970s, Mischel pioneered work illuminating the ability to delay gratification and to exert self-control in the face of strong situational pressures and emotionally "hot" temptations. His studies with preschoolers in the late 1960s often referred to as "the marshmallow experiment ", examined the processes and mental mechanisms that enable a young child to forgo immediate gratification and to wait instead for a larger desired but delayed reward. The test was simple: give the child an option between an immediate treat or more of a delayed treat. For example, the proctor would give the child an option to eat one marshmallow immediately or to wait ten minutes and receive not one, but two marshmallows to eat.

[ 15 ] The test did not have to be conducted with marshmallows specifically; it could be done with Oreo cookies, M&Ms, or other desirable treats. As Mischel followed up with the parents of the children who took the test years later, he found a staggering correlation between those kids who had difficulty delaying gratification and their outcomes in life as an adult.

[ 15 ] For those kids who had trouble waiting for the delectable delight, they tended to have higher rates of obesity and below-average levels of academic achievement later in life.

[ 16 ] Their counterparts who were able to wait longer for the treat had stark different outcomes down the road, including lower body mass index and higher standardized test scores.

[ 16 ] Still a stark contrast appeared when studying children who were raised by parents below the poverty line compared with children whose parents were college-educated. A significantly larger portion of the low-income children ate the treat immediately conversely from the counterparts who waited.

[ 15 ] Continuing research with these original participants has examined how preschool delay of gratification ability links to development over the life course and may predict a variety of important outcomes (e.g., SAT scores, social and cognitive competence, educational attainment, and drug use), and can have significant protective effects against a variety of potential vulnerabilities.

[ 7 ] This work also opened a route to research on temporal discounting in decision-making, and most importantly into the mental mechanisms that enable cognitive and emotional self-control , thereby helping to demystify the concept of willpower.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] While the data is clear about the outcomes of a child failing or passing the Marshmallow Test, what is not clear is understanding why the subjects quickly consume the treat or wait for more. Walter Mischel conducted additional research and predicted that the Marshmallow Test can also be a test of trust.

[ 16 ] Children who were raised by absent parents were less likely to pass possibly because they did not trust the stranger when he or she said they would be given double the reward if they waited. They trusted their instincts and acted upon a certain thing.

[ 16 ] In addition, Mischel believed that the children who wait have the inherent ability to reach their goals and hold positive expectations. This understanding is a hypothesis for why the outcomes later in life are so starkly different.

[ 16 ] Media appearances [ edit ] Mischel appeared on The Colbert Report in September 2014 to discuss his studies shortly after the release of his first book meant for a general audience, The Marshmallow Test .

[ 19 ] In October 2014, an extensive interview with him was published on the PBS NewsHour "Making Sen$e" economics website, [ 20 ] and in January 2015, he and his work were featured twice on the PBS NewsHour broadcast.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] On June 24, 2016, Mischel was interviewed for the Invisibilia Podcast "The Personality Myth" on National Public Radio . He discussed the way that personality works and how it can change over time when a person is presented with new situational circumstances.

[ 23 ] Personal life [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( May 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Mischel lived in Manhattan in New York City, and enjoyed painting and travel. He had three children and six grandchildren. Mischel spoke several languages, including English and French, and spent time in Paris, France on a regular basis and frequented Bend, Oregon later in life. He died at his home in New York from pancreatic cancer on September 12, 2018.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Selected bibliography [ edit ] Scientific publications [ edit ] Mischel, W.  (1968).

Personality and assessment .  New York: Wiley.

Mischel, W.  (1973). Toward a cognitive social learning reconceptualization of personality.

Psychological Review ,  80, 252–283.

Mischel, W., Shoda, Y.

, & Rodriguez, M. L.  (1989).  Delay of gratification in children.

Science ,  244, 933–938.

Mischel, W. & Shoda, Y. (1995). A cognitive-affective system theory of personality: Reconceptualizing situations, dispositions, dynamics, and invariance in personality structure.

Psychological Review , 102, 246–268.

Metcalfe, J., & Mischel, W.  (1999).  A hot/cool system analysis of delay of gratification: Dynamics of willpower.

Psychological Review , 106, 3–19.

Mischel, W., & Ayduk, O. (2004). "Willpower in a cognitive-affective processing system: The dynamics of delay of gratification". In R. F. Baumeister & K. D. Vohs (Eds.), Handbook of self-regulation: Research, Theory, and Applications (pp. 99–129). New York: Guilford.

Mischel, W. (2004). "Toward an integrative science of the person".

Annual Review of Psychology , 55, 1–22.

Autobiography [ edit ] Mischel, W. (2007). "Walter Mischel". In G. Lindzey & W. M. Runyan (Eds.), A History of Psychology in Autobiography (Vol. IX, pp. 229–267).  Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Popular press [ edit ] Mischel, W. (2014).

The Marshmallow Test . New York: Little, Brown.

See also [ edit ] Situationism References [ edit ] ^ Haggbloom, Steven J.; Warnick, Renee; Warnick, Jason E.; Jones, Vinessa K.; Yarbrough, Gary L.; Russell, Tenea M.; Borecky, Chris M.; McGahhey, Reagan; Powell III, John L.; Beavers, Jamie; Monte, Emmanuelle (2002).

"The 100 most eminent psychologists of the 20th century" .

Review of General Psychology .

6 (2): 139– 152.

doi : 10.1037/1089-2680.6.2.139 .

S2CID 145668721 .

^ Carducci, Bernardo J. (2009).

The Psychology of Personality: Viewpoints, Research, and Applications . Wiley-Blackwell. p. 440.

^ "Economag.co" . Archived from the original on 2018-09-16 . Retrieved 2018-09-15 .

^ "To have and have not" .

Haaretz .

^ Mischel, Walter (2007). "Walter Mischel". In Lindzey, Gardner; Runyan, William M. (eds.).

A History of Psychology in Autobiography, Vol. IX . Washington, DC: American Psychological Association . pp.

229– 267.

doi : 10.1037/11571-007 .

ISBN 978-1-59147-796-9 .

^ Druckerman, Pamela (12 September 2014).

"learning-self-control" .

The New York Times .

^ a b Lehrer, Jonah (May 18, 2009).

"Don't!: The secret of self-control" .

The New Yorker .

^ Nolen, Jeannette L.

"Walter Mischel | American psychologist" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2018-02-23 .

^ "Scientist who helps explain self-control wins Grawemeyer Award" . 30 November 2010.

^ Mischel, Walter.

Personality and Assessment , New York: Wiley, 1968.

^ McAdams, Dan (2009).

The Person: An Introduction to the Science of Personality Psychology . Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. p. 143.

ISBN 978-0-470-12913-5 .

^ Mischel, W. & Shoda, Y. (1995). A cognitive-affective system theory of personality: Reconceptualizing situations, dispositions, dynamics, and invariance in personality structure.

Psychological Review, 102 (2), 246–268.

^ Mischel, Walter (2004).

"Toward an Integrative Science of the Person" .

Annual Review of Psychology .

55 (1): 1– 22.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.psych.55.042902.130709 .

ISSN 0066-4308 .

PMID 14744208 .

^ Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Smith, R. E. (2004).

Introduction to Personality: Toward an Integration (7th edn.). New York: Wiley.

^ a b c Ferdman, Roberto A. (2016-06-08).

"The big problem with one of the most popular assumptions about the poor" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 2018-04-05 .

^ a b c d e "Desire delayed" .

The Economist . Retrieved 2018-04-26 .

^ Mischel, W., Shoda, Y., & Rodriguez, M. L. (1989). Delay of gratification in children.

Science, 244 , 933–938.

^ Mischel, W., & Ayduk, O. (2004). Willpower in a cognitive-affective processing system: The dynamics of delay of gratification. In R.F. Baumeister & K.D. Vohs (Eds.), Handbook of Self-Regulation: Research, Theory, and Applications(pp. 99–129). New York: Guilford.

^ Walter Mischel—The Marshmallow Test " Comedy Central " September 25, 2014 ^ "How to teach self-control and reduce economic inequality" .

pbs.org . 10 October 2014 . Retrieved 2018-09-14 .

^ "Want to keep your New Year's resolutions? Stop living in the present and focus on the future" .

pbs.org . January 2015 . Retrieved 2018-09-14 .

^ "Can teaching kids to resist the marshmallow help pave the way to success?" .

pbs.org . 8 January 2015 . Retrieved 2018-09-14 .

^ The Personality Myth , by Lulu Miller and Alix Spiegel " National Public Radio " June 24, 2016 ^ Carey, Benedict (September 14, 2018), "Walter Mischel, 88, Psychologist Famed for Marshmallow Test, Dies" , The New York Times ^ "Walter Mischel Ph.D. Obituary - New York, New York" .

Legacy.com . 13 September 2018 . Retrieved 2018-09-14 .

External links [ edit ] Columbia University Department of Psychology: Walter Mischel Don't! The secret of self-control , by Jonah Lehrer The New Yorker May 18, 2009 Walter Mischel—The Marshmallow Test " Comedy Central " September 25, 2014 The Personality Myth , by Lulu Miller and Alix Spiegel " National Public Radio " June 24, 2016 v t e Psychology History Philosophy Portal Psychologist Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Methodologies Animal testing Archival research Behavior epigenetics Case study Content analysis Experiments Human subject research Interviews Neuroimaging Observation Psychophysics Qualitative research Quantitative research Self-report inventory Statistical surveys Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Psychologists Wilhelm Wundt William James Ivan Pavlov Sigmund Freud Edward Thorndike Carl Jung John B. Watson Clark L. Hull Kurt Lewin Jean Piaget Gordon Allport J. P. Guilford Carl Rogers Erik Erikson B. F. Skinner Donald O. Hebb Ernest Hilgard Harry Harlow Raymond Cattell Abraham Maslow Neal E. Miller Jerome Bruner Donald T. Campbell Hans Eysenck Herbert A. Simon David McClelland Leon Festinger George A. Miller Richard Lazarus Stanley Schachter Robert Zajonc Albert Bandura Roger Brown Endel Tulving Lawrence Kohlberg Noam Chomsky Ulric Neisser Jerome Kagan Walter Mischel Elliot Aronson Daniel Kahneman Paul Ekman Michael Posner Amos Tversky Bruce McEwen Larry Squire Richard E. Nisbett Martin Seligman Ed Diener Shelley E. Taylor John Anderson Ronald C. Kessler Joseph E. LeDoux Richard Davidson Susan Fiske Roy Baumeister Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Category Wiktionary definition Wiktionary category Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Wikibooks Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project People Trove DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Walter_Mischel&oldid=1303096713 " Categories : 1930 births 2018 deaths Health professionals from Vienna Jewish emigrants from Austria after the Anschluss to the United States Columbia University faculty Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Fellows of the Society of Experimental Psychologists Harvard University Department of Psychology faculty Austrian Jews Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences Ohio State University College of Arts and Sciences alumni American social psychologists 20th-century American psychologists 21st-century American psychologists Stanford University Department of Psychology faculty University of Colorado Boulder faculty Deaths from pancreatic cancer in New York (state) Jewish scientists Jewish psychologists APA Distinguished Scientific Award for an Early Career Contribution to Psychology recipients Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA Articles needing additional references from May 2019 All articles needing additional references Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 02:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Walter Mischel 19 languages Add topic

