Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Plato and the Timaeus 2 Gnosticism Toggle Gnosticism subsection 2.1 Angels 2.2 Yaldabaoth 2.2.1 Names 2.3 Marcion 2.4 Valentinus 2.5 The devil 3 Platonism Toggle Platonism subsection 3.1 Middle Platonism 3.2 Plotinus 3.2.1 Henology 3.2.2 Plotinus' Against the Gnostics 3.3 Iamblichus 4 Later representations Toggle Later representations subsection 4.1 Cathars 4.2 Modern influence 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Notes 6.2 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Demiurge 51 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Creation spirit in some schools of philosophy This article is about the philosophical concept of a Universal Fashioner. For other uses, see Demiurge (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Theism Types of faith Agnosticism Apatheism Atheism Classical theism Deism Henotheism Ietsism Ignosticism Monotheism Monism Dualism Monolatry Kathenotheism Omnism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Specific conceptions Brahman Creator Demiurge Deus Father Form of the Good God Great Architect Monad Mother Summum bonum Supreme The Lord Trinity Tawhid Ditheism Monism Personal Unitarianism In particular religions Abrahamic Judaism Christianity Islam Baháʼí Faith Mormonism Mandaeism Samaritanism Indo-Iranian Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Sikhism Yungdrung Bon Zoroastrianism Chinese Tian Shangdi Hongjun Laozu Attributes Eternalness Existence Gender Names ( "God" ) Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Aseity Transcendence Experiences Practices Belief Esotericism Faith Fideism Gnosis Hermeticism Metaphysics Mysticism Prayer Revelation Worship Related topics Euthyphro dilemma God complex God gene Theology Ontology Problem of evil ( theodicy ) Religion philosophy texts Portrayals of God in popular media Religion portal v t e In the Platonic , Neopythagorean , Middle Platonic , and Neoplatonic schools of philosophy , the Demiurge ( / ˈ d ɛ m i .

ɜːr dʒ / ) is an artisan -like figure responsible for fashioning and maintaining the physical universe . Various sects of Gnostics adopted the term demiurge .

Although a fashioner, the demiurge is not necessarily the same as the creator figure in the monotheistic sense, because the demiurge itself and the material from which the demiurge fashions the universe are both considered consequences of something else. Depending on the system, they may be considered either uncreated and eternal or the product of some other entity. Some of these systems are monotheistic, while others are henotheistic or polytheistic .

The word demiurge is an English word derived from demiurgus , a Latinised form of the Greek δημιουργός ( dēmiurgós ) . It was originally a common noun meaning "craftsman" or "artisan", but gradually came to mean "producer", and eventually "creator." The philosophical usage and the proper noun derive from Plato's Timaeus , written c.

360 BC, where the demiurge is presented as the creator of the universe. The demiurge is also described as a creator in the Platonic ( c.

310–90 BC) and Middle Platonic ( c.

90 BC–AD 300) philosophical traditions. In the various branches of the Neoplatonic school (third century onwards), the demiurge is the fashioner of the real, perceptible world after the model of the Ideas , but (in most Neoplatonic systems) is still not itself " the One ".

Within the vast spectrum of Gnostic traditions, views of the Demiurge range dramatically. It is generally understood and agreed upon to be a lesser divinity who governs the material universe. However, the nature of its rule over the material realm differs from sect to sect.

Sethian Gnosticism portrays the Demiurge as an oppressive, ignorant ruler, intentionally binding souls in an inherently corrupt material realm. In contrast, Valentinian Gnosticism sees the Demiurge as a well-meaning but limited figure whose rule reflects ignorance rather than malice.

Plato and the Timaeus [ edit ] Main article: Timaeus (dialogue) Plato , as the speaker Timaeus, refers to the Demiurge frequently in the Socratic dialogue Timaeus (28a ff.

), c.

360 BC. The main character refers to the Demiurge as the entity who "fashioned and shaped" the material world. Timaeus describes the Demiurge as unreservedly benevolent , and so it desires a world as good as possible. The result of his work is a universe as a living god with lesser gods, such as the stars, planets, and gods of traditional religion, inside it. Plato argues that the cosmos needed a Demiurge because the cosmos needed a cause that makes Becoming resemble Being .

[ 1 ] Timaeus is a philosophical reconciliation of Hesiod 's cosmology in his Theogony , syncretically reconciling Hesiod to Homer , [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] though other scholars have argued that Plato's theology 'invokes a broad cultural horizon without committing to any specific poetic or religious tradition'.

[ 5 ] Moreover, Plato believed that the Demiurge created other, so-called "lower" gods who, in turn, created humanity.

[ 6 ] Some scholars have argued that the lower gods are gods of traditional mythology, such as Zeus and Hera.

[ 7 ] Gnosticism [ edit ] Part of a series on Gnosticism Gnostic concepts Adam kasia Adam pagria Aeon Anima mundi Archon Barbelo Demiurge Five Seals Gnosis Kenoma Luminary Manda Monad Ogdoad Pleroma Sophia Uthra World of Light World of Darkness Yaldabaoth Gnostic sects and founders List of Gnostic sects Proto-Gnosticism Maghāriya Thomasines Judean / Israelite Adam Mandaeism Elksai Elkasaites Samaritan Baptist Dositheos Simon Magus ( Simonians ) Menander Quqites Christian Gnosticism Apelles Cerinthus Justin Marcion Marcionism Nicolaism Perates Saturninus Ophites Sethianism Basilides Basilideans Valentinus Valentinianism Marcus Marcosians Florinus Naassenes Thomasine Barbelo Borborites Carpocratians (Gnostic sect) Cerdo (Gnostic) Persian Gnosticism Mani Manichaeism Chinese Gnosticism Chinese Manichaeism Islamic Gnosticism Druze Nusayrism Modern Modern schools Scriptures List of Gnostic texts Texts Nag Hammadi library Pseudo-Abdias Clementine literature Gnosticism and the New Testament Mandaean scriptures Codices Codex Tchacos Cologne Mani-Codex Askew Codex Bruce Codex Berlin Codex Codex Nasaraeus Influenced by Apocalyptic literature Early Christianity Christology Docetism Paul and Gnosticism Merkabah mysticism Middle Platonism Philo Wisdom (personification) Influence on Carl Jung Esoteric Christianity Christian theosophy Gnosticism in modern times Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Perennial philosophy Thelema Theosophy (Blavatskian) Western esotericism René Guénon Rudolf Steiner v t e Gnosticism presents a distinction between the highest, unknowable God or Supreme Being and the demiurgic "creator" of the material, identified in some traditions with Yahweh , the God of the Hebrew Bible . Several systems of Gnostic thought present the Demiurge as antagonistic to the will of the Supreme Being , with his creation initially having the malevolent intention of entrapping aspects of the divine in materiality. In other systems, the Demiurge is instead portrayed as "merely" incompetent or foolish: his creation is an unconscious attempt to replicate the divine world (the pleroma ) based on faint recollections, and thus ends up fundamentally flawed. Thus, in such systems, the Demiurge is a proposed solution to the problem of evil : while the divine beings are omniscient and omnibenevolent, the Demiurge who rules over our own physical world is not.

[ 8 ] Angels [ edit ] Psalm 82 begins, "God stands in the assembly of El [ LXX : assembly of gods], in the midst of the gods he renders judgment", [ 9 ] indicating a plurality of gods, although it does not indicate that these gods were co-actors in creation.

Philo had inferred from the expression "Let us make man" of the Book of Genesis that God had used other beings as assistants in the creation of man, and he explains in this way why man is capable of vice as well as virtue, ascribing the origin of the latter to God, of the former to his helpers in the work of creation.

[ 10 ] The earliest Gnostic sects ascribe the work of creation to angels, some of them using the same passage in Genesis.

[ 11 ] So Irenaeus tells [ 12 ] of the system of Simon Magus , [ 13 ] of the system of Menander , [ 14 ] of the system of Saturninus , in which the number of these angels is reckoned as seven, and [ 15 ] of the system of Carpocrates . In Basilides 's system, he reports, [ 16 ] the world was made by the angels who occupy the lowest heaven; but special mention is made of their chief, who is said to have been the God of the Jews , to have led that people out of the land of Egypt , and to have given them their law. The prophecies are ascribed not to the chief but to the other world-making angels.

The Latin translation, confirmed by Hippolytus of Rome , [ 17 ] makes Irenaeus state that according to Cerinthus (who shows Ebionite influence), creation was made by a power quite separate from the Supreme God and ignorant of him.

Theodoret , [ 18 ] who here copies Irenaeus, turns this into the plural number "powers", and so Epiphanius of Salamis [ 19 ] represents Cerinthus as agreeing with Carpocrates in the doctrine that the world was made by angels.

Yaldabaoth [ edit ] Main article: Yaldabaoth A lion-faced, serpentine deity found on a Gnostic gem in Bernard de Montfaucon 's L'antiquité expliquée et représentée en figures , a depiction of Yaldabaoth.

In the Archontic , Sethian , and Ophite systems, which have many affinities with the doctrine of Valentinus , the making of the world is ascribed to a company of seven archons , whose names are given, but still more prominent is their chief, "Yaldabaoth" (also known as "Yaltabaoth" or "Ialdabaoth").

In the Apocryphon of John c.

AD 120–180, the demiurge declares that he has made the world by himself: Now the archon ["ruler"] who is weak has three names. The first name is Yaltabaoth, the second is Saklas ["fool"], and the third is Samael ["blind god"]. And he is impious in his arrogance which is in him. For he said, 'I am God and there is no other God beside me,' for he is ignorant of his strength, the place from which he had come.

[ 20 ] He is demiurge and maker of man, but as a ray of light from above enters the body of man and gives him a soul, Yaldabaoth is filled with envy; he tries to limit man's knowledge by forbidding him the fruit of knowledge in paradise. At the consummation of all things, all light will return to the Pleroma . But Yaldabaoth, the demiurge, with the material world, will be cast into the lower depths.

[ 21 ] Yaldabaoth is frequently called "the Lion-faced", leontoeides , and is said to have the body of a serpent. The demiurge is also [ 22 ] described as having a fiery nature, applying the words of Moses to him: "the Lord our God is a burning and consuming fire". Hippolytus claims that Simon used a similar description.

[ 23 ] In Pistis Sophia , Yaldabaoth has already sunk from his high estate and resides in Chaos, where, with his forty-nine demons, he tortures wicked souls in boiling rivers of pitch, and with other punishments (pp. 257, 382). He is an archon with the face of a lion, half flame, and half darkness.

In the Nag Hammadi text On the Origin of the World , the three sons of Yaldabaoth are listed as Yao , Eloai, and Astaphaios .

[ 24 ] Under the name of Nebro (rebel), Yaldabaoth is called an angel in the apocryphal Gospel of Judas . He is first mentioned in "The Cosmos, Chaos, and the Underworld" as one of the twelve angels to come "into being [to] rule over chaos and the [underworld]". He comes from heaven, and it is said his "face flashed with fire and [his] appearance was defiled with blood". Nebro creates six angels in addition to the angel Saklas to be his assistants. These six, in turn, create another twelve angels "with each one receiving a portion in the heavens".

Names [ edit ] Main article: Yaldabaoth § Etymology The etymology of the name Yaldabaoth has been subject to many speculative theories. Until 1974, etymologies deriving from the unattested Aramaic : בהותא, romanized: bāhūthā , supposedly meaning " chaos ", represented the majority view. Following an analysis by the Jewish historian of religion Gershom Scholem published in 1974, [ 25 ] this etymology no longer enjoyed any notable support. His analysis showed the unattested Aramaic term to have been fabulated and attested only in a single corrupted text from 1859, with its claimed translation having been transposed from the reading of an earlier etymology, whose explanation seemingly equated " darkness " and "chaos" when translating an unattested supposed plural form of Hebrew : בוהו , romanized : bōhu .

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] " Samael " literally means "Blind God" or "God of the Blind" in Hebrew ( סמאל ‎). This being is considered not only blind, or ignorant of its own origins, but may, in addition, be evil; its name is also found in Judaism as the Angel of Death and in Christian demonology . This link to Judeo-Christian tradition leads to a further comparison with Satan . Another alternative title for the demiurge is "Saklas", Aramaic for "fool". In the Apocryphon of John , Yaldabaoth is also known as both Sakla and Samael.

[ 27 ] The angelic name " Ariel " (Hebrew: 'the lion of God') [ 28 ] has also been used to refer to the Demiurge and is called his "perfect" name; [ 29 ] in some Gnostic lore, Ariel has been called an ancient or original name for Ialdabaoth.

[ 30 ] The name has also been inscribed on amulets as "Ariel Ialdabaoth", [ 31 ] [ 32 ] and the figure of the archon inscribed with "Aariel".

[ 33 ] Marcion [ edit ] According to Marcion , the title God was given to the Demiurge, who was to be sharply distinguished from the higher Good God. The former was díkaios , severely just, the latter agathós , or loving-kind; the former was the "god of this world", [ 34 ] the God of the Old Testament , the latter the true God of the New Testament . Christ, in reality, is the Son of the Good God. The true believer in Christ entered into God's kingdom; the unbeliever remained forever the slave of the Demiurge.

[ 21 ] Valentinus [ edit ] It is in the system of Valentinus that the name Dēmiurgos is used, which occurs nowhere in Irenaeus except in connection with the Valentinian system. When it is employed by other Gnostics either it is not used in a technical sense, or its use has been borrowed from Valentinus. But it is only the name that can be said to be specially Valentinian; the personage intended by it corresponds more or less closely with the Yaldabaoth of the Ophites, the great Archon of Basilides, the Elohim of Justinus , etc.

The Valentinian theory elaborates that from Achamoth ( he kátō sophía or lower wisdom) three kinds of substance take their origin, the spiritual ( pneumatikoí ), the animal ( psychikoí ) and the material ( hylikoí ). The Demiurge belongs to the second kind, as he was the offspring of a union of Achamoth with matter.

[ 21 ] [ 35 ] And as Achamoth herself was only the daughter of Sophía the last of the thirty Aeons, the Demiurge was distant by many emanations from the Propatôr, or Supreme God.

[ 21 ] In creating this world out of Chaos the Demiurge was unconsciously influenced for good; and the universe, to the surprise even of its Maker, became almost perfect. The Demiurge regretted even its slight imperfection, and as he thought himself the Supreme God, he attempted to remedy this by sending a Messiah. To this Messiah, however, was actually united with Jesus the Saviour, Who redeemed men. These are either hylikoí or pneumatikoí .

[ 21 ] The first, or material men, will return to the grossness of matter and finally be consumed by fire; the second, or animal men, together with the Demiurge, will enter a middle state, neither Pleroma nor hyle ; the purely spiritual men will be completely freed from the influence of the Demiurge and together with the Saviour and Achamoth, his spouse, will enter the Pleroma divested of body ( hyle ) and soul ( psyché ).

[ 21 ] [ 36 ] In this most common form of Gnosticism the Demiurge had an inferior though not intrinsically evil function in the universe as the head of the animal, or psychic world.

[ 21 ] The devil [ edit ] Opinions on the devil , and his relationship to the Demiurge, vary. The Ophites held that he and his demons constantly oppose and thwart the human race, as it was on their account the devil was cast down into this world.

[ 37 ] According to one variant of the Valentinian system, the Demiurge is also the maker, out of the appropriate substance, of an order of spiritual beings, the devil, the prince of this world, and his angels. But the devil, as being a spirit of wickedness, is able to recognise the higher spiritual world, of which his maker the Demiurge, who is only animal, has no real knowledge. The devil resides in this lower world, of which he is the prince, the Demiurge in the heavens; his mother Sophia in the middle region, above the heavens and below the Pleroma.

[ 38 ] The Valentinian Heracleon [ 39 ] interpreted the devil as the principle of evil, that of hyle (matter). As he writes in his commentary on John 4:21, The mountain represents the Devil, or his world, since the Devil was one part of the whole of matter, but the world is the total mountain of evil, a deserted dwelling place of beasts, to which all who lived before the law and all Gentiles render worship. But Jerusalem represents the creation or the Creator whom the Jews worship. ... You then who are spiritual should worship neither the creation nor the Craftsman, but the Father of Truth.

This vilification of the creator was held to be inimical to Christianity by the early fathers of the church. In refuting the beliefs of the gnostics, Irenaeus stated that "Plato is proved to be more religious than these men, for he allowed that the same God was both just and good, having power over all things, and himself executing judgment." [ 40 ] Platonism [ edit ] Part of a series on Platonism Life Works Theory of forms Intelligible form Hyperuranion Theory of soul Nous Thumos Phren Epistemology Anamnesis Peritrope Dianoia Cardinal virtues Moral rationalism Political philosophy Mimesis Orthotes onomaton Euthyphro dilemma The Republic Allegory of the cave Analogy of the Sun Analogy of the divided line Form of the Good Noble lie Philosopher king Plato's number Ship of State Ring of Gyges Myth of Er Timaeus Atlantis Demiurge World soul Organicism Classical element Platonic solid Tertium quid Khôra Related articles Commentaries The Academy in Athens Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Neoplatonism and Christianity Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Pseudo-Platonica Related categories Plato Philosophy portal v t e Middle Platonism [ edit ] In Numenius 's Neo-Pythagorean and Middle Platonist cosmogony , the Demiurge is second God as the nous or thought of intelligibles and sensibles [ 41 ] Plotinus [ edit ] The work of Plotinus and other later Platonists in the 3rd century AD to further clarify the Demiurge is known as Neoplatonism . To Plotinus, the second emanation represents an uncreated second cause (see Pythagoras ' Dyad ). Plotinus sought to reconcile Aristotle's energeia with Plato's Demiurge, [ 42 ] which, as Demiurge and mind ( nous ), is a critical component in the ontological construct of human consciousness used to explain and clarify substance theory within Platonic realism (also called idealism ). In order to reconcile Aristotelian with Platonian philosophy, [ 42 ] Plotinus metaphorically identified the demiurge (or nous ) within the pantheon of the Greek Gods as Zeus .

[ 43 ] Henology [ edit ] The first and highest aspect of God is described by Plato as the One (Τὸ Ἕν, 'To Hen'), the source, or the Monad .

[ 44 ] This is the God above the Demiurge, and manifests through the actions of the Demiurge. The Monad emanated the demiurge or Nous (consciousness) from its "indeterminate" vitality due to the monad being so abundant that it overflowed back onto itself, causing self-reflection.

[ 45 ] This self-reflection of the indeterminate vitality was referred to by Plotinus as the "Demiurge" or creator. The second principle is organization in its reflection of the nonsentient force or dynamis , also called the one or the Monad. The dyad is energeia emanated by the one that is then the work, process or activity called nous , Demiurge, mind, consciousness that organizes the indeterminate vitality into the experience called the material world, universe, cosmos.

Plotinus also elucidates the equation of matter with nothing or non-being in The Enneads [ 46 ] which more correctly is to express the concept of idealism or that there is not anything or anywhere outside of the "mind" or nous (cf.

pantheism ).

Plotinus' form of Platonic idealism is to treat the Demiurge, nous , as the contemplative faculty ( ergon ) within man which orders the force ( dynamis ) into conscious reality.

[ 47 ] In this, he claimed to reveal Plato's true meaning: a doctrine he learned from Platonic tradition that did not appear outside the academy or in Plato's text. This tradition of creator God as nous (the manifestation of consciousness), can be validated in the works of pre-Plotinus philosophers such as Numenius , as well as a connection between Hebrew and Platonic cosmology (see also Philo ).

[ 48 ] The Demiurge of Neoplatonism is the Nous (mind of God), and is one of the three ordering principles: Arche (Gr. 'beginning') – the source of all things, Logos (Gr. 'reason/cause') – the underlying order that is hidden beneath appearances, Harmonia (Gr. 'harmony') – numerical ratios in mathematics .

Before Numenius of Apamea and Plotinus' Enneads , no Platonic works ontologically clarified the Demiurge from the allegory in Plato's Timaeus . The idea of Demiurge was, however, addressed before Plotinus in the works of Christian writer Justin Martyr who built his understanding of the Demiurge on the works of Numenius.

[ 49 ] Plotinus' Against the Gnostics [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Against the Gnostics; or, Against Those that Affirm the Creator of the Cosmos and the Cosmos Itself to be Evil Main article: Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Gnosticism attributed falsehood or evil to the concept of the Demiurge or creator, though in some Gnostic traditions the creator is from a fallen, ignorant, or lesser—rather than evil—perspective, such as that of Valentinius . The Neoplatonic philosopher Plotinus addressed within his works Gnosticism's conception of the Demiurge, which he saw as un- Hellenic and blasphemous to the Demiurge or creator of Plato. Plotinus, along with his teacher Ammonius Saccas , was the founder of Neoplatonism .

[ 50 ] In the ninth tractate of the second of his Enneads , Plotinus criticizes his opponents for their appropriation of ideas from Plato: From Plato come their punishments, their rivers of the underworld and the changing from body to body; as for the plurality they assert in the Intellectual Realm—the Authentic Existent, the Intellectual-Principle, the Second Creator and the Soul —all this is taken over from the Timaeus.

— Ennead 2.9.vi; emphasis added from A. H. Armstrong 's introduction to Ennead 2.9 Of note here is the remark concerning the second hypostasis or Creator and third hypostasis or World Soul . Plotinus criticizes his opponents for "all the novelties through which they seek to establish a philosophy of their own" which, he declares, "have been picked up outside of the truth"; [ 51 ] they attempt to conceal rather than admit their indebtedness to ancient philosophy, which they have corrupted by their extraneous and misguided embellishments. Thus their understanding of the Demiurge is similarly flawed in comparison to Plato's original intentions.

Whereas Plato's Demiurge is good wishing good on his creation, Gnosticism contends that the Demiurge is not only the originator of evil but is evil as well. Hence the title of Plotinus' refutation: "Against Those That Affirm the Creator of the Kosmos and the Kosmos Itself to be Evil" (generally quoted as "Against the Gnostics"). Plotinus argues of the disconnect or great barrier that is created between the nous or mind's noumenon (see Heraclitus ) and the material world ( phenomenon ) by believing the material world is evil.

The majority of scholars tend [ 52 ] to understand Plotinus' opponents as being a Gnostic sect—certainly (specifically Sethian ), several such groups were present in Alexandria and elsewhere about the Mediterranean during Plotinus' lifetime. Plotinus specifically points to the Gnostic doctrine of Sophia and her emission of the Demiurge.

Though the former understanding certainly enjoys the greatest popularity, the identification of Plotinus' opponents as Gnostic is not without some contention. Christos Evangeliou has contended [ 53 ] that Plotinus' opponents might be better described as simply "Christian Gnostics", arguing that several of Plotinus' criticisms are as applicable to orthodox Christian doctrine as well. Also, considering the evidence from the time, Evangeliou thought the definition of the term "Gnostics" was unclear. Of note here is that while Plotinus' student Porphyry names Christianity specifically in Porphyry's own works, and Plotinus is to have been a known associate of the Christian Origen , none of Plotinus' works mention Christ or Christianity—whereas Plotinus specifically addresses his target in the Enneads as the Gnostics.

A. H. Armstrong identified the so-called "Gnostics" that Plotinus was attacking as Jewish and Pagan, in his introduction to the tract in his translation of the Enneads . Armstrong alluding to Gnosticism being a Hellenic philosophical heresy of sorts, which later engaged Christianity and Neoplatonism.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] John D. Turner , professor of religious studies at the University of Nebraska, and famed translator and editor of the Nag Hammadi library , stated [ 56 ] that the text Plotinus and his students read was Sethian Gnosticism, which predates Christianity. It appears that Plotinus attempted to clarify how the philosophers of the academy had not arrived at the same conclusions (such as dystheism or misotheism for the creator God as an answer to the problem of evil ) as the targets of his criticism.

Iamblichus [ edit ] See also: Panentheism Later, the Neoplatonist Iamblichus changed the role of the "One", effectively altering the role of the Demiurge as second cause or dyad, which was one of the reasons that Iamblichus and his teacher Porphyry came into conflict.

The figure of the Demiurge emerges in the theoretic of Iamblichus, which conjoins the transcendent, incommunicable “One,” or Source. Here, at the summit of this system, the Source and Demiurge (material realm) coexist via the process of henosis .

[ 57 ] Iamblichus describes the One as a monad whose first principle or emanation is intellect ( nous ), while among "the many" that follow it there is a second, super-existent "One" that is the producer of intellect or soul ( psyche ).

The "One" is further separated into spheres of intelligence; the first and superior sphere is objects of thought, while the latter sphere is the domain of thought. Thus, a triad is formed of the intelligible nous , the intellective nous , and the psyche in order to reconcile further the various Hellenistic philosophical schools of Aristotle 's actus and potentia (actuality and potentiality) of the unmoved mover and Plato's Demiurge.

Then within this intellectual triad Iamblichus assigns the third rank to the Demiurge, identifying it with the perfect or Divine nous with the intellectual triad being promoted to a hebdomad (pure intellect).

In the theoretic of Plotinus, nous produces nature through intellectual mediation, thus the intellectualizing gods are followed by a triad of psychic gods.

Later representations [ edit ] Cathars [ edit ] Catharism apparently inherited their idea of Satan as the creator of the evil world from Gnosticism.

Gilles Quispel writes, "There is a direct link between ancient Gnosticism and Catharism. The Cathars held that the creator of the world, Satanael, had usurped the name of God, but that he had subsequently been unmasked and told that he was not really God." [ 58 ] Modern influence [ edit ] Emil Cioran also wrote his Le mauvais démiurge ("The Evil Demiurge"), published in 1969, influenced by Gnosticism and Schopenhauerian interpretation of Platonic ontology, as well as that of Plotinus.

See also [ edit ] Religion portal Albinus (philosopher) Azazil Devil in Christianity Problem of the creator of God Tenth intellect (Isma'ilism) Urizen References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ See Thomas K. Johansen. 2014. "Why the Cosmos Needs a Craftsman: Plato, Timaeus 27d5-29b1," Phronesis 59 (4): 297-320.

[1] ^ Fontenrose, Joseph (1974).

Python: A Study of Delphic Myth and Its Origin . Biblo & Tannen Publishers. p. 226.

ISBN 978-0-8196-0285-5 .

^ Sallis, John (1999).

Chorology: On Beginning in Plato's Timaeus . Indiana University Press. p. 86.

ISBN 0-253-21308-8 .

^ Keightley, Thomas (1838).

The mythology of ancient Greece and Italy . Oxford University. p.

44 .

theogony timaeus.

^ Bartninkas, Vilius (2023).

Traditional and Cosmic Gods in Later Plato and the Early Academy . Cambridge University Press. p. 65.

doi : 10.1017/9781009322638 .

ISBN 9781009322638 .

^ Thomas Johansen. 2020. “Crafting the Cosmos: Plato on the Limitations of Divine Craftsmanship,” in T.K. Johansen (ed.), Productive Knowledge in Ancient Philosophy : The Concept of Technē, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 86-108.

[2] ^ Vilius Bartninkas. 2023.

Traditional and Cosmic Gods in Later Plato and the Early Academy.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

^ Gilhus, Ingvild Sælid (1 October 1984). "The gnostic demiurge—An agnostic trickster".

Religion .

14 (4): 301– 311.

doi : 10.1016/S0048-721X(84)80010-X .

^ verse 1 ^ It is on this account that Moses says, at the creation of man alone that God said, "Let us make man," which expression shows an assumption of other beings to himself as assistants, in order that God, the governor of all things, might have all the blameless intentions and actions of man, when he does right attributed to him; and that his other assistants might bear the imputation of his contrary actions.

— "Philo: On the Creation, XXIV" .

www.earlyjewishwritings.com .

^ Justin Martyr , Dialogue with Trypho . c. 67.

^ Irenaeus, Adversus Haereses , i. 23, 1.

^ Irenaeus, Adversus Haereses , i. 23, 5.

^ Irenaeus, i. 24, 1.

^ Irenaeus, Adversus Haereses , i. 25.

^ Irenaeus, Adversus Haereses , i. 24, 4.

^ Hippolytus, Refutation of All Heresies . vii. 33.

^ Theodoret, Haer. Fab . ii. 3.

^ Epiphanius, Panarion , 28.

^ "Apocryphon of John," translation by Frederik Wisse in The Nag Hammadi Library . Accessed online at gnosis.org ^ a b c d e f g One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Demiurge ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Hipp.

Ref . vi. 32, p. 191.

^ Hipp.

Ref . vi. 9.

^ Marvin Meyer and James M. Robinson , The Nag Hammadi Scriptures: The International Edition . HarperOne, 2007. pp. 2–3.

ISBN 0-06-052378-6 ^ a b Scholem, Gershom (1974).

"Jaldabaoth Reconsidered" .

Mélanges d'histoire des religions offerts à Henri-Charles Puech . Paris: Collège de France /Presses Universitaires de France: 405– 421 – via Academia.edu .

^ Black, Matthew (1983).

"An Aramaic Etymology for Jaldabaoth?" .

The New Testament and Gnosis : Essays in honour of RobertMcL.Wilson .

London and New York : Bloomsbury Academic . pp.

69– 72.

doi : 10.5040/9781474266277.ch-005 .

ISBN 978-1-4742-6627-7 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ Marvin Meyer and James M. Robinson , The Nag Hammadi Scriptures: The International Edition . HarperOne, 2007.

ISBN 0-06-052378-6 ^ Scholem, Gershom (1965).

Jewish Gnosticism, Merkabah Mysticism, and Talmudic Tradition . Jewish Theological Seminary of America. p. 72.

^ Robert McLachlan Wilson (1976).

Nag Hammadi and gnosis: Papers read at the First International Congress of Coptology . BRILL. pp.

21– 23.

Therefore his esoteric name is Jaldabaoth, whereas the perfect call him Ariel, because he has the appearance of a lion.

^ Gustav Davidson (1994).

A dictionary of angels: including the fallen angels . Scrollhouse. p. 54.

^ David M Gwynn (2010).

Religious Diversity in Late Antiquity . BRILL. p. 448.

^ Campbell Bonner (1949). "An Amulet of the Ophite Gnostics". The American School of Classical Studies at Athens, Hesperia Supplements, Vol. 8: 43– 46.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Gilles Quispel; R. van den Broek ; Maarten Jozef Vermaseren (1981).

Studies in gnosticism and hellenistic religions . BRILL. pp.

40– 41.

^ 2 Corinthians 4:4 ^ "Irenaeus, Adversus Haereses , i. 5" .

^ "Irenaeus, Adversus Haereses , i. 6" .

^ "Irenaeus, Adversus Haereses , i. 30, 8" .

^ "Irenaeus, Adversus Haereses , i. 5, 4" .

^ "Heracleon, Frag. 20" .

^ "Irenaeus, Adversus Haereses , iii. 25" .

^ Kahn, Charles (2001).

Pythagoras and the Pythagoreans . Indianapolis: Hacket Publishing. pp.

124 .

ISBN 978-0-872205758 .

^ a b Karamanolis, George (2006).

Plato and Aristotle in Agreement?: Platonists on Aristotle from Antiochus to Porphyry . Oxford University Press. p. 240.

ISBN 0-19-926456-2 .

^ The ordering principle is twofold; there is a principle known as the Demiurge, and there is the Soul of the All; the appellation "Zeus" is sometimes applied to the Demiurge and sometimes to the principle conducting the universe.

[ citation needed ] ^ Wear, Sarah; Dillon, John (2013).

Dionysius the Areopagite and the Neoplatonist Tradition: Despoiling the Hellenes . Burlington, VT: Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. p. 15.

ISBN 9780754603856 .

^ Wallis, Richard T.; Bregman, Jay, eds. (1992).

Neoplatonism and Gnosticism .

International Society for Neoplatonic Studies . SUNY Press.

ISBN 978-0-7914-1337-1 .

^ "Matter is therefore a non-existent"; Plotinus, Ennead 2, Tractate 4 Section 16.

^ Schopenhauer wrote of this Neoplatonist philosopher: "With Plotinus there even appears, probably for the first time in Western philosophy , idealism that had long been current in the East even at that time, for it taught (Enneads, iii, lib. vii, c.10) that the soul has made the world by stepping from eternity into time, with the explanation: 'For there is for this universe no other place than the soul or mind' ( neque est alter hujus universi locus quam anima ), indeed the ideality of time is expressed in the words: 'We should not accept time outside the soul or mind' ( oportet autem nequaquam extra animam tempus accipere )." (Parerga and Paralipomena, Volume I, "Fragments for the History of Philosophy", § 7) Similarly, Professor Ludwig Noiré wrote: "For the first time in Western philosophy we find idealism proper in Plotinus (Enneads, iii, 7, 10), where he says, 'The only space or place of the world is the soul', and 'Time must not be assumed to exist outside the soul'." [5] It is worth noting, however, that like Plato but unlike Schopenhauer and other modern philosophers, Plotinus does not worry about whether or how we can get beyond our ideas in order to know external objects.

^ Numenius of Apamea was reported to have asked, "What else is Plato than Moses speaking Greek?" Fr. 8 Des Places.

^ Droge, Arthur J. (1987). "Justin Martyr and the Restoration of Philosophy".

Church History .

56 (3): 303– 319.

doi : 10.2307/3166060 .

JSTOR 3166060 .

S2CID 162623811 .

^ John D. Turner.

Neoplatonism .

^ "For, in sum, a part of their doctrine comes from Plato; all the novelties through which they seek to establish a philosophy of their own have been picked up outside of the truth." Plotinus, "Against the Gnostics", Ennead II, 9, 6.

^ Plotinus, Arthur Hilary Armstrong (trans.) (1966).

Plotinus: Enneads II (Loeb Classical Library ed.). Harvard University Press.

From this point to the end of ch. 12 Plotinus is attacking a Gnostic myth known to us best at present in the form it took in the system of Valentinus. The Mother, Sophia-Achamoth, produced as a result of the complicated sequence of events which followed the fall of the higher Sophia, and her offspring the Demiurge, the inferier and ignorant maker of the material universe, are Valentinian figures; cp. Irenaeus, Adversus haereses 1.4 and 5. Valentinius had been in Rome, and there is nothing improbable in the presence of Valentinians there in the time of Plotinus. But the evidence in the Life ch. 16 suggests that the Gnostics in Plotinus's circle belonged rather to the older group called Sethians or Archontics , related to the Ophites or Barbelognostics : they probably called themselves simply 'Gnostics'. Gnostic sects borrowed freely from each other, and it is likely that Valentinius took some of his ideas about Sophia from older Gnostic sources, and that his ideas in turn influenced other Gnostics.

^ Evangeliou, "Plotinus's Anti-Gnostic Polemic and Porphyry's Against the Christians", in Wallis & Bregman, p. 111.

^ From "Introduction to Against the Gnostics", Plotinus' Enneads as translated by A. H. Armstrong, pp. 220–222: "The treatise as it stands in the Enneads is a most powerful protest on behalf of Hellenic philosophy against the un-Hellenic heresy (as it was from the Platonist as well as the orthodox Christian point of view) of Gnosticism. There were Gnostics among Plotinus's own friends, whom he had not succeeded in converting (Enneads ch. 10 of this treatise) and he and his pupils devoted considerable time and energy to anti-Gnostic controversy (Life of Plotinus ch. 16). He obviously considered Gnosticism an extremely dangerous influence, likely to pervert the minds even of members of his own circle. It is impossible to attempt to give an account of Gnosticism here. By far the best discussion of what the particular group of Gnostics Plotinus knew believed is M. Puech's admirable contribution to Entretiens Hardt V (Les Sources de Plotin). But it is important for the understanding of this treatise to be clear about the reasons why Plotinus disliked them so intensely and thought their influence so harmful." ^ Armstrong, pp. 220–22: "Short statement of the doctrine of the three hypostasis, the One, Intellect and Soul; there cannot be more or fewer than these three. Criticism of the attempts to multiply the hypostasis, and especially of the idea of two intellects, one which thinks and that other which thinks that it thinks. (ch. 1). The true doctrine of Soul (ch. 2). The law of necessary procession and the eternity of the universe (ch.3). Attack on the Gnostic doctrine of the making of the universe by a fallen soul, and on their despising of the universe and the heavenly bodies (chs. 4–5). The senseless jargon of the Gnostics, their plagiarism from and perversion of Plato, and their insolent arrogance (ch. 6). The true doctrine about Universal Soul and the goodness of the universe which it forms and rules (chs. 7–8). Refutation of objections from the inequalities and injustices of human life (ch. 9). Ridiculous arrogance of the Gnostics who refuse to acknowledge the hierarchy of created gods and spirits and say that they alone are sons of God and superior to the heavens (ch. 9). The absurdities of the Gnostic doctrine of the fall of "Wisdom" (Sophia) and of the generation and activities of the Demiurge, maker of the visible universe (chs. 10–12). False and melodramatic Gnostic teaching about the cosmic spheres and their influence (ch. 13). The blasphemous falsity of the Gnostic claim to control the higher powers by magic and the absurdity of their claim to cure diseases by casting out demons (ch. 14). The false other-worldliness of the Gnostics leads to immorality (ch. 15). The true Platonic other-worldliness, which love and venerates the material universe in all its goodness and beauty as the most perfect possible image of the intelligible, contracted at length with the false, Gnostic, other-worldliness which hates and despises the material universe and its beauties (chs. 16–18)." ^ Turner, "Gnosticism and Platonism", in Wallis & Bregman.

^ See Theurgy, Iamblichus and henosis Archived 2010-01-09 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Quispel, Gilles and Van Oort, Johannes (2008), p. 143.

Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

Demiurgus in A Dictionary of Christian Biography, Literature, Sects and Doctrines by William Smith and Henry Wace (1877), a publication now in the public domain.

External links [ edit ] Look up demiurge in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Dark Mirrors of Heaven: Gnostic Cosmogony Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Demiurge" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

Reydams-Schils, G. (1999).

Demiurge and Providence. Stoic and Platonist Readings of Plato's Timaeus . Monothéismes et Philosophie. Vol. 2.

doi : 10.1484/M.MON-EB.5.112278 .

ISBN 978-2-503-50656-2 .

Mohr, Richard D. (1985). "Plato's Theology Reconsidered: What the Demiurge Does".

History of Philosophy Quarterly .

2 (2): 131– 144.

JSTOR 27743717 .

Pagels, Elaine H. (October 1976). " 'The Demiurge and his Archons'—A Gnostic View of the Bishop and Presbyters?".

Harvard Theological Review .

69 ( 3– 4): 301– 324.

doi : 10.1017/S0017816000017491 .

S2CID 162393673 .

v t e Ancient Greek philosophical concepts Adiaphora (indifferent) Aletheia (truth) Apeiron (infinite) Aporia (problem) Arche (first principle) Arete (excellence) Ataraxia (tranquility) Cosmos (order) Diairesis (division) Doxa (opinion) Episteme (knowledge) Ethos (character) Eudaimonia (flourishing) Hesychia (stillness) Logos (reason) Mimesis (imitation) Monad (unit) Nous (intellect) Ousia (substance) Pathos (passion) Phronesis (prudence) Physis (nature) Sophia (wisdom) Sophrosyne (temperance) Sophós (sage) Techne (craft) Telos (goal) Thumos (temper) v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal v t e Plato Works Apology Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Laws Lysis Menexenus Meno Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Timaeus Of doubtful authenticity Axiochus Definitions Demodocus Epigrams Epinomis Epistles Seventh Letter Eryxias Halcyon Hipparchus Minos On Justice On Virtue Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Theages Life The Academy in Athens Socratic problem List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Legacy Unwritten doctrines List of manuscripts of Plato's dialogues 23 24 228 229 Commentaries Middle Platonism Neoplatonism and Christianity and Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Plato's Dream Poitier Meets Plato NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐95pxt
Cached time: 20250814214826
Cache expiry: 21600
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, vary‐revision, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.937 seconds
Real time usage: 1.144 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5230/1000000
Revision size: 44200/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 203373/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7544/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 198705/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.578/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23650107/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  948.037      1 -total
 31.61%  299.720      1 Template:Reflist
 17.46%  165.560     16 Template:Cite_book
 11.33%  107.403      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.77%  102.119      1 Template:God
 10.29%   97.565      1 Template:Lang
  9.14%   86.622      8 Template:Navbox
  8.90%   84.375      1 Template:Wikisource
  8.64%   81.878      1 Template:Wikisource/outer_core
  8.48%   80.360      2 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:8796:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814214826 and revision id 1305825679. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Demiurge&oldid=1305825679 " Categories : Conceptions of God Concepts in ancient Greek metaphysics Concepts in ancient Greek philosophy of mind Creator deities Demons in Gnosticism Gnostic cosmology Gnostic deities History of religion Metaphysical theories Names of God in Gnosticism Neoplatonism Timaeus (Plato) Religious philosophical concepts Theories in ancient Greek philosophy Hidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1 errors: missing periodical All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2017 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Wikisource templates with missing id Source attribution Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 09:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Demiurge 51 languages Add topic

