Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early years 2 Career 3 Writing 4 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 4.1 Non-fiction 4.2 Novels 5 Awards and recognition 6 Personal life 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents John G. Cramer 7 languages العربية تۆرکجه Čeština Español فارسی Français مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American novelist For the Australian politician, see John Cramer (Australian politician) .  For the television announcer, see John Cramer (entertainer) .

John G. Cramer Cramer in 2012 Born John Gleason Cramer, Jr.

( 1934-10-24 ) October 24, 1934 (age 90) Houston , Texas , U.S.

Alma mater Rice University Known for Transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics Spouse Pauline Cramer Children Kathryn Cramer Scientific career Fields Nuclear physics , Quantum physics , Ultra-relativistic heavy ion physics , HBT interferometry Institutions University of Washington Doctoral advisor Calvin M. Class Website John Cramer's Home Page John Gleason Cramer Jr.

(born October 24, 1934) is a professor emeritus of physics at the University of Washington in Seattle, Washington , known for his development of the transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics. He has been an active participant with the STAR experiment at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) at Brookhaven National Laboratory , and the particle accelerator at CERN in Geneva , Switzerland.

Early years [ edit ] John Cramer was born in Houston , Texas. He attended Mirabeau B Lamar High School in  Houston, and graduated with a BA in physics from Rice University in 1957. He continued his studies, graduating with an MA in physics from Rice University in 1959 and a Ph.D. in physics from Rice University in 1961.

[ 1 ] Career [ edit ] After serving as a post-doctoral fellow at Indiana University from 1961 to 1963, Cramer continued as an assistant professor at the same university from 1963 to 1964. He was an assistant professor at the University of Washington from 1964 to 1968, an associate professor from 1968 to 1974, and was appointed as a full professor in 1974.

[ 1 ] From 2007 to 2014, Cramer investigated the possibility that quantum nonlocality might be used for communication between observers through the use of switchable interference patterns. In the course of this work, he gained new understanding of the "show stopper" within the quantum formalism that prevents such nonlocal signaling: For each interference pattern, nature also provides and superimposes an "anti-interference pattern".  These are always combined in a way that "erases" potential nonlocal signals.  The two interference patterns complement each other, resulting in no perceptible interference pattern. Measurement changes can dramatically modify the individual interference patterns, but always so that this erasure occurs. In this way, nature is protected from the possibility of retrocausal signaling and its consequences and paradoxes.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Cramer has been making regular appearances on the Science Channel and on NPR Science Friday.

[ 4 ] Writing [ edit ] In addition to his approximately 300 scientific publications in peer-reviewed journals, [ 5 ] John Cramer writes a regular column, "The Alternate View", appearing in every second issue, for Analog Science Fiction and Fact magazine. In July 1986, he published the transactional interpretation of quantum mechanics [ 6 ] which is inspired by the Wheeler–Feynman time-symmetric theory .

His book on quantum mechanics, The Quantum Handshake: Entanglement, Nonlocality and Transactions (2015), published by Springer Verlag, is a comprehensive introduction to the transactional interpretation.

Cramer's simulation of the sound of the Big Bang attracted some mainstream press attention in late 2003 and again in 2013. The simulation originated with an "Alternate View" article, "BOOMERanG and the Sound of the Big Bang" (January 2001).

[ 7 ] Cramer describes the sound as "rather like a large jet plane 100 feet off the ground flying over your house in the middle of the night." Cramer has published three novels, Twistor (1989), Einstein's Bridge (1997) and Fermi's Question (2023), all within the hard science fiction genre.  Cramer was the 2010 Science Guest of Honor at Norwescon , a large science fiction and fantasy convention in the Seattle area due to his physics fact columns in Analog Science Fiction and Fact.

Bibliography [ edit ] This list is incomplete ; you can help by adding missing items .

( September 2017 ) Non-fiction [ edit ] The quantum handshake : entanglement, nonlocality and transactions . New York: Springer. 2015.

Novels [ edit ] Cramer, John (1989).

Twistor . New York: Morrow.

— (2016) [1989].

Twistor . Introduction by Gene Wolfe (Dover paperback ed.). Mineola, N.Y.: Dover Publications.

— (1997).

Einstein's bridge . New York: Avon Books.

— (2023).

Fermi's question (E-book). New York: Baen Books.

Awards and recognition [ edit ] Elected Fellow, American Association for the Advancement of Science (1991); Nominated for the John W. Campbell Award for Best New Writer (1991); Listed in Who's Who in America (from 43rd Edition, 1984); Elected Fellow, American Physical Society (1974); National Science Foundation Fellow at Rice University (1959–61); Sigma-Xi Thesis Award at Rice University (1959); Bausch-Lomb Science Award at Lamar High School Graduation (1953); Personal life [ edit ] Cramer married Pauline Ruth Bond in June, 1961. The couple have three children: Kathryn Cramer (born April, 1962), John G. Cramer III (born January 1964), and Karen Cramer (born April 1967).

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c "CV J. Cramer" (PDF) . Retrieved 21 Jan 2016 .

^ The Quantum Handshake: Entanglement, Nonlocality and Transactions by John G. Cramer, Springer Verlag in 2015, chapter 7.

^ arXiv paper (1409.5098 [quant-ph]) ^ "J Cramer" . Retrieved 21 Jan 2016 .

^ Scientific Publications of John G. Cramer, Professor of Physics, University of Washington (Current to February 2015).

^ The Transactional Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics Archived 2012-07-16 at the Wayback Machine – John Cramer's original paper ^ BOOMERanG and the Sound of the Big Bang at the University of Washington Profile in Marquis Who's Who on the Web .

External links [ edit ] John G. Cramer's Home Page – Includes a photograph of the author, contact information, and more A Puzzling Signal in RHIC Experiments , Physics News Update Number 723 #2, March 15, 2005, by Phil Schewe & Ben Stein.

John G. Cramer at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database Scientific publications of John G. Cramer on INSPIRE-HEP John G. Cramer, professor emeritus of Physics at the University of Washington, presents "The Quantum Handshake Explored." YouTube video dated 1 Feb 2018 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Netherlands Israel People DDB Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_G._Cramer&oldid=1253162656 " Categories : 1934 births 20th-century American novelists 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American physicists 21st-century American novelists 21st-century American male writers 21st-century American physicists American male non-fiction writers American male novelists American nuclear physicists American science writers American science fiction writers Analog Science Fiction and Fact people Brookhaven National Laboratory staff American experimental physicists Fellows of the American Association for the Advancement of Science Lamar High School (Houston) alumni Living people Novelists from Texas Novelists from Washington (state) People associated with CERN Academics from Houston American quantum physicists Rice University alumni Scientists from Seattle Scientists from Texas American theoretical physicists University of Washington faculty Writers from Seattle Writers from Houston Writers from Washington (state) Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Incomplete lists from September 2017 This page was last edited on 24 October 2024, at 17:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John G. Cramer 7 languages Add topic

