Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Taddeo Alderotti 10 languages العربية Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano Latina မြန်မာဘာသာ Português Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French .

(March 2016) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the French article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at [[:fr:Thaddée de Florence]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|fr|Thaddée de Florence}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Taddeo Alderotti Engraving of Alderotti by Allegrini, 1770 Born between 1206 and 1215 Florence , Italy Died 1295 Bologna Occupation(s) Physician , Professor of Medicine Taddeo Alderotti ( Latin : Thaddaeus Alderottus , French : Thaddée de Florence ), born in Florence between 1206 and 1215, died in 1295, was an Italian doctor and professor of medicine at the University of Bologna , who made important contributions to the renaissance of learned medicine in Europe during the High Middle Ages . He was among the first to organize a medical lecture at the university.

One of his works describes a method for concentrating ethanol involving repeated fractional distillation through a water-cooled still, by which an ethanol purity of 90% could be obtained.

[ 1 ] Dante seems to reference him in the Paradiso (XII, 82-85), indicating he pursued learning not for spiritual reasons but worldly ambition, contrasting him with St. Dominic .

[ 2 ] Life [ edit ] Taddeo Alderotti was born in Florence , 1210, and received his primary education there.

[ 3 ] In the mid-1260s, Alderotti went to Bologna, a city known for the study and practice of medicine. Through the middle of the fourteenth century, the universities of Bologna, Montpellier , and Paris had a virtual monopoly on medical education in Western Europe .

[ 4 ] As a professor of medicine, Alderotti quickly gained a reputation as an excellent teacher and commanded large crowds of students. His courses relied on the works of Hippocrates , Galen , and Avicenna , which had been given a position of authority since Constantine the African brought these over from north Africa in the 11th century and translated them.

The students Alderotti taught during his tenure as professor would become some of the best doctors and professors of the next generation. They included, among others, the logician Gentile da Cingoli ; the doctor to the emperor, Bartolomeo da Varignana ; Dino del Garbo , commentator of Avicenna ; Turisanus (Pietro Torregiano de' Torregiani), commentator of Galen; and the anatomist Mondino de' Liuzzi .

A doctor of high repute, Taddeo had a large number of patients, including some far outside Bologna and residing as far away as Modena , Ferrara , Rome , and Milan . In his old age, he gave up his lectures and he moved his medical practice to Venice.

[ 5 ] Born to a modest Florentine family, Taddeo was by the time of his death in 1295 a rich man. His last will and testament indicates that his medical practice, his lecture, and his investments had paid off handsomely.

Works [ edit ] Consilia medicinalia . Modern edition, Nardi, Turin, 1937.

In Claudii Galeni artem parvam commentarii . Naples, 1522.

Expositiones in arduum aphorismorum Hippocratis volumen, in divinum phognosticorum Hippocratis volumen, in praeclarum regiminis acutorum Hippocratis opus, in subtilissimum Joanniti Isagorgarum libellum . Venice, 1527.

Sulla conservazione della salute or Libello per conservare la sanitate . ( On the preservation of health .) Latin edition, De conservatione sanitatis , Bologna, 1477; Italian edition, G. Manuzzi and L. Razzolini, eds., Florence, 1863.

De virtutibus aquae vitae ( apocryphal ) See also [ edit ] Distillation Timeline of chemistry References [ edit ] ^ Holmyard, Eric John (1957).

Alchemy . Harmondsworth: Penguin Books.

ISBN 978-0-486-26298-7 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) pp. 51–52.

^ Prioreschi, Plinio (2003).

A History of Medicine Vol. 5 . Horatius Press. p. 348.

ISBN 1-888456-00-0 .

^ Thomas F. Glick, Steven Livesey, and Faith Wallis, Medieval Science, Technology, and Medicine: An Encyclopedia (Routledge, 2014) ^ Danielle Jacquart, "La scolastique médicale," in Histoire de la pensée médicale en Occident, vol. 1: Antiquité et Moyen Âge , edited by Mirko D. Grmek (Seuil, 1995) ^ Plinio Prioreschi, Medieval Medicine (Horatius Press, 2003) Further reading [ edit ] Sirais, Nancy G. (1981).

Taddeo Alderotti and His Pupils: Two Generations of Italian Medical Learning, ca. 1265-1325 . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0691053138 .

v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Spain Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Taddeo_Alderotti&oldid=1181108115 " Categories : 13th-century births 1295 deaths 13th-century Italian writers 13th-century Italian physicians Physicians from Florence Italian alchemists Academic staff of the University of Bologna 13th-century writers in Latin 13th-century alchemists Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Biography articles needing translation from French Wikipedia Articles with hCards Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 20 October 2023, at 22:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Taddeo Alderotti 10 languages Add topic

