Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career 3 Performance Toggle Performance subsection 3.1 Television 4 Writing 5 Politics 6 Personal life 7 Honour 8 Gallery 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Mallika Sarabhai 28 languages অসমীয়া বাংলা Deutsch فارسی Français ગુજરાતી हिन्दी ಕನ್ನಡ کٲشُر मैथिली മലയാളം मराठी مصرى नेपाली ଓଡ଼ିଆ ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ سرائیکی سنڌي Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ತುಳು اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian politician Padma Bhushan Mallika Sarabhai Sarabhai in Bertolt Brecht 's adaptation of The Good Person of Szechwan directed by Arvind Gaur Born ( 1953-05-09 ) May 9, 1953 (age 72) Ahmedabad, Gujarat , India Occupation(s) Kuchipudi and Bharatanatyam dancer, actress, politician Years active 1969–present Spouse Bipin Shah Children 2, including Revanta Parents Vikram Sarabhai Mrinalini Sarabhai Relatives Kartikeya Sarabhai (brother) Subhashini Ali (cousin) Shaad Ali (nephew) Awards Padma Bhushan-2010 Website www .mallikasarabhai .com Mallika Sarabhai is an Indian classical dancer, activist and actress from Ahmedabad , Gujarat , India. Daughter of a classical dancer Mrinalini Sarabhai and space scientist Vikram Sarabhai , Mallika is an accomplished Kuchipudi and Bharatanatyam dancer [ 1 ] and performer who has specialized in using the arts for social change and transformation.

Early life and education [ edit ] Mallika Sarabhai was born in Ahmedabad to Vikram Sarabhai and Mrinalini Sarabhai . She graduated from the St. Xavier's College, Ahmedabad with a degree in Economics.

[ 2 ] She then completed her MBA from IIM Ahmedabad in 1974 and Doctorate in Organisational Behaviour from the Gujarat University in 1976.

[ 3 ] She is a noted choreographer and dancer and has also acted in a few Hindi, Malayalam, Gujarati and international films.

[ 4 ] Career [ edit ] She started to learn dancing when she was young and started her film career in the parallel cinema when she was 15. Mallika played the role of Draupadi in the Peter Brook 's play The Mahabharata . Mallika has won many accolades during her long career, the Golden Star Award is one of them, which she won for the Best Dance Soloist, Theatre De Champs Elysees, Paris 1977. As well as a dancer, Sarabhai is a social activist.

[ 5 ] She manages the Darpana Academy of Performing Arts located at Ahmedabad, a centre for the arts and for the use of arts as a language for behaviour change.

[ 6 ] Performance [ edit ] She acted in a Gujarati movie titled "Mena Gurjari" released on 30the August 1975. Rajiv was her hero in that movie. Movie was based upon a Gujarati Folklore.

She acted in the Hindi movie titled Himalay Se Ooncha that was released in 1975.  The movie which had Sunil Dutt as the hero, did not do very well at the box office. In 1986 she acted in the Basu Chatterji directed movie titled Sheesha opposite super star Mithun Chakraborty .

In 1989 she performed hard-hitting solo theatrical works, Shakti: The Power of Women.

[ 5 ] Her performance Sita's Daughters has toured the world and been performed over 500 times in three languages. After that, she directed and acted in numerous productions reflecting current issues and awareness among people. Amongst them is An Idea Named Meera; In Search of the Goddess and SvaKranti: The Revolution Within.

Mallika Sarabhai also wrote the script for the play 'Unsuni' based on Harsh Mander's book 'Unheard Voices' to raise awareness amongst children in elite schools and colleges to the real issues facing India's marginalized. The play went around 120 schools and colleges. Arvind Gaur later directed it as a play, with the same name. Darpana Academy has launched the people awareness movement through its production Unsuni which travels all over India.

In 2009 Mallika Sarabhai acted in an Indian adaptation Bertolt Brecht's of The Good Person of Szechwan (Ahmedabadki Aurat Bhali-Ramkali) directed by Arvind Gaur in 34th Vikram Sarabhai International Art Festival.

In the year 2012, Mallika co-directed 'Women with Broken Wings,' an international production with filmmaker Yadavan Chandran and Swiss pianist Elizabeth Sombart , an ode to the millions of women who have been the victims of violence. In 2014 she recreated, with Yadavan Chandran, Kadak Badshaahi, a multimedia production on the 603-year-old history of the city of Ahmedabad . The performance ran for an unprecedented 33 full nights in Darpana's venue, Natarani.

Television [ edit ] Mallika has also used film and television for social change, especially for women's empowerment [ 7 ] and environmental consciousness. Through Darpana Communications, she has been responsible for the production of three thousand hours of TV broadcast programming, all of which has been shown through Doordarshan , Gujarati. The programming uses the most popular genres of TV. She has anchored many shows on STAR TV and Doordarshan as well as the first NACO series on HIV, Talk Positive; the science series Turning Point ; Vaividhyotsav, the culture quiz and Srishti: The Environment Quiz.

Writing [ edit ] Mallika first started writing when she produced and performed Shakti: The Power of Women. Since then she has scripted her shows, TV serials for ISROs educational TV in Madhya Pradesh, film scripts and more new contemporary lyrics for Bharatanatyam. She has been a columnist for Times of India , Vanitha , The Week , DivyaBhaskar , Hans and DNA .

Her recent memoir is title, In Free Fall, My Experiments With Living. She recently appeared on a podcast , The Literary City with Ramjee Chandran to talk about the memoir.

Politics [ edit ] On 19 March 2009, Mallika Sarabhai announced her candidature against the Bharatiya Janata Party 's prime ministerial candidate L K Advani for the Gandhinagar Lok Sabha seat , as an independent candidate in the 2009 general election . She had several offers from the Congress to contest elections, the first being in 1984 from Rajiv Gandhi , but did not join any political party as she believed that all parties are corrupt.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] She eventually lost to L K Advani by a huge margin and forfeited her election deposit in the process.

[ 10 ] She protested against Gujarat Chief Minister, Narendra Modi during Sadbhavna Mission in September 2011.

[ 11 ] She accused Narendra Modi of scuttling the petition filed in Supreme court by her on the 2002 Gujarat violence .

[ 11 ] She joined the Aam Aadmi Party on 8 January 2014.

[ 12 ] Personal life [ edit ] Mallika met Bipin Shah in 1982 and married him. They have two children, a son, Revanta and a daughter Anahita.

[ 13 ] They divorced in 1989.

[ 14 ] Bipin and Mallika co-founded Mapin Publishing in 1984 and continue to run it together.

[ 15 ] The loss of her mother, classical dancer Mrinalini Sarabhai, in 2016, left her bereft; yoga, dance, Transcendental Meditation (TM) and Non-Violent Communication (NVC) were some of the ways that she coped.

[ 16 ] She is the cousin of Indian politician and member of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) Subhashini Ali , daughter of her mother's sister Captain Lakshmi Sehgal (née Dr. Lakshmi Swaminathan) and Colonel Prem Sehgal .

[ 17 ] Her brother is environmental educator and director of Centre for Environment Education (CEE) Kartikeya Sarabhai .

[ 18 ] Honour [ edit ] Government of Gujarat awarded her with 'Gaurav Puraskar' for the contribution in the field of drama and dance.

[ 19 ] She received the Padma Bhushan by government of India.

The French Government awarded her with a knight's rank in the Order of Academic Palms in 2005 for her contribution in the field of drama and dance.

Gallery [ edit ] Performing Saarang in 2011, Indian Institute of Technology Madras With M. T. Vasudevan Nair See also [ edit ] Indian women in dance Sarabhai family Vikram Sarabhai Mrinalini Sarabhai Jan Lokpal Bill References [ edit ] ^ Foundation, Dance Perspectives (13 June 1998).

International Encyclopedia of Dance: A Project of Dance Perspectives Foundation, Inc . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-512309-8 – via Google Books.

^ "Alumni" .

St. Xavier's College (Autonomous) | Affiliated to Gujarat University .

^ "Mallika Sarabhai Biography - Mallika Sarabhai Profile, Childhood, Life & Timeline" .

dances.indobase.com .

^ "The Hindu : National : Mallika Sarabhai to contest against Advani" .

www.hindu.com . Archived from the original on 23 March 2009 . Retrieved 16 April 2011 .

^ a b "Inspiring woman - Mallika Sarabhai" . Archived from the original on 9 May 2023 . Retrieved 13 June 2025 .

^ "Welcome To The World of Darpana" .

www.darpana.com . Archived from the original on 19 July 2011.

^ "Interview with Mallika Sarabhai" .

Women's Web .

^ Service, Express News.

"Danseuse Mallika Sarabhai troops into Advani bastion in Gandhinagar - Express India" .

www.expressindia.com . Archived from the original on 23 September 2012.

^ "Poll dance: Mallika to contest against LK from Gandhinagar" . Archived from the original on 9 May 2012 . Retrieved 16 April 2011 .

^ "The Hindu : National : Modi magic fails to work" .

www.hindu.com . Archived from the original on 19 May 2009 . Retrieved 19 June 2009 .

^ a b "Mallika Sarabhai, riots victims detained at Modi's fast venue" .

Hindustan Times . Indo-Asian News Service. 18 September 2011. Archived from the original on 9 November 2013 . Retrieved 26 February 2013 .

^ Desai, Darshan (8 January 2014).

"Mallika Sarabhai joins AAP" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 9 January 2014 .

^ "Mallika Sarabhai stands for Lok Sabha election as an independent candidate - Globetrotting with Dr.Sunil Kothari" .

www.narthaki.com .

^ Chatterjee, Madhurima (9 January 2012).

"Mallika Unmuzzled" .

The Telegraph (India) .

^ "The Tribune - Magazine section - Saturday Extra" .

www.tribuneindia.com .

^ "Mallika Sarabhai opens up on battles with grief, 'future-proofing' her body" . 22 August 2022.

^ "Ali's Karat and family 'factors' " .

www.telegraphindia.com . Retrieved 16 November 2022 .

^ "Mrinalini Sarabhai's 100th birth anniversary: Some interesting facts about the legendary dancer" .

The Indian Express . 11 May 2018 . Retrieved 16 November 2022 .

^ Vyas, Rajani (2012).

Gujarat Ne Asmita (5th ed.). Ahmedabad: Akshara Publication. p. 284.

Further reading [ edit ] India's 50 Most Illustrious Women ( ISBN 81-88086-19-3 ) by Indra Gupta External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mallika Sarabhai .

Mallika Sarabhai's personal website Welcome to World of Darpana Mallika Sarabhai at TED Mallika Sarabhai at IMDb v t e Padma Bhushan award recipients (2010–2019) 2010 Satya Paul Agarwal Mohammad Amin Sailesh Kumar Bandopadhyay M. S. Banga Anil Bordia Bipan Chandra B. K. Chaturvedi Sant Singh Chatwal G. P. Chopra Tan Chung Madhusudan Dhaky P. R. Dubhashi Puttaraj Gawai Belle Monappa Hegde Ilaiyaraaja Jagdish Chandra Kapur Shrinivas Khale Aamir Khan Sultan Khan Ram Kumar Kumudini Lakhia Kuzhur Narayana Marar Chhannulal Mishra Eledath Thaikkattu Narayanan Mooss C. P. Krishnan Nair S. P. Oswal Akbar Padamsee Ramakanta Panda Balasaheb Vikhe Patil Arogyaswami Paulraj A. R. Rahman Moosa Raza Mallika Sarabhai Nookala Chinna Satyanarayana Abhijit Sen Satya Vrat Shastri Noshir M. Shroff Kushal Pal Singh Bikash Sinha Balagangadharanatha Swamiji Narayanan Vaghul P. K. Warrier Fareed Zakaria 2011 S. P. Balasubrahmanyam Rajashree Birla M. N. Buch C. V. Chandrasekhar Ajai Chowdhry Yogesh Chander Deveshwar Satyadev Dubey T. J. S. George Shankha Ghosh Kris Gopalakrishnan Keki Byramjee Grant Shashi Kapoor Krishen Khanna Khayyam Chanda Kochhar Dwijen Mukhopadhyay Madavoor Vasudevan Nair Ramdas Pai Dashrath Patel Rajendra Singh Pawar Suryanarayanan Ramachandran Shobhana Ranade Gunupati Venkata Krishna Reddy Kallam Anji Reddy Waheeda Rehman Shyam Saran Analjit Singh Arpita Singh Surendra Singh R. K. Srikantan Raghavan Thirumulpad 2012 Suresh H. Advani Shabana Azmi Homi K. Bhabha Shashikumar Chitre Khaled Choudhury Jatin Das Vidya Dehejia Dharmendra S. N. Goenka M. S. Gopalakrishnan T. V. Gopalakrishnan Buddhadev Das Gupta Sunil Janah Anish Kapoor S. B. Mujumdar B. Muthuraman Mira Nair Arvind Panagariya José Pereira Mata Prasad M. S. Raghunathan P. Chandrasekhara Rao Ronen Sen Devi Shetty M. V. Subbiah N. Vittal N. H. Wadia George Yeo 2013 Satya N. Atluri Maharaj Kishan Bhan Jaspal Bhatti Rahul Dravid Adi Godrej Abdul Rashid Khan Rajesh Khanna Mary Kom Nandkishore Shamrao Laud Mangesh Padgaonkar Hemendra Singh Panwar Jogesh Pati Shivajirao Girdhar Patil A. Sivathanu Pillai D. Ramanaidu Kanak Rele V. K. Saraswat Ashoke Sen Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak B. N. Suresh Sharmila Tagore Ramamurthy Thyagarajan Saroja Vaidyanathan 2014 Anisuzzaman Mrityunjay Athreya Padmanabhan Balaram Dalveer Bhandari Ruskin Bond Anita Desai Pullela Gopichand Kamal Haasan Jyeshtharaj Joshi V. N. Kaul Neelam Kler M. Mahadevappa Leander Paes Koppillil Radhakrishnan Anumolu Ramakrishna Thirumalachari Ramasami Lloyd Rudolph Susanne Hoeber Rudolph Vinod Prakash Sharma Gulam Mohammed Sheikh Parween Sultana Dhirubhai Thaker Vairamuthu J. S. Verma T. H. Vinayakram 2015 Jahnu Barua Manjul Bhargava Vijay P. Bhatkar Swapan Dasgupta David Frawley Bill Gates Melinda French Gates Swami Satyamitranand N. Gopalaswami Subhash C. Kashyap Gokulotsavji Maharaj Saichiro Misumi Ambrish Mithal Sudha Ragunathan Harish Salve Ashok Seth Rajat Sharma Satpal Singh Shivakumara Swami Khadg Singh Valdiya 2016 Ravindra Chandra Bhargava Robert D. Blackwill Hafeez Contractor Indu Jain Heisnam Kanhailal Anupam Kher Sania Mirza Pallonji Mistry Udit Narayan Saina Nehwal Yarlagadda Lakshmi Prasad Vinod Rai N. S. Ramanuja Tatacharya A. V. Rama Rao D. Nageshwara Reddy Dayananda Saraswati Barjinder Singh Hamdard Ram V. Sutar Tejomayananda 2017 Vishwa Mohan Bhatt Deviprasad Dwivedi Ratnasundarsuri Niranjanananda Saraswati Cho Ramaswamy Maha Chakri Sirindhorn Tehemton Erach Udwadia 2018 Pankaj Advani Philipose Mar Chrysostom Mahendra Singh Dhoni Alexander Kadakin Ramachandran Nagaswamy Laxman Pai Arvind Parikh Sharda Sinha 2019 John T. Chambers Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa Pravin Gordhan Dharampal Gulati Darshan Lal Jain Ashok Laxmanrao Kukade Kariya Munda Budhaditya Mukherjee Mohanlal Nambi Narayanan Kuldip Nayar Bachendri Pal V. K. Shunglu Hukmdev Narayan Yadav # Posthumous conferral 1954–1959 1960–1969 1970–1979 1980–1989 1990–1999 2000–2009 2010–2019 2020–2029 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Academics CiNii Artists FID Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mallika_Sarabhai&oldid=1305959219 " Categories : Living people Actresses from Gujarat Indian civil rights activists Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad alumni Indian human rights activists Indian women activists Indian women's rights activists Dancers from Gujarat Recipients of the Padma Bhushan in arts Recipients of the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award Chevaliers of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres Kuchipudi exponents Actresses in Gujarati cinema Actresses in Malayalam cinema Sarabhai family 20th-century Indian dancers 20th-century Indian women artists 20th-century Indian actresses Women writers from Gujarat Activists from Gujarat Women artists from Gujarat 21st-century Indian dancers 21st-century Indian women artists Indian female classical dancers 21st-century Indian women politicians 21st-century Indian politicians Women in Gujarat politics Film directors from Gujarat Screenwriters from Gujarat Indian women screenwriters Indian women film directors 21st-century Indian actresses Women civil rights activists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from August 2014 Use dmy dates from November 2022 Articles with hCards Commons category link is on Wikidata Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 03:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mallika Sarabhai 28 languages Add topic

