Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Circadian rhythm 2 Other cycles 3 Biochemical basis of biological rhythms 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Biological rhythm 13 languages العربية Čeština Español Esperanto Euskara Français עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Русский Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For a pseudoscientific theory about biorhythms in humans, see Biorhythm (pseudoscience) .

Biological rhythms are repetitive biological processes .

[ 1 ] Some types of biological rhythms have been described as biological clocks. They can range in frequency from microseconds to less than one repetitive event per decade. Biological rhythms are studied by chronobiology . In the biochemical context biological rhythms are called biochemical oscillations .

[ 2 ] The variations of the timing and duration of biological activity in living organisms occur for many essential biological processes. These occur (a) in animals (eating, sleeping, mating, hibernating, migration, cellular regeneration, etc.), (b) in plants (leaf movements, photosynthetic reactions, etc.), and in microbial organisms such as fungi and protozoa. They have even been found in bacteria , especially among the cyanobacteria (aka blue-green algae, see bacterial circadian rhythms ).

Circadian rhythm [ edit ] The best studied rhythm in chronobiology is the circadian rhythm , a roughly 24-hour cycle shown by physiological processes in all these organisms. The term circadian comes from the Latin circa , meaning "around" and dies , "day", meaning "approximately a day." It is regulated by circadian clocks .

The circadian rhythm can further be broken down into routine cycles during the 24-hour day: [ 3 ] Diurnal , which describes organisms active during daytime Nocturnal , which describes organisms active in the night Crepuscular , which describes animals primarily active during the dawn and dusk hours (ex: white-tailed deer, some bats) While circadian rhythms are defined as regulated by endogenous processes, other biological cycles may be regulated by exogenous signals.  In some cases, multi-trophic systems may exhibit rhythms driven by the circadian clock of one of the members (which may also be influenced or reset by external factors).  The endogenous plant cycles may regulate the activity of the bacterium by controlling availability of plant-produced photosynthate.

Other cycles [ edit ] Many other important cycles are also studied, including: Infradian rhythms , which are cycles longer than a day. Examples include circannual or annual cycles that govern migration or reproduction cycles in many plants and animals, or the human menstrual cycle .

Ultradian rhythms , which are cycles shorter than 24 hours, such as the 90-minute REM cycle , the 4-hour nasal cycle , or the 3-hour cycle of growth hormone production.

Tidal rhythms , commonly observed in marine life, which follow the roughly 12.4-hour transition from high to low tide and back.

Lunar rhythms , which follow the lunar month (29.5 days). They are relevant e.g. for marine life, as the level of the tides is modulated across the lunar cycle.

Gene oscillations – some genes are expressed more during certain hours of the day than during other hours.

Within each cycle, the time period during which the process is more active is called the acrophase .

[ 4 ] When the process is less active, the cycle is in its bathyphase or trough phase.  The particular moment of highest activity is the peak or maximum ; the lowest point is the nadir .  How high (or low) the process gets is measured by the amplitude .

Biochemical basis of biological rhythms [ edit ] Goldbeter's book [ 2 ] provides a thorough analysis of the biochemical mechanisms and their kinetic properties that underlie biological rhythms.

References [ edit ] ^ Biological Rhythms R. Refinetti, in Encyclopedia of Ecology, 2008 ^ a b Goldbeter, A. (1996).

Biochemical Oscillations and Cellular Rhythms: The Molecular Bases of Periodic and Chaotic Behaviour .

ISBN 0-521-40307-3 .

^ Nelson RJ. 2005. An Introduction to Behavioral Endocrinology. Sinauer Associates, Inc.: Massachusetts. Pg587.

^ Refinetti, Roberto (2006).

Circadian Physiology . CRC Press/Taylor & Francis Group.

ISBN 0-8493-2233-2 .

Lay summary External links [ edit ] Society for Research on Biological Rhythms Biological rhythm in Encyclopedia Britannica v t e Biological rhythms Internal rhythms Circadian rhythm Infradian rhythm Ultradian rhythm Lunar rhythm Annual rhythm External cycles Diurnality Diurnal cycle Nocturnality Cathemerality Crepuscular Matutinal Vespertine Seasonality Photoperiodism Vernalization Fields Behavioural ecology Chronobiology Ethology See also Chronotype Diel vertical migration Light pollution Solunar theory Parts of a day Authority control databases International FAST National United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biological_rhythm&oldid=1065100768 " Categories : Chronobiology Biological processes This page was last edited on 11 January 2022, at 20:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biological rhythm 13 languages Add topic

