Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Aims 2 Actions Toggle Actions subsection 2.1 Exhibitions 2.2 Publications 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Arbeitsrat für Kunst 4 languages Deutsch Español Français Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Soviet artisan union The Arbeitsrat für Kunst ( German : 'Workers council for art' or 'Art Soviet') was a union of architects, painters, sculptors and art writers, who were based in Berlin from 1918 to 1921. It developed as a response to the Workers and Soldiers councils and was dedicated to bringing current developments and tendencies in architecture and art to a broader population.

The Arbeitsrat worked closely with the Novembergruppe and the Deutscher Werkbund . Some of the architects represented in the Arbeitsrat united in the Glass Chain , or joined the correspondence group, Der Ring . Many members were important founders of the Bauhaus . Individual members informed the most important German academy of art of the time, the Staatliche Akademie für Kunst und Kunstgewerbe Breslau, as well as the Bauhaus.

Aims [ edit ] Art and the people must form an entity. Art shall no longer be a luxury of the few but should be enjoyed and experienced by the broad masses. The aim is an alliance of the arts under the wing of great architecture.

Flyer dated March 1st 1919 [ 1 ] Their demands were: the acknowledgment of all tasks of building as public and not private tasks, the abolition of all official privileges, the establishment of community centers as places to exchange art and ideas, the dissolution of the Academy of the arts and the Prussian national art commission , the release of architectural, plastics, painting and handicraft commissions from national patronage, the promotion of museums as education places, the removal of artistically worthless monuments and the formation of a state body to oversee and promote education in the arts.

The Arbeitsrat reacted to the unpalatable situation concerning orders for young architects, who were lost in the First world war .

Actions [ edit ] The Arbeitsrat recruited the public to participate in its art and architectural exhibitions and publications. Its exhibitions were open for non-architects and also for non-members of the group to take part, with designs, models, sketches and sculptures.

Exhibitions [ edit ] "Ausstellung für unbekannte Architekten",(Exhibition for unknown architects ) Berlin und Weimar, 1919 "Neues Bauen" (New building), Berlin, 1920 Publications [ edit ] Bruno Taut: Ein Architektur-Programm . (An architectural programme) Berlin 1918 Paul Rudolf Henning: Ton. Ein Aufruf von P. R. Henning. Zweite Flugschrift des Arbeitsrats für Kunst ( Clay/tone/sound. A call by P.R. Henning. Second Pamphlet of the work advice for art ). Berlin ca. 1918 Arbeitsrat für Kunst (Hrsg.): Arbeitsrat für Kunst. Flugblatt ( Arbeitsrat für Kunst. Leaflet ). Envelope with woodcut by Max Pechstein , Berlin 1919 Arbeitsrat für Kunst (Hrsg.): Ja! Stimmen des Arbeitsrates für Kunst in Berlin (Yes! Voices of the Art Society in Berlin). Berlin 1919 Arbeitsrat für Kunst (Hrsg.): Ruf zum Bauen: zweite Buchpublikation des Arbeiterrats für Kunst ( Call for building: Second book publication of the Arbeitsrats für Kunst ). Berlin 1920 Otto Bartning: Ein Unterrichtsplan für Architektur und bildende Künste ( An instruction plan for architecture and the visual arts ) Notes [ edit ] ^ Hans Scharoun - Organic Functionalism Archived September 27, 2007, at the Wayback Machine References [ edit ] Karl Ernst Osthaus: Reden und Schriften. Folkwang – Werkbund – Arbeitsrat . König, Köln 2002.

ISBN 3-88375-560-5 Regine Prange: Architekturphantasie ohne Architektur? Der Arbeitsrat für Kunst und seine Ausstellungen , in: Thorsten Scheer, Josef Paul Kleihues, Paul Kahlfeldt (Hrsg.): Bauen in Berlin: 1900–2000. Stadt der Architektur. Architektur der Stadt 1900–2000.

Nicolai, Berlin 2000.

ISBN 3-87584-013-5 Manfred Schlösser: Arbeitsrat für Kunst: Berlin 1918–1921.

Akademie der Künste, Berlin 1980.

ISBN 3-88331-916-3 Eberhard Steneberg: Arbeitsrat für Kunst. Berlin 1918–1921.

Marzona, Düsseldorf 1987.

ISBN 3-921420-33-4 External links [ edit ] Katrin Husmann: Der Arbeitsrat für Kunst Uwe M. Schneede: Die abgesonderte Welt. Hermann Finsterlin und die Gläserne Kette This page was translated from the German Wikipedia at:- de:Arbeitsrat für Kunst .

Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arbeitsrat_für_Kunst&oldid=1290303047 " Categories : Expressionist architecture Architecture groups Culture in Berlin 1910s in Berlin 1920s in Berlin 1918 establishments in Germany 1921 disestablishments in Germany Workers' councils Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 May 2025, at 23:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Arbeitsrat für Kunst 4 languages Add topic

