Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classical hexameter 2 Application 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Hexameter 43 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch Asturianu Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara Français Galego Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Íslenska Italiano Latina Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Português Русский Seeltersk Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Hexameters ) Metrical line of verses consisting of six feet Hexameter is a metrical line of verses consisting of six feet (a "foot" here is the pulse, or major accent, of words in an English line of poetry ; in Greek as well as in Latin a "foot" is not an accent , but describes various combinations of syllables ). It was the standard epic metre in classical Greek and Latin literature, such as in the Iliad , Odyssey and Aeneid . Its use in other genres of composition include Horace 's satires, Ovid 's Metamorphoses , and the Hymns of Orpheus. According to Greek mythology , hexameter was invented by Phemonoe , daughter of Apollo and the first Pythia of Delphi.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Classical hexameter [ edit ] Main article: Dactylic hexameter In classical hexameter, the six feet follow these rules: A foot can be made up of two long syllables (— —), a spondee ; or a long and two short syllables, a dactyl (— ∪∪).

The first four feet can contain either one of them.

The fifth is almost always a dactyl, and last must be a spondee / trochee (together forming an adonic ). Exceptions can occur when a polysyllabic (especially Greek) name ends a verse.

A short syllable (∪) is a syllable with a short vowel and no consonant at the end. A long syllable (—) is a syllable that either has a long vowel, one or more consonants at the end (or a long consonant ), or both. Spaces between words are not counted in syllabification, so for instance "cat" is a long syllable (—) if said in isolation, but "cat attack" in combination would be syllabified as short-short-long: "ca", "ta", "tack" (∪∪ —).

Variations of the sequence from line to line, as well as the use of caesura (logical full stops within the line) are essential in avoiding what may otherwise be a monotonous sing-song effect.

Application [ edit ] Although the rules seem simple, it is hard to use classical hexameter in English, because English is a stress-timed language that condenses vowels and consonants between stressed syllables, while hexameter relies on the regular timing of the phonetic sounds. Languages having the latter properties (i.e., languages that are not stress-timed) include Ancient Greek, Latin, Lithuanian and Hungarian.

While the above classical hexameter has never enjoyed much popularity in English, where the standard metre is iambic pentameter , English poems have frequently been written in iambic hexameter . There are numerous examples from the 16th century and a few from the 17th; the most prominent of these is Michael Drayton 's Poly-Olbion (1612) in couplets of iambic hexameter. An example from Drayton (marking the six feet on each line): Nor a/ny o/ther wold / like Cot/swold e/ver sped, So rich / and fair / a vale / in for/tuning / to wed.

In the 17th century the iambic hexameter, also called alexandrine , was used as a substitution in the heroic couplet , and as one of the types of permissible lines in lyrical stanzas and the Pindaric odes of Cowley and Dryden .

Several attempts were made in the 19th century to naturalise the dactylic hexameter to English — by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow , Arthur Hugh Clough , and others — none of them particularly successful.

Gerard Manley Hopkins wrote many of his poems in six-foot iambic and sprung rhythm lines. In the 20th century a loose ballad-like six-foot line with a strong medial pause was used by William Butler Yeats . The iambic six-foot line has also been used occasionally, and an accentual six-foot line has been used by translators from the Latin and many poets.

In the late 18th century the hexameter was adapted to the Lithuanian language by Kristijonas Donelaitis . His poem "Metai" (The Seasons) is considered the most successful hexameter text in Lithuanian as yet.

For dactylic hexameter poetry in Hungarian language , see Dactylic hexameter#In Hungarian .

Albert Meyer [ de ] (1893–1962) used a natural form of hexameter in his translation of some verses from Homer's Odyssey into the Swiss dialect of Bern .

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Dactylic hexameter Latin prosody Poetic meter Notes [ edit ] ^ Pausanias, 10.5.7 ^ Pliny the Elder, 7.57 ^ "Bärndütsch isch Chärndütsch" . Retrieved 2024-09-08 .

References [ edit ] Stephen Greenblatt et al.

The Norton Anthology of English Literature , volume D, 9th edition (Norton, 2012).

Pausanias.

Description of Greece, Vol. IV.

Translation by W.H.S. Jones, Litt.D., and H.A. Ormerod, M.A. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann Ltd., 1918).

Pliny the Elder.

The Natural History.

Translated by John Bostock, M.D., F.R.S. H.T. Riley, Esq., B.A. (London: Taylor and Francis, 1855).

External links [ edit ] Hexametrica , a tutorial on Latin dactylic hexameter at Skidmore College Hexameter.co , practice scanning lines of dactylic hexameter from a variety of Latin authors v t e Poetic meters Meter Monometer Dimeter Trimeter Tetrameter Pentameter Hexameter Heptameter Octameter Meters by metrical feet Iamb Iambic tetrameter Iambic pentameter Iambic heptameter Dactyl Dactylic hexameter Trochee/Trochaic Trochaic tetrameter Trochaic octameter Arabic poetry Basīṭ Hazaj Kāmil Mutaqārib Madīd Rajaz Tawīl Wāfir Hebrew poetry Qinah Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hexameter&oldid=1292102636 " Category : Types of verses Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 06:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hexameter 43 languages Add topic

