Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Program history and overview 2 Science 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Mars Gravity Biosatellite 2 languages Català Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Aborted low gravity research project Mars Gravity Biosatellite Program overview Country Australia USA Manager University of Washington MIT University of Queensland Purpose Study the effects of Mars -level gravity on mammals [ 1 ] Status Canceled Program history Duration 2001-2009 First flight 2010 or 2011 (planned) Launch site(s) Cape Canaveral Space Force Station (planned) Vehicle information Uncrewed vehicle(s) Discoverer capsule [ 1 ] Launch vehicle(s) Falcon 1E (planned) Minotaur IV (planned) The Mars Gravity Biosatellite was a project initiated as a competition between universities in 2001 by the Mars Society . The aim was to build a spacecraft concept to study the effects of Mars-level gravity (~0.38g) on mammals.

Presentations were given to Robert Zubrin ( Mars Society ), and the award for best design was given to The University of Washington (UW). The UW team continued to develop the concept until the end of the school year (June 2002), after which funding became an issue. The team from UW contacted members of the team that presented from MIT, and the two universities agreed to continue development together. Later University of Queensland – Australia (UQ) joined the team as well. The program ended in 2009.

Program history and overview [ edit ] The Mars Gravity Biosatellite program began in 2001 as a Mars Society initiative called Translife that grew out of a discussion between Robert Zubrin and Elon Musk .  It was intended to study the effects of the gravity of Mars (about one-third that of Earth) on mammals , for which no data was available.  Over the next few years, the program grew both scope and vision, with staff and students from MIT ( Payload ), UW ( Spacecraft Bus ) and UQ ( Reentry ) collaboratively designing various parts of the mission concept.  With ongoing funding challenges, UW and UQ withdrew after several years and Georgia Institute of Technology stepped in to build on their design work.  The effort represented the most ambitious and complex student satellite project to date.

The mission concept was envisioned to carry 15 mice in low Earth orbit for five weeks. The satellite was designed to spin at approximately 32 rpm [ 2 ] to generate centrifugal force that they would experience as gravity on the surface of Mars . At the end of its mission, the satellite would reenter Earth's atmosphere and its cargo of mice would be retrieved. In 2007, a tentative launch date for the Mars Gravity Biosatellite had been set for 2010 or 2011, as the primary payload on a Falcon 1E or a Minotaur IV launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida.

[ 2 ] In 2005, the involved universities received a $200,000 NASA advanced projects development grant to support the development of a full payload engineering model.

[ 3 ] In 2006, the students of Mars Gravity developed a novel microfinancing platform called Your Name Into Space. This was meant to help finance the development of their spacecraft.  This initiative is designed to give individuals and corporations the opportunity to fly images of their choice into orbit.

[ 4 ] By the program's end in 2009, the project had engaged over 600 undergraduate, graduate, and high school students in aerospace engineering, space life sciences, and program management. Over 20 conference presentations and papers were published, earning multiple student awards.

[ 5 ] On 24 June 2009, a status report was released declaring the end of this program, due to lack of funding and shifting priorities at NASA.

[ 5 ] Science [ edit ] Further information: Effect of spaceflight on the human body and Space medicine Gravity on Mars is only about 38% as strong as it is on Earth, and the long-term effects of such reduced gravity are unknown. Astronauts who are weightless for long periods of time lose significant amounts of bone and muscle mass. It is unclear if the gravity on Mars is strong enough to avoid or minimize these health problems. The Mars Gravity Biosatellite was meant to provide data on how mammalian health is affected by long-term exposure to lower levels of gravity, focusing on bone loss, changes in bone structure, muscle atrophy , and changes in the inner ear . The results from the five-week mission experiment would have been compared against a variety of Earth-based controls, including vivarium, hindlimb suspension, partial weight suspension, flight habitat effects, and short-radius centrifuge testing.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Spaceflight portal Simulated gravity References [ edit ] ^ a b Francis, Scott (2006), Entry System Design of the Mars Gravity Biosatellite , Georgia Tech , retrieved 26 May 2024 ^ a b c Korzun, Ashley M.; Wagner, Erika B.; et al. (2007).

Mars Gravity Biosatellite: Engineering, Science, and Education . 58th International Astronautical Congress .

^ NASA Grant Energizes Student-Developed Mars Project .  Leonard David, Space . September 30, 2005.

^ "Your Name Into Space" . Archived from the original on February 21, 2009 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

^ a b "The Mars Gravity Biosatellite Program Is Closing Down" .

spaceref.com . 24 June 2009. Archived from the original on September 14, 2012 . Retrieved 22 August 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Mars Gravity [ usurped ] , archived home page "Mars Mice" . NASA. 2004-01-20. Archived from the original on 2021-03-04 . Retrieved 2018-10-26 .

Mars group launches high-flying fundraiser Space ship logos go ka-ching!, Sasha Brown, News Office, November 3, 2006, MIT News Release Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mars_Gravity_Biosatellite&oldid=1279451099 " Categories : Colonization of Mars Proposed satellites Non-profit organizations based in the United States Scientific organizations based in the United States Mars Biosatellites Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 March 2025, at 17:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mars Gravity Biosatellite 2 languages Add topic

