Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Subflashes 2 Red giants 3 Binary white dwarfs 4 Helium shell flash 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Helium flash 26 languages العربية বাংলা Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский සිංහල Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Brief thermal runaway nuclear fusion in the core of low-mass stars Fusion of helium in the core of low-mass stars.

A helium flash is a very brief thermal runaway nuclear fusion of large quantities of helium into carbon through the triple-alpha process in the core of low-mass stars (between 0.8 solar masses ( M ☉ ) and 2.0 M ☉ [ 1 ] ) during their red giant phase. The Sun is predicted to experience a flash 1.2 billion years after it leaves the main sequence . A much rarer runaway helium fusion process can also occur on the surface of accreting white dwarf stars.

Low-mass stars do not produce enough gravitational pressure to initiate normal helium fusion. As the hydrogen in the core is exhausted, some of the helium left behind is instead compacted into degenerate matter , supported against gravitational collapse by quantum mechanical pressure rather than thermal pressure .  Subsequent hydrogen shell fusion further increases the mass of the core until it reaches temperature of approximately 100 million kelvins , which is hot enough to initiate helium fusion (or "helium burning") in the core.

However, a property of degenerate matter is that increases in temperature do not produce an increase in the pressure of the matter until the thermal pressure becomes so very high that it exceeds degeneracy pressure. In main-sequence stars, thermal expansion regulates the core temperature, but in degenerate cores, this does not occur. Helium fusion increases the temperature, which increases the fusion rate, which further increases the temperature in a runaway reaction, which quickly spans the entire core. This produces a flash of very intense helium fusion that lasts only a few minutes, [ 2 ] but during that time, produces energy at a rate comparable to the entire Milky Way galaxy.

[ 2 ] In the case of normal low-mass stars, the vast energy release causes much of the core to come out of degeneracy, allowing it to thermally expand.  This consumes most of the total energy released by the helium flash, [ 2 ] and any left-over energy is absorbed into the star's upper layers. Thus the helium flash is mostly undetectable by observation and is described solely by astrophysical models. After the core's expansion and cooling, the star's surface rapidly cools and contracts in as little as 10,000 years until it is roughly 2% of its former radius and luminosity. It is estimated that the electron-degenerate helium core weighs about 40% of the star mass and that 6% of the core is converted into carbon.

[ 2 ] Subflashes [ edit ] Subflashes are pulsational instabilities that occur after the main helium flash. They are driven by stars that do not have good convective or radiative boundaries.

[ 3 ] Subflashes can last several hours to days and can occur for many years with each subsequent flash generally being weaker.

[ 3 ] Subflashes can be detected by applying fourier transforms to the light curve data.

[ 4 ] Red giants [ edit ] Sakurai's Object is a white dwarf undergoing a helium shell flash.

[ 5 ] During the red giant phase of stellar evolution in stars with less than 2.0 M ☉ , the nuclear fusion of hydrogen ceases in the core as it is depleted, leaving a helium-rich core. While fusion of hydrogen continues in the star's shell causing a continuation of the accumulation of helium in the core, making the core denser, the temperature is still unable to reach the level required for helium fusion, as happens in more massive stars. Thus the thermal pressure from fusion is no longer sufficient to counter the gravitational collapse and create the hydrostatic equilibrium found in most stars. This causes the star to start contracting and increasing in temperature until it eventually becomes compressed enough for the helium core to become degenerate matter . This degeneracy pressure is finally sufficient to stop further collapse of the most central material but the rest of the core continues to contract and the temperature continues to rise until it reaches a point ( ≈1 × 10 8 K ) at which the helium can ignite and start to fuse.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] The explosive nature of the helium flash arises from its taking place in degenerate matter. Once the temperature reaches 100–200 million kelvins and helium fusion begins using the triple-alpha process , the temperature rapidly increases, further raising the helium fusion rate and, because degenerate matter is a good conductor of heat , widening the reaction region.

However, since degeneracy pressure (which is purely a function of density) is dominating thermal pressure (proportional to the product of density and temperature), the total pressure is only weakly dependent on temperature.  Thus, the dramatic increase in temperature only causes a slight increase in pressure, so there is no stabilizing cooling expansion of the core.

This runaway reaction quickly climbs to about 100 billion times the star's normal energy production (for a few seconds) until the temperature increases to the point that thermal pressure again becomes dominant, eliminating the degeneracy. The core can then expand and cool down and a stable burning of helium will continue.

[ 9 ] A star with mass greater than about 2.25 M ☉ starts to burn helium without its core becoming degenerate, and so does not exhibit this type of helium flash. In a very low-mass star (less than about 0.5 M ☉ ), the core is never hot enough to ignite helium. The degenerate helium core will keep on contracting, and finally becomes a helium white dwarf .

The helium flash is not directly observable on the surface by electromagnetic radiation. The flash occurs in the core deep inside the star, and the net effect will be that all released energy is absorbed by the entire core, causing the degenerate state to become nondegenerate. Earlier computations indicated that a nondisruptive mass loss would be possible in some cases, [ 10 ] but later star modeling taking neutrino energy loss into account indicates no such mass loss.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] In a one solar mass star, the helium flash is estimated to release about 5 × 10 41 J , [ 13 ] or about 0.3% of the energy release of a 1.5 × 10 44 J type Ia supernova , [ 14 ] which is triggered by an analogous ignition of carbon fusion in a carbon–oxygen white dwarf.

Binary white dwarfs [ edit ] When hydrogen gas is accreted onto a white dwarf from a binary companion star, the hydrogen can fuse to form helium for a narrow range of accretion rates, but most systems develop a layer of hydrogen over the degenerate white dwarf interior. This hydrogen can build up to form a shell near the surface of the star. When the mass of hydrogen becomes sufficiently large, runaway fusion causes a nova . In a few binary systems where the hydrogen fuses on the surface, the mass of helium built up can burn in an unstable helium flash. In certain binary systems the companion star may have lost most of its hydrogen and donate helium-rich material to the compact star. Note that similar flashes occur on neutron stars.

[ citation needed ] Helium shell flash [ edit ] Helium shell flashes are a somewhat analogous but much less violent, nonrunaway helium ignition event, taking place in the absence of degenerate matter. They occur periodically in asymptotic giant branch stars in a shell outside the core. This is late in the life of a star in its giant phase. The star has burnt most of the helium available in the core, which is now composed of carbon and oxygen. Helium fusion continues in a thin shell around this core, but then turns off as helium becomes depleted. This allows hydrogen fusion to start in a layer above the helium layer. After enough additional helium accumulates, helium fusion is reignited, leading to a thermal pulse which eventually causes the star to expand and brighten temporarily (the pulse in luminosity is delayed because it takes a number of years for the energy from restarted helium fusion to reach the surface [ 15 ] ). Such pulses may last a few hundred years, and are thought to occur periodically every 10,000 to 100,000 years.

[ 15 ] After the flash, helium fusion continues at an exponentially decaying rate for about 40% of the cycle as the helium shell is consumed.

[ 15 ] Thermal pulses may cause a star to shed circumstellar shells of gas and dust.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Carbon detonation – Runaway fusion in a white dwarf star References [ edit ] ^ Pols, Onno (September 2009).

"Chapter 9: Post-main sequence evolution through helium burning" (PDF) .

Stellar Structure and Evolution (lecture notes). Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 May 2019.

^ a b c d Taylor, David.

"The End Of The Sun" .

Northwestern University .

almost all the energy of the flash is absorbed by the titanic weight-lifting necessary to lift the core out of its white-dwarf condition.

^ a b Battich, Tiara; Bertolami, Marcelo M. Miller; Córsico, Alejandro H.; Althaus, Leandro G. (2018-06-01).

"Pulsational instabilities driven by the ∈ mechanism in hot pre-horizontal branch stars - I. The hot-flasher scenario" .

Astronomy & Astrophysics .

614 : A136.

arXiv : 1801.07287 .

Bibcode : 2018A&A...614A.136B .

doi : 10.1051/0004-6361/201731463 .

ISSN 0004-6361 .

^ Balona, Luis A. (2020-10-29).

"The Hot Limit of Solar-like Oscillations From Kepler Photometry" .

Frontiers in Astronomy and Space Sciences .

7 : 85.

arXiv : 2008.06299 .

Bibcode : 2020FrASS...7...85B .

doi : 10.3389/fspas.2020.529025 .

ISSN 2296-987X .

^ "White Dwarf Resurrection" . Retrieved 3 August 2015 .

^ Hansen, Carl J.; Kawaler, Steven D.; Trimble, Virginia (2004).

Stellar Interiors - Physical Principles, Structure, and Evolution (2 ed.). Springer. pp.

62 –5.

ISBN 978-0387200897 .

^ Seeds, Michael A.; Backman, Dana E. (2012).

Foundations of Astronomy (12 ed.).

Cengage Learning . pp.

249– 51.

ISBN 978-1133103769 .

^ Karttunen, Hannu; Kröger, Pekka; Oja, Heikki; Poutanen, Markku; Donner, Karl Johan, eds. (2007-06-27).

Fundamental Astronomy (5 ed.). Springer. p.

249 .

ISBN 978-3540341437 .

^ Deupree, R. G.; R. K. Wallace (1987).

"The core helium flash and surface abundance anomalies" .

Astrophysical Journal .

317 : 724– 732.

Bibcode : 1987ApJ...317..724D .

doi : 10.1086/165319 .

^ Deupree, R. G. (1984).

"Two- and three-dimensional numerical simulations of the core helium flash" .

The Astrophysical Journal .

282 : 274.

Bibcode : 1984ApJ...282..274D .

doi : 10.1086/162200 .

^ Deupree, R. G. (1996-11-01). "A Reexamination of the Core Helium Flash".

The Astrophysical Journal .

471 (1): 377– 384.

Bibcode : 1996ApJ...471..377D .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.31.44 .

doi : 10.1086/177976 .

S2CID 15585754 .

^ Mocák, M (2009).

Multidimensional hydrodynamic simulations of the core helium flash in low-mass stars (PhD. Thesis). Technische Universität München.

Bibcode : 2009PhDT.........2M .

^ Edwards, A. C. (1969).

"The Hydrodynamics of the Helium Flash" .

Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society .

146 (4): 445– 472.

Bibcode : 1969MNRAS.146..445E .

doi : 10.1093/mnras/146.4.445 .

^ Khokhlov, A.; Müller, E.; Höflich, P. (1993). "Light curves of Type IA supernova models with different explosion mechanisms".

Astronomy and Astrophysics .

270 ( 1– 2): 223– 248.

Bibcode : 1993A&A...270..223K .

^ a b c Wood, P. R.; D. M. Zarro (1981). "Helium-shell flashing in low-mass stars and period changes in mira variables".

Astrophysical Journal .

247 (Part 1): 247.

Bibcode : 1981ApJ...247..247W .

doi : 10.1086/159032 .

v t e White dwarf Formation Chandrasekhar limit Hertzsprung–Russell diagram Mira variable PG 1159 star Stellar evolution Fate Black dwarf Type Ia supernova Candidates Neutron star Pulsar Magnetar Related links Stellar black hole Related links Compact star Quark star Exotic star Extreme helium star Subdwarf B star Helium planet In binary systems Nova Remnant List Dwarf nova Micronova Symbiotic nova Cataclysmic variable star AM CVn star Polar Intermediate polar X-ray binary Supersoft X-ray source Binary pulsar Helium flash Carbon detonation Properties Pulsating Urca process Electron-degenerate matter Quasi-periodic oscillations White dwarf cooling anomaly Related Planetary nebula List RAMBOs White dwarf luminosity function Timeline of white dwarfs, neutron stars, and supernovae List Category v t e Stars List Formation Accretion Molecular cloud Bok globule Young stellar object Protostar Pre-main-sequence Herbig Ae/Be T Tauri Herbig–Haro object Hayashi track Henyey track Evolution Main sequence Red-giant branch Horizontal branch Red clump Asymptotic giant branch post-AGB super-AGB Blue loop Planetary nebula Protoplanetary Wolf–Rayet nebula PG1159 Dredge-up OH/IR Instability strip Luminous blue variable Stellar population Supernova Superluminous Hypernova Classification Early Late Main sequence O B A F G K M Subdwarf O B WR OB Subgiant Giant Blue Red Yellow Bright giant Supergiant Blue Red Yellow Hypergiant Yellow Carbon S CN CH White dwarf Chemically peculiar Am Ap/Bp CEMP HgMn He-weak Barium Lambda Boötis Lead Technetium Be Shell B[e] Helium Extreme Blue straggler Remnants Compact star Parker's star White dwarf Helium planet Neutron Radio-quiet Pulsar Binary X-ray Magnetar Stellar black hole X-ray binary Burster SGR Hypothetical Blue dwarf Black dwarf Exotic Boson Electroweak Strange Preon Planck Dark Dark-energy Quark Q Black hole star Black Hawking Quasi-star Gravastar Thorne–Żytkow object Iron Blitzar White hole Nucleosynthesis Deuterium burning Lithium burning Proton–proton chain CNO cycle Helium flash Triple-alpha process Alpha process C burning Ne burning O burning Si burning s-process r-process p-process Nova Symbiotic Remnant Luminous red nova Recurrent Micronova Supernova Structure Core Convection zone Microturbulence Oscillations Radiation zone Atmosphere Photosphere Starspot Chromosphere Stellar corona Alfvén surface Stellar wind Bubble Bipolar outflow Accretion disk Protoplanetary disk Proplyd Asteroseismology Helioseismology Circumstellar dust Cosmic dust Circumstellar envelope Eddington luminosity Kelvin–Helmholtz mechanism Properties Designation Dynamics Effective temperature Luminosity Kinematics Magnetic field Absolute magnitude Mass Metallicity Rotation Gravity darkening Starlight Variable Photometric system Color index Hertzsprung–Russell diagram Color–color diagram Strömgren sphere Kraft break Star systems Binary Contact Common envelope Eclipsing Symbiotic Multiple Cluster Open Globular Super Planetary system Earth-centric observations Sun Solar eclipse Solar radio emission Solar System Sunlight Pole star Circumpolar Constellation Asterism Magnitude Apparent Extinction Photographic Radial velocity Proper motion Parallax Photometric-standard Lists Proper names Arabic Chinese Extremes Most massive Highest temperature Lowest temperature Largest volume Smallest volume Brightest Historical brightest Most luminous Nearest bright Most distant With resolved images With multiple exoplanets Brown dwarfs Red dwarfs White dwarfs Milky Way novae Supernovae Candidates Remnants Planetary nebulae Timeline of stellar astronomy Related Substellar object Brown dwarf Desert Sub Planet Galactic year Galaxy Guest Gravity Intergalactic Neutron star merger Planet-hosting stars Stellar collision Stellar engulfment Tidal disruption event Category Stars portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Helium_flash&oldid=1303659229 " Categories : Concepts in astrophysics Exotic matter Helium Nucleosynthesis Stellar evolution Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2016 This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 09:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Helium flash 26 languages Add topic

