Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Alumni 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Cornell Law Review Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Cornell Law Review" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Academic journal Cornell Law Review Discipline Law Language English Edited by Ian B. Hayes, Editor-in-Chief [ 1 ] Publication details Former name(s) Cornell Law Quarterly History 1915–present Publisher Cornell Law School ( United States ) Frequency Bimonthly Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) Bluebook Cornell L. Rev.

ISO 4 Cornell Law Rev.

Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L ISSN 0010-8847 Links Journal homepage The Cornell Law Review is the flagship legal journal of Cornell Law School .  Originally published in 1915 as the Cornell Law Quarterly , the journal features scholarship in all fields of law.  Notably, past issues of the Cornell Law Review have included articles by Supreme Court justices Robert H. Jackson , John Marshall Harlan II , William O. Douglas , Felix Frankfurter , Ruth Bader Ginsburg , and Amy Coney Barrett .

History [ edit ] Cornell Law School first published a law review in June 1894—the first and only issue of the Cornell Law Journal —and again published a law review (the New York Law Review ) from January to July 1895. Following these initial efforts, the Cornell Law Review began its continuous publication in 1915.

[ 2 ] Until 1966, the Cornell Law Review published four issues annually and was known as the Cornell Law Quarterly .  Six Student Editors were joined by one Faculty Editor, a Business Manager, and an Assistant Business Manager. In the first issue of Cornell Law Quarterly in November 1915, Cornell professor (and soon-to-be dean ) Edwin Hamlin Woodruff defended the launch of this new journal from critics who decried the proliferation of legal periodicals at the time (one contemporary critic counted 20 journals total, including non-scholarly periodicals).

Woodruff argued that the Cornell Law Quarterly would "justify its existence if it can reach and be helpful to...lawyers who might otherwise give their attention exclusively to the routine of practice" and noted the "pedagogical value...within the college itself" for the students who worked on the journal.  Woodruff wrote that the journal "would not fail of its purpose, if it substantially enhances the spirit of mutual service between the College of Law and Cornell Lawyers; if it aides in some degree to foster any needed reform in the law, or to give help by intelligent discussion and investigation toward the solution of legal problems; and if it satisfies within the college itself among the students and faculty a desire to advance...the cause of legal education in a larger sense." The first article in the first issue of the Cornell Law Quarterly was authored by Cornell University President Jacob Gould Schurman , who had recently completed his term as vice-president of the New York State Constitutional Convention of 1915.  Schurman, and other authors in that issue and later issues of the Cornell Law Quarterly , chronicled the recent constitutional convention to illuminate the provisions of the state's new Constitution.  The journal also realized Woodruff's vision by honing the legal skills of the student editors who served on the journal. One of the first Editors-in-Chief, Elbert Tuttle , later rose to prominence as the Chief Judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit during a time when that court was called upon to be the primary enforcer of the Supreme Court's decision in Brown v. Board of Education in the southern states in that circuit.

The journal grew steadily over the next fifty years, expanding to the point at which a staff of 34 students undertook a two-stage expansion of the journal's publishing schedule. In 1966, the Cornell Law Quarterly published six issues—Fall, Winter I, Winter II, Spring I, Spring II, and Summer. In 1967, it committed itself to a bi-monthly publishing schedule and changed its name to the Cornell Law Review . Today, the Review is edited exclusively by upper class students in Cornell Law School's Juris Doctor (J.D.) program.

In 2019, the Cornell Law Review became the first of the Top-14 schools to elect an all-female executive board.

[ 3 ] The Cornell Law Review publishes seven issues annually.

Alumni [ edit ] Prominent alumni of the Cornell Law Review include: Edward J. Bloustein , 17th President of Rutgers University Arthur Hobson Dean , diplomat and corporate lawyer, Chairman of Cornell Board of Trustees Mary H. Donlon , first female editor-in-chief of Cornell Law Review, and of any US law review, [ 4 ] and later Judge on the United States Customs Court Bob DuPuy , President and Chief Operating Officer of Major League Baseball William vanden Heuvel , former United States Permanent Representative to the United Nations and former Ambassador to the European Office of the United Nations in Geneva Robert Hillman, Edwin H. Woodruff Professor of Law at Cornell Law School Sol Linowitz , United States Ambassador to the Organization of American States , Chairman of Xerox William P. Rogers , 63rd United States Attorney General , 55th United States Secretary of State [ 5 ] Faust Rossi, Samuel S. Leibowitz Professor of Trial Techniques at Cornell Law School Elbert Tuttle , former Chief Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit Richard C. Wesley , Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit References [ edit ] ^ "Current Masthead" . Cornell Law Review . Retrieved 28 March 2025 .

^ Forrester, Ray (Fall 1964). "Introduction to Volume 50 Cornell Law Quarterly".

Cornell Law Quarterly .

50 (1): 1– 4.

^ Sloan, Karen (6 February 2019).

"Cornell Law Review's New All-Women Board Speaks Volumes, Editor Says" .

New York Law Journal . Retrieved 26 April 2019 .

^ Famous First Facts (5th Ed.), page 189, no. 3127.

^ Smith, J.Y. (January 4, 2001).

"Lawyer-Statesman William P. Rogers Dies" .

The Washington Post . Washington DC: Washington Post Company . Retrieved March 10, 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Cornell Law Review v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cornell_Law_Review&oldid=1282976971 " Categories : American law journals Cornell University academic journals General law journals Academic journals established in 1915 1915 establishments in New York (state) Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2011 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Bimonthly journals (infobox) This page was last edited on 29 March 2025, at 18:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cornell Law Review Add languages Add topic

