Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Motivation 2 Types 3 Degree of usefulness and reliability 4 Bias and compensating methods Toggle Bias and compensating methods subsection 4.1 Matching techniques bias 4.2 Multiple comparison bias 4.3 Omitted variable bias 4.4 Selection bias 5 Quality 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Observational study 16 languages العربية Asturianu Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Lietuvių Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский ไทย 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study with uncontrolled variable of interest Anthropological survey paper from 1961 by Juhan Aul ( et ) from University of Tartu who measured about 50 000 people In fields such as epidemiology , social sciences , psychology and statistics , an observational study draws inferences from a sample to a population where the independent variable is not under the control of the researcher because of ethical concerns or logistical constraints. One common observational study is about the possible effect of a treatment on subjects, where the assignment of subjects into a treated group versus a control group is outside the control of the investigator.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] This is in contrast with experiments , such as randomized controlled trials , where each subject is randomly assigned to a treated group or a control group. Observational studies, for lacking an assignment mechanism, naturally present difficulties for inferential analysis.

Motivation [ edit ] The independent variable may be beyond the control of the investigator for a variety of reasons: A randomized experiment would violate ethical standards.  Suppose one wanted to investigate the abortion – breast cancer hypothesis , which postulates a causal link between induced abortion and the incidence of breast cancer.  In a hypothetical controlled experiment, one would start with a large subject pool of pregnant women and divide them randomly into a treatment group (receiving induced abortions) and a control group (not receiving abortions), and then conduct regular cancer screenings for women from both groups.  Needless to say, such an experiment would run counter to common ethical principles.  (It would also suffer from various confounds and sources of bias, e.g. it would be impossible to conduct it as a blind experiment .)  The published studies investigating the abortion–breast cancer hypothesis generally start with a group of women who already have received abortions. Membership in this "treated" group is not controlled by the investigator: the group is formed after the "treatment" has been assigned.

[ citation needed ] The investigator may simply lack the requisite influence.  Suppose a scientist wants to study the public health effects of a community-wide ban on smoking in public indoor areas.  In a controlled experiment, the investigator would randomly pick a set of communities to be in the treatment group.  However, it is typically up to each community and/or its legislature to enact a smoking ban .  The investigator can be expected to lack the political power to cause precisely those communities in the randomly selected treatment group to pass a smoking ban.  In an observational study, the investigator would typically start with a treatment group consisting of those communities where a smoking ban is already in effect.

[ citation needed ] A randomized experiment may be impractical.  Suppose a researcher wants to study the suspected link between a certain medication and a very rare group of symptoms arising as a side effect.  Setting aside any ethical considerations, a randomized experiment would be impractical because of the rarity of the effect.  There may not be a subject pool large enough for the symptoms to be observed in at least one treated subject.  An observational study would typically start with a group of symptomatic subjects and work backwards to find those who were given the medication and later developed the symptoms. Thus a subset of the treated group was determined based on the presence of symptoms, instead of by random assignment.

[ citation needed ] Many randomized controlled trials are not broadly representative of real-world patients and this may limit their external validity . Patients who are eligible for inclusion in a randomized controlled trial are usually younger, more likely to be male, healthier and more likely to be treated according to recommendations from guidelines.

[ 3 ] If and when the intervention is later added to routine-care, a large portion of the patients who will receive it may be old with many concomitant diseases and drug-therapies.

Types [ edit ] Case-control study : study originally developed in epidemiology, in which two existing groups differing in outcome are identified and compared on the basis of some supposed causal attribute.

Cross-sectional study : involves data collection from a population, or a representative subset, at one specific point in time.

Longitudinal study :  correlational research study that involves repeated observations of the same variables over long periods of time.

Cohort study and Panel study are particular forms of longitudinal study.

Degree of usefulness and reliability [ edit ] "Although observational studies cannot be used to make definitive statements of fact about the "safety, efficacy, or effectiveness" of a practice, they can: [ 4 ] provide information on 'real world' use and practice; detect signals about the benefits and risks of...[the] use [of practices] in the general population; help formulate hypotheses to be tested in subsequent experiments; provide part of the community-level data needed to design more informative pragmatic clinical trials; and inform clinical practice." [ 4 ] Bias and compensating methods [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Observational study" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In all of those cases, if a randomized experiment cannot be carried out, the alternative line of investigation suffers from the problem that the decision of which subjects receive the treatment is not entirely random and thus is a potential source of bias . A major challenge in conducting observational studies is to draw inferences that are acceptably free from influences by overt biases, as well as to assess the influence of potential hidden biases. The following are a non-exhaustive set of problems especially common in observational studies.

Matching techniques bias [ edit ] In lieu of experimental control, multivariate statistical techniques allow the approximation of experimental control with statistical control by using matching methods. Matching methods account for the influences of observed factors that might influence a cause-and-effect relationship. In healthcare and the social sciences , investigators may use matching to compare units that nonrandomly received the treatment and control. One common approach is to use propensity score matching in order to reduce confounding , [ 5 ] although this has recently come under criticism for exacerbating the very problems it seeks to solve.

[ 6 ] Multiple comparison bias [ edit ] Multiple comparison bias can occur when several hypotheses are tested at the same time. As the number of recorded factors increases, the likelihood increases that at least one of the recorded factors will be highly correlated with the data output simply by chance.

[ 7 ] Omitted variable bias [ edit ] An observer of an uncontrolled experiment (or process) records potential factors and the data output: the goal is to determine the effects of the factors. Sometimes the recorded factors may not be directly causing the differences in the output. There may be more important factors which were not recorded but are, in fact, causal.  Also, recorded or unrecorded factors may be correlated which may yield incorrect conclusions.

[ 8 ] Selection bias [ edit ] Another difficulty with observational studies is that researchers may themselves be biased in their observational skills. This would allow for researchers to (either consciously or unconsciously) seek out the information they're looking for while conducting their research. For example, researchers may exaggerate the effect of one variable, or downplay the effect of another: researchers may even select in subjects that fit their conclusions. This selection bias can happen at any stage of the research process. This introduces bias into the data where certain variables are systematically incorrectly measured.

[ 9 ] Quality [ edit ] A 2014 (updated in 2024) Cochrane review concluded that observational studies produce results similar to those conducted as randomized controlled trials .

[ 10 ] The review reported little evidence for significant effect differences between observational studies and randomized controlled trials, regardless of design.

[ 10 ] Differences need to be evaluated by looking at population, comparator, heterogeneity, and outcomes.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Observational interpretation fallacy Correlation does not imply causation Observation Difference-in-differences Randomized controlled trial (RCT) Blinded experiment Scientific method References [ edit ] ^ "Observational study" . Archived from the original on 2016-04-27 . Retrieved 2008-06-25 .

^ Porta M, ed. (2008).

A Dictionary of Epidemiology (5th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195314496 .

^ Kennedy-Martin T, Curtis S, Faries D, Robinson S, Johnston J (November 2015).

"A literature review on the representativeness of randomized controlled trial samples and implications for the external validity of trial results" .

Trials .

16 (1): 495.

doi : 10.1186/s13063-015-1023-4 .

PMC 4632358 .

PMID 26530985 .

^ a b "Although observational studies cannot provide definitive evidence of safety, efficacy, or effectiveness, they can: 1) provide information on "real world" use and practice; 2) detect signals about the benefits and risks of complementary therapies use in the general population; 3) help formulate hypotheses to be tested in subsequent experiments; 4) provide part of the community-level data needed to design more informative pragmatic clinical trials; and 5) inform clinical practice." "Observational Studies and Secondary Data Analyses To Assess Outcomes in Complementary and Integrative Health Care." Richard Nahin, Ph.D., M.P.H., Senior Advisor for Scientific Coordination and Outreach, National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health , June 25, 2012 ^ Rosenbaum, Paul R. 2009.

Design of Observational Studies . New York: Springer.

^ King, Gary; Nielsen, Richard (2019-05-07). "Why Propensity Scores Should Not Be Used for Matching".

Political Analysis .

27 (4): 435– 454.

doi : 10.1017/pan.2019.11 .

hdl : 1721.1/128459 .

ISSN 1047-1987 .

S2CID 53585283 .

| link to the full article (from the author's homepage ^ Benjamini, Yoav (2010).

"Simultaneous and selective inference: Current successes and future challenges" .

Biometrical Journal .

52 (6): 708– 721.

doi : 10.1002/bimj.200900299 .

PMID 21154895 .

S2CID 8806192 .

^ "Introductory Econometrics Chapter 18: Omitted Variable Bias" .

www3.wabash.edu . Retrieved 2022-07-16 .

^ Hammer, Gaël P; du Prel, Jean-Baptist; Blettner, Maria (2009-10-01).

"Avoiding Bias in Observational Studies" .

Deutsches Ärzteblatt International .

106 (41): 664– 668.

doi : 10.3238/arztebl.2009.0664 .

ISSN 1866-0452 .

PMC 2780010 .

PMID 19946431 .

^ a b c Toews, Ingrid; Anglemyer, Andrew; Nyirenda, John Lz; Alsaid, Dima; Balduzzi, Sara; Grummich, Kathrin; Schwingshackl, Lukas; Bero, Lisa (2024-01-04).

"Healthcare outcomes assessed with observational study designs compared with those assessed in randomized trials: a meta-epidemiological study" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

1 (1): MR000034.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.MR000034.pub3 .

ISSN 1469-493X .

PMC 10765475 .

PMID 38174786 .

Further reading [ edit ] Rosenbaum PR (2002).

Observational Studies (2nd ed.). New York: Springer-Verlag.

ISBN 0387989676 .

"NIST/SEMATECH Handbook on Engineering Statistics" at NIST v t e Statistics Outline Index Descriptive statistics Continuous data Center Mean Arithmetic Arithmetic-Geometric Contraharmonic Cubic Generalized/power Geometric Harmonic Heronian Heinz Lehmer Median Mode Dispersion Average absolute deviation Coefficient of variation Interquartile range Percentile Range Standard deviation Variance Shape Central limit theorem Moments Kurtosis L-moments Skewness Count data Index of dispersion Summary tables Contingency table Frequency distribution Grouped data Dependence Partial correlation Pearson product-moment correlation Rank correlation Kendall's τ Spearman's ρ Scatter plot Graphics Bar chart Biplot Box plot Control chart Correlogram Fan chart Forest plot Histogram Pie chart Q–Q plot Radar chart Run chart Scatter plot Stem-and-leaf display Violin plot Data collection Study design Effect size Missing data Optimal design Population Replication Sample size determination Statistic Statistical power Survey methodology Sampling Cluster Stratified Opinion poll Questionnaire Standard error Controlled experiments Blocking Factorial experiment Interaction Random assignment Randomized controlled trial Randomized experiment Scientific control Adaptive designs Adaptive clinical trial Stochastic approximation Up-and-down designs Observational studies Cohort study Cross-sectional study Natural experiment Quasi-experiment Statistical inference Statistical theory Population Statistic Probability distribution Sampling distribution Order statistic Empirical distribution Density estimation Statistical model Model specification L p space Parameter location scale shape Parametric family Likelihood (monotone) Location–scale family Exponential family Completeness Sufficiency Statistical functional Bootstrap U V Optimal decision loss function Efficiency Statistical distance divergence Asymptotics Robustness Frequentist inference Point estimation Estimating equations Maximum likelihood Method of moments M-estimator Minimum distance Unbiased estimators Mean-unbiased minimum-variance Rao–Blackwellization Lehmann–Scheffé theorem Median unbiased Plug-in Interval estimation Confidence interval Pivot Likelihood interval Prediction interval Tolerance interval Resampling Bootstrap Jackknife Testing hypotheses 1- & 2-tails Power Uniformly most powerful test Permutation test Randomization test Multiple comparisons Parametric tests Likelihood-ratio Score/Lagrange multiplier Wald Specific tests Z -test (normal) Student's t -test F -test Goodness of fit Chi-squared G -test Kolmogorov–Smirnov Anderson–Darling Lilliefors Jarque–Bera Normality (Shapiro–Wilk) Likelihood-ratio test Model selection Cross validation AIC BIC Rank statistics Sign Sample median Signed rank (Wilcoxon) Hodges–Lehmann estimator Rank sum (Mann–Whitney) Nonparametric anova 1-way (Kruskal–Wallis) 2-way (Friedman) Ordered alternative (Jonckheere–Terpstra) Van der Waerden test Bayesian inference Bayesian probability prior posterior Credible interval Bayes factor Bayesian estimator Maximum posterior estimator Correlation Regression analysis Correlation Pearson product-moment Partial correlation Confounding variable Coefficient of determination Regression analysis Errors and residuals Regression validation Mixed effects models Simultaneous equations models Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) Linear regression Simple linear regression Ordinary least squares General linear model Bayesian regression Non-standard predictors Nonlinear regression Nonparametric Semiparametric Isotonic Robust Homoscedasticity and Heteroscedasticity Generalized linear model Exponential families Logistic (Bernoulli) / Binomial / Poisson regressions Partition of variance Analysis of variance (ANOVA, anova) Analysis of covariance Multivariate ANOVA Degrees of freedom Categorical / multivariate / time-series / survival analysis Categorical Cohen's kappa Contingency table Graphical model Log-linear model McNemar's test Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel statistics Multivariate Regression Manova Principal components Canonical correlation Discriminant analysis Cluster analysis Classification Structural equation model Factor analysis Multivariate distributions Elliptical distributions Normal Time-series General Decomposition Trend Stationarity Seasonal adjustment Exponential smoothing Cointegration Structural break Granger causality Specific tests Dickey–Fuller Johansen Q-statistic (Ljung–Box) Durbin–Watson Breusch–Godfrey Time domain Autocorrelation (ACF) partial (PACF) Cross-correlation (XCF) ARMA model ARIMA model (Box–Jenkins) Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) Vector autoregression (VAR) Frequency domain Spectral density estimation Fourier analysis Least-squares spectral analysis Wavelet Whittle likelihood Survival Survival function Kaplan–Meier estimator (product limit) Proportional hazards models Accelerated failure time (AFT) model First hitting time Hazard function Nelson–Aalen estimator Test Log-rank test Applications Biostatistics Bioinformatics Clinical trials / studies Epidemiology Medical statistics Engineering statistics Chemometrics Methods engineering Probabilistic design Process / quality control Reliability System identification Social statistics Actuarial science Census Crime statistics Demography Econometrics Jurimetrics National accounts Official statistics Population statistics Psychometrics Spatial statistics Cartography Environmental statistics Geographic information system Geostatistics Kriging Category Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject v t e Clinical research and experimental design Overview Clinical trial Trial protocols Adaptive clinical trial Academic clinical trials Clinical study design Evidence-based medicine Real world evidence Patient and public involvement Controlled study ( EBM I to II-1 ) Randomized controlled trial Scientific experiment Blind experiment Open-label trial Adaptive clinical trial Platform trial Observational study ( EBM II-2 to II-3 ) Cross-sectional study vs.

Longitudinal study , Ecological study Cohort study Retrospective Prospective Case–control study ( Nested case–control study ) Case series Case study Case report Measures Occurrence Incidence , Cumulative incidence , Prevalence , Point prevalence , Period prevalence Association Risk difference , Number needed to treat , Number needed to harm , Risk ratio , Relative risk reduction , Odds ratio , Hazard ratio Population impact Attributable fraction among the exposed , Attributable fraction for the population , Preventable fraction among the unexposed , Preventable fraction for the population Other Clinical endpoint , Virulence , Infectivity , Mortality rate , Morbidity , Case fatality rate , Specificity and sensitivity , Likelihood-ratios , Pre- and post-test probability Trial/test types In vitro In vivo Animal testing Animal testing on non-human primates First-in-man study Multicenter trial Seeding trial Vaccine trial Analysis of clinical trials Risk–benefit ratio Systematic review Replication Meta-analysis Intention-to-treat analysis Interpretation of results Selection bias Survivorship bias Correlation does not imply causation Null result Sex as a biological variable Category Glossary List of topics Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Observational_study&oldid=1300844960 " Categories : Observational study Statistical data types Design of experiments Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2010 Articles needing additional references from August 2021 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 18:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Observational study 16 languages Add topic

