Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Family systems theory 3 Publications Toggle Publications subsection 3.1 Publications about Bowen 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Murray Bowen 6 languages العربية Deutsch Français 한국어 Polski Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American physician, family therapist, and academic (1913-1990) This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Murray Bowen" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may contain citations that do not verify the text .

Please help improve it by checking for citation inaccuracies and resourcing or removing material failing verification.

( November 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Murray Bowen ( / ˈ b oʊ ən / BOH -ən ; January 31, 1913, in Waverly, Tennessee – October 9, 1990) was an American psychiatrist and a professor in psychiatry at Georgetown University . Bowen was among the pioneers of family therapy and a noted founder of systemic therapy . Beginning in the 1950s he developed a systems theory of the family.

Biography [ edit ] Murray Bowen (Lucius Murray Bowen [ 1 ] ) was born in 1913 as the oldest of five and grew up in the small town of Waverly, Tennessee , where his father was the mayor for some time.

[ 2 ] Bowen earned his Bachelor of Science degree in 1934 at the University of Tennessee in Knoxville . He received his MD in 1937 at the Medical School of the University of Tennessee in Memphis . After that, he had internships at Bellevue Hospital in New York City in 1938 and at the Grasslands Hospital, Valhalla, New York , from 1939 to 1941. From 1941 to 1946, he did his military training followed by five years of active duty with Army in the United States and Europe. During the war, while working with soldiers, his interest changed from surgery to psychiatry . Though he had been accepted for a post-military fellowship in surgery at the Mayo Clinic, in 1946 he started at the Menninger Foundation in Topeka, Kansas, as a fellow in psychiatry and personal psychoanalysis. This psychiatric training and experience lasted until 1954.

[ 3 ] From 1954 to 1959, Bowen worked at the National Institute of Mental Health , Bethesda, Maryland. He continued to develop the theory based in systematic therapy which viewed the family as an emotional unit, later known as Bowen Theory.

[ 4 ] At that time, family therapy was relatively new to the field of human services. Since the inception of Bowen Theory, it has been applied in several human services fields such as social services, education, and leadership development.

[ 5 ] After defining the field of family therapy he started integrating new concepts with the theory, noting that none of this had previously been addressed in the psychological literature. The theory he developed is Bowen Family Systems Theory . His approach gained national attention within two years of its introduction.

[ 6 ] Bowen did research on parents who lived with one adult schizophrenic child, which he thought could provide a paradigm for all children. From 1959 to 1990 he worked at the Georgetown University Medical Center in Washington DC as a clinical professor at the department of psychiatry, and later as director of family programs and founder of a Family Center. Bowen’s research focused on human interaction within the family “unit” or system. Bowen focused on the prodromal states that preceded a medical diagnosis. For Bowen, each concept was extended, and woven into physical, emotional, and social illness. Bowen criticized psychiatry’s penchant for diagnosing and treating mental illness as of limited usefulness and ultimately a dead end.

His colleagues have described him as having “an unrelenting conviction that theory is the most important foundation for psychiatry, family theory, and other practice fields.” During his time at Georgetown University, Bowen founded a Family Center in order to conduct his research. After his death in the 1990s, the center changed to the Bowen Center for the Study of the Family, a non-profit organization to carry on his legacy.

[ 7 ] In addition to his research and teaching, Bowen had other faculty appointments and consultancies. He was visiting professor in a variety of medical schools, including at the University of Maryland from 1956 to 1963 and at the Medical College of Virginia at Richmond from 1964 to 1978. He was a life fellow at the American Psychiatric Association and at the American Orthopsychiatric Association, and a life member at the Group for the Advancement of Psychiatry . He was on the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology in 1961 and first president at the American Family Therapy Association.

Murray Bowen received multiple awards and recognitions, including: 1978-1982, Originator and First President, American Family Therapy Association; [ 8 ] 1985 June, Alumnus of the Year, Menninger Foundation; 1985 December, Faculty, Evolution of Psychotherapy Conference, Erickson Foundation, Phoenix; 1986 June, Graduation Speaker, Menninger School of Psychiatry; 1986, Governor's Certificate, Tennessee Homecoming ‘86, Knoxville; 1986 October, Distinguished Alumnus Award, University of Tennessee-Knoxville.

He died of pulmonary disease in 1990.

In November 2002, Bowen's papers were donated to the U.S. National Library of Medicine .

[ 9 ] The collection of 125 boxes is stored offsite.

[ 10 ] Family systems theory [ edit ] Self-differentiation is a core concept within family systems theory, developed by Bowen in the mid-20th century.

[ 11 ] Bowen's theory posits that individuals are best understood within the context of their family relationships, which are seen as interconnected and interdependent. According to Bowen, each family member has a specific level of self-differentiation that influences their behavior within the family system.

[ citation needed ] Publications [ edit ] Bowen wrote about fifty papers, book chapters, and monographs based on his radically new relationships-based theory of human behavior.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Some important publications were: 1966, The Use of Family Theory in Clinical Practice .

1974, Toward the Differentiation of Self in One's Family of Origin .

1978, Family Therapy in Clinical Practice , Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson Inc., 1978.

1988, '' Family Evaluation: An Approach Based on Bowen Theory, co-written with  Kerr, M.E. at The Family Center at Georgetown University Hospital," New York: Norton & Co., 1988.

2019, '' Handbook of Psychiatry Volume 22 | ISBN 978-613-8-38663-6 , co-written with Javad Nurbakhsh ;  Hamideh Jahangiri; at The Lap Lambert Academic Publishing," Germany, 2019.

Publications about Bowen [ edit ] Roberta M. Gilbert, Extraordinary Relationships: A New Way of Thinking About Human Interactions , Minneapolis, MN: Chronimed Publishing, 1992.

Robert J. Noone, Family and Self: Bowen Theory and the Shaping of Adaptive Capacity , Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2021.

See also [ edit ] Systems science portal Systems psychology Edwin Friedman References [ edit ] ^ "Dr. Lucius Murray Bowen and LeRoy Bowen - Kansas Memory" .

www.kansasmemory.org . Retrieved December 7, 2016 .

^ Curriculum Vitae of Dr. Bowen by Murray Bowen, Washington, D.C. January 1990: Dr. Bowen gave here a brief overview in his own vita. There are many other papers and audio plus video tapes available at the National Library of Medicine and at the Bowen Center for the Study of the Family. Both are located in Washington, DC.

^ His background in science led to his formation of a new theory of psychotherapy that used systems ideas in place of Freudian concepts.

^ Bowen, Joanne (March 28, 2013). "Forward".

The Origins of Family Psychotherapy: The NIMH Family Study Project . Lanham, MD: Jason Aronson. p.

2 .

ISBN 978-0-7657-0975-2 .

^ "Home" .

thebowencenter.org .

^ "Home" .

thebowencenter.org .

^ "Home" .

thebowencenter.org .

^ Past Presidents , afta.org ^ "Murray Bowen papers 1951-2004: Access and Use" .

Archives and Modern Manuscripts Finding Aids . U.S. National Library of Medicine. Archived from the original on December 21, 2014 . Retrieved December 21, 2014 .

^ "Murray Bowen papers 1951-2004: Summary Information" .

Archives and Modern Manuscripts Finding Aids . U.S. National Library of Medicine. Archived from the original on December 21, 2014 . Retrieved December 21, 2014 .

^ Bowen, M. (1978). *Family Therapy in Clinical Practice*. Jason Aronson.

^ In 1990, Bowen stated that the most important publication was his book, Family Therapy in Clinical Practice , Jason Aronson Inc., publisher, Northvale, NJ, 1978. This book contains some twenty years of his theoretical work. Successive adherents of Bowen Natural Family Systems Theory point to the 1988 text Family Evaluation: An Approach Based on Bowen Theory, co-written with Dr. Bowen's heir apparent spokesperson/successor/colleague, Dr. Michael E. Kerr, M.D..

Bowen's academic papers are referenced in both books. During his last ten years, from 1980 to 1990, most of his concepts were described in detail in about twenty videotapes. A list of tapes, both theoretical and clinical, is available at the Georgetown University Hospital.

^ More biographies are listed in Membership Directories: At the American Psychiatric Association since 1950; At the directory of Medical Specialists since 1952; At the American Men of Medicine in 1961; In the World Who’s Who in Science: 1700 B.C. to 1966 A.D.

(3700 years in one volume) in 1966; In Personalities of the South since 1976; And in the Who’s Who in America in 1978.

External links [ edit ] The Bowen Center for the Study of the Family Biography of Murray Bowen, M.D. (January 31, 1913 - October 9, 1990) , The Bowen Center for the Study of the Family.

Dr. Bowen weblog: This website offer 9 paragraph Ideas to action s about Bowen's work.

Programs in Bowen Theory about educational programs in Northern California based on Bowen theory.

Western Pennsylvania Family Center about education and training in Bowen theory and its applications in Pittsburgh, PA.

Leadership in Ministry a clergy and helping professions training program grounded in Bowen Theory.

v t e Systems science System types Art Biological Complex Coupled human–environment Ecological Economic Information Multi-agent Nervous Recommender Social Concepts Doubling time Leverage points Limiting factor Negative feedback Positive feedback Theoretical fields Control theory Cybernetics Earth system science Living systems Sociotechnical system Systemics Urban metabolism World-systems theory Analysis Biology Dynamics Ecology Engineering Neuroscience Pharmacology Philosophy Psychology Theory ( Systems thinking ) Scientists Russell L. Ackoff Victor Aladjev William Ross Ashby Ruzena Bajcsy Béla H. Bánáthy Gregory Bateson Anthony Stafford Beer Richard E. Bellman Ludwig von Bertalanffy Margaret Boden Alexander Bogdanov Kenneth E. Boulding Murray Bowen Kathleen Carley Mary Cartwright C. West Churchman Manfred Clynes George Dantzig Edsger W. Dijkstra Fred Emery Heinz von Foerster Stephanie Forrest Jay Wright Forrester Barbara Grosz Charles A. S. Hall Mike Jackson Lydia Kavraki James J. Kay Faina M. Kirillova George Klir Allenna Leonard Edward Norton Lorenz Niklas Luhmann Humberto Maturana Margaret Mead Donella Meadows Mihajlo D. Mesarovic James Grier Miller Radhika Nagpal Howard T. Odum Talcott Parsons Ilya Prigogine Qian Xuesen Anatol Rapoport John Seddon Peter Senge Claude Shannon Katia Sycara Eric Trist Francisco Varela Manuela M. Veloso Kevin Warwick Norbert Wiener Jennifer Wilby Anthony Wilden Applications Systems theory in anthropology Systems theory in archaeology Systems theory in political science Organizations List Principia Cybernetica Category Portal Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Greece Korea Poland Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Murray_Bowen&oldid=1301019663 " Categories : 1913 births 1990 deaths American psychiatrists Family therapists American systems scientists Georgetown University Medical Center faculty University of Tennessee alumni People from Waverly, Tennessee 20th-century American physicians Hidden categories: Use mdy dates from September 2022 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2014 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking reliable references from November 2014 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 17:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Murray Bowen 6 languages Add topic

