Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geological setting 2 Tectonic history 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Sources Toggle the table of contents Caroline plate 19 languages Български Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Македонски 日本語 Polski Português Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Minor oceanic tectonic plate north of New Guinea Caroline plate The Caroline plate is shown with red shading in this map of local tectonic features from Bird's 2003 model.

[ 1 ] Further definition of some of the plate boundaries implied in the map has occurred in the southeast since.

[ 2 ] Type Minor Approximate area 1,700,000 km 2 [ 3 ] Movement 1 north-west Speed 1 87 mm/year Features Pacific Ocean 1 Relative to the African plate The Caroline plate is a minor tectonic plate that straddles the Equator in the eastern hemisphere located north of New Guinea . It forms a subduction zone along the border with the Bird's Head plate and other minor plates of the New Guinea region to the south. A transform boundary forms the northern border with the Pacific plate . Along the border with the Philippine Sea plate is a convergent boundary that transitions into a rift .

The Caroline plate was first proposed as a distinct plate by Weissel & Anderson 1978 .

Geological setting [ edit ] A separate terrane with its own tectonic history, the Caroline plate has been considered part of the Pacific plate because of sparse seismicity and low velocities along its boundaries.  It includes the West and East Caroline basins and the inactive Eauripik Rise separating them, but neither the Caroline Islands nor the Caroline Ridge. It is subducting under the Bird's Head and the plates or blocks associated with the present Australian plate along the New Guinea Trench to the south.

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] The boundary with the Philippine Sea to the west has two segments: the southern segment, the Ayu Trough was spreading at a rate of 8 mm/yr c.

25–2 Ma but has been slowing down since.  The northern segment, the Palau and southern Yap trenches, is not an active subduction zone as indicated by the lack of active volcanoes .  The Caroline- Pacific boundary is a complex, evolving system partly and potentially developing into a subduction zone.  The south-east boundary, along the Manus Trench , is a convergent boundary, but in the absence of active volcanoes and earthquakes, is not a subduction zone at present.

[ 1 ] This is the boundary of the Caroline plate with the North Bismarck plate , which is believed to be a relic plate currently moving with the Pacific plate.

[ 5 ] [ 4 ] Beyond the North Bismarck plate to the south is an area with currently actively independently moving microplates such as the South Bismarck plate , the Solomon Sea plate and the Woodlark plate .

[ 2 ] Tectonic history [ edit ] The Caroline plate moves at velocities very close to those of the Pacific plate and its age of formation and current status as an independent plate are uncertain.  There is a very slow rate of spreading between the Caroline and Philippine plates, but the Caroline plate apparently moved together with both the Philippine and New Guinea plates during the Neogene.

[ 6 ] The Caroline Ridge, to the north, meets the Caroline plate at the Sorol Trough at which there some evidence of oblique extension; the Caroline Ridge, however, is, although of uncertain origin, made of oceanic crust and probably the product of a hotspot.  The presence of a trench and indications of subduction beneath the Pacific plate is suggestive but the absence of island arcs, which could be expected from substantial subduction in the past, makes the development along this boundary unclear.

[ 6 ] The Caroline plate was, under all circumstances, a separate plate in the past.  The boundary along its eastern side, the Mussau Trench, must have been an important boundary since magnetic anomalies on the Caroline plate are Oligocene but those on the Pacific plate Cretaceous.  There are indications of spreading in the Caroline Sea 34–27 Ma. If the Caroline plate moved with the Pacific plate there should be clear evidences of a corresponding subduction beneath New Guinea, of which there is virtually none. The Ayu Trough is a slow spreading zone that opened 15 Ma.

[ 6 ] Before about 6 million years ago as the Ontong Java Plateau and Indo-Australian plate collided the Bismarck Sea was initially formed as a back-arc basin behind the New Britain arc, and after the collision, a transpressional zone developed in what is now the west Bismarck Sea, associated with subduction of the Caroline plate and North Bismarck plate at the New Guinea Trench.

[ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c Bird 2003 , Caroline Plate (CL), pp. 18–20 ^ a b Benyshek, E. K.; Taylor, B. (2021).

"Tectonics of the Papua-Woodlark region" .

Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems .

22 (e2020GC009209).

doi : 10.1029/2020GC009209 .

^ Alden 2016 ^ a b c Holm, RJ; Rosenbaum, G; Richards, SW (1 May 2016). "Post 8 Ma reconstruction of Papua New Guinea and Solomon Islands: Microplate tectonics in a convergent plate boundary setting".

Earth-Science Reviews .

156 : 66– 81.

doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2016.03.005 .

^ Weiler, PD; Coe, RS (2000). "Rotations in the actively colliding Finisterre Arc Terrane: paleomagnetic constraints on Plio-Pleistocene evolution of the South Bismarck microplate, northeastern Papua New Guinea".

Tectonophysics .

316 ( 3– 4): 297– 325.

doi : 10.1016/S0040-1951(99)00259-0 .

^ a b c Hall 2002 , Caroline plate, pp. 393–394 Sources [ edit ] Alden, A. (2016).

"Here Are the Sizes of Tectonic or Lithospheric Plates" . About.com. Archived from the original on 5 June 2016 . Retrieved 18 December 2016 .

Bird, P. (2003).

"An updated digital model of plate boundaries" (PDF) .

Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems .

4 (3).

Bibcode : 2003GGG.....4.1027B .

doi : 10.1029/2001GC000252 . Retrieved 18 December 2016 .

"An updated digital model of plate boundaries" .

PeterBird . 2003.

Bracey, D. R. (1983).

Geophysics and tectonic development of the Caroline Basin (PDF) (Report). U.S. Naval Oceanographic Office TR283 . Retrieved 18 December 2016 .

Hall, R. (2002).

"Cenozoic geological and plate tectonic evolution of SE Asia and the SW Pacific: computer-based reconstructions, model and animations" (PDF) .

Journal of Asian Earth Sciences .

20 (4): 353– 431.

Bibcode : 2002JAESc..20..353H .

doi : 10.1016/S1367-9120(01)00069-4 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-13 . Retrieved 18 December 2016 .

Weissel, J. K.; Anderson, R. N. (1978).

"Is there a Caroline plate?" .

Earth and Planetary Science Letters .

41 (2): 143– 158.

Bibcode : 1978E&PSL..41..143W .

doi : 10.1016/0012-821X(78)90004-3 . Retrieved 18 December 2016 .

v t e Tectonic plates Major plates African Antarctic Eurasian Indo-Australian Australian Indian North American Pacific South American Minor plates Amurian Arabian Burma Caribbean Caroline Cocos Indian Nazca New Hebrides Okhotsk Philippine Scotia Somali Sunda Yangtze Microplates Adriatic Aegean Sea Anatolian Balmoral Reef Banda Sea Bird's Head Capricorn Coiba Conway Reef Explorer Futuna Galápagos Gonâve Gorda Greenland Halmahera Iberian Iranian Juan de Fuca Juan Fernández Kerguelen Kermadec Lwandle Madagascar Malpelo Manus Maoke Mariana Molucca Sea Niuafo’ou North Andes North Bismarck North Galápagos Okinawa Panama Pelso Philippine Mobile Belt Rivera Rovuma Sangihe Seychelles Shetland Solomon Sea South Bismarck South Sandwich Timor Tisza Tonga Trobriand Victoria Woodlark Ancient plates Baltic Bellingshausen Charcot Cimmeria Farallon Insular Intermontane Izanagi Kula Lhasa Malvinas Moa Phoenix Kshiroda Oceanic ridges Aden Ridge Carlsberg Ridge Central Indian Ridge Chile Ridge Cocos Ridge East Pacific Rise Explorer Ridge Gakkel Ridge Galápagos Spreading Center Gorda Ridge Juan de Fuca Ridge Mid-Atlantic Ridge Knipovich Ridge Kolbeinsey Ridge Mohns Ridge Reykjanes Ridge Pacific–Antarctic Ridge South American–Antarctic Ridge Southeast Indian Ridge Southwest Indian Ridge Ancient oceanic ridges Aegir Ridge Alpha Ridge Antarctic–Phoenix Ridge Kula–Farallon Ridge Mid-Labrador Ridge Pacific–Farallon Ridge Pacific–Kula Ridge Geology portal List Category Commons v t e Tectonic plates of Southeast Asia – New Guinea ( Australian plate – Pacific plate convergence zone) Large Caroline plate Philippine Sea plate Sunda plate Small West Burma plate Philippines Philippine Mobile Belt Indonesia Banda Sea plate Bird's Head plate Halmahera plate Molucca Sea Collision Zone Molucca Sea plate Sangihe plate Timor plate New Guinea Maoke plate North Bismarck plate Manus plate Solomon Sea plate South Bismarck plate Trobriand plate Woodlark plate Faults Flores back-arc thrust fault Great Sumatran Fault Marikina Valley fault system New Britain subduction zone Palu-Koro Fault Philippine fault system Ramu-Markham Fault Sorong Fault Trenches and troughs Java Trench (Sunda) with Mentawai Trough Sunda Trough Timor Trough Philippines Cotabato Trench Manila Trench North Luzon Trough Negros Trench Palawan Trench Philippine Trench East Luzon Trench Sulu Trench Sulawesi and Moluccas Aru Trough Banda Trench Ceram Trough Salajar Trough Sangihe Trough Talaud Trough Ternate Trough Timor Aur Trough Tanimbar Trough New Guinea Ayu Trough Kilinailau Trench Manokwari Trough Lyra Trough Mussau Trough New Guinea Trench Pocklington Trough New Britain Trench (Bougainville) West Caroline Trough West Melanesian Trench Subsea plateaus and basins Arafura Basin Aru-Tanimbar Basin Bengkulu Basin Benham Plateau Bula Basin East Natuna Basin Geelvinck (Cendrawasih) Basin Manus Basin Minahasa Basin North Australian Basin North Biak Basin North Flores Basin Northern East Java Basin Northern Makassar Basin Ontong Java Plateau Sawu Basin Southern Makassar Basin Talaud Basin Weber Deep West Halmahera Basin West Natuna Basin Woodlark Basin Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Caroline_plate&oldid=1298142211 " Categories : Tectonic plates Geology of the Pacific Ocean Plate tectonics Geology of Papua New Guinea Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 18:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Caroline plate 19 languages Add topic

