Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Sources 3 Climate focus 4 Associated entities 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents National Climatic Data Center 8 languages Deutsch Français Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Polski Português Simple English Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Active US archive of weather data.

National Climatic Data Center Agency overview Formed 1934 ( 1934 ) Dissolved 2015 ( 2015 ) Superseding agency National Centers for Environmental Information Jurisdiction United States government Headquarters Asheville, North Carolina Annual budget $65 million (2013) [ 1 ] Agency executive Thomas R. Karl , Director Website ncdc .noaa .gov The United States National Climatic Data Center ( NCDC ), previously known as the National Weather Records Center (NWRC) , in Asheville , North Carolina , was the world's largest active archive of weather data.

In 2015, the NCDC merged with two other federal environmental records agencies to become the National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI).

[ 2 ] Courtesy of: National Climatic Data Center, National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration, February 2015.

History [ edit ] In 1934, the U.S. government established a tabulation unit in New Orleans , Louisiana, to process weather records.  Climate records and upper air observations were punched onto cards in 1936.  This organization was transferred to Asheville, North Carolina , in 1951, where the National Weather Records Center (NWRC).

[ 3 ] It was housed in the Grove Arcade Building in Asheville, North Carolina.

Processing of the climate data was accomplished at Weather Records Processing Centers at Chattanooga, Tennessee ; Kansas City, Missouri ; and San Francisco, California, until January 1, 1963, when it was consolidated with the NWRC.

[ 4 ] In 1967, the agency was renamed the National Climatic Data Center.

[ 5 ] In 1995, the NCDC moved into the newly completed Veach-Baley Federal Complex in downtown Asheville.

In 2015, the NCDC merged with the National Geophysical Data Center and the National Oceanographic Data Center to become the National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI).

[ 2 ] Sources [ edit ] Data were received from a wide variety of sources, including weather satellites , radar , automated airport weather stations , National Weather Service (NWS) Cooperative Observers , aircraft, ships, radiosondes , wind profilers , rocketsondes , solar radiation networks, and NWS Forecast/Warnings/Analyses Products.

Climate focus [ edit ] The Center provided historical perspectives on climate which were vital to studies on global climate change , the greenhouse effect , and other environmental issues . The Center stored information essential to industry, agriculture, science, hydrology , transportation, recreation , and engineering. These services are still provided by the NCEI.

The NCDC said: Evidence is mounting that global climate is changing. While it is generally accepted that humans are negatively influencing the climate, the extent to which humans are responsible is still under study. Regardless of the causes, it is essential that a baseline of long-term climate data be compiled; therefore, global data must be acquired, quality controlled, and archived. Working with international institutions such as the International Council of Scientific Unions , the World Data Centers , and the World Meteorological Organization , NCDC develops standards by which data can be exchanged and made accessible.

NCDC provides the historical perspective on climate. Through the use of over a hundred years of weather observations, reference data bases are generated. From this knowledge the clientele of NCDC can learn from the past to prepare for a better tomorrow. Wise use of our most valuable natural resource, climate, is the goal of climate researchers, state and regional climate centers, business, and commerce.

[ 6 ] Associated entities [ edit ] NCDC also maintained World Data Center for Meteorology, Asheville. The four World Centers (U.S., Russia, Japan and China) have created a free and open situation in which data and dialogue are exchanged.

NCDC maintained the U.S. Climate Reference Network datasets and a vast number of other climate monitoring products.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Climate Prediction Center Environmental data rescue Monthly Climatic Data for the World National Severe Storms Laboratory NOAA National Operational Model Archive and Distribution System (NOMADS) State of the Climate Storm Prediction Center References [ edit ] ^ Osborne, Susan; Vincent, Katy (eds.).

"2013 Annual Report" (PDF) . NCDC. p. 29 . Retrieved August 20, 2015 .

^ a b "About" . April 2, 2020.

^ Staff (May 1961).

"Forecasts and Warnings" (PDF) .

Weather Bureau Topics .

United States Weather Bureau : 82 . Retrieved April 22, 2012 .

^ Staff (January 1963).

"WRPC Consolidation Nears Completion at Asheville NWRC" (PDF) .

United States Weather Bureau : 7 . Retrieved April 22, 2012 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Luther Thigpen (October 1966).

"Weather Facts Find Ever Expanding Market" (PDF) .

ESSA World . Environmental Satellite Services Administration: 14 . Retrieved April 20, 2012 .

^ NCDC: What Is NCDC?

^ NCDC: Climate Monitoring Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF National Germany United States Australia Czech Republic Spain Norway Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Climatic_Data_Center&oldid=1256467028 " Categories : Climate change organizations based in the United States Climate change assessment and attribution National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service National Weather Service Oceanography Asheville, North Carolina 1934 establishments in Louisiana 2015 disestablishments in North Carolina Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2024 This page was last edited on 10 November 2024, at 01:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Climatic Data Center 8 languages Add topic

