Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Current roster 3 Season-by-season records 4 Mascots 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Brockton Rox (Frontier League) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Frontier League baseball team in Brockton, Massachusetts For the earlier team of the same name that last competed in the Futures Collegiate Baseball League, see Brockton Rox (2002–2024) .

Brockton Rox Logo Information League Frontier League Location Brockton, Massachusetts Ballpark Campanelli Stadium Founded 2024 Former name(s) New England Chowdahheads (pre-debut) New England Knockouts (2024) Colors Navy blue, red, white Ownership Bill Janetscheck General manager Alex Tanish Manager Jerod Edmondson Media HomeTeam Network Website brocktonrox.com A Brockton Rox home game against the Ottawa Titans The Brockton Rox are a professional baseball team based in Brockton, Massachusetts . The Rox compete in the Frontier League (FL) as a member of the North Division in the Atlantic Conference. The team has been in existence since 2024, making them the third-youngest team in the FL, prior to the 2024 Frontier League expansion.

The Rox are one of the newest FL teams, along with the Mississippi Mud Monsters and Down East Bird Dawgs . They joined the league as part of the 2024 Frontier League expansion as the New England Knockouts . Prior to the 2025 season, the team was renamed to the Brockton Rox , following the folding of the original Brockton Rox , a collegiate team that had the same name. The original Brockton Rox shared their home ballpark with the Knockouts during the 2024 season, until it was announced that the Knockouts had been acquired by the former Greenville Drive and Salem Red Sox owner, Bill Janetscheck. With the change in ownership, the team announced a re-brand to the Brockton Rox, marking the demise of the FCBL franchise.

[ 1 ] The Rox plays its home games at Campanelli Stadium .

History [ edit ] The Frontier League announced late in the 2023 season that it would be placing a team in Brockton for the 2024 Frontier League season to replace the Empire State Greys , a traveling team founded when the Southern Illinois Miners were disbanded after their owners retired. Brockton's most recent professional baseball team had been the former iteration of the Brockton Rox , who were founded as a member of the former Northern League in 2002, and left the Can-Am League following the 2011 season to become a collegiate league team.

A team naming contest was conducted following the 2023 season, with five names chosen as finalists.

[ 2 ] Of these, the most popular was New England Chowdahheads , and the team initially selected it as their new moniker, announcing it in November 2023.

[ 3 ] However, reactions from fans and local business leaders in the area were lukewarm at best; as such, the owners of the team reconsidered.

[ 4 ] On December 15, they announced that they would be dropping the Chowdahheads name in favor of a name that was reflective of Brockton's history of producing championship caliber prizefighters such as Rocky Marciano and Marvelous Marvin Hagler —the New England Knockouts .

[ 4 ] On January 29, 2025, it was announced that the Knockouts franchise had been acquired by former Greenville Drive and Salem Red Sox owner, Bill Janetscheck. With the change in ownership, the team announced a re-brand to the Brockton Rox .

[ 5 ] The previously noted Brockton Rox, which originated as a professional team, had competed in the Futures Collegiate Baseball League from 2012 through 2024, the final season of which they shared Campanelli Stadium with the Knockouts.

Current roster [ edit ] Brockton Rox roster v t e Active roster Coaches/Other Pitchers -- Trevor Anibal 19 Heisell Baro 28 Mike McKenna -- Richard Brito -- Chic DeGaetano -- Enmanuel De Los Santos 5 Jared Henry -- Bryan Marrero -- Thomas Nelson 25 Michael Quigley 37 Brendan Bell 35 Kyle Petri 25 Matt Maloney -- Santiago Ramirez Jr.

31 Ben Seiler Catchers 17 Derek Bender 34 Hemmanuel Rosario Infielders 16 Trey Ciulla-Hall 9 JR DiSarcina 12 Evan Giordano -- Tyler Johnson 24 Jack-Thomas Wold -- Brett Young Outfielders 3 Keagan Calero -- Dylan Goldstein 14 Tommy Kretzler 15 Austin White Manager 11 Jerod Edmondson Coaches 17 Dan Sausville 10 Liam O'Sullivan Disabled list ‡ Inactive list § Suspended list updated May 4, 2025 Transactions Season-by-season records [ edit ] Season W-L record Win % Finish Playoffs 2024 38–56 .404 6th in FL East Did not qualify 2025 22–27 .449 Totals 60–83 .420 — — Mascots [ edit ] The team currently utilizes two boxing kangaroo mascots, due to Brockton's heritage of boxing: K-O (carried over from the original Brockton Rox), and Champ.

References [ edit ] ^ Touri, Amin (January 29, 2025).

"Brockton Rox returning to professional baseball with Red Sox Hall of Famer Jim Rice as co-owner" .

The Boston Globe . Retrieved January 30, 2025 .

^ Helms, Chris (November 3, 2023).

"Name your team: Brockton's pro baseball squad opens voting on five name finalists" .

Enterprise News . Retrieved March 20, 2024 .

^ "New England Chowdahheads Announced as the Newest Member of the Frontier League" .

ngscsports.com . November 16, 2023 . Retrieved March 20, 2024 .

^ a b Helms, Chris (December 15, 2023).

"Brockton's pro baseball club dumps 'Chowdahheads' name. Here's the new name" .

Enterprise News . Retrieved January 27, 2024 .

^ Baker, Paul (January 29, 2025).

"It's A Rox Revival in Brockton" .

stadiumjourney.com . Retrieved January 30, 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Frontier League Atlantic Conference Brockton Rox Down East Bird Dawgs New Jersey Jackals New York Boulders Ottawa Titans Québec Capitales Sussex County Miners Tri-City ValleyCats Trois-Rivières Aigles Midwest Conference Evansville Otters Florence Y'alls Gateway Grizzlies Joliet Slammers Lake Erie Crushers Mississippi Mud Monsters Schaumburg Boomers Washington Wild Things Windy City ThunderBolts Championship Rosters v t e Sports teams based in Massachusetts Australian football USAFL Boston Demons Baseball MLB Boston Red Sox IL Worcester Red Sox FL Brockton Rox CCBL Bourne Braves Brewster Whitecaps Chatham Anglers Cotuit Kettleers Falmouth Commodores Harwich Mariners Hyannis Harbor Hawks Orleans Firebirds Wareham Gatemen Yarmouth–Dennis Red Sox FCBL Pittsfield Suns Westfield Starfires Worcester Bravehearts NECBL Martha's Vineyard Sharks North Adams SteepleCats North Shore Navigators Valley Blue Sox Basketball NBA Boston Celtics BIG3 Boston Ball Hogs Esports CDL Boston Breach OWL Boston Uprising Football NFL New England Patriots IFL Massachusetts Pirates WFA Boston Renegades Hockey NHL Boston Bruins PWHL Boston Fleet AHL Springfield Thunderbirds ECHL Worcester Railers NAHL Northeast Generals Lacrosse WPLL New England Command UWLX Boston Storm PLL Boston Cannons WLL Boston Guard Roller derby WFTDA Bay State Brawlers Roller Derby Boston Roller Derby MRDA Pioneer Valley Roller Derby Rugby league NARL Boston Bears Rugby union MLR New England Free Jacks NERFU Boston RFC Boston Ironsides RFC Boston Irish Wolfhounds Boston Maccabi Rugby Charles River Rats Mystic River Old Gold Rugby South Shore Anchors Worcester RFC WER Boston Banshees Soccer MLS New England Revolution NWSL Boston Legacy FC (2026) MLSNP New England Revolution II USL2 Black Rock FC Boston Bolts Boston City FC Western Mass Pioneers NPSL Valeo FC UWS New England Mutiny Ultimate AUDL Boston Glory College athletics NCAA Division I Bentley Falcons Boston College Eagles Boston University Terriers Harvard Crimson Holy Cross Crusaders Merrimack Warriors Northeastern Huskies Stonehill Skyhawks UMass Minutemen and Minutewomen UMass Lowell River Hawks NCAA Division II American International Yellow Jackets Assumption Greyhounds Bentley Falcons NCAA Division III Amherst Mammoths Anna Maria Amcats Babson Beavers Brandeis Judges Bridgewater State Bears Clark Cougars Curry Colonels Dean Bulldogs Eastern Nazarene Lions Elms Blazers Emerson Lions Emmanuel Saints Endicott Gulls Fitchburg State Falcons Framingham State Rams Gordon Fighting Scots Lasell Lasers Lesley Lynx Mount Holyoke Lyons MCLA Trailblazers Massachusetts Maritime Buccaneers MIT Engineers Nichols Bison Regis Pride Salem State Vikings Simmons Sharks Smith Pioneers Springfield Pride Suffolk Rams Tufts Jumbos UMass Boston Beacons UMass Dartmouth Corsairs Wellesley Blue Wentworth Leopards Western New England Golden Bears Westfield State Owls Wheaton Lyons Williams Ephs WPI Engineers Worcester State Lancers NAIA Fisher Falcons USCAA Bay Path Wildcats Hampshire Black Sheep NJCAA Division II Massasoit Warriors NJCAA Division III Benjamin Franklin Shockers Bristol Bayhawks Bunker Hill Bulldogs Holyoke Cougars Massachusetts Bay Buccaneers Northern Essex Knights Quinsigamond Chiefs Roxbury Tigers Springfield Technical Rams Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Brockton_Rox_(Frontier_League)&oldid=1306523725 " Categories : Frontier League teams Professional baseball teams in Massachusetts 2024 establishments in Massachusetts Baseball teams established in 2024 Sports in Brockton, Massachusetts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 05:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Brockton Rox (Frontier League) Add languages Add topic

