Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Development 1.2 Institutions 2 State Toggle State subsection 2.1 People's democratic state 2.2 People's republican state 2.3 National-democratic state 2.4 Socialist-oriented state 2.5 Socialist state 3 The state system of unitary power Toggle The state system of unitary power subsection 3.1 Legislatures as the highest organ of state power 3.1.1 Constitution 3.1.1.1 Role of constitutions 3.1.1.2 Constitutional supervision 3.2 Government as the highest administrative agency of state power 3.3 Judicial organs and socialist law 3.4 Military 3.4.1 Control 3.4.2 Representation 3.5 Ruling party 3.5.1 Leading role 3.5.2 Internal organisation 4 Economic system 5 Analysis Toggle Analysis subsection 5.1 Left-wing criticism 5.2 Memory 6 See also 7 References 8 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 8.1 General 8.2 Articles and journal entries 8.3 Books 8.4 News 8.5 Other Toggle the table of contents Communist state 42 languages العربية বাংলা Беларуская Български Буряад Čeština Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ລາວ Македонски मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia State that is administered and governed by a single communist party This article is about sovereign states governed by communist parties. For the hypothetical social stage proposed by Marxist theory, see Communist society . For a list of states designated as communist, see List of communist states .

Flags of the Communist Party of Vietnam , flown beside Vietnamese national flags in Hanoi , Vietnam Part of a series on Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type Collective farming Collective leadership Commanding heights of the economy Democratic centralism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Intensification of the class struggle under socialism Labor aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism New Soviet man One-party state Partiinost' Popular front Proletarian internationalism Protracted people's war Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Yugoslav State socialist Soviet republic Totalitarianism Theory of the productive forces Third Period Vanguardism Wars of national liberation Unified power Variants Browderism Camilism Fidelismo Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kádárism Kaysone Phomvihane Thought Khrushchevism Machelism Maoism Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Prachanda Path Sankarism Socialism with Chinese characteristics Stalinism Neo- Titoism Politicians Lenin Stalin Foster Dimitrov Thälmann Hồ Pollitt Browder Rákosi Nosaka Bierut Tito Togliatti Ulbricht Kaganovich Mao Khrushchev Choibalsan Díaz Ibárruri Gottwald Thorez Chervenkov Gheorghiu-Dej Zachariadis Deng Gomułka Brezhnev Hoxha Namboodiripad Hall Giáp Zhivkov Bakdash Kim Kádár Honecker Husák Koliševski Qasim Taraki Ceaușescu Barre Adhikari Kaysone Neto Jaruzelski Aidit Mugabe Chin Pot Habash Castro Jiang (Zemin) Guevara Lara Garang Gorbachev Kérékou Machel Mengistu Bains Brar Wijeweera Bishop Zyuganov Ortega Cano Kaypakkaya Sankara Xi Dahal Intellectuals Marx Engels Lukács Roy Bukharin Dutt Haywood Chen Trường Bettelheim Dutta Hinton Camilo Parenti Hirschman Guzmán Badiou Andreyeva Sison Losurdo Newton Avakian Davis Trọng Ghandy Dean Jiang (Shigong) Li Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism (1924) Dialectical and Historical Materialism (1938) The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) (1938) Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR (1951) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism (1960) Guerrilla Warfare (1961) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) President Ho Chi Minh's Testament (1969) The Governance of China (2014) History Soviet Union 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War World War II Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Revolution China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Korean War Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency Revolutions of 1989 Nepalese Civil War By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia 1975–79 1979–92 China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia Czechia Slovakia East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia South Yemen Soviet Union Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan Vietnam Yugoslavia Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia Organizations Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam French Communist Party IMCWP Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Party of Labour of Albania Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Workers' Front (Spain) Workers' Party of Korea Related topics All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism Mass killings Bolshevism Crimes against humanity under communist regimes Mass killings Criticism of communist party rule Cult of personality Intercommunalism Leninism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism New class Post-communism Red fascism Red Scare Second Second World State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union State capitalism State socialism Tankie Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Trotskyism Communism portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Part of a series on Communist parties Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Egypt Eswatini Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Libya Madagascar Namibia Morocco Réunion Senegal South Africa EFF SACP South Sudan Sudan Togo Tunisia Americas Argentina PCA PCCE PCRA Bolivia Brazil PCdoB PCB PCR Canada CPC CPC-ML Chile PCCh PC(AP) Colombia PCC PC de C (M–L) Cuba Dominican Republic Ecuador PCE PCMLE Mexico PC PPS PPSM PCMML Panama MLN-29 PPP Paraguay Peru PCP PCP-SL MPCP PCdelP–PR Uruguay United States ACP CPUSA FRSO FSP PSL PLP RCPUSA SEP SL/US WWP WSPUS Venezuela Asia Bahrain Bangladesh CPB WPB RWPB Bhutan Burma China India CPI CPI(M) CPI-ML(L) CPI(Maoist) SUCI(C) Iran CPI Tudeh Toufan Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Nepal CPN (UML) CPN (MC) CPN (US) NWPP North Korea Pakistan Palestine Philippines CPP PKP-1930 Sri Lanka CPSL JVP FLSP Syria SCP (Bakdash) SCP (Unified) Tajikistan Vietnam Former parties Cambodia KPRP CPK Indonesia Korea Malaya and Singapore CPM CPM/ML CPM/RF Saudi Arabia Sarawak Taiwan Thailand Europe Albania Armenia Austria KPÖ PdA Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium KP PC Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria KPB SKB Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark DKP KP APK Estonia Finland France PCF PCOF PRCF PCRF Georgia Germany KPD DKP MLPD Greece ΚΚΕ ΚΟΕ Anasintaxi Hungary Munkáspárt Munkáspárt 2006 Ireland CPI WPI Italy PC PRC Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal PCP PCTP Romania Russia KR CPRF PDP RCWP-CPSU Serbia Slovakia Spain PCE FO CC PCPE PCE (M–L) PCTE Sweden KP SKP Switzerland Communist Party PdA Turkey DHKP/C EMEP HTKP KDH/L KKP TKP MKP MLKP TDKP TKEP TKEP/L TKIP TKP/ML Ukraine KPU SKU United Kingdom CPB CPB-ML CPGB-ML CPGB-PCC CPS NCPB RCG RCP RCPB-ML Former parties Albania Czechoslovakia East Germany Italy Netherlands Poland Romania San Marino Soviet Union Turkey United Kingdom West Germany Yugoslavia Oceania Australia CPA CPA(ML) Socialist Alliance Socialist Alternative Victorian Socialists New Zealand CL OMU SPA Former parties Australia Communist Alliance CPA DSP RSP Victorian Socialist Party New Zealand CPNZ SUP CL International organizations IMCWP Comintern Cominform INITIATIVE ICS ILPS ICP FI Trotskyist internationals Related topics Central committee Communism history Criticism of rule Democratic centralism General Secretary List of communist parties Politburo Secretariat Communism portal v t e A communist state , also known as a Marxist–Leninist state , is a one-party state in which the totality of the power belongs to a party adhering to some form of Marxism–Leninism , a branch of the communist ideology . Marxism–Leninism was the state ideology of the Soviet Union , the Comintern after its Bolshevisation , and the communist states within the Comecon , the Eastern Bloc , and the Warsaw Pact .

[ 1 ] After the peak of Marxism–Leninism, when many communist states were established, the Revolutions of 1989 brought down most of the communist states; however, Communism remained the official ideology of the ruling parties of China , Cuba , Laos , Vietnam , [ 2 ] and to a lesser extent, North Korea .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] During the later part of the 20th century, before the Revolutions of 1989, around one-third of the world's population lived in communist states.

[ 5 ] Communist states are typically authoritarian and are typically administered through democratic centralism by a single centralised communist party apparatus. These parties are usually Marxist–Leninist or some national variation thereof such as Maoism or Titoism . There have been several instances of communist states with functioning political participation (i.e.

Soviet democracy ) processes involving several other non-party organisations such as direct democratic participation, factory committees , and trade unions , although the communist party remained the centre of power.

[ 6 ] As a term, communist state is used by Western historians, political scientists, and media to refer to these countries. However, these states do not describe themselves as communist nor do they claim to have achieved communism — they refer to themselves as socialist states that are in the process of constructing socialism and progressing toward a communist society .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Other terms used by communist states include national-democratic , people's democratic , socialist-oriented , and workers and peasants' states.

[ 9 ] Academics, political commentators, and other scholars tend to distinguish between communist states and social democratic states, with the first representing the Eastern Bloc and the latter representing Western Bloc countries that have been democratically governed by left-wing parties such as France , Sweden , and other social democracies.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Overview An anachronous map of countries that have been ruled by a one-party Marxist–Leninist state at some point in their history.

Development History of communist states Current communist states China, PR Cuba Laos Korea, DPR Vietnam Previous communist states Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Congo Czechoslovakia Ethiopia Germany, DR Grenada Hungary Kampuchea Madagascar Mongolia Mozambique Poland Romania Somalia Soviet Union Tuva Yemen, PDR Yugoslavia Upper Volta Post-Soviet states Abkhazia Armenia Azerbaijan Belarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia South Ossetia Tajikistan Transnistria Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan Communism portal v t e During the 20th century, the world's first constitutionally communist state was Soviet Russia at the end of 1917. In 1922, it joined other former territories of the empire to become the Soviet Union . After World War II , the Soviet Army occupied much of Eastern Europe and helped bring the existing communist parties to power in those countries. Originally, the communist states in Eastern Europe were allied with the Soviet Union.

Yugoslavia would declare itself non-aligned , and Albania later took a different path. After a war against Japanese occupation and a civil war resulting in a Communist victory, the People's Republic of China was established in 1949. Communist states were also established in Cambodia , Cuba , Laos , North Korea , and Vietnam . In 1989, the communist states in Eastern Europe collapsed after the Iron Curtain broke under public pressure during a wave of mostly non-violent movements as part of the Revolutions of 1989 which led to the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. China's socio-economic structure has been referred to as "nationalistic state capitalism" and the Eastern Bloc ( Eastern Europe and the Third World ) as "bureaucratic-authoritarian systems." [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Today, the existing communist states in the world are in China , Cuba , Laos , Vietnam , and North Korea (DPRK) . These states do not claim to have achieved communism in their countries but to be building and working toward its establishment. The preamble to the Socialist Republic of Vietnam's Constitution states that Vietnam only entered a transition stage between capitalism and socialism after the country was re-unified under the communist party in 1976 [ 14 ] and the 1992 Constitution of the Republic of Cuba states that the role of the communist party is to "guide the common effort toward the goals and construction of socialism." [ 15 ] The DPRK's constitution outlines a socialist economy and the ruling Workers' Party of Korea remains ideologically committed to communism.

[ citation needed ] Institutions Communist states share similar institutions, which are organised on the premise that the communist party is a vanguard of the proletariat and represents the long-term interests of the people. The doctrine of democratic centralism , developed by Vladimir Lenin as a set of principles to be used in the internal affairs of the communist party, is extended to society at large.

[ 16 ] According to democratic centralism, the people must elect all leaders, and all proposals must be debated openly, but once a decision has been reached, all people have a duty to account to that decision. When used within a political party, democratic centralism is meant to prevent factionalism and splits. When applied to an entire state, democratic centralism creates a one-party system .

[ 16 ] The constitutions of most communist states describe their political system as a form of democracy.

[ 17 ] They recognise the sovereignty of the people as embodied in a series of representative parliamentary institutions. Such states do not have a separation of powers and instead have one national legislative body (such as the Supreme Soviet in the Soviet Union), which is bestowed with unitary power and is often defined as the highest organ of state power. Unitary power means that the legislature has the power of the judiciary, legislature and executive but chooses to delegate these powers to other institutions.

[ 18 ] In communist states, the unitary legislatures often have a similar structure to the parliaments in liberal republics , with two significant differences. First, the deputies elected to these unitary legislatures are not expected to represent the interests of any particular constituency but rather the long-term interests of the people as a whole; and second, against Karl Marx 's advice, the unitary legislatures of communist states are not in permanent session. Instead, they convene once or several times yearly in sessions that usually last only a few days.

[ 19 ] When the unitary legislature is not in session, its powers are transferred to a smaller council (often called a presidium ) which acts as a collective head of state . In some systems, the presidium is composed of crucial communist party members who vote the resolutions of the communist party into law.

[ 19 ] A feature of communist states is the existence of numerous state-sponsored social organisations (associations of journalists, teachers, writers and other professionals, consumer cooperatives , sports clubs , trade unions , youth organisations , and women's organisations ) which are integrated into the political system. In communist states, the social organisations are expected to promote social unity and cohesion, to serve as a link between the government and society and to provide a forum for the recruitment of new communist party members.

[ 20 ] Historically, the political organisation of many socialist states has been dominated by a one-party monopoly. Some communist governments such as those in China , Czechoslovakia , or East Germany have or had more than one political party, but all minor parties are or were required to follow the leadership of the communist party. In communist states, the government may not tolerate criticism of policies that have already been implemented in the past or are being implemented in the present.

[ 21 ] State According to Marxist–Leninist thought, the state is a repressive institution led by a ruling class .

[ 22 ] This class dominates the state and expresses its will through it.

[ 22 ] By formulating law, the ruling class uses the state to oppress other classes and form a class dictatorship.

[ 22 ] However, the goal of the communist state is to abolish that state.

[ 22 ] The Soviet Russia Constitution of 1918 stated: "The principal object of the Constitution of the R.S.F.S.R., which is adapted to the present transition period, consists in the establishment of a dictatorship of the urban and rural proletariat and the poorest peasantry, in the form of a powerful All-Russian Soviet power; the object of which is to secure complete suppression of the bourgeoisie, the abolition of exploitation of man by man, and the establishment of Socialism, under which there shall be neither class division nor state authority".

[ 22 ] The communist state is the dictatorship of the proletariat , where the advanced elements of the proletariat are the ruling class.

[ 23 ] In Marxist–Leninist thinking, the socialist state is the last repressive state since the next stage of development is that of pure communism , a classless and stateless society.

[ 23 ] Friedrich Engels commented on the state, writing: "State interference in social relations, becomes, in one domain after another, superfluous, and then dies out of itself; the government of persons is replaced by the administration of things, and by the conduct of processes of production. The state is not 'abolished'. It dies out." [ 24 ] In "The Tax in Kind", Vladimir Lenin argued: "No one, I think, in studying the question of the economic system of Russia, has denied its transitional character. Nor, I think, has any Communist denied that the term Soviet Socialist Republic implies the determination of the Soviet power to achieve the transition to socialism, and not that the existing economic system is recognised as a socialist order." [ 25 ] The introduction of the first five-year plan in the Soviet Union got many communists to believe that the withering away of the state was imminent.

[ 26 ] However, Joseph Stalin warned that the withering away of the state would not occur until after the socialist mode of production had achieved dominance over capitalism.

[ 26 ] Soviet jurist Andrey Vyshinsky echoed this assumption and said that the socialist state was necessary "in order to defend, to secure, and to develop relationships and arrangements advantageous to the workers, and to annihilate completely capitalism and its remnants." [ 27 ] Ideology permeates these states.

[ 28 ] According to scholar Peter Tang, "[t]he supreme test of whether a Communist Party-state remains revolutionarily dedicated or degenerates into a revisionist or counterrevolutionary system lies in its attitude toward the Communist ideology." [ 29 ] Therefore, the sole ideological purpose of communist states is to spread socialism and to reach that goal these states have to be guided by Marxism–Leninism.

[ 29 ] The communist states have opted for two ways to achieve this goal, namely govern indirectly by Marxism–Leninism through the party (Soviet model), or commit the state officially through the constitution to Marxism–Leninism (Maoist China–Albania model).

[ 30 ] The Soviet model is the most common and is currently in use in China.

[ 31 ] Marxism–Leninism was mentioned in the Soviet constitution .

[ 28 ] Article 6 of the 1977 Soviet constitution stated: "The Communist Party, armed with Marxism–Leninism, determines the general perspective of the development of society and the course of the domestic and foreign policy of the USSR." [ 28 ] This contrasts with the 1976 Albanian constitution which stated in Article 3: "In the People's Socialist Republic of Albania the dominant ideology is Marxism–Leninism. The entire social order is developing on the basis of its principles." [ 31 ] The 1975 Chinese constitution had a similar tone, stating in Article 2 that "Marxism–Leninism–Mao Zedong Thought is the theoretical basis guiding the thinking of our nation." [ 31 ] The 1977 Soviet constitution did also use phrases such as "building socialism and communism", "on the road to communism", "to build the material and technical basis of communism" and "to perfect socialist social relations and transform them into communist relations" in the preamble.

[ 28 ] People's democratic state The people's democratic state was implemented in Eastern Europe after World War II.

[ 32 ] It can be defined as a state and society in which feudal vestiges have been liquidated and where the system of private ownership exists, but the state-owned enterprises in the field of industry, transport, and credit eclipse it.

[ 33 ] In the words of Eugene Varga , "the state itself and its apparatus of violence serve the interests, not of the monopolistic bourgeoisie, but of the toilers of town and country." [ 33 ] Soviet philosopher N. P. Farberov stated: "People's democracy in the people's republics is a democracy of the toiling classes, headed by the working class, a broad and full democracy for the overwhelming majority of the people, that is, a socialist democracy in its character and its trend. In this sense, we call it popular." [ 33 ] People's republican state The people's republican state is a socialist state with a republican constitution. Although the term initially became associated with populist movements in the 19th century, such as the German Völkisch movement and the Narodniks in Russia, it is now associated with communist states. A number of the short-lived communist states which formed during World War I and its aftermath called themselves people's republics. Many of these sprang up in the territory of the former Russian Empire following the October Revolution .

[ 34 ] Additional people's republics emerged following the Allied victory in World War II, mainly within the Soviet Union's Eastern Bloc .

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] In Asia, China became a people's republic following the Chinese Communist Revolution [ 37 ] and North Korea also became a people's republic.

[ 38 ] During the 1960s, Romania and Yugoslavia ceased to use the term people's republic in their official name, replacing it with the term socialist republic as a mark of their ongoing political development.

Czechoslovakia also added the term socialist republic into its name during this period; it had become a people's republic in 1948, but the country had not used that term in its official name.

[ 39 ] Albania used both terms in its official name from 1976 to 1991.

[ 40 ] National-democratic state The concept of the national-democratic state tried to theorise how a state could develop socialism by bypassing the capitalist mode of production .

[ 41 ] While Vladimir Lenin first articulated the theory of non-capitalist development, the novelty of this concept was applying it to the progressive elements of the national liberation movements in the Third World .

[ 41 ] The term national-democratic state was introduced shortly after the death of Stalin , who believed colonies to be mere lackeys of Western imperialism and that the socialist movement had few prospects there.

[ 41 ] The countries where the national liberation movements took power and instituted an anti-imperialist foreign policy and sought to construct a form of socialism were considered national-democratic states by Marxist–Leninists.

[ 41 ] An example of a national-democratic state is Egypt under Gamal Abdel Nasser which was committed to constructing Arab socialism .

[ 42 ] Except Cuba, none of these states developed socialism.

[ 42 ] According to scholar Sylvia Woodby Edington, this might explain why the concept of the national-democratic state "never received full theoretical elaboration as a political system." [ 42 ] However, one feature was clearly defined, namely, that these states did not need to be led by a Marxist–Leninist party.

[ 43 ] Socialist-oriented state A socialist-oriented state seeks to reach socialism by non-capitalist development.

[ 44 ] As a term, it substantially differs from the concept of the national-democratic state.

[ 44 ] The singular difference is that the socialist-oriented state was divided into two stages: a national-democratic socialist-oriented state and a people's democratic socialist-oriented state.

[ 43 ] Countries belonging to the national-democratic socialist-oriented state category were also categorised as national-democratic states.

[ 43 ] Examples of national-democratic socialist-oriented states are Algeria , ruled by the National Liberation Front , Ba'athist Iraq , and Socialist Burma .

[ 43 ] In contrast, people's democratic socialist-oriented states had to be guided by Marxism–Leninism and accept the universal truths of Marxism–Leninism and reject other notions of socialism such as African socialism .

[ 43 ] The socialist-oriented states had seven defining features, namely, they were revolutionary democracies, had a revolutionary-democratic party, class dictatorship, defense of the socialist-oriented states, had organs of socialisation, initiated socialist construction, and the type of socialist-oriented state (either national-democratic or people's democratic).

[ 45 ] The political goal of revolutionary democracy is to create the conditions for socialism in countries where the social, political, and economic conditions for socialism do not exist.

[ 46 ] The second feature to be met is the establishment of a revolutionary-democratic party which has to establish itself as the leading force and guide the state by using Marxist–Leninist ideology.

[ 47 ] While introduced in these states, democratic centralism is rarely upheld.

[ 48 ] Unlike capitalism which is ruled by the bourgeoisie class, and socialism, where the proletariat leads, the socialist-oriented state represents a broad and heterogeneous group of classes that seek to consolidate national independence.

[ 48 ] Since peasants were usually the largest class in socialist-oriented states, their role was emphasised—similar to the working class in other socialist states.

[ 49 ] However, Marxist–Leninists admitted that these states often fell under the control of certain cliques such as the military in Ethiopia .

[ 49 ] The establishment of a legal system and coercive institutions are also noted to safeguard the socialist-oriented nature of the state.

[ 50 ] The fifth feature is that the socialist-oriented state must take over the media and educational system while establishing mass organisations to mobilise the populace.

[ 51 ] Unlike the Soviet economic model, the economy of the socialist-oriented states are mixed economies that seek to attract foreign capital and which seeks to maintain and develop the private sector .

[ 52 ] In the words of Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev , these states were in the process of taking over the commanding heights of the economy and instituting a state-planned economy.

[ 42 ] According to Soviet sources, Laos was the one socialist-oriented state that has managed to develop into a socialist state.

[ 53 ] Socialist state A socialist state is more than a form of government and can only exist in countries with a socialist economy . There are examples of several states that have instituted a socialist form of government before achieving socialism. The former socialist states of Eastern Europe were established as people's democracies (a developmental stage between capitalism and socialism ). Regarding the Marxist–Leninist-ruled countries of Africa and the Middle East, the Soviet Union deemed none of them socialist states—referring to them as socialist-oriented states. While many countries with constitutional references to socialism and countries ruled by long-standing socialist movements exist, within Marxist–Leninist theory a socialist state is led by a communist party that has instituted a socialist economy in a given country.

[ 54 ] It deals with states that define themselves either as a socialist state or as a state led by a governing Marxist–Leninist party in their constitutions. For this reason alone, these states are often called communist states.

[ 7 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] The state system of unitary power Main article: Unitary power Legislatures as the highest organ of state power The meeting place of the Chinese National People's Congress All communist political systems practice unitary state power . This means that the legislature, usually defined as the highest organ of state power, has executive, legislative and judicial power and can interfere in these organs as long as the law does not illegalise it. This is because both Marx and Lenin abhorred the parliamentary systems of bourgeois democracy , but neither sought to abolish the legislature as an institution.

[ 57 ] Lenin wrote that it would be impossible to develop proletarian democracy "without representative institutions." [ 57 ] Both of them considered the governing model of the Paris Commune of 1871 , in which executive and legislative were combined in one body, to be ideal.

[ 57 ] More importantly, Marx applauded the election process by "universal suffrage in the various wards and towns." [ 57 ] While the institution of such a legislature might not be important in itself, they "have a place in the literature and rhetoric of the ruling parties which cannot be ignored—in the language of the party's intimacy with working masses, of its alleged knowledge about interests of working people, of social justice and socialist democracy, of the mass line and learning from the people." [ 58 ] This reasoning gives communist legislatures the right to interfere in every state institution unless the legislature itself has made a law that bars it from it. This also means there are no limits to politicisation, unlike in liberal democracies, where politicians are legally barred from interfering in judicial work. This is a firm rejection of the separation of powers found in liberal democracies since no institution can legally enforce checks and balances on the communist legislature. The legislature passes the constitution, which can only be amended by the legislature. Soviet legal theorists denounced judicial review and extra-parliamentary review as bourgeoisie institutions. They also perceived it as a limitation of the people's supreme power. The legislature, together with its suborgans, oversaw the constitutional order.

[ 59 ] Since the legislature is the supreme judge of constitutionality, the legislature's acts cannot be unconstitutional.

[ 60 ] Moreover, this means that judicial independence in communist states does not mean the same as in liberal democracies. In communist states, judicial independence means stopping all interference not granted by law, but interference in itself is not barred.

The Supreme Soviet was the first socialist legislature, and the Soviet legislative system was introduced in all communist states.

[ 61 ] The Supreme Soviet convened twice a year, usually for two or three days each, making it one of the world's first frequently-convened legislatures during its existence.

[ 62 ] The same meeting frequency was the norm in the Eastern Bloc countries and modern-day China.

[ 63 ] China's legislature, the National People's Congress (NPC), is modelled on the Soviet one.

[ 64 ] As with the Soviet one, the NPC is the highest organ of the state and elects a Standing Committee (the Soviets had a Presidium ), the government (named the State Council in China and the Council of Ministers in the Soviet Union), the Supreme Court (such as the Supreme Court of East Germany), the Supreme Procuratorate (such as the Supreme People's Procuracy of Vietnam ), the Chairman of the National Defence Council (for example, the Chairman of the Council for National Defense and Security of Vietnam), National Supervisory institutions (such as the Director of China's National Supervisory Commission ) and other institutions if they exist.

[ 65 ] Moreover, in all communist states, the ruling party has either had a clear majority, such as China or held every seat as they did in the Soviet Union, in their Supreme Soviet. A majority in the legislature ensures the centralised and unitary leadership of the central committee of the ruling Marxist–Leninist party over the state.

[ 66 ] By having legislatures, the Marxist–Leninist parties try to keep ideological consistency between supporting representative institutions and safeguarding the party's leading role.

[ 57 ] They seek to use the legislatures as a linkage between the rulers and the ruled.

[ 57 ] These institutions are representative and usually mirror the population in areas such as ethnicity and language , "yet with occupations distributed in a manner skewed towards government officials." [ 57 ] Unlike in liberal democracies, legislatures of communist states are not to act as a forum for conveying demands or interest articulation—they meet too infrequently for this to be the case.

[ 67 ] This might explain why communist states have not developed terms such as delegates and trustees to give legislature representatives the power to vote according to their best judgement or in the interest of their constituency.

[ 67 ] Scholar Daniel Nelson has noted: "As with the British parliament before the seventeenth-century turmoil secured its supremacy, legislative bodies in communist states physically portray the 'realm' ruled by (to stretch an analogy) 'kings'. Members of the assemblies 'represent' the population to whom the rulers speak and over whom they govern, convening a broader 'segment of society' [...] than the court itself." [ 67 ] Despite this, it does not mean that the communist states use legislatures to strengthen their communication with the populace—the party, rather than the legislature, could take that function.

[ 67 ] Ideologically, it has another function, namely, to prove that communist states do not only represent the interests of the working class but all social strata.

[ 68 ] Communist states are committed to establishing a classless society and use legislatures to show that all social strata, whether bureaucrat, worker, or intellectual, are committed and have interests in building such a society.

[ 68 ] As is the case in China, national institutions such as the legislature "must exist which brings together representatives of all nationalities and geographic areas." [ 68 ] It does not matter if the legislatures only rubber stamp decisions because by having them, it shows that communist states are committed to incorporating minorities and areas of the country by including them in the composition of the legislature.

[ 68 ] In communist states, there is usually a high proportion of members who are government officials.

[ 69 ] In this instance, it might mean that it is less important what legislatures do and more important who its representatives are.

[ 69 ] The members of such legislatures at central and local levels are usually either government or party officials, leading figures in their community, or national figures outside the communist party.

[ 69 ] This shows that legislatures are tools to garner popular support for the government in which leading figures campaign and spread information about the party's policies and ideological development.

[ 69 ] Furthermore, Western researchers have devoted little attention to legislatures in communist states. The reason is that there are no significant bodies of political socialisation compared to legislatures in liberal democracies. While political leaders in communist states are often elected as members of legislatures, these posts are not relevant to political advancement. The role of legislatures is different from country to country. In the Soviet Union, the Supreme Soviet did "little more than listen to statements from Soviet political leaders and to legitimate decisions already made elsewhere" while in the legislatures of Poland, Vietnam, and Yugoslavia it has been more active and had an impact on rule-making.

[ 70 ] Constitution Role of constitutions Marxist–Leninists view the constitution as a fundamental law and as an instrument of force.

[ 71 ] The constitution is the source of law and legality.

[ 72 ] Unlike in liberal democracies , the Marxist–Leninist constitution is not a framework to limit the power of the state.

[ 72 ] To the contrary, a Marxist–Leninist constitution seeks to empower the state—believing the state to be an organ of class domination and law to be the expression of the interests of the dominant class.

[ 72 ] Marxist–Leninists believe that all national constitutions do this to ensure that countries can strengthen and enforce their own class system.

[ 72 ] In this instance, it means that Marxist–Leninists conceive of constitutions as a tool to defend the socialist nature of the state and attack its enemies.

[ 72 ] This contrasts with the liberal conception of constitutionalism that "law, rather than men, is supreme." [ 73 ] Unlike the relatively constant (and, in some instances, permanently fixed ) nature of democratic constitutions, a Marxist–Leninist constitution is ever-changing.

[ 74 ] Andrey Vyshinsky , a Procurator General of the Soviet Union during the 1930s, notes that the "Soviet constitutions represent the total of the historical path along which the Soviet state has travelled. At the same time, they are the legislative basis of subsequent development of state life." [ 74 ] That is, the constitution sums up what has already been achieved.

[ 75 ] This belief is also shared by the Chinese Communist Party , which argued that "the Chinese Constitution blazes a path for China, recording what has been won in China and what is yet to be conquered." [ 74 ] A constitution in a communist state has an end.

[ 76 ] The preamble of the 1954 Chinese constitution outlines the historical tasks of the Chinese communists, "step by step, to bring about the socialist industrialisation of the country and, step by step, to accomplish the socialist transformation of agriculture, handicraft and capitalist industry and commerce." [ 76 ] In communist states, the constitution was a tool to analyse the development of society.

[ 77 ] The Marxist–Leninist party in question would have to study the correlation of forces, literally society's class structure, before enacting changes.

[ 77 ] Several terms were coined for different developmental states by Marxist–Leninist legal theorists, including new democracy , people's democracy , and the primary stage of socialism .

[ 75 ] This is also why amendments to constitutions are not enough and major societal changes need a novel constitution which corresponds with the reality of the new class structure.

[ 75 ] With Nikita Khrushchev 's repudiation of Stalin's practices in the " Secret Speech " and the Chinese Communist Party's repudiation of certain Maoist policies, Marxist–Leninist legal theories began to emphasise "the formal, formerly neglected constitutional order." [ 78 ] Deng Xiaoping , not long after Chairman Mao Zedong 's death, noted that "[d]emocracy has to be institutionalised and written into law, to make sure that institutions and laws do not change whenever the leadership changes or whenever the leaders change their views. [...] The trouble now is that our legal system is incomplete. [...] Very often what leaders say is taken as law and anyone who disagrees is called a lawbreaker." [ 79 ] In 1986, Li Buyan wrote that "the policies of the Party usually are regulations and calls which to a certain extent are only principles. The law is different; it is rigorously standardised. It explicitly and concretely stipulates what the people should, can, or cannot do." [ 80 ] These legal developments were echoed in later years in Cuba, Laos, and Vietnam. This has led to the development of the communist concept of socialist rule of law, which runs parallel to, and is distinct from, the liberal term of the same name.

[ 81 ] In the last years, this emphasis on the constitution as both a legal document and a paper which documents society's development has been noted by the Chinese Communist Party general secretary Xi Jinping , who stated in 2013 that "[n]o organisation or individual has the privilege to overstep the Constitution and law." [ 82 ] Constitutional supervision After Soviet Union general secretary Joseph Stalin 's death, several communist states have experimented with some sort of constitutional supervision.

[ 83 ] These organs were designed to safeguard the supreme power of the legislature from circumvention by political leaders.

[ 83 ] Romania was the first to experiment with constitutional supervision when it established a Constitutional Committee in 1965.

[ 83 ] It was elected by the legislature, and leading jurists sat on the committee, but it was only empowered to advise the legislature.

[ 83 ] Keith Hand has commented that "[i]t was not an effective institution in practice", being unable to prevent Nicolae Ceausescu 's emasculation of Romania's Great National Assembly after the inauguration of the July Theses .

[ 83 ] Hungary and Poland experimented with constitutional supervision in the early 1980s.

[ 83 ] Hungary established the Council of Constitutional Law, which was elected by the legislature and consisted of several leading jurists.

[ 83 ] It was empowered to review the constitutionality and legality of statutes, administrative regulations, and other normative documents; however, if the agency in question failed to heed its advice, it needed to petition the legislature.

[ 83 ] In 1989, the Soviets established the Constitutional Supervision Committee, which "was subordinate only to the USSR constitution." [ 84 ] It was empowered "to review the constitutionality and legality of a range of state acts of the USSR and its republics. Its jurisdiction included laws [passed by the legislature], decrees of the Supreme Soviet's Presidium, union republic constitutions and laws, some central administrative decrees, Supreme Court explanations, and other central normative documents." [ 84 ] If the committee deemed the legislature to have breached legality, the legislature was obliged to discuss the issue, but it could reject it if more than two-thirds voted against the findings of the Constitutional Supervision Committee.

[ 84 ] While it was constitutionally powerful, it lacked enforcement powers, it was often ignored, and it failed to defend the constitution during the coup against Mikhail Gorbachev .

[ 85 ] The Chinese leadership has argued against establishing any corresponding constitutional supervisory committee due to their association with the failed communist states of Europe.

[ 86 ] None of the surviving communist states (China, Cuba, Laos, and Vietnam) have experimented with constitutional supervision committees or constitutional supervision of any kind outside the existing framework until 2018, when the Constitution and Law Committee of the National People's Congress was bestowed the right of constitutional review.

[ 87 ] Government as the highest administrative agency of state power The government of communist states is usually defined as the "executive organ of the highest state organ of power" or as the "highest administrative agency of state power".

[ 88 ] It functions as the executive organ of the legislature.

[ 88 ] This model has been introduced with variations in all communist states.

[ 61 ] For most of its existence, the Soviet government was known as the Council of Ministers [ 88 ] and identical names were used for the governments of Albania , East Germany , Hungary , Poland , and Romania .

[ 89 ] It was independent of the other central agencies such as the legislature and its standing committee, but the Supreme Soviet was empowered to decide on all questions it wished.

[ 90 ] The Soviet government was responsible to the legislature, and in between sessions of the legislature, it reported to the legislature's standing committee.

[ 91 ] The standing committee could reorganise and hold the Soviet government accountable, but it could not instruct the government.

[ 91 ] In communist states, the government was responsible for the overall economic system, public order, foreign relations, and defense.

[ 91 ] The Soviet model was more or less identically implemented in Bulgaria , Czechoslovakia , East Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Romania, with few exceptions.

[ 89 ] One exception was Czechoslovakia, where it had a president and not a collective head of state.

[ 92 ] Another exception was in Bulgaria, where the State Council was empowered to instruct the Council of Ministers.

[ 93 ] Judicial organs and socialist law Main article: Socialist law In every communist state, the judicial and procuratorial bodies are organs of the legislature. For instance, China's Supreme People's Court is the "legislative organ of governance that manages the judicial system in the name of the" National People's Congress , and through it, the Chinese Communist Party .

[ 94 ] These bodies are responsible to and report on their work to the legislature. For instance, the Prosecutor-General of Vietnam's Supreme People's Procuracy delivers an annual Work Report to the legislature, the National Assembly , every year. Moreover, all communist states have been established in countries with a civil law system .

[ 95 ] The countries of Eastern Europe had formally been governed by the Austro-Hungarian Empire , German Empire , and Russian Empire —all of whom had a civil law legal system.

[ 95 ] Cuba had a civil law system imposed on them by Spain, while China introduced civil law to overlay with Confucian elements, and Vietnam used French law.

[ 95 ] Since the establishment of the Soviet Union, there has been a scholarly debate on whether socialist law is a separate legal system or is a part of the civil law tradition.

[ 95 ] Legal scholar Renè David wrote that the socialist legal system "possesses, in relation to our French law, particular features that give it a complete originality, to the extent that it is no longer possible to connect it, like the former Russian law, to the system of Roman law ." [ 96 ] Similarly, Christoper Osakwe concludes that socialist law is "an autonomous legal system to be essentially distinguished from the other contemporary families of law." [ 97 ] Proponents of socialist law as a separate legal system have identified the following features: [ 97 ] The socialist law is to disappear with the withering away of the state .

[ 97 ] The rule of the Marxist–Leninist party.

[ 97 ] The socialist law is subordinate and reflects changes to the economic order (the absorption of private law by public law ).

[ 97 ] The socialist law has a religious character.

[ 98 ] The socialist law is prerogative rather than normative .

[ 98 ] Legal officials argue differently for their cases compared to Westerners.

[ 99 ] For instance, "[t]he predominant view among Soviet jurists in the 1920s was that Soviet law of that period was Western-style law appropriate for a Soviet economy that remained capitalist to a significant degree ." [ 99 ] This changed with the introduction of the command economy , and the term socialist law was conceived to reflect this in the 1930s.

[ 99 ] Hungarian legal theorist Imre Szabó acknowledged similarities between socialist law and civil law, but he noted that "four basic types of law may be distinguished: the laws of the slave, feudal, capitalist, and socialist societies." [ 100 ] Using the Marxist theory of historical materialism , Szabó argues that socialist law cannot belong to the same law family since the material structure is different from the capitalist countries as their superstructure (state) has to reflect these differences.

[ 101 ] In other words, law is a tool by the ruling class to govern.

[ 101 ] As Renè David notes, socialist jurists "isolate their law, to put into another category, a reprobate category, the Romanist laws and the common law, is the fact that they reason less as jurists and more as philosophers and Marxists; it is in taking a not strictly legal viewpoint that they affirm the originality of their socialist law." [ 102 ] However, some socialist legal theorists, such as Romanian jurist Victor Zlatescu differentiated between type of law and family of law. According to Zlatescu, "[t]he distinction between the law of the socialist countries and the law of the capitalist countries is not of the same nature as the difference between Roman-German law and the common law, for example. Socialist law is not a third family among the others, as in certain writings of Western comparatists." [ 103 ] In other words, socialist law is civil law, but it is a different type of law for a different society.

[ 103 ] Yugoslav jurist Borislav Blagojević [ sr ] noted that a "great number of legal institutions and legal relations remain the same in socialist law", further stating that it is "necessary and justified" to put them to use if they are "in conformity with the corresponding interests of the ruling class in the state in question." [ 104 ] Importantly, socialist law had retained civil law institutions, methodology, and organisation.

[ 105 ] This can be discerned by the fact that East Germany retained the 1896 German civil code until 1976 while Poland used existing Austrian, French, German, and Russian civil codes until adoption of its own civil code in 1964.

[ 106 ] Scholar John Quigley wrote that "[s]ocialist law retains the inquisitorial style of trial, law-creation predominantly by legislatures rather than courts, and a significant role for legal scholarship in construing codes." [ 105 ] Military Control Communist states have established two types of civil-military systems. The armed forces of most socialist states have historically been state institutions based on the Soviet model, [ 107 ] but in China, Laos, North Korea, and Vietnam, the armed forces are party-state institutions. However, several differences exist between the statist (Soviet) and the party-state models (China). In the Soviet model, the Soviet armed forces was led by the Council of Defense (an organ formed by the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union ) while the Council of Ministers was responsible for formulating defence policies.

[ 108 ] The party leader was ex officio the Chairman of the Council of Defense.

[ 108 ] Below the Council of Defense, there was the Main Military Council which was responsible for the strategic direction and leadership of the Soviet armed forces.

[ 108 ] The working organ of the Council of Defense was the General Staff tasked with analysing military and political situations as they developed.

[ 109 ] The party controlled the armed forces through the Main Political Directorate (MPD) of the Ministry of Defense , a state organ that functioned "with the authority of a department of the CPSU Central Committee ." [ 110 ] The MPD organised political indoctrination and created political control mechanisms at the centre to the company level in the field.

[ 111 ] Formally, the MPD was responsible for organising party and Komsomol organs as well as subordinate organs within the armed forces; ensuring that the party and state retain control over the armed forces; evaluates the political performance of officers; supervising the ideological content of the military press; and supervising the political-military training institutes and their ideological content.

[ 111 ] The head of the MPD was ranked fourth in military protocol, but it was not a member of the Council of Defense.

[ 112 ] The Administrative Organs Department of the CPSU Central Committee was responsible for implementing the party personnel policies and supervised the KGB , the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Defense.

[ 113 ] In the Chinese party-state model, the People's Liberation Army (PLA) is a party institution.

[ 114 ] In the preamble of the Constitution of the Chinese Communist Party , it is stated: "The Communist Party of China (CPC) shall uphold its absolute leadership over the People's Liberation Army and other people's armed forces." [ 114 ] The PLA carries out its work in accordance with the instructions of the Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party .

[ 115 ] Mao Zedong described the PLA's institutional situation as follows: "Every communist must grasp the truth, ' Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun .' Our principle is that the party commands the gun, and the gun must never be allowed to command the Party ." [ 116 ] The Central Military Commission (CMC) is both an organ of the state and the party—it is an organ of the CCP Central Committee and an organ of the national legislature, the National People's Congress.

[ 117 ] The CCP General Secretary is ex officio party CMC Chairman and the President of the People's Republic of China is by right state CMC Chairman.

[ 117 ] The composition of the party CMC and the state CMC are identical.

[ 117 ] The CMC is responsible for the command of the PLA and determines national defence policies.

[ 117 ] fifteen departments report directly to the CMC and that are responsible for everything from political work to administration of the PLA.

[ 118 ] Of significance is that the CMC eclipses by far the prerogatives of the CPSU Administrative Organs Department while the Chinese counterpart to the Main Political Directorate supervises not only the military, but also intelligence, the security services, and counterespionage work.

[ 119 ] Representation Unlike in liberal democracies, active military personnel are members and partake in civilian institutions of governance.

[ 120 ] This is the case in all communist states.

[ 120 ] The Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV) has elected at least one active military figure to its CPV Politburo since 1986.

[ 121 ] In the 1986–2006 period, active military figures sitting in the CPV Central Committee stood at an average of 9,2 per cent.

[ 121 ] Military figures are also represented in the national legislature (the National Assembly ) and other representative institutions.

[ 121 ] In China, the two CMC vice chairmen have had by right office seats in the CCP Politburo since 1987.

[ 122 ] Ruling party Leading role A Marxist–Leninist party has led every communist state.

[ 54 ] This party seeks to represent and articulate the interests of the classes exploited by capitalism .

[ 54 ] It seeks to lead the exploited classes to achieve communism.

[ 54 ] However, the party cannot be identified with the exploited class in general.

[ 54 ] Its membership comprises members with advanced consciousness above sectional interests.

[ 54 ] Therefore, the party represents the advanced section of the exploited classes and, through them, leads the exploited classes by interpreting the universal laws governing human history towards communism.

[ 123 ] In Foundations of Leninism (1924), Joseph Stalin wrote that "the proletariat [working class] needs the Party first of all as its General Staff, which it must have for the successful seizure of power. [...] But the proletariat needs the Party not only to achieve the [class] dictatorship; it needs it still more to maintain the [class] dictatorship." [ 124 ] The current Constitution of Vietnam states in Article 4 that "[t]he Communist Party of Vietnam , the vanguard of the Vietnamese working class, simultaneously the vanguard of the toiling people and of the Vietnamese nation, the faithful representative of the interests of the working class, the toiling people, and the whole nation, acting upon the Marxist–Leninist doctrine and Ho Chi Minh 's thought, is the leading force of the state and society." [ 125 ] In a similar form, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) describes itself as "the vanguard of the Chinese working class, the Chinese people, and the Chinese nation." [ 126 ] As noted by both communist parties, the ruling parties of communist states are vanguard parties .

Vladimir Lenin theorised that vanguard parties were "capable of assuming power and leading the whole people to socialism, of directing and organising the new system, of being the teacher, the guide, the leader of all the working and exploited people in organising their social life without the bourgeoisie." [ 127 ] This idea eventually evolved into the concept of the party's leading role in leading the state [ 127 ] as seen in the CCP's self-description and Vietnam's constitution.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] Internal organisation The Marxist–Leninist governing party organises itself around the principle of democratic centralism and through it, the state too.

[ 128 ] It means that all directing bodies of the party, from top to bottom, shall be elected; that party bodies shall give periodical accounts of their activities to their respective party organisations; that there shall be strict party discipline and the subordination of the minority to the majority; and that all decisions of higher bodies shall be absolutely binding on lower bodies and on all party members.

[ 128 ] The highest organ of a Marxist–Leninist governing party is the party congress.

[ 129 ] The congress elects the central committee and either an auditing commission and a control commission, or both, although not always.

[ 129 ] The central committee is the party's highest decision-making organ in-between party congresses and elects a politburo and a secretariat amongst its members and the party's leader.

[ 129 ] When the central committee is not in session, the politburo is the highest decision-making organ of the party and the secretariat is the highest administrative organ.

[ 129 ] In certain parties, either the central committee or the politburo elects amongst its members a standing committee of the politburo which acts as the highest decision-making organ in between sessions of the politburo, central committee, and the Congress. This leadership structure is identical all the way down to the primary party organisation of the ruling party.

[ 129 ] Economic system From reading their works, many followers of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels drew the idea that the socialist economy would be based on planning and not market mechanisms.

[ 130 ] These ideas later developed into believing that planning was superior to the market mechanism.

[ 131 ] Upon seizing power, the Bolsheviks began advocating a national state planning system.

[ 131 ] The 8th Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) resolved to institute "the maximum centralisation of production [...] simultaneously striving to establish a unified economic plan." [ 131 ] The Gosplan , the State Planning Commission, the Supreme Soviet of the National Economy , and other central planning organs were established during the 1920s in the era of the New Economic Policy .

[ 132 ] On introducing the planning system, it became a common belief in the international communist movement that the Soviet planning system was a more advanced form of economic organisation than capitalism.

[ 133 ] This led to the system being introduced voluntarily in countries such as China, Cuba, and Vietnam and, in some cases, imposed by the Soviet Union.

[ 133 ] In communist states, the state planning system had five main characteristics.

[ 134 ] Firstly, except for field consumption and employment, practically all decisions were centralised at the top.

[ 134 ] Secondly, the system was hierarchical —the centre formulated a plan that was sent down to the level below, which would imitate the process and send the plan further down the pyramid.

[ 134 ] Thirdly, the plans were binding in nature, i.e. everyone had to follow and meet the goals outlined in them.

[ 134 ] Fourthly, the predominance of calculating in physical terms to ensure planned allocation of commodities were not incompatible with planned production.

[ 134 ] Finally, money played a passive role within the state sector since the planners focused on physical allocation.

[ 134 ] According to Michael Ellman , in a centrally-planned economy , "the state owns the land and all other natural resources and all characteristics of the traditional model, the enterprises, and their productive assets. Collective ownership (e.g. the property of collective farms) also exists but plays a subsidiary role and is expected to be temporary." [ 134 ] The private ownership of the means of production still exists, although it plays a somewhat more minor role.

[ 135 ] Since the class struggle in capitalism is caused by the division between owners of the means of production and the workers who sell their labour, state ownership (defined as the property of the people in these systems) is considered as a tool to end the class struggle and empower the working class.

[ 136 ] Analysis See also: Criticism of communist party rule and Postsocialism Countries such as the Soviet Union and China were criticised by various authors and organisations based on the lack of the representative nature of multi-party liberal democracy , [ 137 ] [ 138 ] in addition to several other areas where socialist society and Western societies differed. Socialist societies were commonly characterised by state ownership or social ownership of the means of production either through administration through communist party organisations, democratically elected councils and communes , and co-operative structures—in opposition to the liberal democratic capitalist free-market paradigm of management, ownership and control by corporations and private individuals.

[ 139 ] Communist states have also been criticised for the influence and outreach of their respective ruling parties on society , in addition to lack of recognition for some Western legal rights and liberties such as the right to own property and the restriction of the right to free speech .

[ 140 ] The early economic development policies of communist states have been criticised for focusing primarily on the development of heavy industry .

[ citation needed ] Communist party rule has been criticised as authoritarian or totalitarian for suppressing and killing political dissidents and social classes (so-called " enemies of the people "), religious persecution , ethnic cleansing , forced collectivisation , and use of forced labor in concentration camps . Communist party rule has also been accused of genocidal acts in Cambodia , China , Poland and Ukraine , although there is scholarly dispute regarding the Holodomor's classification as genocide.

[ 141 ] Especially in the West, criticism of communist rule has also been grounded in criticism of socialism , by economists such as Friedrich Hayek and Milton Friedman , who argued that the state ownership and planned economy characteristic of Soviet-style communist rule were responsible for economic stagnation and shortage economies , providing few incentives for individuals to improve productivity and engage in entrepreneurship .

[ 142 ] Anti-Stalinist left and other left-wing critics see it as an example of state capitalism [ 143 ] [ 144 ] and have referred to it as a " red fascism " contrary to left-wing politics.

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] [ 147 ] Other leftists, including Marxist–Leninists , criticise it for its repressive state actions while recognising certain advancements such as egalitarian achievements and modernisation under such states.

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] Counter-criticism is diverse, including the view it presents a biased or exaggerated anti-communist narrative. Some academics propose a more nuanced analysis of communist party rule.

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] Soviet advocates and socialists responded to criticism by highlighting the ideological differences in the concept of freedom. McFarland and Ageyev noted that "Marxist–Leninist norms disparaged laissez-faire individualism (as when housing is determined by one's ability to pay), also [condemning] wide variations in personal wealth as the West has not. Instead, Soviet ideals emphasised equality—free education and medical care, little disparity in housing or salaries, and so forth." [ 152 ] When asked to comment on the claim that former citizens of communist states enjoy increased freedoms, Heinz Kessler , former East German Minister of National Defence , replied: "Millions of people in Eastern Europe are now free from employment, free from safe streets, free from health care, free from social security." [ 153 ] In his analysis of states run under Marxist–Leninist ideology, economist Michael Ellman of the University of Amsterdam notes that such states compared favorably with Western states in some health indicators such as infant mortality and life expectancy.

[ 154 ] A 1986 study published in the American Journal of Public Health and a 1992 study published in International Journal of Health Services stated, respectively, that "between countries at similar levels of economic development, socialist countries showed more favorable PQL (physical quality of life) outcomes" and that socialism was "for the most part, more successful than capitalism in improving the health conditions of the world's populations." [ 155 ] [ 156 ] Philipp Ther posits that there was an increase in the standard of living throughout Eastern Bloc countries as the result of modernisation programs under communist governments.

[ 157 ] Similarly, Amartya Sen's own analysis of international comparisons of life expectancy found that several Marxist–Leninist states made significant gains and commented "one thought that is bound to occur is that communism is good for poverty removal." [ 158 ] [ 159 ] Socialist scholar Michael Parenti argues that communist states experienced greater economic development than they would have otherwise, or that their leaders were forced to take harsh measures to defend their countries against the Western Bloc during the Cold War . In addition, Parenti states that communist party rule provided some human rights such as economic, social and cultural rights not found under capitalist states such as that everyone is treated equal regardless of education or financial stability; that any citizen can keep a job; or that there is a more efficient and equal distribution of resources.

[ 148 ] Professors Paul Greedy and Olivia Ball report that communist parties pressed Western governments to include economic rights in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

[ 160 ] Professor David L. Hoffmann argues that many actions of communist party rule were rooted in the response Western governments gave during World War I and that communist party rule institutionalised them.

[ 161 ] While noting "its brutalities and failures", Milne argues that "rapid industrialisation, mass education, job security and huge advances in social and gender equality" are not accounted and the dominant account of communist party rule "gives no sense of how communist regimes renewed themselves after 1956 or why western leaders feared they might overtake the capitalist world well into the 1960s." [ 149 ] Left-wing criticism Left-wing critics argue that states under communist party rule took the form of state capitalism and that they followed anti-imperialism , populism , nationalism and social democracy . Rather than representing a socialist planned economy , the Soviet model has been described in practice as either a form of state capitalism [ 162 ] [ 163 ] [ 164 ] or a non-planned , command economy .

[ 165 ] [ 166 ] [ 167 ] The fidelity of those varied socialist revolutionaries, leaders and parties to the work of Karl Marx and that of other socialist thinkers is highly contested and has been rejected by many Marxists and other socialists alike.

[ 168 ] Some academics, scholars and socialists have criticised the linking of all leftist and socialist ideals to the excesses of authoritarian socialism.

[ 169 ] Many democratic and libertarian socialists, including anarchists , mutualists and syndicalists , refer to communist states as examples of state socialism , and they oppose this system for its support of a workers' state instead of abolishing the bourgeois state apparatus outright. They contrast state socialism with their own form of socialism which involves either collective ownership (in the form of worker cooperatives ) or common ownership of the means of production without central planning by the state. Those libertarian socialists believe there is no need for a state in a socialist system because there would be no class to suppress and no need for an institution based on coercion, and they regard the state being a remnant of capitalism.

[ 170 ] [ 171 ] [ 172 ] They hold that statism is antithetical to true socialism.

[ 173 ] For instance, libertarian socialist William Morris wrote in a Commonweal article: "State Socialism? — I don't agree with it; in fact I think the two words contradict one another, and that it is the business of Socialism to destroy the State and put Free Society in its place".

[ 174 ] American Marxist Raya Dunayevskaya dismissed communist states as a type of state capitalism [ 175 ] [ 176 ] [ 177 ] because she believed that state ownership of the means of production represents state capitalism rather than socialism.

[ 178 ] the dictatorship of the proletariat is a form of democracy and single-party rule is undemocratic; [ 179 ] She also argued that Marxism–Leninism is neither Marxism nor Leninism , but rather a composite ideology which socialist leaders such as Joseph Stalin used to expediently determine what is communism and what is not communism among the Eastern Bloc countries.

[ 180 ] Memory See also: Decommunization and Communist nostalgia Protest against Ukrainian decommunisation policies in Donetsk , 2014. The red banner reads, "Our homeland USSR".

Monuments to the "victims of communist states" exist in almost all capitals of Eastern Europe. There are several museums documenting communist rule such as the Museum of Occupations and Freedom Fights in Lithuania, the Museum of the Occupation of Latvia in Riga, and the House of Terror in Budapest, all three of which also document Nazi rule.

[ 181 ] [ 182 ] In Washington D.C., a bronze statue based upon the 1989 Tiananmen Square Goddess of Democracy sculpture was dedicated as the Victims of Communism Memorial in 2007, having been authorised by the United States Congress in 1993.

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] The Victims of Communism Memorial Foundation plans to build an International Museum on Communism in Washington. As of 2008, Russia contained 627 memorials and memorial plaques dedicated to victims of the communist states, most of which were created by private citizens and did not have a national monument or a national museum.

[ 185 ] [ page needed ] The Wall of Grief in Moscow, inaugurated in October 2017, is Russia's first monument for victims of political persecution by Stalin during the country's Soviet era.

[ 186 ] In 2017, Canada's National Capital Commission approved the design for a memorial to the victims of communism to be built at the Garden of the Provinces and Territories in Ottawa.

[ 187 ] On 23 August 2018, Estonia's Victims of Communism 1940–1991 Memorial was inaugurated in Tallinn by President Kersti Kaljulaid .

[ 188 ] [ better source needed ] The memorial construction was financed by the state and is managed by the Estonian Institute of Historical Memory .

[ 189 ] The opening ceremony was chosen to coincide with the official European Day of Remembrance for Victims of Stalinism and Nazism .

[ 190 ] According to Laure Neumayer, this is used as an anti-communist narrative "based on a series of categories and figures" to "denounce Communist state violence (qualified as 'Communist crimes', 'red genocide' or 'classicide') and to honour persecuted individuals (presented alternatively as 'victims of Communism' and 'heroes of anti totalitarian resistance')." [ 191 ] [ page needed ] According to anthropologist Kristen Ghodsee , efforts to institutionalise the victims of communism narrative, or the moral equivalence between the Nazi Holocaust (race murder) and the victims of communism (class murder), and in particular the push at the beginning of the 2008 financial crisis for commemoration of the latter in Europe, can be seen as the response by economic and political elites to fears of a leftist resurgence in the face of devastated economies and extreme inequalities in both the East and West as the result of the excesses of neoliberal capitalism . Ghodsee argues that any discussion of achievements under communist states, including literacy, education, women's rights, and social security is usually silenced, and any discourse on the subject of communism is focused almost exclusively on Stalin's crimes and the double genocide theory .

[ 182 ] In the decades following the Revolutions of 1989 , nostalgia for the defunct Marxist governments and the communist ideal reemerged among segments of the population in the former Soviet Union and much of Eastern Europe.

[ 192 ] Russian-American author and cultural theorist Svetlana Boym noted that outbreaks of nostalgia often follow periods of political change and revolution.

[ 192 ] She observed that in former communist states, memory narratives surrounding life under socialism may be polarised.

[ 192 ] Many residents who lived through this era recalled only economic stagnation, while others valued it for a sense of perceived stability and national strength.

[ 192 ] The dissolution of the Soviet Union was followed by a rapid increase in poverty, [ 193 ] [ 194 ] [ 195 ] crime, [ 196 ] [ 197 ] corruption, [ 198 ] [ 199 ] unemployment, [ 200 ] homelessness, [ 201 ] [ 202 ] rates of disease, [ 203 ] [ 204 ] [ 205 ] infant mortality, domestic violence, [ 206 ] and income inequality, [ 207 ] along with decreases in calorie intake, life expectancy, adult literacy, and income.

[ 208 ] The region also experienced a spike in excess deaths.

[ 209 ] According to Kristen Ghodsee , a researcher on post-communist Eastern Europe: Only by examining how the quotidian aspects of daily life were affected by great social, political and economic changes can we make sense of the desire for this collectively imagined, more egalitarian past. Nobody wants to revive 20th century totalitarianism . But nostalgia for communism has become a common language through which ordinary men and women express disappointment with the shortcomings of parliamentary democracy and neoliberal capitalism today.

[ 210 ] Ekaterina Kalinina, a sociologist at the University of Copenhagen , found that positive narratives of life under socialism was often driven by the loss of social benefits and the collapse of the extensive welfare state enjoyed by many residents of former communist states.

[ 211 ] Kalinina pointed out that nostalgia for the Soviet Union had the greatest appeal to those "who find themselves in more vulnerable economic and social positions" in Russia after 1991.

[ 211 ] Per Kalinina, these individuals are nostalgic for "economic security and social welfare." [ 211 ] See also Communism portal Socialism portal Wikimedia Commons has media related to Communist countries .

List of socialist states List of anarchist communities Capitalist state List of anti-capitalist and communist parties with national parliamentary representation List of communist parties Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Stalinism References ^ Bottomore, T. B.

(1991).

A Dictionary of Marxist Thought .

Wiley-Blackwell . p. 54.

^ Cooke, Chris, ed. (1998).

Dictionary of Historical Terms (2nd ed.). pp.

221– 222, 305.

^ Lee, Grace (Spring 2003).

"The Political Philosophy of Juche" (PDF) .

Stanford Journal of East Asian Affairs .

3 (1).

The DPRK claims that juche is Kim Il Sung's creative application of Marxist-Leninist principle to the modern political realities in North Korea.

^ Atsuhito, Isozaki (21 June 2021).

"A Revival of North Korean Communism?: The rhetoric is there. But what does it mean?" .

The Diplomat . Retrieved 2 December 2022 .

In his closing address at the Conference of Cell Secretaries of the Workers' Party of Korea in late April, Kim mentioned the word "communism" six times. His recent claim that North Korea aims to become a "communist utopia" is a notable change in rhetoric.

^ Ball, Terence; Dagger, Richard, eds. (2019) [1999].

"Communism" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (revised ed.) . Retrieved 10 June 2020 .

^ Webb & Webb 1935 Sloan 1937 Farber 1992 , pp. 229–230 Getzler 2002 Busky 2000 , p. 9: "In a modern sense of the word, communism refers to the ideology of Marxism–Leninism." ^ a b Wilczynski 2008 , p. 21: "Contrary to Western usage, these countries describe themselves as 'Socialist' (not 'Communist'). The second stage (Marx's 'higher phase'), or 'Communism' is to be marked by an age of plenty, distribution according to needs (not work), the absence of money and the market mechanism, the disappearance of the last vestiges of capitalism and the ultimate 'whithering away' of the State." ^ Steele 1999 , p. 45: "Among Western journalists the term 'Communist' came to refer exclusively to regimes and movements associated with the Communist International and its offspring: regimes which insisted that they were not communist but socialist, and movements which were barely communist in any sense at all." Rosser & Rosser 2003 , p. 14: "Ironically, the ideological father of communism, Karl Marx, claimed that communism entailed the withering away of the state. The dictatorship of the proletariat was to be a strictly temporary phenomenon. Well aware of this, the Soviet Communists never claimed to have achieved communism, always labeling their own system socialist rather than communist and viewing their system as in transition to communism" Williams 1983 , p.

289 : "The decisive distinction between socialist and communist, as in one sense these terms are now ordinarily used, came with the renaming, in 1918, of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks) as the All-Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks). From that time on, a distinction of socialist from communist, often with supporting definitions such as social democrat or democratic socialist, became widely current, although it is significant that all communist parties, in line with earlier usage, continued to describe themselves as socialist and dedicated to socialism." ^ Nation, R. Craig (1992).

Black Earth, Red Star: A History of Soviet Security Policy, 1917-1991 .

Cornell University Press . pp.

85– 6.

ISBN 978-0801480072 . Archived from the original on 1 August 2019 . Retrieved 19 December 2014 – via Google Books .

^ Barrett 1978 : "If we were to extend the definition of socialism to include Labor Britain or socialist Sweden, there would be no difficulty in refuting the connection between capitalism and democracy." Kendall 2011 , pp. 125–127: "Sweden, Great Britain, and France have mixed economies, sometimes referred to as democratic socialism—an economic and political system that combines private ownership of some of the means of production, governmental distribution of some essential goods and services, and free elections. For example, government ownership in Sweden is limited primarily to railroads, mineral resources, a public bank, and liquor and tobacco operations." Li 2015 , pp. 60–69: "The scholars in camp of democratic socialism believe that China should draw on the Sweden experience, which is suitable not only for the West but also for China. In the post-Mao China, the Chinese intellectuals are confronted with a variety of models. The liberals favor the American model and share the view that the Soviet model has become archaic and should be totally abandoned. Meanwhile, democratic socialism in Sweden provided an alternative model. Its sustained economic development and extensive welfare programs fascinated many. Numerous scholars within the democratic socialist camp argue that China should model itself politically and economically on Sweden, which is viewed as more genuinely socialist than China. There is a growing consensus among them that in the Nordic countries the welfare state has been extraordinarily successful in eliminating poverty." ^ Heilbroner, Robert L. (Winter 1991).

"From Sweden to Socialism: A Small Symposium on Big Questions" .

Dissident . Barkan, Joanne; Brand, Horst; Cohen, Mitchell; Coser, Lewis; Denitch, Bogdan; Fehèr, Ferenc; Heller, Agnès; Horvat, Branko; Tyler, Gus. pp. 96–110. Retrieved 17 April 2020.

^ Morgan, W. John (2001). "Marxism–Leninism: The Ideology of Twentieth-Century Communism". In Wright, James D. (ed.).

International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences (2nd ed.). Oxford: Elsevier . pp.

657– 662.

^ Andrai, Charles F. (1994).

Comparative Political Systems: Policy Performance and Social Change . Armonk, New York: M. E. Sharpe . pp.

24– 25.

^ "Constitution of 1992" .

Vietnam Embassy . Archived from the original on 9 July 2011.

On 2 July 1976, the National Assembly of reunified Vietnam decided to change the country's name to the Socialist Republic of Vietnam; the country entered a period of transition to socialism, strove for national construction, and unyieldingly defended its frontiers while fulfilling its internationalist duty.

^ "Constitution of the Republic of Cuba, 1992" .

Cubanet . Archived from the original on 9 July 2011.

The Communist Party of Cuba, a follower of Martí's ideas and of Marxism–Leninism, and the organized vanguard of the Cuban nation, is the highest leading force of society and of the state, which organizes and guides the common effort toward the goals of the construction of socialism and the progress toward a communist society.

^ a b Furtak 1987 , pp. 8–9.

^ Furtak 1987 , p. 12.

^ Furtak 1987 , p. 13.

^ a b Furtak 1987 , p. 14.

^ Furtak 1987 , pp. 16–17.

^ Furtak 1987 , pp. 18–19.

^ a b c d e Guins 1950 , p. 187.

^ a b Guins 1950 , pp. 187–188.

^ Imam 1986 , p. 383.

^ Lenin, Vladimir (21 April 1921).

The Tax in Kind . Retrieved 15 June 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ a b Guins 1950 , p. 188.

^ Guins 1950 , pp. 188–189.

^ a b c d Tang 1980 , p. 43.

^ a b Tang 1980 , p. 41.

^ Tang 1980 , pp. 42–43.

^ a b c Tang 1980 , p. 42.

^ Skilling 1961 , p. 16.

^ a b c Skilling 1961 , p. 21.

^ Åslund 2009 , p. 12 Minahan 2013 , p. 296 Tunçer-Kılavuz 2014 , p. 53 Khabtagaeva 2009 , p. 21 Macdonald, Stacey & Steele 2004 , p. 413 ^ Gjevori 2018 , p. 21 Stankova 2014 , p. 148 Müller-Rommel & Mansfeldová 2001 , p. 62 Hajdú 2011 , p. 27 Frankowski & Stephan 1995 , p. 23 Paquette 2001 , p. 55 ^ Lampe, John R. (2000).

Yugoslavia as History: Twice There Was a Country .

Cambridge University Press . p. 233.

ISBN 9780521774017 – via Google Books .

^ "The Chinese Revolution of 1949" .

Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs .

United States Department of State .

^ Kihl, Young Whan; Kim, Hong Nack (2014).

North Korea: The Politics of Regime Survival .

Routledge . p. 8.

ISBN 9781317463764 – via Google Books .

^ Webb, Adrian (2008).

The Routledge Companion to Central and Eastern Europe Since 1919 . Routledge Companions to History.

Routledge . pp. 80, 88.

ISBN 9781134065219 – via Google Books .

^ Da Graça, John V. (2000).

Heads of State and Government (2nd ed.).

St. Martin's Press . p. 56.

ISBN 978-1-56159-269-2 – via Google Books .

^ a b c d Poelzer 1989 , p. 13.

^ a b c d Poelzer 1989 , p. 14.

^ a b c d e Poelzer 1989 , p. 16.

^ a b Poelzer 1989 , p. 15.

^ Poelzer 1989 , p. 22.

^ Poelzer 1989 , p. 23.

^ Poelzer 1989 , p. 24.

^ a b Poelzer 1989 , p. 25.

^ a b Poelzer 1989 , p. 26.

^ Poelzer 1989 , p. 44.

^ Poelzer 1989 , pp. 50–52.

^ Poelzer 1989 , pp. 54–55.

^ Poelzer 1989 , p. 61.

^ a b c d e f Harding 1981 , p. 27.

^ Steele 1999 , p. 45: "Among Western journalists the term 'Communist' came to refer exclusively to regimes and movements associated with the Communist International and its offspring: regimes which insisted that they were not communist but socialist, and movements which were barely communist in any sense at all." ^ Rosser & Rosser 2003 , p. 14: "Ironically, the ideological father of communism, Karl Marx, claimed that communism entailed the withering away of the state. The dictatorship of the proletariat was to be a strictly temporary phenomenon. Well aware of this, the Soviet Communists never claimed to have achieved communism, always labelling their own system socialist rather than communist and viewing their system as in transition to communism" ^ a b c d e f g Nelson 1982 , p. 7.

^ Nelson 1982 , p. 6.

^ Hand 2016 , p. 2.

^ Hazard 1985 , p. 163.

^ a b Gardner, Schöpflin & White 1987 , p. 86.

^ Gardner, Schöpflin & White 1987 , p. 91.

^ Gardner, Schöpflin & White 1987 , pp. 114–115.

^ Gardner, Schöpflin & White 1987 , p. 114.

^ Gardner, Schöpflin & White 1987 , p. 115.

^ Gardner, Schöpflin & White 1987 , p. 82.

^ a b c d Nelson 1982 , p. 8.

^ a b c d Nelson 1982 , p. 9.

^ a b c d Nelson 1982 , p. 10.

^ Nelson 1982 , p. 1.

^ Chang 1956 , p. 520.

^ a b c d e Chang 1956 , p. 521.

^ Chang 1956 , p. xi.

^ a b c Chang 1956 , p. 522.

^ a b c Chang 1956 , p. xii.

^ a b Chang 1956 , p. 524.

^ a b Triska 1968 , p. xii.

^ Chang 1956 , p. xiii.

^ Keith 1991 , p. 112.

^ Keith 1991 , p. 114.

^ Keith 1991 , p. 118.

^ Wan, William; Qi, Li (3 June 2013).

"China's constitution debate hits a sensitive nerve" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 27 December 2019 .

^ a b c d e f g h Hand 2016 , p. 3.

^ a b c Hand 2016 , p. 4.

^ Hand 2016 , p. 5.

^ Hand 2016 , p. 15.

^ Hand 2016 , p. 16.

^ a b c Feldbrugge 1985 , p. 202.

^ a b Staar 1988 , p. 36 (Bulgaria), 65 (Czechoslovakia), 133 (Hungary), 161 (Romania), 195 (Poland).

^ Feldbrugge 1985 , pp. 202–203.

^ a b c Feldbrugge 1985 , p. 203.

^ Staar 1988 , p. 64.

^ Dimitrov 2006 , p. 170.

^ Stone Sweet, Bu & Zhuo 2023 , p. 18.

^ a b c d Quigley 1989 , p. 781.

^ Quigley 1989 , p. 782.

^ a b c d e Quigley 1989 , p. 783.

^ a b Quigley 1989 , p. 784.

^ a b c Quigley 1989 , p. 796.

^ Quigley 1989 , pp. 798–99.

^ a b Quigley 1989 , p. 799.

^ Quigley 1989 , p. 797.

^ a b Quigley 1989 , p. 800.

^ Quigley 1989 , p. 802.

^ a b Quigley 1989 , p. 803.

^ Quigley 1989 , p. 801.

^ Kramer 1985 , p. 47.

^ a b c Snyder 1987 , p. 28.

^ Snyder 1987 , p. 30.

^ Loeber 1984 , p. 13.

^ a b Staff writer 1980 , p. 1.

^ Staff writer 1980 , p. 3.

^ Kokoshin 2016 , p. 19.

^ a b Mulvenon 2018 , p. 3.

^ Tung 2012 , p. 251.

^ Blasko 2006 , p. 6.

^ a b c d Blasko 2006 , p. 27.

^ Garafola, Cristina L. (23 September 2016).

"People's Liberation Army Reforms and Their Ramifications" .

RAND Corporation . Retrieved 27 December 2019 .

^ Kokoshin 2016 , p. 23.

^ a b Staff writer 1980 , p. 7.

^ a b c Thayer 2008 , p. 68.

^ Miller 2018 , p. 4.

^ Harding 1981 , pp. 27–28.

^ Steiner 1951 , p. 58.

^ a b Bui 2016 , p. 223.

^ a b Li 2017 , p. 219.

^ a b Evans 1993 , p. 20.

^ a b Gardner, Schöpflin & White 1987 , p. 131.

^ a b c d e "Central Committee" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

^ Ellman 2014 , pp. 1–2.

^ a b c Ellman 2014 , p. 2.

^ Ellman 2014 , p. 9.

^ a b Ellman 2014 , p. 11.

^ a b c d e f g Ellman 2014 , p. 22.

^ Ellman 2014 , p. 23.

^ Ellman 2014 , p. 25.

^ Samuel P., Huntington (1970).

Authoritarian Politics in Modern Society: The Dynamics of Established One-party Systems .

Basic Books (AZ).

^ Lowy, Michael (1986). "Mass Organization, Party and State: Democracy in its Transition to Socialism".

Transition and Development: Problems of Third World Socialism (94): 264.

^ Amandae, Sonja (2003).

Rationalizing Capitalist Democracy: The Cold War Origins of Rational Choice Liberalism .

University of Chicago Press .

^ "Need for international condemnation of crimes of totalitarian communist regimes" . Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe. 25 January 2006 . Retrieved 31 January 2020 .

^ Sawicky, Nicholas D. (20 December 2013).

The Holodomor: Genocide and National Identity (Education and Human Development Master's Theses). The College at Brockport: State University of New York . Retrieved 6 October 2020 – via Digital Commons.

Scholars also disagree over what role the Soviet Union played in the tragedy. Some scholars point to Stalin as the mastermind behind the famine, due to his hatred of Ukrainians (Hosking, 1987). Others assert that Stalin did not actively cause the famine, but he knew about it and did nothing to stop it (Moore, 2012). Still other scholars argue that the famine was just an effect of the Soviet Union's push for rapid industrialization and a by-product of that was the destruction of the peasant way of life (Fischer, 1935). The final school of thought argues that the Holodomor was caused by factors beyond the control of the Soviet Union and Stalin took measures to reduce the effects of the famine on the Ukrainian people (Davies & Wheatcroft, 2006).

^ Von Mises 1990 Hayek, Friedrich (1935). "The Nature and History of the Problem"; "The Present State of the Debate".

Collectivist Economic Planning . pp. 1–40, 201–243.

Durlauf & Blume 1987 Biddle, Samuels & Davis 2006 , p. 319: "What became known as the socialist calculation debate started when von Mises (1935 [1920]) launched a critique of socialism." Levy & Peart 2008 [ page needed ] ^ Cliff, Tony (1996).

State Capitalism in Russia (PDF) . Retrieved 6 October 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Alami, Ilias; Dixon, Adam D. (January 2020).

"State Capitalism(s) Redux? Theories, Tensions, Controversies" .

Competition & Change .

24 (1): 70– 94.

doi : 10.1177/1024529419881949 .

ISSN 1024-5294 .

S2CID 211422892 .

^ Voline (1995).

"Red Fascism" .

Itinéraire (13). Translated by Sharkey, Paul. Paris . Retrieved 6 October 2020 – via The Anarchist Library.

First published in the July 1934 edition of Ce qu'il faut dire (Brussels).

^ Meyer, Gerald (Summer 2003). "Anarchism, Marxism and the Collapse of the Soviet Union".

Science & Society .

67 (2): 218– 221.

doi : 10.1521/siso.67.2.218.21187 .

ISSN 0036-8237 .

JSTOR 40404072 .

^ Tamblyn, Nathan (April 2019).

"The Common Ground of Law and Anarchism" .

Liverpool Law Review .

40 (1): 65– 78.

doi : 10.1007/s10991-019-09223-1 .

hdl : 10871/36939 .

ISSN 1572-8625 .

S2CID 155131683 .

^ a b Parenti, Michael (1997).

Blackshirts and Reds: Rational Fascism and the Overthrow of Communism . San Francisco: City Lights Books . p. 58.

ISBN 978-0872863293 .

^ a b Milne 2006 : "The dominant account gives no sense of how communist regimes renewed themselves after 1956 or why western leaders feared they might overtake the capitalist world well into the 1960s. For all its brutalities and failures, communism in the Soviet Union, eastern Europe and elsewhere delivered rapid industrialisation, mass education, job security and huge advances in social and gender equality." ^ Ghodsee 2014 .

^ Ghodsee, Sehon & Dresser 2018 .

^ McFarland, Ageyev & Abalakina-Paap 1992 .

^ Parenti, Michael (1997).

Blackshirts and Reds: Rational Fascism and the Overthrow of Communism . San Francisco: City Lights Books. p. 118.

ISBN 978-0-87286-330-9 .

^ Ellman 2014 , p.

372 .

^ Cereseto, S.; Waitzkin, H. (1986).

"Economic development, political-economic system, and the physical quality of life" .

American Journal of Public Health .

76 (6): 661– 666.

doi : 10.2105/ajph.76.6.661 .

PMC 1646771 .

PMID 3706593 .

^ Navarro, V. (1992). "Has socialism failed? An analysis of health indicators under socialism".

International Journal of Health Services .

23 (2): 583– 601.

doi : 10.2190/B2TP-3R5M-Q7UP-DUA2 .

PMID 1399170 .

S2CID 44945095 .

^ Ther, Philipp (2016).

Europe Since 1989: A History .

Princeton University Press . p. 132.

ISBN 9780691167374 .

Stalinist regimes aimed to catapult the predominantly agrarian societies into the modern age by swift industrialization. At the same time, they hoped to produce politically loyal working classes by mass employment in large state industries. Steelworks were built in Eisenhüttenstadt (GDR), Nowa Huta (Poland), Košice (Slovakia), and Miskolc (Hungary), as were various mechanical engineering and chemical combines and other industrial sites. As a result of communist modernization, living standards in Eastern Europe rose. Planned economies, moreover, meant that wages, salaries, and the prices of consumer goods were fixed. Although the communists were not able to cancel out all regional differences, they succeeded in creating largely egalitarian societies.

^ Wilkinson, Richard G.

(November 1996).

Unhealthy Societies: The Afflictions of Inequality .

Routledge . p.

122 .

ISBN 0415092353 .

^ Hickel, Jason ; Sullivan, Dylan (1 July 2023).

"Capitalism, Global Poverty, and the Case for Democratic Socialism" .

Monthly Review . Retrieved 8 August 2023 .

As the economist Amartya Sen remarked in his 1981 study of health and literacy achievements around the world: "One thought that is bound to occur is that communism is good for poverty removal." ^ Ball, Olivia; Gready, Paul (2007).

The No-Nonsense Guide to Human Rights . New Internationalist. p. 35.

ISBN 978-1-904456-45-2 .

^ Hoffmann, David (2011).

Cultivating the Masses: Modern State Practices and Soviet Socialism, 1914–1939 . Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press . pp.

6– 10.

ISBN 9780801446290 .

^ Chomsky, Noam (1986).

"The Soviet Union Versus Socialism" .

Our Generation (Spring/Summer). Retrieved 29 January 2020.

^ Howard & King 2001 .

^ Wolff 2015 .

^ Wilhelm 1985 .

^ Zimbalist, Andrew; Sherman, Howard J. (October 1988).

Comparing Economic Systems: A Political-Economic Approach .

Harcourt College Publishing . pp.

4 .

ISBN 978-0-15-512403-5 .

Almost all industry in the Soviet Union is government owned and all production is directed, in theory, by a central plan (though in practice much is left for local discretion and much happens that is unplanned or not under government control).

^ Ellman 2007 , p.

22 : "In the USSR in the late 1980s the system was normally referred to as the 'administrative-command' economy. What was fundamental to this system was not the plan but the role of administrative hierarchies at all levels of decision making; the absence of control over decision making by the population [...].

^ Phillips, Ben (1981).

"USSR: Capitalist or Socialist?" .

The Call .

10 (8) . Retrieved 15 July 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Dean (2012) , pp.

6–7 ; Ehms (2014) ; Milne (2002) ; Milne (2006) ^ Schumpeter, Joseph (2008) [1942].

Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy . Harper Perennial. p. 169.

ISBN 978-0-06-156161-0 .

But there are still others (concepts and institutions) which by virtue of their nature cannot stand transplantation and always carry the flavor of a particular institutional framework. It is extremely dangerous, in fact it amounts to a distortion of historical description, to use them beyond the social world or culture whose denizens they are. Now ownership or property – also, so I believe, taxation – are such denizens of the world of commercial society, exactly as knights and fiefs are denizens of the feudal world. But so is the state (a denizen of commercial society).

^ McKay, Iain, ed. (2012). "Why do anarchists oppose state socialism?".

An Anarchist FAQ . Vol. II. Edinburgh: AK Press .

ISBN 978-1-902593-90-6 .

OCLC 182529204 .

^ McKay, Iain, ed. (2012). "What would an anarchist society look like?".

An Anarchist FAQ . Vol. II. Edinburgh: AK Press .

ISBN 978-1-902593-90-6 .

OCLC 182529204 .

^ McKay, Iain, ed. (2008). "Isn't libertarian socialism an oxymoron?".

An Anarchist FAQ . Vol. I. Stirling: AK Press .

ISBN 978-1-902593-90-6 .

OCLC 182529204 .

^ Morris 1890 , p. 153.

^ Dunayevskaya, Raya (1941).

"The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics is a Capitalist Society" .

Internal Discussion Bulletin of the Workers Party . Retrieved 23 April 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Dunayevskaya, Raya (1946).

"The Nature of the Russian Economy" .

The New International .

XII (10): 313–317.

XIII (1/January 1947): 27–30. Retrieved 23 April 2020.

^ Boggs, Grace Lee; Dunayevskaya, Ray; James, C. L. R. (1986).

State Capitalism and World Revolution . Chicago: Charles H. R. Publishing Company.

ISBN 9780882860794 . Retrieved 23 April 2020.

^ Lichtenstein 2011 , pp. 160–161.

^ Ishay, Micheline (2007).

The Human Rights Reader: Major Political Essays, Speeches, and Documents from Ancient Times to the Present .

Taylor & Francis . p. 245.

ISBN 9780415951609 .

^ Todd, Allan (2012).

History for the IB Diploma: Communism in Crisis 1976–1989 .

Cambridge University Press . p. 16.

ISBN 978-1107649279 .

^ Gille, Zsuzsa; Todorova, Maria (2012).

Post-Communist Nostalgia .

Berghahn Books . p. 4.

ISBN 978-0-857-45643-4 .

^ a b Ghodsee 2014 , p. 124.

^ Friendship Act (HR3000) (PDF) . United States Congress. 1993. p. 15 at §905a1 . Retrieved 14 November 2020 – via U.S. Government Publishing Office.

^ Fekeiki, Omar (13 June 2007).

"The Toll of Communism" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 19 November 2020 .

^ Satter, David (2011).

It Was a Long Time Ago, and It Never Happened Anyway: Russia and the Communist Past .

Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0-300-17842-5 .

^ "Wall of Grief: Putin opens first Soviet victims memorial" . BBC News. 30 October 2017. Retrieved 19 November 2020.

^ "Victims of communism monument could be unveiled next spring" .

CBC News . 19 March 2018 . Retrieved 19 November 2020 .

^ "Estonia's Victims of Communism 1940–1991" .

Kommunismiohvrite memoriaal . 23 August 2018 . Retrieved 19 November 2020 .

^ "Cornerstone laid for new memorial for victims of communist crimes" . ERR News. 4 May 2018. Retrieved 19 November 2020.

^ "Victims of Communism Memorial opened in Tallinn" .

ERR News . 24 August 2018 . Retrieved 19 November 2020 .

^ Neumayer, Laure (2018).

The Criminalisation of Communism in the European Political Space after the Cold War . London: Routledge .

ISBN 9781351141741 .

^ a b c d Boym, Svetlana (2011).

"Nostalgia" .

Atlas of Transformation . Prague. Archived from the original on 29 May 2024 . Retrieved 2 September 2024 .

^ McAaley, Alastair.

Russia and the Baltics: Poverty and Poverty Research in a Changing World . Archived from the original on 23 January 2017 . Retrieved 18 July 2016 .

^ "An epidemic of street kids overwhelms Russian cities" .

The Globe and Mail . 16 April 2002 . Retrieved 17 July 2016 .

^ Targ, Harry (2006).

Challenging Late Capitalism, Neoliberal Globalization, & Militarism .

^ Gerber, Theodore P.; Hout, Michael (July 1998). "More Shock than Therapy: Market Transition, Employment, and Income in Russia, 1991–1995".

American Journal of Sociology .

104 (1): 1– 50.

doi : 10.1086/210001 .

^ Volkov, Vladimir (26 April 2007).

"The Bitter Legacy of Boris Yeltsin (1931-2007)" . World Socialist Website . Retrieved 31 January 2020 .

^ "Cops for Hire" .

The Economist . 18 March 2010 . Retrieved 4 December 2015 .

^ "Corruption Perceptions Index 2014" . Transparency International. 3 December 2014. Archived from the original on 29 September 2014 . Retrieved 18 July 2016 .

^ Hardt, John (2003).

Russia's Uncertain Economic Future: With a Comprehensive Subject Index .

M. E. Sharpe . p. 481.

^ Alexander, Catharine; Buchil, Victor; Humphrey, Caroline (12 September 2007).

Urban Life in Post-Soviet Asia .

CRC Press .

^ Smorodinskaya, Tatiana, ed. (2007).

Encyclopaedia of Contemporary Russian .

Routledge .

^ Galazkaa, Artur (2000).

"Implications of the Diphtheria Epidemic in the Former Soviet Union for Immunization Programs" .

Journal of Infectious Diseases .

181 (s1): 244– 248.

doi : 10.1086/315570 .

PMID 10657222 .

^ Shubnikov, Eugene.

"Non-communicable Diseases and Former Soviet Union countries" .

World Health Organization . Archived from the original on 11 October 2016 . Retrieved 18 July 2016 .

^ Wharton, Melinda; Vitek, Charles (1998).

"Diphtheria in the Former Soviet Union: Reemergence of a Pandemic Disease" .

Emerging Infectious Diseases .

4 (4): 539– 550.

doi : 10.3201/eid0404.980404 .

PMC 2640235 .

PMID 9866730 . Retrieved 18 July 2016 .

^ Parenti, Michael (1997).

Blackshirts and Reds: Rational Fascism and the Overthrow of Communism . San Francisco: City Lights Books . pp. 107, 115.

ISBN 978-0872863293 .

^ Hoepller 2011 .

^ Poland, Marshall.

"Russian Economy in the Aftermath of the Collapse of the Soviet Union" . Archived from the original on 8 July 2016 . Retrieved 18 July 2016 .

^ Ghodsee, Kristen ; Orenstein, Mitchell A. (2021).

Taking Stock of Shock: Social Consequences of the 1989 Revolutions . New York: Oxford University Press . pp.

195– 196.

doi : 10.1093/oso/9780197549230.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0197549247 .

In the mortality belt of the European former Soviet Union, an aggressive health policy intervention might have prevented tens of thousands of excess deaths, or at least generated a different perception of Western intentions. Instead, Western self-congratulatory triumphalism, the political priority to irreversibly destroy the communist system, and the desire to integrate East European economies into the capitalist world at any cost took precedence.

^ "Dr. Kristen Ghodsee, Bowdoin College – Nostalgia for Communism" .

WAMC Northeast Public Radio . 1 November 2011.

Archived from the original on 4 May 2022 . Retrieved 3 March 2022 .

^ a b c Christie 2019 .

Bibliography General References for when the individuals were elected to the office of CCP leader, the name of the offices and when they established and were abolished are found below.

19th National Congress (2017).

Constitution of the Communist Party of China .

Chinese Communist Party .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) Gungwu, Wang (2012).

China: Development and Governance .

World Scientific Publishing Company . pp.

12– 13.

ISBN 978-9814425841 .

Articles and journal entries Barrett, William (1 April 1978).

"Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy: A Symposium" .

Commentary . Retrieved 14 June 2020 .

Bui, T. (2016).

"Constitutionalizing Single Party Leadership in Vietnam: Dilemmas of Reform" (PDF) .

Asian Journal of Comparative Law .

11 (2).

Cambridge University Press : 219– 234.

doi : 10.1017/asjcl.2016.22 .

Chang, Yu-nan (August 1956). "The Chinese Communist State System Under the Constitution of 1954".

The Journal of Politics .

18 (3).

The University of Chicago Press on behalf of the Southern Political Science Association : 520– 546.

doi : 10.2307/2127261 .

JSTOR 2127261 .

S2CID 154446161 .

Farber, Samuel (1992). "Before Stalinism: The Rise and Fall of Soviet Democracy".

Studies in Soviet Thought .

44 (3): 229– 230.

Ghodsee, Kristen (Fall 2014).

"A Tale of 'Two Totalitarianisms': The Crisis of Capitalism and the Historical Memory of Communism" (PDF) .

History of the Present: A Journal of Critical History .

4 (2): 115– 142.

doi : 10.5406/historypresent.4.2.0115 .

JSTOR 10.5406/historypresent.4.2.0115 .

Ghodsee, Kristen ; Sehon, Scott ; Dresser, Sam, eds. (22 March 2018).

"The merits of taking an anti-anti-communism stance" .

Aeon .

Archived from the original on 1 April 2022 . Retrieved 12 August 2021 .

Guins, George (July 1950). "Law Does not Wither Away in the Soviet Union".

The Russian Review .

9 (3).

Wiley on behalf of The Editors and Board of Trustees of the Russian Review: 187– 204.

doi : 10.2307/125763 .

JSTOR 125763 .

Hand, Keith (2016).

"An Assessment of Socialist Constitutional Supervision Models and Prospects for a Constitutional Supervision Committee in China: The Constitution as Commander?" .

Legal Studies Research Paper Series (150).

University of California .

SSRN 2624663 .

Hazard, John (August 1975).

"Soviet Model for Marxian Socialist Constitutions" .

Cornell Law Review .

60 (6).

Cornell University : 109– 118.

Hoepller, Cristopher (2011).

"Russian Demographics: The Role of the Collapse of the Soviet Union" .

Undergraduate Research Journal for the Human Sciences .

10 (1).

Howard, M. C.; King, J. E. (2001).

" 'State Capitalism' in the Soviet Union" (PDF) .

History of Economics Review .

34 (1): 110– 126.

doi : 10.1080/10370196.2001.11733360 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 July 2019.

Imam, Zafar (July–September 1986). "The Theory of the Soviet State Today".

The Indian Journal of Political Science .

47 (3).

Indian Political Science Association : 382– 398.

JSTOR 41855253 .

Keith, Richard (March 1991). "Chinese Politics and the New Theory of 'Rule of Law' ".

The China Quarterly .

125 (125).

Cambridge University Press on behalf of the School of Oriental and African Studies : 109– 118.

doi : 10.1017/S0305741000030320 .

JSTOR 654479 .

S2CID 154980279 .

Kokoshin, Andrey (October 2016).

"2015 Military Reform in the People's Republic of China" (PDF) .

Belfer Center Paper .

Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs .

Kramer, Mark N. (January 1985). "Civil-Military Relations in the Warsaw Pact: The East European Component".

International Affairs .

61 (1).

Oxford University Press on behalf of the Royal Institute of International Affairs : 45– 66.

doi : 10.2307/2619779 .

JSTOR 2619779 .

McFarland, Sam; Ageyev, Vladimir; Abalakina-Paap, Marina (1992). "Authoritarianism in the Former Soviet Union".

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

63 (6): 1004– 1010.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.397.4546 .

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.63.6.1004 .

Miller, Alice (January 2018).

"The 19th Central Committee Politburo" (PDF) .

China Leadership Monitor (55).

Hoover Institute .

Mulvenon, James (January 2018).

"The Cult of Xi and the Rise of the CMC Chairman Responsibility System" (PDF) .

China Leadership Monitor (55).

Hoover Institute .

Poelzer, Greg (1989).

An Analysis of Grenada as a Socialist-Oriented State (Thesis).

Carleton University .

Skilling, H. Gordon (January 1961). "People's Democracy and the Socialist Revolution: A Case Study in Communist Scholarship. Part I".

Soviet Studies . Vol. 12, no. 3.

Taylor & Francis . pp.

241– 262.

Snyder, Stanley (1987).

Soviet Troop Control and the Power Distribution (Thesis).

Naval Postgraduate School .

hdl : 10945/22490 .

National Foreign Assessment Center (1980).

Political Control of the Soviet Armed Forces (PDF) (Report).

Central Intelligence Agency . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 January 2017.

Steiner, H. Arthur (1951). "The Role of the Chinese Communist Party".

The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science .

277 (1): 56– 66.

doi : 10.1177/000271625127700107 .

ISSN 0002-7162 .

JSTOR 1030252 .

S2CID 145485494 .

Stone Sweet, Alec; Bu, Chong; Zhuo, Ding (25 May 2023).

"Breaching the Taboo? Constitutional Dimensions of the New Chinese Civil Code" .

Asian Journal of Comparative Law .

18 (3): 319– 344.

doi : 10.1017/asjcl.2023.18 .

S2CID 258915998 .

Tang, Peter S. H. (February 1980). "The Soviet, Chinese and Albanian Constitutions: Ideological Divergence and Institutionalized Confrontation?".

Studies in Soviet Thought .

21 (1).

Springer Publishing : 39– 58.

doi : 10.1007/BF00832025 .

JSTOR 20098938.pdf .

S2CID 144486393 .

Quigley, John (Autumn 1989).

"Socialist Law and the Civil Law Tradition" (PDF) .

The American Journal of Comparative Law .

37 (4).

Oxford University Press : 781– 808.

doi : 10.2307/840224 .

JSTOR 840224 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 May 2018 . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

Books Åslund, Anders (2009).

How Ukraine Became a Market Economy and Democracy . Peterson Institute.

ISBN 9780881325461 – via Google Books .

Biddle, Jeff; Samuels, Warren; Davis, John (2006).

A Companion to the History of Economic Thought .

Wiley-Blackwell .

Blasko, Dennis (2006).

The Chinese Army Today: Tradition and Transformation for the 21st Century .

Routledge .

ISBN 9781135988777 .

Busky, Donald F. (20 July 2000).

Democratic Socialism: A Global Survey .

Praeger .

ISBN 978-0275968861 .

Dean, Jodi (2012).

The Communist Horizon .

Verso Books .

ISBN 9781844679546 .

Dimitrov, Vessellin (2006). "Bulgaria: A Core Against the Odds". In Dimitrov, Vessellin; Goetz, H. Klaus; Wollmann, Hellmut (eds.).

Governing after Communism: Institutions and Policymaking (2nd ed.).

Martinus Nijhoff Publishers . pp.

159– 203.

ISBN 9780742540095 .

Durlauf, Steven N.; Blume, Lawrence E., eds. (1987).

The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics Online .

Palgrave Macmillan .

doi : 10.1057/9780230226203.1570 .

Ellman, Michael (2007). "The Rise and Fall of Socialist Planning". In Estrin, Saul; Kołodko, Grzegorz W.; Uvalić, Milica (eds.).

Transition and Beyond: Essays in Honour of Mario Nuti . New York City: Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 9780230546974 .

Ellman, Michael (2014).

Socialist Planning (3rd ed.).

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 9781107427327 .

Evans, Daniel (1993).

Soviet Marxism–Leninism: The Decline of an Ideology .

ABC-CLIO .

ISBN 9780275947637 .

Feldbrugge, F. J. M. (1985). "Council of Ministers". In Feldbrugge, F. J. M.; Van den Berg, G. P.; Simons, William B. (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Soviet Law (2nd ed.).

Martinus Nijhoff Publishers . pp.

202– 204.

ISBN 1349060860 .

Frankowski, Stanisław; Stephan, Paul B. (1995).

Legal Reform in Post-Communist Europe: The View from Within . Martinus Nijhoff.

ISBN 9780792332183 – via Google Books .

Furtak, Robert K. (1987).

The Political Systems of the Socialist States . New York City: St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 9780312625276 .

Gardner, John; Schöpflin, George; White, Stephen (1987).

Communist Political Systems (2nd ed.).

Macmillan Education .

ISBN 0-333-44108-7 .

Getzler, Israel (2002) [1982].

Kronstadt 1917-1921: The Fate of a Soviet Democracy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0521894425 .

Gjevori, Elvin (2018).

Democratisation and Institutional Reform in Albania . Springer.

ISBN 9783319730714 – via Google Books .

Hajdú, József (2011).

Labour Law in Hungary . Kluwer Law International.

ISBN 9789041137920 .

Harding, Neil (1981). "What Does It Mean to Call a Regime Marxist?". In Szajkowski, Bogdan (ed.).

Marxist Governments . Vol. 1.

Palgrave Macmillan . pp.

22– 33.

ISBN 978-0-333-25704-3 .

Hazard, John (1985). "Constitutional Law". In Feldbrugge, F. J. M.; Van den Berg, G. P.; Simons, William B. (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Soviet Law (2nd ed.).

Martinus Nijhoff Publishers . pp.

162– 163.

ISBN 1349060860 .

Kendall, Diana (2011).

Sociology in Our Time: The Essentials .

Cengage Learning .

ISBN 9781111305505 .

Khabtagaeva, Bayarma (2009).

Mongolic Elements in Tuvan . Turcologica Series. Vol. 81. Otto Harrassowitz Verlag.

ISBN 9783447060950 – via Google Books .

Levy, David M.; Peart, Sandra J. (2008). "Socialist calculation debate".

The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics (Second ed.).

Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 978-0333786765 .

Li, He (2015).

Political Thought and China's Transformation: Ideas Shaping Reform in Post-Mao China . Springer.

ISBN 9781137427816 .

Li, Lin (2017).

Building the Rule of Law in China .

Elsevier .

ISBN 9780128119303 .

Lichtenstein, Nelson (2011).

American Capitalism: Social Thought and Political Economy in the Twentieth Century .

University of Pennsylvania Press .

ISBN 9780812202632 .

Loeber, Dietrich Andre (1984). "On the Status of the CPSU within the Soviet Legal System". In Simons, William; White, Stephen (eds.).

The Party Statutes of the Communist World .

Martinus Nijhoff Publishers . pp.

1– 22.

ISBN 9789024729753 .

Macdonald, Fiona; Stacey, Gillian; Steele, Philip (2004).

Peoples of Eastern Asia . Vol. 8: Mongolia–Nepal. Marshall Cavendish.

ISBN 9780761475477 – via Google Books .

Minahan, James (2013).

Miniature Empires: A Historical Dictionary of the Newly Independent States .

Routledge .

ISBN 9781135940102 – via Google Books .

Von Mises, Ludwig (1990).

Economic calculation in the Socialist Commonwealth (PDF) .

Mises Institute .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 September 2019 . Retrieved 11 November 2019 .

Müller-Rommel, Ferdinand; Mansfeldová, Zdenka (2001). "Chapter 5: Czech Republic". In Blondel, Jean; Müller-Rommel, Ferdinand (eds.).

Cabinets in Eastern Europe .

Palgrave Macmillan .

doi : 10.1057/9781403905215_6 .

ISBN 978-1-349-41148-1 .

Nelson, Daniel (1982). "Communist Legislatures and Communist Politics". In Nelson, Daniel; White, Stephen (eds.).

Communist Legislatures in Comparative Perspective . Vol. 1.

Palgrave Macmillan . pp.

1– 13.

ISBN 1349060860 .

Paquette, Laure (2001).

NATO and Eastern Europe After 2000: Strategic Interactions with Poland, the Czech Republic, Romania, and Bulgaria . Nova.

ISBN 9781560729693 – via Google Books .

Rosser, Barkley; Rosser, Marianne (2003).

Comparative Economics in a Transforming World Economy .

MIT Press .

ISBN 978-0262182348 .

Sloan, Pat (1937).

Soviet Democracy . London: Left Book Club; Victor Gollancz Ltd.

Staar, Richard (1988).

Communist Regimes in Eastern Europe (4th ed.).

Hoover Press .

ISBN 9780817976934 .

Stankova, Marietta (2014).

Bulgaria in British Foreign Policy, 1943–1949 . Anthem Series on Russian, East European and Eurasian Studies.

Anthem Press .

ISBN 9781783082353 – via Google Books .

Steele, David Ramsay (September 1999).

From Marx to Mises: Post Capitalist Society and the Challenge of Economic Calculation . Open Court.

ISBN 978-0875484495 .

Thayer, Carlyle (2008).

"Military Politics in Contemporary Vietnam" (PDF) . In Mietzner, Marcus (ed.).

The Political Resurgence of the Military in Southeast Asia: Conflict and Leadership .

Routledge .

ISBN 9780415460354 .

Triska, Jan, ed. (1968).

Constitution of the Communist-Party States .

Hoover Institution Publications .

ISBN 978-0817917012 .

Tunçer-Kılavuz, Idil (2014).

Power, Networks and Violent Conflict in Central Asia: A Comparison of Tajikistan and Uzbekistan . Routledge advances in Central Asian studies. Vol. 5.

Routledge .

ISBN 9781317805113 – via Google Books .

Tung, W. L. (2012).

The Political Institutions of Modern China (2nd ed.).

Springer Science & Business Media .

ISBN 9789401034432 .

Webb, Sidney; Webb, Beatrice (1935).

Soviet Communism: A New Civilisation?

. London: Longmans.

Wilczynski, J. (2008).

The Economics of Socialism after World War Two: 1945–1990 . Aldine Transaction.

ISBN 9780202362281 .

Wilhelm, John Howard (1985). "The Soviet Union Has an Administered, Not a Planned, Economy".

Soviet Studies .

37 (1): 118– 130.

doi : 10.1080/09668138508411571 .

Williams, Raymond (1983).

"Socialism" .

Keywords: A vocabulary of culture and society, revised edition .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-520469-8 .

News Christie, Caroline (24 January 2019).

"Exploring the rise of Soviet nostalgia in Russia" .

Document Journal . New York. Archived from the original on 29 March 2024 . Retrieved 29 March 2024 .

Milne, Seumas (12 September 2002).

"The battle for history" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 22 April 2020 .

Milne, Seumas (16 February 2006).

"Communism may be dead, but clearly not dead enough" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 22 April 2020 .

Morris, William (17 May 1890).

"The 'Eight Hours' and the Demonstration" .

Commonweal . Vol. 6, no. 227. p. 153 . Retrieved 4 November 2019 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

Other Ehms, Jule (2014).

"The Communist Horizon" .

Marx & Philosophy Review of Books .

Marx & Philosophy Society . Retrieved 22 April 2020 .

Wolff, Richard D.

(27 June 2015).

"Socialism Means Abolishing the Distinction Between Bosses and Employees" .

Truthout . Archived from the original on 11 March 2018 . Retrieved 29 January 2020 .

v t e Authoritarian and totalitarian forms of government Forms Absolute monarchy Autocracy Liberal Tsarist Communist state Counterintelligence state Dictatorship Benevolent Civilian Constitutional Dictablanda Grassroots Military Proletarian Right-wing Dominant-party system Illiberal democracy Totalitarian Libertarian authoritarianism Mafia state Managerial state Mediacracy Ochlocracy One-party state Oligarchy Police state Theocracy Islamic state Tyranny Majoritarian Soft Ideologies Authoritarian conservatism Chiangism Francoism Putinism Metaxism Authoritarian capitalism Pinochetism Authoritarian socialism Marxism–Leninism Stalinism Maoism Deng Xiaoping Theory Xi Jinping Thought Juche Despotism Enlightened Soft Ecoauthoritarianism Fascism Eco Neo Imperialism Nazism Neo Religious Caesaropapism Khomeinism Ziaism Shōwa Statism Techno See also Democracy indices Deep state Inverted totalitarianism Personality Leadership style Left-wing Right-wing Social dominance orientation Statism Strongman List of totalitarian states v t e Socialism by country By country Argentina Australia New Australia Bangladesh Brazil Lulism Canada China Communist since 1978 Kuomintang Hong Kong Estonia Ethiopia Finland France Greece India Iran Italy Libya Netherlands New Zealand Pakistan Sri Lanka Sweden Tunisia United Kingdom Corbynism United States African-American Venezuela Chavismo Vietnam History United Kingdom United States Regional variants African Arab British Burmese Chinese European Israeli Melanesian Nicaraguan Tanzanian Venezuelan Vietnamese Current and historical socialist states Africa Angola Benin Burkina Faso Congo-Brazzaville Egypt Ethiopia 1974–1987 1987–1991 Guinea Libya Madagascar Mozambique Seychelles Somalia Sudan Americas Barbados Cuba Grenada Chile Nicaragua Asia Afghanistan Burma Cambodia 1975–1979 1979–1992 1982–1992 China Iraq North Korea Laos Mongolia South Yemen Syria Tuva Vietnam North Vietnam Short-lived Azerbaijan People's Government East Turkestan Far East Fujian Gilan Inner Mongolia Jiangxi Kuwait Kurdish Republic of Mahabad North Korea (1946–1947) North Korea (1947–1948) Democratic Republic of Yemen South Vietnam Europe Albania Bulgaria Czechoslovakia Czech Republic Slovakia East Germany Hungary (1949–1989) Poland Romania Soviet Union Yugoslavia Short-lived Alsace-Lorraine Banat Baranya–Baja Bavaria 1918–1919 1919 Bessarabia Byelorussia (1919) Bremen Bihać Crimea (1919) Finland 1918 1939–1940 Estonia (1918–1919) Galicia Hungary (1919) Ireland Naissaar Saxony Slovakia (1919) Tarnobrzeg Užice Würzburg Brussels Soldiers' Council History of socialism v t e Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Anti-imperialism Anti-fascism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type economic planning Commanding heights of the economy Developed socialism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Labour aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism Partiinost' People's democracy People's democratic revolution Popular front Proletarian internationalism Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Theory of the productive forces Third Period Wars of national liberation State forms People's democratic state National democratic state Socialist state State of socialist orientation Socialist state of the whole people Class system Dictatorship of the proletariat People's democratic dictatorship Political system Party Central committee General Secretary of the Communist Party Politburo Secretariat Vanguardism State Permanent organ of the supreme state organ of power Special committees of the supreme state organ of power Supreme executive and administrative organ Supreme state organ of power Leading role of the party Transmission belt Unified power Unified state apparatus Hybrid Civilian control of the military Collective leadership Cult of personality Democratic centralism Variants Cuban ( Fidelismo Guevarism ) Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche ( Songun Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism Kimjongunism ) Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism ( Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Naxalism Prachanda Path Mao-spontex Islamic Maoism Pantherism ( Intercommunalism ) New Synthesis Mulelism ) Kaysone Phomvihane Thought National Pol Potism African ( Sankarism Machelism Nkrumaism ) Socialism with Chinese characteristics ( Dengism Three Represents Scientific Outlook on Development Xi Jinping Thought ) Stalinism ( Neo-Stalinism ) People's Multiparty Democracy American ( Bill of Rights socialism Browderism Marcyism New Communism ) Dubčekism Zachariadism Brezhnevism Taistoism Titoism ( Đilasism Rankovićism ) People Joseph Stalin Mao Zedong John Maclean James Connolly Ernst Thälmann Khorloogiin Choibalsan Ehmetjan Qasim José Díaz Maurice Thorez Palmiro Togliatti Dolores Ibárruri Harry Pollitt Rajani Palme Dutt Ho Chi Minh Võ Nguyên Giáp Earl Browder Nikita Khrushchev Walter Ulbricht Josip Broz Tito Mátyás Rákosi Lazar Kaganovich Georgi Dimitrov Bolesław Bierut Willie Gallacher Valko Chervenkov Klement Gottwald Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej Enver Hoxha Kaysone Phomvihane Khalid Bakdash Leonid Brezhnev Deng Xiaoping Pol Pot Nikos Zachariadis Che Guevara Fidel Castro Agostinho Neto Mengistu Haile Mariam Kim Il Sung Chin Peng Sanzō Nosaka Nicolae Ceaușescu Gustáv Husák János Kádár Maurice Bishop Erich Honecker Władysław Gomułka Samora Machel Thomas Sankara Mathieu Kérékou Siad Barre Nur Muhammad Taraki Alfonso Cano Pushpa Kamal Dahal Rohana Wijeweera Abimael Guzmán Gus Hall Gennady Zyuganov Xi Jinping Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism Dialectical and Historical Materialism The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) Britain's Road to Socialism Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR A Critique of Soviet Economics Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism Guerrilla Warfare History Soviet Union ( 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 ) Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Communist Revolution China ( 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present ) Tito–Stalin split Korean War De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Albanian–Soviet split Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black Power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency New People's Army rebellion Maoist insurgency in Turkey Sino-Albanian split Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Revolutions of 1989 By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia ( Democratic Kampuchea People's Republic of Kampuchea ) China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia ( Czechia Slovakia ) East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia Soviet Union ( Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan ) Vietnam Yemen Yugoslavia ( Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia ) Organizations Albanian Party of Labour Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Brazil Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of India (Marxist) Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Philippines Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam Communist Party of Malaya Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Shining Path ( Militarized Communist Party of Peru ) Workers' Party of Korea Portuguese Communist Party Related topics Bolshevism Leninism Trotskyism See also All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism ( Mass killings ) Cold War Crimes against humanity under Marxist–Leninist regimes ( Mass killings ) Criticism of Marxist–Leninist party rule MAGA Communism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism New class Post-Marxism–Leninism Red fascism Red Scare ( Second ) Second World State capitalism State socialism State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Socialism portal Communism portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9m2md
Cached time: 20250816130733
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.265 seconds
Real time usage: 2.531 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 25800/1000000
Revision size: 134650/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 558209/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 24392/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 602345/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.387/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 11245084/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2048.506      1 -total
 26.98%  552.702      1 Template:Reflist
 26.42%  541.282    235 Template:Sfn
 21.57%  441.867     82 Template:Cite_book
  9.31%  190.656     34 Template:Cite_journal
  6.12%  125.365      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  5.97%  122.205      1 Template:Marxism–Leninism_sidebar
  3.81%   78.069      1 Template:Short_description
  3.18%   65.112      6 Template:Fix
  3.06%   62.598    259 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:215623:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816130733 and revision id 1305318404. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Communist_state&oldid=1305318404 " Categories : Communist states Authoritarianism Communism Dictatorship Maoism Marxism–Leninism Socialism Totalitarianism Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2025 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use British English from December 2020 Use dmy dates from December 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2020 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from March 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1: long volume value This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 10:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Communist state 42 languages Add topic

