Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Overview 3 Differences among schools 4 Schools 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Literary theory 54 languages Afrikaans العربية অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Magyar Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Systematic study of the nature of literature This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Literary theory" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Literature Oral literature Folklore fable fairy tale folk play folksong heroic epic legend myth proverb Oration Performance audiobook spoken word Saying Major written forms Book Drama closet drama Poetry lyric narrative Prose Nonsense verse Ergodic Electronic Long prose fiction Anthology Serial Novel / romance Short prose fiction Novella Novelette Short story Drabble Sketch Flash fiction Parable Religious Wisdom Prose genres Fiction Children's Encyclopedic Genre action adventure coming-of-age crime erotic fantasy horror military paranormal romance science fiction supernatural western Historical Realist Speculative Non-fiction Academic history philosophy Anecdote Epistle Essay Journalism Letter Life Nature Persuasive Travelogue Poetry genres Narrative Children Epic Dramatic Verse novel National Lyric Ballad Elegy Epigram Ghazal Haiku Hymn Limerick Ode Qasida Sonnet Villanelle Lists Epic Groups and movements Poets Dramatic genres Comedy Libretto Play historical moral Satire Script Tragedy Tragicomedy History Ancient Classical Medieval Modernist Postmodern Lists and outlines Outline Glossary Books Writers Movements Cycles Literary awards poetry Short story collection Lost literary work Lacuna Theory and criticism Sociology Magazines Composition Language Narrative Feud Estate Literature portal v t e Literary theory is the systematic study of the nature of literature and of the methods for literary analysis .

[ 1 ] Since the 19th century, literary scholarship includes literary theory and considerations of intellectual history , moral philosophy, social philosophy, and interdisciplinary themes relevant to how people interpret meaning .

[ 1 ] In the humanities in modern academia, the latter style of literary scholarship is an offshoot of post-structuralism .

[ 2 ] Consequently, the word theory became an umbrella term for scholarly approaches to reading texts , some of which are informed by strands of semiotics , cultural studies , philosophy of language , and continental philosophy , often witnessed within Western canon along with some postmodernist theory.

History [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( January 2024 ) The practice of literary theory became a profession in the 20th century, but it has historical roots that run as far back as ancient Greece ( Aristotle 's Poetics is an often cited early example), ancient India ( Bharata Muni 's Natya Shastra ), and ancient Rome ( Longinus 's On the Sublime ). In medieval times, scholars in the Middle East ( Al-Jahiz 's al-Bayan wa-'l-tabyin and al-Hayawan , and ibn al-Mu'tazz 's Kitab al-Badi ) [ 3 ] and Europe [ 4 ] continued to produce works based on literary studies. The aesthetic theories of philosophers from ancient philosophy through the 18th and 19th centuries are important influences on current literary study. The theory and criticism of literature are tied to the history of literature .

Some scholars, both theoretical and anti-theoretical, refer to the 1980s and 1990s debates on the academic merits of theory as "the theory wars ".

[ 5 ] Proponents and critics of the turn to theory take different (and often conflicting) positions about what counts as a theory or what it means to theorize within/about/alongside literature or other cultural creations.

[ 6 ] Overview [ edit ] One of the fundamental questions of literary theory is "what is literature ?" and "how should or do we read?". Some contemporary theorists and literary scholars believe either that  "literature" cannot be defined or that it can refer to any use of language . Specific theories are distinguished not only by their methods and conclusions, but even by how they create meaning in a " text ". However, some theorists acknowledge that these texts do not have a singular, fixed meaning which is deemed "correct".

[ 7 ] Since theorists of literature often draw on very heterogeneous traditions of Continental philosophy and the philosophy of language , any classification of their approaches is only an approximation. There are many types of literary theory, which take different approaches to texts. Broad schools of theory that have historically been important include historical and biographical criticism , New Criticism , formalism , Russian formalism , and structuralism , post-structuralism , Marxism or historical materialism , feminism and French feminism , post-colonialism , new historicism , deconstruction , reader-response criticism , narratology and psychoanalytic criticism.

Differences among schools [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( May 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The different interpretive and epistemological perspectives of different schools of theory often arise from, and so give support to, different moral and political commitments. For instance, the work of the New Critics often contained an implicit moral dimension, and sometimes even a religious one: a New Critic might read a poem by T. S. Eliot or Gerard Manley Hopkins for its degree of honesty in expressing the torment and contradiction of a serious search for belief in the modern world. Meanwhile, a Marxist critic might find such judgments merely ideological rather than critical; the Marxist would say that the New Critical reading did not keep enough. Or a post-structuralist critic might simply avoid the issue by understanding the religious meaning of a poem as an allegory of meaning, treating the poem's references to "God" by discussing their referential nature rather than what they refer to.

Such a disagreement cannot be easily resolved, because it is inherent in the radically different terms and goals (that is, the theories) of the critics. Their theories of reading derive from vastly different intellectual traditions: the New Critic bases his work on an East-Coast American scholarly and religious tradition, while the Marxist derives his thought from a body of critical social and economic thought, the post-structuralist's work emerges from twentieth-century Continental philosophy of language.

In the late 1950s, the Canadian literary critic Northrop Frye attempted to establish an approach for reconciling historical criticism and New Criticism while addressing concerns of early reader-response and numerous psychological and social approaches. His approach, laid out in his Anatomy of Criticism , was explicitly structuralist, relying on the assumption of an intertextual "order of words" and universality of certain structural types. His approach held sway in English literature programs for several decades but lost favor during the ascendance of post-structuralism.

For some theories of literature (especially certain kinds of formalism), the distinction between "literary" and other sorts of texts is of paramount importance. Other schools (particularly post-structuralism in its various forms: new historicism, deconstruction, some strains of Marxism and feminism) have sought to break down distinctions between the two and have applied the tools of textual interpretation to a wide range of "texts", including film, non-fiction, historical writing, and even cultural events.

Mikhail Bakhtin argued that the "utter inadequacy" of literary theory is evident when it is forced to deal with the novel ; while other genres are fairly stabilized, the novel is still developing.

[ 8 ] Another crucial distinction among the various theories of literary interpretation is intentionality, the amount of weight given to the author's own opinions about and intentions for a work. For most pre-20th century approaches, the author's intentions are a guiding factor and an important determiner of the "correct" interpretation of texts. The New Criticism was the first school to disavow the role of the author in interpreting texts, preferring to focus on "the text itself" in a close reading . In fact, as much contention as there is between formalism and later schools, they share the tenet that the author's interpretation of a work is no more inherently meaningful than any other.

Artificial intelligence writing has created new opportunities for examining literature, as N. Katherine Hayles ' work, Bacteria to AI points out.

[ 9 ] Hayles calls for using "literary-critical techniques" to analyze meanings from AI-derived texts, such as ChatGPT .

[ 10 ] Ethical literary criticism also employs scientific methods to study how literature is created and to examine ethical implications of AI creating literature.

[ 11 ] Schools [ edit ] Listed below are some of the most commonly identified schools of literary theory, along with their major authors: Aestheticism – associated with Romanticism , a philosophy defining aesthetic value as the primary goal in understanding literature. This includes both literary critics who have tried to understand and/or identify aesthetic values and those like Oscar Wilde who have stressed art for art's sake .

Oscar Wilde , Walter Pater , Harold Bloom African-American literary theory American pragmatism and other American approaches Harold Bloom , Stanley Fish , Richard Rorty Cognitive literary theory – applies research in cognitive science and philosophy of mind to the study of literature and culture.

Frederick Luis Aldama , Mary Thomas Crane, Nancy Easterlin, William Flesch, David Herman, Suzanne Keen , Patrick Colm Hogan, Alan Richardson, Ellen Spolsky , Blakey Vermeule , Lisa Zunshine Cambridge criticism – close examination of the literary text and the relation of literature to social issues I.A. Richards , F.R. Leavis , Q.D. Leavis , William Empson .

Critical race theory Cultural studies – emphasizes the role of literature in everyday life Raymond Williams , Dick Hebdige , and Stuart Hall ( British Cultural Studies ); Max Horkheimer and Theodor Adorno ; Michel de Certeau ; also Paul Gilroy , John Guillory Darwinian literary studies – situates literature in the context of evolution and natural selection Deconstruction – a strategy of "close" reading that elicits the ways that key terms and concepts may be paradoxical or self-undermining, rendering their meaning undecidable Jacques Derrida , Paul de Man , J. Hillis Miller , Philippe Lacoue-Labarthe , Gayatri Spivak , Avital Ronell Descriptive poetics Brian McHale Feminist literary criticism Eco-criticism – explores cultural connections and human relationships to the natural world Gender (see feminist literary criticism ) – which emphasizes themes of gender relations Luce Irigaray , Judith Butler , Hélène Cixous , Julia Kristeva , Elaine Showalter Formalism – a school of literary criticism and literary theory having mainly to do with structural purposes of a particular text German hermeneutics and philology Friedrich Schleiermacher , Wilhelm Dilthey , Hans-Georg Gadamer , Erich Auerbach , René Wellek Marxism (see Marxist literary criticism ) – which emphasizes themes of class conflict Georg Lukács , Valentin Voloshinov , Raymond Williams , Terry Eagleton , Fredric Jameson , Theodor Adorno , Walter Benjamin Narratology New Criticism – looks at literary works on the basis of what is written, and not at the goals of the author or biographical issues W. K. Wimsatt , F. R. Leavis , John Crowe Ransom , Cleanth Brooks , Robert Penn Warren New historicism – which examines the work through its historical context and seeks to understand cultural and intellectual history through literature Stephen Greenblatt , Louis Montrose , Jonathan Goldberg , H. Aram Veeser Postcolonialism – focuses on the influences of colonialism in literature, especially regarding the historical conflict resulting from the exploitation of less developed countries and indigenous peoples by Western nations Edward Said , Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak , Homi Bhabha and Declan Kiberd Postmodernism – criticism of the conditions present in the twentieth century, often with concern for those viewed as social deviants or the Other Michel Foucault , Roland Barthes , Gilles Deleuze , Félix Guattari and Maurice Blanchot Post-structuralism – a catch-all term for various theoretical approaches (such as deconstruction ) that criticize or go beyond Structuralism 's aspirations to create a rational science of culture by extrapolating the model of linguistics to other discursive and aesthetic formations Roland Barthes , Michel Foucault , Julia Kristeva Psychoanalysis (see psychoanalytic literary criticism ) – explores the role of consciousnesses and the unconscious in literature including that of the author, reader, and characters in the text Sigmund Freud , Jacques Lacan , Harold Bloom , Slavoj Žižek , Viktor Tausk Queer theory – examines, questions, and criticizes the role of gender identity and sexuality in literature Judith Butler , Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick , Michel Foucault Reader-response criticism – focuses upon the active response of the reader to a text Louise Rosenblatt , Wolfgang Iser , Norman Holland , Hans-Robert Jauss , Stuart Hall Realist James Wood Russian formalism Victor Shklovsky , Vladimir Propp Structuralism and semiotics (see semiotic literary criticism ) – examines the universal underlying structures in a text, the linguistic units in a text and how the author conveys meaning through any structures Ferdinand de Saussure , Roman Jakobson , Claude Lévi-Strauss , Roland Barthes , Mikhail Bakhtin , Juri Lotman , Umberto Eco , Jacques Ehrmann , Northrop Frye and morphology of folklore Other theorists: Robert Graves , Alamgir Hashmi , John Sutherland , Leslie Fiedler , Kenneth Burke , Paul Bénichou , Barbara Johnson See also [ edit ] Literature portal Poetry portal Communication theory List of literary terms List of literary movements Dramatic theory Critical theory Literary criticism Janet C. Richards Text (literary theory) School of Resentment Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Culler 1997, p.1 ^ Searle, John . (1990), "The Storm Over the University" , The New York Review of Books , December 6, 1990.

^ van Gelder, G. J. H. (1982), Beyond the Line: Classical Arabic Literary Critics on the Coherence and Unity of the Poem , Brill Publishers , pp.

1– 2, ISBN 90-04-06854-6 ^ Johnson, Eleanor (2013).

Practicing Literary Theory in the Middle Ages: Ethics and the Mixed Form in Chaucer, Gower, Usk, and Hoccleve . University of Chicago Press. pp.

1– 15.

ISBN 9780226015989 .

^ Mark Bevir, Jill Hargis, Sara Rushing, "Introduction", in: Mark Bevir, Jill Hargis, Sara Rushing (eds.), Histories of Postmodernism , Routledge, 2020.

^ "Literary Theory | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

^ Sullivan, Patrick (2002-01-01). " "Reception Moments," Modern Literary Theory, and the Teaching of Literature".

Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy .

45 (7): 568– 577.

JSTOR 40012241 .

^ Bakhtin 1981, p.8 ^ Mackereth, Kerry (2025-06-09).

"Symbiosis From Bacteria to AI with N. Katherine Hayles" .

The Good Robot . Retrieved 2025-07-31 .

^ Hayles, Nancy Katherine (2025).

Bacteria to AI: Human Futures with Our Nonhuman Symbionts (1st ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 156.

ISBN 978-0-226-83747-5 .

^ Hongbo, Lyu; Wenkai, Fang (September 2024).

"AI Turn in Ethical Literary Criticism" (PDF) .

Interdisciplinary Studies of Literature .

8 (3).

References [ edit ] Peter Barry .

Beginning Theory: An Introduction to Literary and Cultural Theory .

ISBN 0-7190-6268-3 .

Jonathan Culler . (1997) Literary Theory: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-285383-X .

Terry Eagleton .

Literary Theory: An Introduction .

ISBN 0-8166-1251-X .

Terry Eagleton.

After Theory .

ISBN 0-465-01773-8 .

Jean-Michel Rabaté.

The Future of Theory .

ISBN 0-631-23013-0 .

The Johns Hopkins Guide to Literary Theory and Criticism .

ISBN 0-8018-4560-2 .

Modern Criticism and Theory: A Reader.

Ed.

David Lodge and Nigel Wood. 2nd Ed.

ISBN 0-582-31287-6 Theory's Empire: An Anthology of Dissent.

Ed.

Daphne Patai and Will H. Corral.

ISBN 0-231-13417-7 .

Bakhtin, M. M.

(1981) The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays . Ed. Michael Holquist. Trans.

Caryl Emerson and Michael Holquist. Austin and London: University of Texas Press.

René Wellek .

A History of Modern Criticism: 1750–1950 . Yale University Press, 1955–1992, 8 volumes.

Further reading [ edit ] Carroll, Joseph (2012) [2007].

"Evolutionary approaches to literature & drama" . In Dunbar, Robin ; Barrett, Louise (eds.).

Oxford Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology . Oxford University Press. pp.

637– 648.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198568308.013.0044 .

ISBN 978-0-19-856830-8 . Retrieved 2020-05-13 .

Castle, Gregory.

Blackwell Guide to Literary Theory . Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2007.

Culler, Jonathan.

The Literary in Theory . Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2007.

Terry Eagleton .

Literary Theory . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2008. ( http://www.upress.umn.edu/ ) Literary Theory: An Anthology . Edited by Julie Rivkin and Michael Ryan. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2004.

Lisa Zunshine , ed.

Introduction to Cognitive Cultural Studies . Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2010 Writing: what for and for whom. The joys and travails of the artist , edited by Ralf van Bühren . Rome: EDUSC, 2024.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Literary theory .

Aristotle's Poetics (350 BCE) A translation By S. H. Butcher Longinus's On the Sublime (1st century CE) A translation By H. L. Havell Sir Philip Sidney's Defence of Poesie (1595) Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy : "Literary Theory" , by Vince Brewton Introduction to Modern Literary Theory "A Bibliography of Literary Theory, Criticism and Philology", by José Ángel García Landa Annotated bibliography on literary theory The Litcrit Toolkit Critical Literary Theory Purdue OWL Johns Hopkins Guide to Literary Theory & Criticism v t e Literary criticism Literary theory Archetypal criticism Biographical criticism Chicago school Cultural materialism Darwinian criticism Deconstruction Descriptive poetics Ecocriticism Feminist criticism Formalism Geneva school Geocriticism Marxist criticism New Criticism New historicism Postcolonial criticism Postcritique Psychoanalytic criticism Reader-response criticism Russian formalism Semiotic criticism Sociological criticism Source criticism Thing theory Theorists and critics Plato Aristotle Horace Longinus Plotinus St. Augustine Boethius Aquinas Dante Boccaccio de Pizan Valmiki Lu Ji Sidney Tasso Bacon Hobbes Corneille Dryden Boileau-Despréaux Locke Pope Addison Vico Burke (Edmund) Hume Johnson Young Lessing Reynolds Diderot Kant Wollstonecraft Blake Schiller Schlegel Wordsworth de Staël Schelling Coleridge von Humboldt Keats Schopenhauer Peacock Shelley von Goethe Hegel Leopardi De Sanctis Carlyle Mill Emerson Sainte-Beuve Lowell Poe Arnold Taine Baudelaire Marx Kierkegaard Nietzsche Pater Zola France Wilde Mallarmé Tolstoy Croce Gramsci Eco Freud de Saussure Lévi-Strauss Hulme Benjamin Shklovsky Eliot Jung Trotsky Woolf Richards Bakhtin Bataille Ransom Lacan Lukács Valéry Burke (Kenneth) Cassirer Brooks Mukařovský Sartre de Beauvoir Adorno Jakobson Frye Bachelard Gombrich Heidegger Chomsky Derrida Barthes Foucault Poulet Williams Trilling Kristeva de Man Bloom Achebe Said Deleuze Guattari Girard Cixous Iser White Gadamer Ricoeur Abrams Geertz Marinetti Tzara Breton Loy de Andrade Hu Paz Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐mxbm7
Cached time: 20250812020039
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.416 seconds
Real time usage: 0.564 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1878/1000000
Revision size: 19940/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 81605/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2146/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 86871/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.263/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7503340/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  460.553      1 -total
 22.19%  102.174      1 Template:Reflist
 17.12%   78.847      1 Template:Wikiquote
 16.88%   77.758      1 Template:Sister_project
 16.87%   77.703      1 Template:Literature
 16.64%   76.638      1 Template:Side_box
 13.03%   60.004      1 Template:Citation
 10.86%   50.006      1 Template:Short_description
 10.21%   47.010      3 Template:Ambox
  9.84%   45.306      1 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:51119:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812020039 and revision id 1303735786. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Literary_theory&oldid=1303735786 " Categories : Literary theory Interpretation (philosophy) Communication theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2009 All articles needing additional references Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles to be expanded from January 2024 All articles to be expanded Articles that may contain original research from May 2012 All articles that may contain original research This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 19:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Literary theory 54 languages Add topic

