Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Printed media Toggle Printed media subsection 1.1 Newspaper 1.2 Magazines 1.3 Books 2 Electronic media Toggle Electronic media subsection 2.1 Telegraph 2.2 Radio 3 References Toggle the table of contents Media coverage of tropical cyclones Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on Wikipedia .

See Wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions.

( September 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Tropical cyclones Outline Media coverage Structure Central dense overcast Development Eye Effects By region Warnings and watches Storm surge Preparedness Response Climatology and tracking Basins Climate change effects RSMCs Scales Observation Forecasting Rainfall forecasting Rainfall climatology Track forecasting Naming History List of historical names Lists of retired names: Atlantic , Pacific hurricane , Pacific typhoon , Philippine , Australian , South Pacific Tropical cyclones portal v t e Media coverage of tropical cyclones has been carried out in various ways over the past centuries. The passages of hurricanes , typhoons , cyclones , and tropical storms have been reported through newspapers , word of mouth , and telegraph .

Since the early to mid-20th century, technological advances have included radio , television , newsreel footage shown in theaters, mass media , and more recently, the internet . Internet coverage encompasses blogs and online news sites that report data on tropical cyclones.

This article covers the various methods by which the media report tropical cyclones and their effects.

Printed media [ edit ] Newspaper [ edit ] Newspaper reports on tropical cyclones and their effects have been in existence since the days before advances in communication in the mid–19th century. Local and national newspapers, such as the New York Times and the Washington Post , have reported the passage of tropical cyclones and their effects.

News agencies , including the Associated Press , Reuters , and United Press International , also report on the passage and effects of tropical cyclones.

Magazines [ edit ] Magazines publish stories written about tropical cyclones either during or after the event. Certain magazines permit more freedom in narrative structure, allowing articles to explore different aspects of a tropical cyclone. In the early years, reports on tropical cyclones were written in news magazines like Time [ 1 ] or in magazines pertaining to science and meteorology like Weatherwise , Monthly Weather Review , and National Geographic .

[ 2 ] However, in the 21st century, coverage of tropical cyclones and their effects has been featured in a wider range of magazines, including Vanity Fair [ 3 ] and Forbes .

[ 4 ] Books [ edit ] Books have been written about tropical cyclones in general, as well as the history of specific tropical cyclones, such as the 1900 Galveston Hurricane or Hurricane Katrina . These books are written by professional meteorologists, scientists, and ordinary people. Some notable examples of books about tropical cyclones include Issac's Storm [ 5 ] and Florida Hurricanes History.

[ 6 ] Electronic media [ edit ] Telegraph [ edit ] Before the invention of the radio , electronic media coverage of tropical cyclones was limited to the telegraph , which was invented in 1839. A notable example of telegraph coverage of tropical cyclones occurred during the 1900 Galveston Hurricane [ 7 ] Radio [ edit ] Along with the telegraph , radio was also used to cover tropical cyclones. This practice began as early as the 1900s.

WX4NHC , an amateur radio station operated by the National Hurricane Center , serves as an example.

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ Time (1955).

"Hurricanes Way" . Archived from the original on December 15, 2008 . Retrieved 2007-06-22 .

^ NPPA (2006).

"NPPA Photojournalism awards 2006" . Archived from the original on 2009-10-09 . Retrieved 2007-06-22 .

^ Douglas Brinkley (2006).

"How New Orleans Drowned" . Retrieved 2007-06-22 .

^ Matthew Swibel (2007).

"Road Map To Disaster" .

Forbes . Archived from the original on May 8, 2014 . Retrieved 2007-06-22 .

^ Random House (1999).

"Random House book archive" . Retrieved 2007-06-22 .

^ Jay Barnes (2007).

"Jay Barnes on Hurricanes" . Archived from the original on 2008-09-07 . Retrieved 2007-06-22 .

^ Random House (1999).

"Random House book archive" . Retrieved 2007-06-25 .

^ Florida International University (2008).

"WX4NHC Homepage" . Retrieved 2008-04-24 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Media_coverage_of_tropical_cyclones&oldid=1221157251 " Categories : Environmental mass media Tropical cyclones Media coverage and representation Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles with style issues from September 2017 All articles with style issues This page was last edited on 28 April 2024, at 06:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Media coverage of tropical cyclones Add languages Add topic

