Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Logical view Toggle Logical view subsection 2.1 Apprehension 2.2 Judgment 2.3 Inference 3 Developmental view 4 Psychometric view 5 Cognitive view 6 Systems view 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Mental operations 2 languages Español فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mental operations Approaches and Types Logical Apprehension Judgement Inference Piagetian Seriation Transitivity Classification Decentering Reversibility Conservation Psychometric Cognition Memory Divergent production Convergent production Evaluation Cognitive Attentional focalization Attentional discarding Spatial basic operating scheme Representation Comparison Operations of memory Temporal basic operating scheme Systemic Cognitive operations Practical operations Affective operations Expressive operations Perceptual-motor operations Regulative operations Writers Pierre Janet Jean Piaget Joy Paul Guilford Silvio Ceccato Giulio Benedetti Codrin Stefan Tapu Psychology portal Mental operations are operations that affect mental contents. Initially, operations of reasoning have been the object of logic alone.

Pierre Janet was one of the first to use the concept in psychology. Mental operations have been investigated at a developmental level by Jean Piaget , and from a psychometric perspective by J. P. Guilford . There is also a cognitive approach to the subject, as well as a systems view of it.

History [ edit ] Since Antiquity , mental operations, more precisely, formal operations of reasoning have been the object of logic .

[ 1 ] In 1903, Pierre Janet described two types of mental operations: [ 2 ] reality operations – mental operations under the control of logic; disinterested operations – escaping the control of reason.

Jean Piaget differentiated a preoperational stage , and operational stages of cognitive development , on the basis of presence of mental operations as an adaptation tool.

[ 3 ] J. P. Guilford's Structure of Intellect model described up to 180 different intellectual abilities organized along three dimensions—Operations, Content, and Products.

[ 4 ] Logical view [ edit ] According to most logicians, the three primary mental operations are apprehension (understanding) , judgement , and inference .

[ 1 ] Apprehension [ edit ] Apprehension is the mental operation by which an idea is formed in the mind. If you were to think of a sunset or a baseball, the action of forming that picture in your mind is apprehension. The verbal expression of apprehension is called a term.

Judgment [ edit ] Judgment is the mental operation by which we predicate something of a subject. Were you to think, "That sunset is beautiful" or "Baseball is the all-American sport" is to make a judgment. The verbal expression of judgment is the statement (or proposition).

Inference [ edit ] Inference (or reasoning) is the mental operation by which we draw conclusions from other information. If you were to think, "I like to look at that sunset, because I enjoy beautiful things, and that sunset is beautiful" you would be reasoning. The verbal expression of reasoning is the logical argument.

[ 1 ] Developmental view [ edit ] Jean Piaget identifies several mental operations of the concrete operational stage of cognitive development : [ 3 ] Mental operations according to Jean Piaget.

Seriation —the ability to sort objects in an order according to size, shape, or any other characteristic. For example, if given different-shaded objects they may make a color gradient.

Transitivity —The ability to recognize logical relationships among elements in a serial order, and perform 'transitive inferences' (for example, If A is taller than B, and B is taller than C, then A must be taller than C).

Classification —the ability to name and identify sets of objects according to appearance, size or other characteristic, including the idea that one set of objects can include another.

Decentering —where the child takes into account multiple aspects of a problem to solve it. For example, the child will no longer perceive an exceptionally wide but short cup to contain less than a normally-wide, taller cup.

Reversibility —the child understands that numbers or objects can be changed, then returned to their original state. For this reason, a child will be able to rapidly determine that if 4+4 equals t, t−4 will equal 4, the original quantity.

Conservation —understanding that quantity, length or number of items is unrelated to the arrangement or appearance of the object or items.

Piaget also describes a formal operational stage , with formal operations of abstract thinking : hypothesizing, hypothesis testing, and deduction .

[ 3 ] Psychometric view [ edit ] Guilford's Structure of Intellect According to J. P. Guilford 's Structure of Intellect (SI) theory, an individual's performance on intelligence tests can be traced back to the underlying mental abilities or factors of intelligence. SI theory comprises multiple intellectual abilities organized along three dimensions—Operations, Content, and Products.

[ 5 ] Operations dimension SI includes six operations or general intellectual processes: Cognition—The ability to understand, comprehend, discover, and become aware of information.

Memory recording—The ability to encode information.

Memory retention—The ability to recall information.

Divergent production—The ability to generate multiple solutions to a problem; creativity.

Convergent production—The ability to deduce a single solution to a problem; rule-following or problem-solving.

Evaluation—The ability to judge whether or not information is accurate, consistent, or valid.

Content dimension SI includes five broad areas of information to which the human intellect applies the six operations: Visual—Information perceived through seeing.

Auditory—Information perceived through hearing.

Kinesthetic -through actions Symbolic—Information perceived as symbols or signs that have no meaning by themselves; e.g., Arabic numerals or the letters of an alphabet.

Semantic—Information perceived in words or sentences, whether oral, written, or silently in one's mind.

Behavioral—Information perceived as acts of people.

Product dimension As the name suggests, this dimension contains results of applying particular operations to specific contents. The SI model includes six products, in increasing complexity: Units—Single items of knowledge.

Classes—Sets of units sharing common attributes.

Relations—Units linked as opposites or in associations, sequences, or analogies.

Systems—Multiple relations interrelated to comprise structures or networks.

Transformations—Changes, perspectives, conversions, or mutations to knowledge.

Implications—Predictions, inferences, consequences, or anticipations of knowledge.

Therefore, according to Guilford there are 6 x 5 x 6 = 180 intellectual abilities or factors. Each ability stands for a particular operation in a particular content area and results in a specific product, such as Comprehension of Figural Units or Evaluation of Semantic Implications.

[ 4 ] Cognitive view [ edit ] Mental operations: cognitive view.

Following on the footsteps of Silvio Ceccato, [ 6 ] Giulio Benedetti describes several types of mental operations: [ 7 ] attentional focalization – focusing attention on something; attentional discarding – stopping our attention on an object; spatial basic operating scheme (attentional movement) – passing attention from one part to another of the attentional field; operation of representation – evoking a mental image; operation of comparison ; operations of memory ; temporal basic operating scheme – variation of attentional focalization.

Systems view [ edit ] Mental operations: systems view.

Taking into account all mental processes , the following types of mental operations have been described: [ 8 ] cognitive operations – production and verbalization of images and thoughts; practical operations, pertaining to executive functions ; affective operations – affective evaluation of the world and self ; expressive operations ( emotional expression ); perceptual-motor operations (e.g., eye–hand coordination ); regulative operations – verbalization of needs, motives and feelings, and self-control .

See also [ edit ] Logical connective Mental event Mental process Mental rotation References [ edit ] ^ a b c Hobhouse, LT (2005).

The Theory of Knowledge: A Contribution to Some Problems of Logic and Metaphysics , Kessinger Publishing, p. 223.

ISBN 978-1-4179-6206-8 .

^ Valsiner, Jaan; van der Veer, René (2000).

The social mind: construction of the idea.

Cambridge University Press, pp. 103-106.

ISBN 0-521-58973-8 .

^ a b c Ginsburg, Herbert; Opper, Sylvia (1979).

Piaget's Theory of Intellectual Development.

Prentice Hall, p. 152.

ISBN 0-13-675140-7 .

^ a b Guilford, Joy Paul (1980). Some changes in the structure of intellect model.

Educational and Psychological Measurement 48 : 1-4.

^ Guilford, Joy Paul (1950). Creativity.

American Psychologist 5 (9): 444-454.

^ Ceccato, Silvio (1961).

Linguistic Analysis and Programming for Mechanical Translation . G. Feltrinelli.

^ Benedetti, Giulio (2005).

"Basic mental operations which make up mental categories" (PDF).

www.mind-consciousness-language.com ^ Tapu, Codrin Stefan (2001).

Hypostatic Personality: Psychopathology of Doing and Being Made . Premier, pp. 18-19.

ISBN 973-8030-59-5 .

v t e Mental processes Cognition Association Awareness Cognitive flexibility Cognitive liberty Forecasting affective Foresight Comprehension Consciousness Critical thinking Decision-making Imagination Intuition Problem solving methods strategies Prospection Perception Amodal Color RGB model Depth Form Haptic ( Touch ) Perception as interpretation Peripheral Social Sound Harmonics Pitch Speech Visual Memory Consolidation Encoding Storage Recall Other Attention Experiential avoidance Higher nervous activity Intention Ironic process theory Learning Mental fatigue Relational frame theory Mental set Thinking Thought suppression Volition Category v t e Psychology History Philosophy Portal Psychologist Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Methodologies Animal testing Archival research Behavior epigenetics Case study Content analysis Experiments Human subject research Interviews Neuroimaging Observation Psychophysics Qualitative research Quantitative research Self-report inventory Statistical surveys Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Psychologists Wilhelm Wundt William James Ivan Pavlov Sigmund Freud Edward Thorndike Carl Jung John B. Watson Clark L. Hull Kurt Lewin Jean Piaget Gordon Allport J. P. Guilford Carl Rogers Erik Erikson B. F. Skinner Donald O. Hebb Ernest Hilgard Harry Harlow Raymond Cattell Abraham Maslow Neal E. Miller Jerome Bruner Donald T. Campbell Hans Eysenck Herbert A. Simon David McClelland Leon Festinger George A. Miller Richard Lazarus Stanley Schachter Robert Zajonc Albert Bandura Roger Brown Endel Tulving Lawrence Kohlberg Noam Chomsky Ulric Neisser Jerome Kagan Walter Mischel Elliot Aronson Daniel Kahneman Paul Ekman Michael Posner Amos Tversky Bruce McEwen Larry Squire Richard E. Nisbett Martin Seligman Ed Diener Shelley E. Taylor John Anderson Ronald C. Kessler Joseph E. LeDoux Richard Davidson Susan Fiske Roy Baumeister Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Category Wiktionary definition Wiktionary category Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Wikibooks Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mental_operations&oldid=1169715368 " Categories : Cognitive science Mental content Hidden category: Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 10 August 2023, at 20:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mental operations 2 languages Add topic

