Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 First World War 2.2 Versailles peace conference 2.3 In the 1920s 2.4 During the Great Depression 2.5 Second World War 2.6 Postwar 3 Economic viewpoint Toggle Economic viewpoint subsection 3.1 Views on free trade and protectionism 3.1.1 Turning point of the Great Depression 3.1.2 Critique of the theory of comparative advantage 3.2 Views on trade imbalances 3.3 Views on inflation 4 Influence and legacy Toggle Influence and legacy subsection 4.1 Keynesian ascendancy 1939–79 4.1.1 Neo-Keynesian economics 4.1.2 Multiplier 4.2 Keynesian economics out of favour 1979–2007 4.3 Keynesian resurgence 2008–09 4.4 New Keynesian economics 5 Overall views Toggle Overall views subsection 5.1 Praise 5.2 Critiques 5.3 Views on race 6 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 6.1 Relationships 6.2 Marriage 6.3 Support for the arts 6.4 Philosophical and spiritual views 6.5 Investments 6.6 Political life 6.7 Heraldic arms 6.8 Death 7 Cultural representations 8 Publications Toggle Publications subsection 8.1 Books 8.2 Articles and pamphlets 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Notes 10.2 Citations 10.3 Sources 10.4 Primary sources 11 External links Toggle the table of contents John Maynard Keynes 135 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Cebuano Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Madhurâ Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pangasinan پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла संस्कृतम् Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Walon Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Yerwa Kanuri Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British economist (1883–1946) "John Keynes" and "Keynes" redirect here. For his father, see John Neville Keynes . For his biography by Skidelsky, see John Maynard Keynes (Skidelsky) . For other uses, see Keynes (disambiguation) .

The Right Honourable The Lord Keynes CB FBA Keynes in 1929 Born ( 1883-06-05 ) 5 June 1883 Cambridge , England Died 21 April 1946 (1946-04-21) (aged 62) Tilton House, near Firle , East Sussex, England, United Kingdom Political party Liberal Spouse Lydia Lopokova ​ ( m.

1925) ​ Parents John Neville Keynes (father) Florence Ada Brown (mother) Academic background Education King's College, Cambridge ( BA ) Influences Bentham Burke Silvio Gesell [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Johannsen Keynes Sr Malthus Marshall Newton Wicksell Russell [ 4 ] G. E. Moore [ 5 ] Sraffa Academic work Discipline Political economy Probability School or tradition Keynesian economics Institutions King's College, Cambridge Notable ideas Macroeconomics Keynesian economics Liquidity preference Spending multiplier AD–AS model Demand-side economics Member of the House of Lords Lord Temporal In office 7 July 1942 – 21 April 1946 Preceded by Peerage created Succeeded by Peerage extinct Signature Part of a series on Macroeconomics Basic concepts Aggregate demand Aggregate supply Business cycle CAGR Deflation Demand shock Disinflation Effective demand Expectations Adaptive Rational Financial crisis Growth Inflation Demand-pull Cost-push Interest rate Investment Liquidity trap Measures of national income and output GDP GNI NNI Microfoundations Money Endogenous Money creation Demand for money Liquidity preference Money supply National accounts SNA Nominal rigidity Price level Recession Shrinkflation Stagflation Supply shock Saving Unemployment Policies Fiscal Monetary Commercial Central bank Universal basic income Models IS–LM AD–AS Keynesian cross Multiplier Accelerator Phillips curve Arrow–Debreu Harrod–Domar Solow–Swan Ramsey–Cass–Koopmans Overlapping generations General equilibrium DSGE Endogenous growth Matching theory Mundell–Fleming Overshooting NAIRU Related fields Econometrics Economic statistics Monetary economics Development economics Evolutionary economics International economics Schools Mainstream Keynesian Neo- New Monetarism New classical Real business-cycle theory Stockholm New neoclassical synthesis Saltwater and freshwater Heterodox Austrian Chartalism Modern monetary theory Ecological Post-Keynesian Circuitism Disequilibrium Marxian Market monetarism Supply-side People François Quesnay Adam Smith Thomas Robert Malthus Karl Marx Léon Walras Knut Wicksell Irving Fisher Wesley Clair Mitchell John Maynard Keynes Alvin Hansen Michał Kalecki Gunnar Myrdal Simon Kuznets Joan Robinson Friedrich Hayek John Hicks Richard Stone Hyman Minsky Milton Friedman Paul Samuelson Lawrence Klein Edmund Phelps Robert Lucas Jr.

Edward C. Prescott Peter Diamond William Nordhaus Joseph Stiglitz Thomas J. Sargent Paul Krugman N. Gregory Mankiw See also Macroeconomic model Publications in macroeconomics Economics Applied Microeconomics Political economy Mathematical economics Money portal Business portal v t e John Maynard Keynes, 1st Baron Keynes [ 6 ] CB , FBA ( / k eɪ n z / KAYNZ ; 5 June 1883 – 21 April 1946), was an English economist and philosopher whose ideas fundamentally changed the theory and practice of macroeconomics and the economic policies of governments. Originally trained in mathematics, he built on and greatly refined earlier work on the causes of business cycles .

[ 7 ] One of the most influential economists of the 20th century, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] he produced writings that are the basis for the school of thought known as Keynesian economics , and its various offshoots.

[ 11 ] His ideas, reformulated as New Keynesianism , are fundamental to mainstream macroeconomics . He is known as the "father of macroeconomics".

[ 12 ] During the Great Depression of the 1930s, Keynes spearheaded a revolution in economic thinking , challenging the ideas of neoclassical economics that held that free markets would, in the short to medium term, automatically provide full employment, as long as workers were flexible in their wage demands. He argued that aggregate demand (total spending in the economy) determined the overall level of economic activity, and that inadequate aggregate demand could lead to prolonged periods of high unemployment, and since wages and labour costs are rigid downwards the economy will not automatically rebound to full employment.

[ 13 ] Keynes advocated the use of fiscal and monetary policies to mitigate the adverse effects of economic recessions and depressions . After the 1929 crisis, Keynes also turned away from a fundamental pillar of neoclassical economics: free trade . He criticized Ricardian comparative advantage theory (the foundation of free trade), considering the theory's initial assumptions unrealistic, and became definitively protectionist.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] He detailed these ideas in his magnum opus, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money , published in early 1936. By the late 1930s, leading Western economies had begun adopting Keynes's policy recommendations. Almost all capitalist governments had done so by the end of the two decades following Keynes's death in 1946. As a leader of the British delegation, Keynes participated in the design of the international economic institutions established after the end of World War II but was overruled by the American delegation on several aspects.

Keynes's influence started to wane in the 1970s, partly as a result of the stagflation that plagued the British and American economies during that decade, and partly because of criticism of Keynesian policies by Milton Friedman and other monetarists , [ 17 ] who disputed the ability of government to favourably regulate the business cycle with fiscal policy .

[ 18 ] The 2008 financial crisis sparked the 2008–2009 Keynesian resurgence . Keynesian economics provided the theoretical underpinning for economic policies undertaken in response to the 2008 financial crisis by President Barack Obama of the United States, Prime Minister Gordon Brown of the United Kingdom, and other heads of governments.

[ 19 ] When Time magazine included Keynes among its Most Important People of the Century in 1999, it reported that "his radical idea that governments should spend money they don't have may have saved capitalism".

[ 20 ] The Economist has described Keynes as "Britain's most famous 20th-century economist".

[ 21 ] In addition to being an economist, Keynes was also a civil servant , a director of the Bank of England , and a part of the Bloomsbury Group of intellectuals.

[ 22 ] Early life and education [ edit ] King's College, Cambridge . Keynes's grandmother wrote to him saying that, since he was born in Cambridge, people will expect him to be clever.

John Maynard Keynes was born in Cambridge , England, in June 1883 to an upper-middle-class family. His father, John Neville Keynes , was an economist and a lecturer in moral sciences at the University of Cambridge and his mother, Florence Ada Keynes , a local social reformer. Keynes was the firstborn and was followed by two more children – Margaret Neville Keynes in 1885 and Geoffrey Keynes in 1887. Geoffrey became a surgeon and Margaret married the Nobel Prize-winning physiologist Archibald Hill .

According to the reminiscences of his brother Geoffrey, their parents were loving and attentive. They attended a Congregational Church [ 23 ] [ 24 ] : 14 and remained in the same house throughout their lives, where the children were always welcome to return. Keynes received considerable support from his father, including expert coaching to help him pass his scholarship exams and financial help both as a young man and when his assets were nearly wiped out at the onset of Great Depression in 1929. Keynes's mother made her children's interests her own, and according to Skidelsky, "because she could grow up with her children, they never outgrew home".

[ 24 ] : 14 In January 1889, at the age of five and a half, Keynes started at the kindergarten of the Perse School for Girls for five mornings a week. He quickly showed a talent for arithmetic, but his health was poor leading to several long absences. He was tutored at home by a governess, Beatrice Mackintosh, and his mother. In January 1892, at eight and a half, he started as a day pupil at St Faith's preparatory school. By 1894, Keynes was top of his class and excelling at mathematics. In 1896, St Faith's headmaster, Ralph Goodchild, wrote that Keynes was "head and shoulders above all the other boys in the school" and was confident that Keynes could get a scholarship to Eton.

[ 25 ] In 1897, Keynes won a King's Scholarship to Eton College , where he displayed talent in a wide range of subjects, particularly mathematics, classics and history: in 1901, he was awarded the Tomline Prize for mathematics. At Eton, Keynes experienced the first "love of his life" in Dan Macmillan, older brother of the future Prime Minister Harold Macmillan .

[ 26 ] : 27 Despite his middle-class background, Keynes mixed easily with upper-class pupils.

In 1902, Keynes left Eton for King's College, Cambridge , after receiving a scholarship for this also, to read mathematics.

Alfred Marshall begged Keynes to become an economist, [ 27 ] although Keynes's own inclinations drew him towards philosophy, especially the ethical system of G. E. Moore . Keynes was elected to the University Pitt Club [ 28 ] : 52–81 and was an active member of the semi-secretive Cambridge Apostles society, a debating club largely reserved for the brightest students. Like many members, Keynes retained a bond to the club after graduating and continued to attend occasional meetings throughout his life. Before leaving Cambridge, Keynes became the president of the Cambridge Union Society and Cambridge University Liberal Club . He was said to be an atheist.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] In May 1904, he received a first-class BA in mathematics. Aside from a few months spent on holidays with family and friends, Keynes continued to involve himself with the university over the next two years. He took part in debates, further studied philosophy and attended economics lectures informally as a graduate student for one term, which constituted his only formal education in the subject. He took civil service exams in 1906.

The economist Harry Johnson wrote that the optimism imparted by Keynes's early life is a key to understanding his later thinking.

[ 31 ] Keynes was always confident he could find a solution to whatever problem he turned his attention to and retained a lasting faith in the ability of government officials to do good.

[ 32 ] Keynes's optimism was also cultural, in two senses: he was of the last generation raised by an empire still at the height of its power and was also of the last generation who felt entitled to govern by culture, rather than by expertise. According to Skidelsky , the sense of cultural unity current in Britain from the 19th century to the end of World War I provided a framework with which the well-educated could set various spheres of knowledge in relation to each other and life, enabling them to confidently draw from different fields when addressing practical problems.

[ 24 ] : 146–147 Career [ edit ] In October 1906 Keynes began his Civil Service career as a clerk in the India Office .

[ 33 ] He enjoyed his work at first, but by 1908 had become bored and resigned his position to return to Cambridge and work on probability theory , through a lectureship in economics at first funded personally by economists Alfred Marshall and Arthur Pigou ; he became a fellow of King's College in 1909.

[ 34 ] By 1909 Keynes had also published his first professional economics article in The Economic Journal , about the effect of a recent global economic downturn on India.

[ 35 ] He founded the Political Economy Club , a weekly discussion group. Keynes's earnings rose further as he began to take on pupils for private tuition.

In 1911 Keynes was made the editor of The Economic Journal . By 1913 he had published his first book, Indian Currency and Finance .

[ 36 ] He was then appointed to the Royal Commission on Indian Currency and Finance [ 37 ] – the same topic as his book – where Keynes showed considerable talent at applying economic theory to practical problems. His written work was published under the name "J M Keynes", though to his family and friends he was known as Maynard. (His father, John Neville Keynes, was also always known by his middle name).

[ 38 ] First World War [ edit ] The British Government called on Keynes's expertise during the First World War . While he did not formally rejoin the civil service in 1914, Keynes travelled to London at the government's request a few days before hostilities started. Bankers had been pushing for the suspension of specie payments – the gold equivalent of banknotes – but with Keynes's help, the Chancellor of the Exchequer (then Lloyd George ) was persuaded that this would be a bad idea, as it would hurt the future reputation of the city if payments were suspended before it was necessary.

In January 1915 Keynes took up an official government position at the Treasury . Among his responsibilities were the design of terms of credit between Britain and its continental allies during the war and the acquisition of scarce currencies. According to economist Robert Lekachman , Keynes's "nerve and mastery became legendary" because of his performance of these duties, as in the case where he managed to assemble a supply of Spanish pesetas .

The secretary of the Treasury was delighted to hear Keynes had amassed enough to provide a temporary solution for the British Government. But Keynes did not hand the pesetas over, choosing instead to sell them all to break the market: his boldness paid off, as pesetas then became much less scarce and expensive.

[ 39 ] On the introduction of military conscription in 1916, he applied for exemption as a conscientious objector , which was effectively granted conditional upon continuing his government work.

In the 1917 King's Birthday Honours , Keynes was appointed Companion of the Order of the Bath for his wartime work, [ 40 ] and his success led to the appointment that had a huge effect on Keynes's life and career; Keynes was appointed financial representative for the Treasury to the 1919 Versailles peace conference . He was also appointed Officer of the Belgian Order of Leopold .

[ 41 ] Versailles peace conference [ edit ] Main articles: Heavenly Twins (Sumner and Cunliffe) , Paris Peace Conference (1919–1920) , and Treaty of Versailles Keynes's colleague, David Lloyd George . Keynes was initially wary of the "Welsh Wizard," preferring his rival Asquith , but was impressed with Lloyd George at Versailles; this did not deter Keynes from painting a scathing picture of the then-prime minister in The Economic Consequences of the Peace .

Keynes's experience at Versailles was influential in shaping his future outlook, yet it was not a successful one. Keynes's main interest had been in trying to prevent Germany's compensation payments being set so high it would traumatise innocent German people, damage the nation's ability to pay and sharply limit its ability to buy exports from other countries – thus hurting not just Germany's economy but that of the wider world.

Unfortunately for Keynes, conservative powers in the coalition that emerged from the 1918 coupon election were able to ensure that both Keynes himself and the Treasury were largely excluded from formal high-level talks concerning reparations. Their place was taken by the Heavenly Twins – the judge Lord Sumner and the banker Lord Cunliffe , whose nickname derived from the "astronomically" high war compensation they wanted to demand from Germany. Keynes was forced to try to exert influence mostly from behind the scenes.

The three principal players at the Paris conferences were Britain's Lloyd George, France's Georges Clemenceau and America's President Woodrow Wilson .

[ 42 ] It was only Lloyd George to whom Keynes had much direct access; until the 1918 election he had some sympathy with Keynes's view but while campaigning had found his speeches were well received by the public only if he promised to harshly punish Germany, and had therefore committed his delegation to extracting high payments.

Lloyd George did, however, win some loyalty from Keynes with his actions at the Paris conference by intervening against the French to ensure the dispatch of much-needed food supplies to German civilians. Clemenceau also pushed for substantial reparations, though not as high as those proposed by the British, while on security grounds, France argued for an even more severe settlement than Britain.

Wilson initially favoured relatively lenient treatment of Germany – he feared too harsh conditions could foment the rise of extremism and wanted Germany to be left sufficient capital to pay for imports. To Keynes's dismay, Lloyd George and Clemenceau were able to pressure Wilson to agree to include pensions in the reparations bill.

Towards the end of the conference, Keynes came up with a plan that he argued would not only help Germany and other impoverished central European powers but also be good for the world economy as a whole. It involved the radical writing down of war debts, which would have had the possible effect of increasing international trade all round, but at the same time thrown over two-thirds of the cost of European reconstruction on the United States.

[ 24 ] : 225–232 [ a ] Lloyd George agreed it might be acceptable to the British electorate. However, America was against the plan; the US was then the largest creditor, and by this time Wilson had started to believe in the merits of a harsh peace and thought that his country had already made excessive sacrifices. Hence despite his best efforts, the result of the conference was a treaty which disgusted Keynes both on moral and economic grounds and led to his resignation from the Treasury.

[ 24 ] : 231–235 In June 1919 he turned down an offer to become chairman of the British Bank of Northern Commerce , a job that promised a salary of £2,000 in return for a morning per week of work.

[ 24 ] : 234 Keynes's analysis on the predicted damaging effects of the treaty appeared in the highly influential book, The Economic Consequences of the Peace , published in 1919.

[ 44 ] This work has been described as Keynes's best book, where he was able to bring all his gifts to bear – his passion as well as his skill as an economist. In addition to economic analysis, the book contained appeals to the reader's sense of compassion : [ 45 ] : 209 I cannot leave this subject as though its just treatment wholly depended either on our pledges or on economic facts. The policy of reducing Germany to servitude for a generation, of degrading the lives of millions of human beings, and of depriving a whole nation of happiness should be abhorrent and detestable, – abhorrent and detestable, even if it was possible, even if it enriched ourselves, even if it did not sow the decay of the whole civilized life of Europe.

— Keynes, "Reparation" p.

209 , The Economic Consequences of the Peace (1919) Also present was striking imagery such as "year by year Germany must be kept impoverished and her children starved and crippled" along with bold predictions which were later justified by events: [ 45 ] : 251 If we aim deliberately at the impoverishment of Central Europe, vengeance, I dare predict, will not limp. Nothing can then delay for very long that final war between the forces of Reaction and the despairing convulsions of Revolution, before which the horrors of the late German war will fade into nothing.

— Keynes, "Remedies" p.

251 , The Economic Consequences of the Peace (1919) Keynes's followers assert that his predictions of disaster were borne out when the German economy suffered the hyperinflation of 1923 , and again by the collapse of the Weimar Republic and the outbreak of the Second World War. However, historian Ruth Henig claims that "most historians of the Paris peace conference now take the view that, in economic terms, the treaty was not unduly harsh on Germany and that, while obligations and damages were inevitably much stressed in the debates at Paris to satisfy electors reading the daily newspapers, the intention was quietly to give Germany substantial help towards paying her bills, and to meet many of the German objections by amendments to the way the reparations schedule was in practice carried out".

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ b ] Only a small fraction of reparations was ever paid. In fact, historian Stephen A. Schuker demonstrates in American 'Reparations' to Germany, 1919–33 , that the capital inflow from American loans substantially exceeded German out payments so that, on a net basis, Germany received support equal to four times the amount of the post-Second World War Marshall Plan .

[ 48 ] Schuker also shows that, in the years after Versailles, Keynes became an informal reparations adviser to the German government, wrote one of the major German reparation notes, and supported hyperinflation on political grounds. Nevertheless, The Economic Consequences of the Peace gained Keynes international fame, even though it also caused him to be regarded as anti-establishment – it was not until after the outbreak of the Second World War that Keynes was offered a directorship of a major British Bank, or an acceptable offer to return to government with a formal job. However, Keynes was still able to influence government policy-making through his network of contacts, his published works and by serving on government committees; this included attending high-level policy meetings as a consultant.

[ 24 ] : 593–598 In the 1920s [ edit ] Keynes had completed his A Treatise on Probability before the war but published it in 1921.

[ 24 ] : 283 The work was a notable contribution to the philosophical and mathematical underpinnings of probability theory , championing the important view that probabilities were no more or less than truth values intermediate between simple truth and falsity. Keynes developed the first upper-lower probabilistic interval approach to probability in chapters 15 and 17 of this book, as well as having developed the first decision weight approach with his conventional coefficient of risk and weight, c , in chapter 26. In addition to his academic work, the 1920s saw Keynes active as a journalist selling his work internationally and working in London as a financial consultant. In 1924 Keynes wrote an obituary for his former tutor Alfred Marshall which Joseph Schumpeter called "the most brilliant life of a man of science I have ever read".

[ 49 ] Mary Paley Marshall was "entranced" by the memorial, while Lytton Strachey rated it as one of Keynes's "best works".

[ 24 ] : 342 In 1922 Keynes continued to advocate reduction of German reparations with A Revision of the Treaty .

[ 24 ] : 245 He attacked the post-World War I deflation policies with A Tract on Monetary Reform in 1923 [ 24 ] : 329 – a trenchant argument that countries should target stability of domestic prices, avoiding deflation even at the cost of allowing their currency to depreciate. Britain suffered from high unemployment through most of the 1920s, leading Keynes to recommend the depreciation of sterling to boost jobs by making British exports more affordable. From 1924 he was also advocating a fiscal response, where the government could create jobs by spending on public works.

[ 24 ] : 343–344 During the 1920s Keynes's pro-stimulus views had only limited effect on policymakers and mainstream academic opinion – according to Hyman Minsky one reason was that at this time his theoretical justification was "muddled".

[ 35 ] The Tract had also called for an end to the gold standard. Keynes advised it was no longer a net benefit for countries such as Britain to participate in the gold standard , as it ran counter to the need for domestic policy autonomy. It could force countries to pursue deflationary policies at exactly the time when expansionary measures were called for to address rising unemployment. The Treasury and Bank of England were still in favour of the gold standard and in 1925 they were able to convince the then Chancellor Winston Churchill to re-establish it, which had a depressing effect on British industry. Keynes responded by writing The Economic Consequences of Mr. Churchill and continued to argue against the gold standard until Britain finally abandoned it in 1931.

[ 24 ] : 352–355 During the Great Depression [ edit ] The Great Depression and its periods of worldwide economic hardship formed the backdrop against which the Keynesian Revolution took place. This image is Migrant Mother , taken by photographer Dorothea Lange in March 1936.

Wikiquote has quotations related to The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money .

Keynes had begun a theoretical work to examine the relationship between unemployment, money and prices back in the 1920s.

[ 50 ] The work, Treatise on Money , was published in 1930 in two volumes. A central idea of the work was that if the amount of money being saved exceeds the amount being invested – which can happen if interest rates are too high – then unemployment will rise. This is in part a result of people not wanting to spend too high a proportion of what employers pay out, making it difficult, in aggregate, for employers to make a profit. Another key theme of the book is the unreliability of financial indices for representing an accurate – or indeed meaningful – indication of general shifts in purchasing power of currencies over time. In particular, he criticised the justification of Britain's return to the gold standard in 1925 at pre-war valuation by reference to the wholesale price index . He argued that the index understated the effects of changes in the costs of services and labour.

Keynes was deeply critical of the British government's austerity measures during the Great Depression . He believed that budget deficits during recessions were a good thing and a natural product of an economic slump. He wrote, "For Government borrowing of one kind or another is nature's remedy, so to speak, for preventing business losses from being, in so severe a slump as the present one, so great as to bring production altogether to a standstill." [ 51 ] At the height of the Great Depression, in 1933, Keynes published The Means to Prosperity , which contained specific policy recommendations for tackling unemployment in a global recession, chiefly counter-cyclical public spending.

The Means to Prosperity contains one of the first mentions of the multiplier effect . While it was addressed chiefly to the British Government, it also contained advice for other nations affected by the global recession. A copy was sent to the newly elected President Franklin D. Roosevelt and other world leaders. The work was taken seriously by both the American and British governments, and according to Robert Skidelsky , helped pave the way for the later acceptance of Keynesian ideas, though it had little immediate practical influence. In the 1933 London Economic Conference opinions remained too diverse for a unified course of action to be agreed upon.

[ 24 ] : 490–500 External videos Booknotes interview with Robert Skidelsky on John Maynard Keynes: Fighting for Freedom, 1937–1946 , 28 April 2002 , C-SPAN Keynesian-like policies were adopted by Sweden and Germany, but Sweden was seen as too small to command much attention, and Keynes was deliberately silent about the successful efforts of Germany as he was dismayed by its imperialist ambitions and its treatment of Jews.

[ 24 ] : 500–504 Apart from Great Britain, Keynes's attention was primarily focused on the United States. In 1931, he received considerable support for his views on counter-cyclical public spending in Chicago, then America's foremost center for economic views alternative to the mainstream.

[ 35 ] [ 24 ] : 507 However, orthodox economic opinion remained generally hostile regarding fiscal intervention to mitigate the depression , until just before the outbreak of war .

[ 35 ] In late 1933 Keynes was persuaded by Felix Frankfurter to address President Roosevelt directly, which he did by letters and face-to-face in 1934, after which the two men spoke highly of each other.

[ 24 ] : 506–509 However, according to Skidelsky, the consensus is that Keynes's efforts began to have a more than marginal influence on US economic policy only after 1939.

[ 24 ] Keynes's magnum opus , The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money was published in 1936.

[ 13 ] It was researched and indexed by one of Keynes's favourite students, and later economist, David Bensusan-Butt .

[ 52 ] The work served as a theoretical justification for the interventionist policies Keynes favoured for tackling a recession. Although Keynes stated in his preface that his General Theory was only secondarily concerned with the "applications of this theory to practice", the circumstances of its publication were such that his suggestions shaped the course of the 1930s.

[ 53 ] In addition, Keynes introduced the world to a new interpretation of taxation: since the legal tender is now defined by the state, inflation becomes "taxation by currency depreciation". This hidden tax meant a) that the standard of value should be governed by deliberate decision; and (b) that it was possible to maintain a middle course between deflation and inflation.

[ 54 ] This novel interpretation was inspired by the desperate search for control over the economy which permeated the academic world after the Depression. The General Theory challenged the earlier neoclassical economic paradigm, which had held that provided it was unfettered by government interference, the market would naturally establish full employment equilibrium. In doing so Keynes was partly setting himself against his former teachers Marshall and Pigou. Keynes believed the classical theory was a "special case" that applied only to the particular conditions present in the 19th century, his theory being the general one. Classical economists had believed in Say's law , which, simply put, states that " supply creates its demand ", and that in a free-market workers would always be willing to lower their wages to a level where employers could profitably offer them jobs.

[ 55 ] An innovation from Keynes was the concept of price stickiness – the recognition that in reality workers often refuse to lower their wage demands even in cases where a classical economist might argue that it is rational for them to do so. Due in part to price stickiness, it was established that the interaction of " aggregate demand " and " aggregate supply " may lead to stable unemployment equilibria – and in those cases, it is on the state, not the market, that economies must depend for their salvation. In contrast, Keynes argued that demand is what creates supply and not the other way around. He questioned Say's Law by asking what would happen if the money that is being given to individuals is not finding its way back into the economy and is saved instead. He suggested the result would be a recession. To tackle the fear of a recession Say's Law suggests government intervention. This government intervention can be used to prevent any further increase in savings in the form of a decreased interest rate. Decreasing the interest rate will encourage people to start spending and investing again, or so it is stated by Say's Law. The reason behind this is that when there is little investing, savings start to accumulate and reach a stopping point in the flow of money. During the normal economic activity, it would be justified to have savings because they can be given out as loans but in this case, there is little demand for them, so they are doing no good for the economy. The supply of savings then exceeds the demand for loans and the result is lower prices or lower interest rates. Thus, the idea is that the money that was once saved is now re-invested or spent, assuming lower interest rates appeal to consumers. To Keynes, however, this was not always the case, and it couldn't be assumed that lower interest rates would automatically encourage investment and spending again since there is no proven link between the two.

[ 55 ] Caricature by David Low , 1934 The General Theory argues that demand, not supply, is the key variable governing the overall level of economic activity. Aggregate demand, which equals total un-hoarded income in a society, is defined by the sum of consumption and investment. In a state of unemployment and unused production capacity, one can enhance employment and total income only by first increasing expenditures for either consumption or investment. Without government intervention to increase expenditure, an economy can remain trapped in a low-employment equilibrium. The demonstration of this possibility has been described as the revolutionary formal achievement of the work.

[ 24 ] : 528–538 The book advocated activist economic policy by government to stimulate demand in times of high unemployment, for example by spending on public works . "Let us be up and doing, using our idle resources to increase our wealth," he wrote in 1928. "With men and plants unemployed, it is ridiculous to say that we cannot afford these new developments. It is precisely with these plants and these men that we shall afford them." [ 51 ] The General Theory is often viewed as the foundation of modern macroeconomics . Few senior American economists agreed with Keynes through most of the 1930s.

[ 56 ] Yet his ideas were soon to achieve widespread acceptance, with eminent American professors such as Alvin Hansen agreeing with the General Theory before the outbreak of World War II.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] [ 59 ] Keynes himself had only limited participation in the theoretical debates that followed the publication of the General Theory as he suffered a heart attack in 1937, requiring him to take long periods of rest. Among others, Hyman Minsky and Post-Keynesian economists have argued that as a result, Keynes's ideas were diluted by those keen to compromise with classical economists or to render his concepts with mathematical models like the IS–LM model (which, they argue, distort Keynes's ideas).

[ 35 ] [ 59 ] Keynes began to recover in 1939, but for the rest of his life his professional energies were directed largely towards the practical side of economics: the problems of ensuring optimum allocation of resources for the war efforts, post-war negotiations with America, and the new international financial order that was presented at the Bretton Woods Conference .

In the General Theory and later, Keynes responded to the socialists who argued, especially during the Great Depression of the 1930s, that capitalism caused war. He argued that if capitalism were managed domestically and internationally (with coordinated international Keynesian policies, an international monetary system that did not pit the interests of countries against one another, and a high degree of freedom of trade), then this system of managed capitalism could promote peace rather than conflict between countries. His plans during World War II for post-war international economic institutions and policies (which contributed to the creation at Bretton Woods of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank , and later to the creation of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and eventually the World Trade Organization ) were aimed to give effect to this vision.

[ 60 ] Although Keynes has been widely criticised – especially by members of the Chicago school of economics – for advocating in their view irresponsible government spending financed by borrowing, in fact he was a firm believer in balanced budgets and regarded the proposals for programmes of public works during the Great Depression as an exceptional measure to meet the needs of exceptional circumstances.

[ 61 ] Second World War [ edit ] Keynes (right) and the US representative Harry Dexter White at the inaugural meeting of the International Monetary Fund 's Board of Governors in Savannah, Georgia in 1946 During the Second World War , Keynes argued in How to Pay for the War , published in 1940, that the war effort should be largely financed by higher taxation and especially by compulsory saving (essentially workers lending money to the government), rather than deficit spending , to avoid inflation. Compulsory saving would act to dampen domestic demand, assist in channelling additional output towards the war efforts, would be fairer than punitive taxation and would have the advantage of helping to avoid a post-war slump by boosting demand once workers were allowed to withdraw their savings. In September 1941 he was proposed to fill a vacancy in the Court of Directors of the Bank of England , and subsequently carried out a full term from the following April.

[ 62 ] In June 1942, Keynes was rewarded for his service with a hereditary peerage in the King's Birthday Honours.

[ 63 ] On 7 July his title was gazetted as " Baron Keynes , of Tilton, in the County of Sussex " and he took his seat in the House of Lords on the Liberal Party benches.

[ 64 ] As the Allied victory began to look certain, Keynes was heavily involved, as leader of the British delegation and chairman of the World Bank commission, in the mid-1944 negotiations that established the Bretton Woods system . The Keynes plan, concerning an international clearing-union, argued for a radical system for the management of currencies. He proposed the creation of a common world unit of currency, the bancor and new global institutions – a world central bank and the International Clearing Union . Keynes envisaged these institutions as managing an international trade and payments system with strong incentives for countries to avoid substantial trade deficits or surpluses.

[ 65 ] The US's greater negotiating strength, however, meant that the outcomes accorded more closely to the more conservative plans of Harry Dexter White . According to US economist J. Bradford DeLong , on almost every point where he was overruled by the Americans, Keynes was later proven correct by events.

[ 66 ] The two new institutions, later known as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), were founded as a compromise that primarily reflected the American vision. There would be no incentives for states to avoid a large trade surplus ; instead, the burden for correcting a trade imbalance would continue to fall only on the deficit countries, which Keynes had argued were least able to address the problem without inflicting economic hardship on their populations. Yet, Keynes was still pleased when accepting the final agreement, saying that if the institutions stayed true to their founding principles, "the brotherhood of man will have become more than a phrase." [ 67 ] [ 68 ] Postwar [ edit ] After the war, Keynes continued to represent the United Kingdom in international negotiations despite his deteriorating health. He succeeded in obtaining preferential terms from the United States for new and outstanding debts to facilitate the rebuilding of the British economy.

[ 69 ] : §1945 to 1946 Just before his death in 1946, Keynes told Henry Clay, a professor of social economics and advisor to the Bank of England , [ 70 ] of his hopes that Adam Smith 's " invisible hand " could help Britain out of the economic hole it was in: "I find myself more and more relying for a solution of our problems on the invisible hand which I tried to eject from economic thinking twenty years ago." [ 69 ] : §1945 to 1946 Economic viewpoint [ edit ] Views on free trade and protectionism [ edit ] Turning point of the Great Depression [ edit ] According to Keynesian theory, trade deficits are harmful. The countries that import more than they export weaken their economies. When the trade deficit increases, unemployment rises and gross domestic product (GDP) slows down. Furthermore, surplus countries exert a "negative externality" on their trading partners. They get richer at the expense of others and destroy the output of their trading partners. John Maynard Keynes believed that the products of surplus countries should be taxed to avoid trade imbalances.

[ 71 ] At the beginning of his career, Keynes was an economist close to Alfred Marshall , deeply convinced of the benefits of free trade. From the crisis of 1929 onwards, noting the commitment of the British authorities to defend the gold parity of the pound sterling and the rigidity of nominal wages, he gradually adhered to protectionist measures.

[ 14 ] On 5 November 1929, when heard by the Macmillan Committee to bring the British economy out of the crisis, Keynes indicated that the introduction of tariffs on imports would help to rebalance the trade balance. The committee's report states in a section entitled "import control and export aid", that in an economy where there is not full employment, the introduction of tariffs can improve production and employment. Thus, the reduction of the trade deficit favours the country's growth.

[ 14 ] In January 1930, in the Economic Advisory Council, Keynes proposed the introduction of a system of protection to reduce imports. In the autumn of 1930, he proposed a uniform tariff of 10% on all imports and subsidies of the same rate for all exports.

[ 14 ] In the Treatise on Money , published in the autumn of 1930, he took up the idea of tariffs or other trade restrictions with the aim of reducing the volume of imports and rebalancing the balance of trade.

[ 14 ] On 7 March 1931, in the New Statesman and Nation , he wrote an article entitled Proposal for a Tariff Revenue . He pointed out that the reduction in wages led to a reduction in national demand which constrained markets. Instead, he proposed the idea of an expansionary policy combined with a tariff system to neutralise the effects on the balance of trade. The application of customs tariffs seemed to him "unavoidable, whoever the Chancellor of the Exchequer might be". Thus, for Keynes, an economic recovery policy is only fully effective if the trade deficit is eliminated. He proposed a 15% tax on manufactured and semi-manufactured goods and 5% on certain foodstuffs and raw materials, with others needed for exports exempted (wool, cotton).

[ 14 ] In 1932, in an article entitled The Pro- and Anti-Tariffs , published in The Listener , he envisaged the protection of farmers and certain sectors such as the automobile and iron and steel industries, considering them indispensable to Britain.

[ 14 ] Critique of the theory of comparative advantage [ edit ] In the post-crisis situation of 1929, Keynes judged the assumptions of the free trade model unrealistic. He criticised, for example, the neoclassical assumption of wage adjustment.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] As early as 1930, in a note to the Economic Advisory Council, he doubted the intensity of the gain from specialisation in the case of manufactured goods. While participating in the MacMillan Committee, he admitted that he no longer "believed in a very high degree of national specialisation" and refused to "abandon any industry which is unable, for the moment, to survive". He also criticised the static dimension of the theory of comparative advantage, which, in his view, by fixing comparative advantages definitively, led in practice to a waste of national resources.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] In the Daily Mail of 13 March 1931, he called the assumption of perfect sectoral labour mobility "nonsense" since it states that a person made unemployed contributes to a reduction in the wage rate until he finds a job. But for Keynes, this change of job may involve costs (job search, training) and is not always possible. Generally speaking, for Keynes, the assumptions of full employment and automatic return to equilibrium discredit the theory of comparative advantage.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] In July 1933, he published an article in the New Statesman and Nation entitled National Self-Sufficiency , in which he criticised the argument of the specialisation of economies, which is the basis of free trade. He thus proposed the search for a certain degree of self-sufficiency. Instead of the specialisation of economies advocated by the Ricardian theory of comparative advantage, he prefers the maintenance of a diversity of activities for nations.

[ 15 ] In it he refutes the principle of peacemaking trade. His vision of trade became that of a system where foreign capitalists compete for new markets. He defends the idea of producing on national soil when possible and reasonable and expresses sympathy for the advocates of protectionism .

[ 16 ] He notes in National Self-Sufficiency : [ 16 ] [ 14 ] A considerable degree of international specialization is necessary in a rational world in all cases where it is dictated by wide differences of climate, natural resources, native aptitudes, level of culture and density of population. But over an increasingly wide range of industrial products, and perhaps of agricultural products also, I have become doubtful whether the economic loss of national self-sufficiency is great enough to outweigh the other advantages of gradually bringing the product and the consumer within the ambit of the same national, economic, and financial organization. Experience accumulates to prove that most modern processes of mass production can be performed in most countries and climates with almost equal efficiency.

He also writes in National Self-Sufficiency : [ 16 ] [ 14 ] I sympathize, therefore, with those who would minimize, rather than with those who would maximize, economic entanglement among nations. Ideas, knowledge, science, hospitality, travel – these are the things which should of their nature be international. But let goods be homespun whenever it is reasonably and conveniently possible, and, above all, let finance be primarily national.

Later, Keynes had a written correspondence with James Meade centred on the issue of import restrictions. Keynes and Meade discussed the best choice between quota and tariff. In March 1944 Keynes began a discussion with Marcus Fleming after the latter had written an article entitled Quotas versus depreciation . On this occasion, we see that he has definitely taken a protectionist stance after the Great Depression . He considered that quotas could be more effective than currency depreciation in dealing with external imbalances. Thus, for Keynes, currency depreciation was no longer sufficient and protectionist measures became necessary to avoid trade deficits. To avoid the return of crises due to a self-regulating economic system, it seemed essential to him to regulate trade and stop free trade (deregulation of foreign trade).

[ 14 ] Views on trade imbalances [ edit ] Keynes was the principal author of a proposal – the so-called Keynes Plan – for an International Clearing Union . The two governing principles of the plan were that the problem of settling outstanding balances should be solved by "creating" additional "international money", and that debtor and creditor should be treated almost alike as disturbers of equilibrium. In the event, though, the plans were rejected, in part because "American opinion was naturally reluctant to accept the principle of equality of treatment so novel in debtor-creditor relationships".

[ 72 ] : 326–329 The new system is not founded on free-trade (liberalisation [ 73 ] of foreign trade [ 74 ] ) but rather on the regulation of international trade, to eliminate trade imbalances: the nations with a surplus would have an incentive to reduce it, and in doing so they would automatically clear other nations deficits.

[ 75 ] He proposed a global bank that would issue its currency – the bancor – which was exchangeable with national currencies at fixed rates of exchange and would become the unit of account between nations, which means it would be used to measure a country's trade deficit or trade surplus. Every country would have an overdraft facility in its bancor account at the International Clearing Union. He pointed out that surpluses lead to weak global aggregate demand – countries running surpluses exert a "negative externality" on trading partners, and pose, far more than those in deficit, a threat to global prosperity.

[ 71 ] In his 1933 Yale Review article "National Self-Sufficiency", [ 16 ] [ 76 ] he already highlighted the problems created by free trade. His view, supported by many economists and commentators at the time, was that creditor nations may be just as responsible as debtor nations for disequilibrium in exchanges and that both should be under an obligation to bring trade back into a state of balance. Failure for them to do so could have serious consequences. In the words of Geoffrey Crowther , then editor of The Economist , "If the economic relationships between nations are not, by one means or another, brought fairly close to balance, then there is no set of financial arrangements that can rescue the world from the impoverishing results of chaos." [ 72 ] : 336 These ideas were informed by events prior to the Great Depression when – in the opinion of Keynes and others – international lending, primarily by the US, exceeded the capacity of sound investment and so got diverted into non-productive and speculative uses, which in turn invited default and a sudden stop to the process of lending.

[ 72 ] : 368–372 Influenced by Keynes, economics texts in the immediate post-war period put a significant emphasis on balance in trade. For example, the second edition of the popular introductory textbook, An Outline of Money , [ 72 ] devoted the last three of its ten chapters to questions of foreign exchange management and in particular the "problem of balance". However, in more recent years, since the end of the Bretton Woods system in 1971, with the increasing influence of monetarist schools of thought in the 1980s, and particularly in the face of large sustained trade imbalances, these concerns – and particularly concerns about the destabilising effects of large trade surpluses – have largely disappeared from mainstream economics discourse [ 77 ] [ page needed ] and Keynes's insights have slipped from view.

[ 78 ] [ page needed ] They received some attention again after the 2008 financial crisis .

[ 79 ] Views on inflation [ edit ] Keynes has been characterised as being indifferent or even positive about mild inflation.

[ 45 ] : 220 – 232 He had expressed a preference for inflation over deflation , saying that if one has to choose between the two evils, it is "better to disappoint the rentier" than to inflict pain on working-class families.

[ 80 ] Keynes was also aware of the dangers of inflation.

[ 59 ] [ page range too broad ] In The Economic Consequences of the Peace , he wrote: [ 45 ] : 220 Lenin is said to have declared that the best way to destroy the Capitalist System was to debauch the currency. By a continuing process of inflation, governments can confiscate, secretly and unobserved, an important part of the wealth of their citizens. There is no subtler, no surer means of overturning the existing basis of society than to debauch the currency. The process engages all the hidden forces of economic law on the side of destruction, and does it in a manner which not one man in a million is able to diagnose.

Views on alienation Keynes was not deeply concerned with alienation and did not explicitly use the term in his writings. While Keynes was pro-business and viewed capitalism as essential for economic growth, he acknowledged that it created economic insecurity and dissatisfaction, which could alienate workers, yet he believed this was only a temporary problem. In his book the Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren (1930), he envisioned a future where society would become so wealthy that the pursuit of money for its own sake would become irrelevant, effectively eliminating alienation.

[ 81 ] He believed that continuous economic growth would eventually reduce the need for excessive labor and alleviate extreme inequality, allowing people to pursue more fulfilling lives. While Keynes' optimistic vision has not fully materialized, global wealth has grown significantly since his time. Yet, alienation remains a pressing issue, especially during periods of rising inequality, suggesting that economic growth alone may not be enough to eliminate the problem.

Influence and legacy [ edit ] Prime Minister Clement Attlee with King George VI after Attlee won the 1945 election Keynesian ascendancy 1939–79 [ edit ] Main article: Keynesian Revolution From the end of the Great Depression to the mid-1970s, Keynes provided the main inspiration for economic policymakers in Europe, America and much of the rest of the world.

[ 59 ] While economists and policymakers had become increasingly won over to Keynes's way of thinking in the mid and late 1930s, it was only after the outbreak of World War II that governments started to borrow money for spending on a scale sufficient to eliminate unemployment. According to the economist John Kenneth Galbraith (then a US government official charged with controlling inflation), in the rebound of the economy from wartime spending, "one could not have had a better demonstration of the Keynesian ideas".

[ 82 ] The Keynesian Revolution was associated with the rise of modern liberalism in the West during the post-war period.

[ 83 ] Keynesian ideas became so popular that some scholars point to Keynes as representing the ideals of modern liberalism, as Adam Smith represented the ideals of classical liberalism .

[ 84 ] After the war, Winston Churchill attempted to check the rise of Keynesian policy-making in the United Kingdom and used rhetoric critical of the mixed economy in his 1945 election campaign. Despite his popularity as a war hero, Churchill suffered a landslide defeat to Clement Attlee , whose government's economic policy continued to be influenced by Keynes's ideas.

[ 82 ] Neo-Keynesian economics [ edit ] Main article: Neo-Keynesian economics Neo-Keynesian IS–LM model is used to analyse the effect of demand shocks on the economy.

Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e In the late 1930s and 1940s, economists (notably John Hicks , Franco Modigliani and Paul Samuelson ) attempted to interpret and formalise Keynes's writings in terms of formal mathematical models . In what had become known as the neoclassical synthesis , they combined Keynesian analysis with neoclassical economics to produce neo-Keynesian economics , which came to dominate mainstream macroeconomic thought for the next 40 years.

By the 1950s, Keynesian policies were adopted by almost the entire developed world and similar measures for a mixed economy were used by many developing nations. By then, Keynes's views on the economy had become mainstream in the world's universities. Throughout the 1950s and 1960s, the developed and emerging free capitalist economies enjoyed exceptionally high growth and low unemployment.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] Professor Gordon Fletcher has written that the 1950s and 1960s, when Keynes's influence was at its peak, appear in retrospect as a golden age of capitalism .

[ 59 ] In late 1965 Time magazine ran a cover article with a title comment from Milton Friedman (later echoed by US President Richard Nixon ), " We are all Keynesians now ". The article described the exceptionally favourable economic conditions then prevailing and reported that "Washington's economic managers scaled these heights by their adherence to Keynes's central theme: the modern capitalist economy does not automatically work at top efficiency, but can be raised to that level by the intervention and influence of the government." The article also states that Keynes was one of the three most important economists who ever lived, and that his General Theory was more influential than the magna opera of other famous economists, such as Adam Smith 's The Wealth of Nations .

[ 87 ] Multiplier [ edit ] The concept of the multiplier was first developed by R.F. Kahn [ 88 ] in his article "The relation of home investment to unemployment" [ 89 ] in The Economic Journal of June 1931. The Kahn multiplier was the employment multiplier; Keynes took the idea from Kahn and formulated the investment multiplier.

[ 90 ] Keynesian economics out of favour 1979–2007 [ edit ] Main article: Post-war displacement of Keynesianism Keynesian economics were officially discarded by the British Government in 1979, but forces had begun to gather against Keynes's ideas over 30 years earlier.

Friedrich Hayek had formed the Mont Pelerin Society in 1947, with the explicit intention of nurturing intellectual currents to one day displace Keynesianism and other similar influences. Its members included the Austrian School economist Ludwig von Mises along with the then-young Milton Friedman. Initially, the society had little impact on the wider world – according to Hayek it was as if Keynes had been raised to sainthood after his death and that people refused to allow his work to be questioned.

[ 82 ] [ 91 ] Friedman, however, began to emerge as a formidable critic of Keynesian economics from the mid-1950s, and especially after his 1963 publication of A Monetary History of the United States .

On the practical side of economic life, " big government " had appeared to be firmly entrenched in the 1950s, but the balance began to shift towards the power of private interests in the 1960s. Keynes had written against the folly of allowing "decadent and selfish" speculators and financiers the kind of influence they had enjoyed after World War I. For two decades after World War II public opinion was strongly against private speculators, the disparaging label " Gnomes of Zurich " being typical of how they were described during this period. International speculation was severely restricted by the capital controls in place after Bretton Woods. According to the journalists Larry Elliott and Dan Atkinson , 1968 was the pivotal year when power shifted in favour of private agents such as currency speculators. As the key 1968 event Elliott and Atkinson picked out America's suspension of the conversion of the dollar into gold except on request of foreign governments, which they identified as the beginning of the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system.

[ 92 ] Criticisms of Keynes's ideas had begun to gain significant acceptance by the early 1970s, as they were then able to make a credible case that Keynesian models no longer reflected economic reality. Keynes himself included few formulas and no explicit mathematical models in his General Theory . For economists such as Hyman Minsky , Keynes's limited use of mathematics was partly the result of his scepticism about whether phenomena as inherently uncertain as economic activity could ever be adequately captured by mathematical models. Nevertheless, many models were developed by Keynesian economists, with a famous example being the Phillips curve which predicted an inverse relationship between unemployment and inflation. It implied that unemployment could be reduced by government stimulus with a calculable cost to inflation. In 1968, Milton Friedman published a paper arguing that the fixed relationship implied by the Philips curve did not exist.

[ 93 ] Friedman suggested that sustained Keynesian policies could lead to both unemployment and inflation rising at once – a phenomenon that soon became known as stagflation . In the early 1970s stagflation appeared in both the US and Britain just as Friedman had predicted, with economic conditions deteriorating further after the 1973 oil crisis . Aided by the prestige gained from his successful forecast, Friedman led increasingly successful criticisms against the Keynesian consensus, convincing not only academics and politicians but also much of the general public with his radio and television broadcasts. The academic credibility of Keynesian economics was further undermined by additional criticism from other monetarists trained in the Chicago school of economics , by the Lucas critique and by criticisms from Hayek's Austrian School.

[ 59 ] So successful were these criticisms that by 1980 Robert Lucas claimed economists would often take offence if described as Keynesians.

[ 94 ] Keynesian principles fared increasingly poorly on the practical side of economics – by 1979 they had been displaced by monetarism as the primary influence on Anglo-American economic policy.

[ 59 ] However, many officials on both sides of the Atlantic retained a preference for Keynes, and in 1984 the Federal Reserve officially discarded monetarism, after which Keynesian principles made a partial comeback as an influence on policy-making.

[ 95 ] Not all academics accepted the criticism against Keynes – Minsky has argued that Keynesian economics had been debased by excessive mixing with neoclassical ideas from the 1950s, and that it was unfortunate that this branch of economics had even continued to be called "Keynesian".

[ 35 ] Writing in The American Prospect , Robert Kuttner argued it was not so much excessive Keynesian activism that caused the economic problems of the 1970s but the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system of capital controls , which allowed capital flight from regulated economies into unregulated economies in a fashion similar to Gresham's law phenomenon (where weak currencies undermine strong ones).

[ 96 ] Historian Peter Pugh has stated that a key cause of the economic problems afflicting America in the 1970s was the refusal to raise taxes to finance the Vietnam War , which was against Keynesian advice.

[ 97 ] A more typical response was to accept some elements of the criticisms while refining Keynesian economic theories to defend them against arguments that would invalidate the whole Keynesian framework – the resulting body of work largely composing New Keynesian economics . In 1992 Alan Blinder wrote about a "Keynesian Restoration", as work based on Keynes's ideas had to some extent become fashionable once again in academia, though in the mainstream it was highly synthesised with monetarism and other neoclassical thinking. In the world of policy making, free market influences broadly sympathetic to monetarism have remained very strong at government level – in powerful normative institutions like the World Bank , the IMF and US Treasury , and in prominent opinion-forming media such as the Financial Times and The Economist .

[ 98 ] Keynesian resurgence 2008–09 [ edit ] Main article: 2008–09 Keynesian resurgence The economist Manmohan Singh , the then-prime minister of India, spoke strongly in favour of Keynesian fiscal stimulus at the 2008 G-20 Washington summit .

[ 99 ] The 2008 financial crisis led to public skepticism about the free market consensus even from some on the economic right. In March 2008, Martin Wolf , chief economics commentator at the Financial Times , announced the death of the dream of global free-market capitalism.

[ 100 ] In the same month macroeconomist James K. Galbraith used the 25th Annual Milton Friedman Distinguished Lecture to launch a sweeping attack against the consensus for monetarist economics and argued that Keynesian economics were far more relevant for tackling the emerging crises.

[ 101 ] Economist Robert J. Shiller had begun advocating robust government intervention to tackle the financial crises, specifically citing Keynes.

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] [ 104 ] Nobel laureate Paul Krugman also actively argued the case for vigorous Keynesian intervention in the economy in his columns for The New York Times .

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] [ 107 ] Other prominent economic commentators who have argued for Keynesian government intervention to mitigate the 2008 financial crisis included George Akerlof , [ 108 ] J. Bradford DeLong , [ 109 ] Robert Reich [ 110 ] and Joseph Stiglitz .

[ 111 ] Newspapers and other media have also cited work relating to Keynes by Hyman Minsky , [ 35 ] Robert Skidelsky , [ 24 ] Donald Markwell [ 112 ] and Axel Leijonhufvud .

[ 113 ] A series of major bailouts were pursued during the 2008 financial crisis , starting on 7 September 2008 with the announcement that the US Government was to nationalise the two government-sponsored enterprises which oversaw most of the US subprime mortgage market – Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac . In October, Alistair Darling , the British Chancellor of the Exchequer , referred to Keynes as he announced plans for substantial fiscal stimulus to head off the worst effects of recession, in accordance with Keynesian economic thought.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] Similar policies have been adopted by other governments worldwide.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] This was in stark contrast to the action imposed on Indonesia during the 1997 Asian financial crisis , when it was forced by the IMF to close 16 banks at the same time, prompting a bank run .

[ 118 ] Much of the post-crisis discussion reflected Keynes's advocacy of international coordination of fiscal or monetary stimulus, and of international economic institutions such as the IMF and the World Bank, which many had argued should be reformed as a "new Bretton Woods", and should have been even before the crises broke out.

[ 119 ] The IMF and United Nations economists advocated a coordinated international approach to fiscal stimulus.

[ 120 ] Donald Markwell argued that in the absence of such an international approach, there would be a risk of worsening international relations and possibly even world war arising from economic factors similar to those present during the depression of the 1930s.

[ 112 ] By the end of December 2008, the Financial Times reported that "the sudden resurgence of Keynesian policy is a stunning reversal of the orthodoxy of the past several decades." [ 121 ] In December 2008, Paul Krugman released his book The Return of Depression Economics and the Crisis of 2008 , arguing that economic conditions similar to those that existed during the earlier part of the 20th century had returned, making Keynesian policy prescriptions more relevant than ever. In February 2009 Robert J. Shiller and George Akerlof published Animal Spirits , a book where they argue the current US stimulus package is too small as it does not take into account Keynes's insight on the importance of confidence and expectations in determining the future behaviour of businesspeople and other economic agents.

In the March 2009 speech entitled Reform the International Monetary System , Zhou Xiaochuan , the governor of the People's Bank of China , came out in favour of Keynes's idea of a centrally managed global reserve currency. Zhou argued that it was unfortunate that part of the reason for the Bretton Woods system breaking down was the failure to adopt Keynes's bancor . Zhou proposed a gradual move towards increased use of IMF special drawing rights (SDRs).

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] Although Zhou's ideas had not been broadly accepted, leaders meeting in April at the 2009 G-20 London summit agreed to allow $250 billion of special drawing rights to be created by the IMF, to be distributed globally. Stimulus plans were credited for contributing to a better-than-expected economic outlook by both the OECD [ 124 ] and the IMF, [ 125 ] [ 126 ] in reports published in June and July 2009. Both organisations warned global leaders that recovery was likely to be slow, so counter-recessionary measures ought not be rolled back too early.

While the need for stimulus measures was broadly accepted among policymakers, there had been much debate over how to fund the spending. Some leaders and institutions, such as Angela Merkel [ 127 ] and the European Central Bank , [ 128 ] expressed concern over the potential impact on inflation, national debt and the risk that a too-large stimulus will create an unsustainable recovery.

Among professional economists the revival of Keynesian economics has been even more divisive. Although many economists, such as George Akerlof, Paul Krugman, Robert Shiller and Joseph Stiglitz, supported Keynesian stimulus, others did not believe higher government spending would help the United States economy recover from the Great Recession . Some economists, such as Robert Lucas , questioned the theoretical basis for stimulus packages.

[ 129 ] Others, like Robert Barro and Gary Becker , say that empirical evidence for beneficial effects from Keynesian stimulus does not exist.

[ 130 ] However, there is a growing academic literature that shows that fiscal expansion helps an economy grow in the near term, and that certain types of fiscal stimulus are particularly effective.

[ 131 ] [ 132 ] New Keynesian economics [ edit ] Main article: New Keynesian economics New Keynesian economics developed in the 1990s and early 2000s as a response to the critique that macroeconomics lacked microeconomic foundations . New Keynesianism developed models to provide microfoundations for Keynesian economics. It incorporated parts of new classical macroeconomics to develop the new neoclassical synthesis , which forms the basis for mainstream macroeconomics today.

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] [ 135 ] [ 136 ] Two main assumptions define the New Keynesian approach to macroeconomics. Like the New Classical approach, New Keynesian macroeconomic analysis usually assumes that households and firms have rational expectations . However, the two schools differ in that New Keynesian analysis usually assumes a variety of market failures . In particular, New Keynesians assume that there is imperfect competition [ 137 ] in price and wage setting to help explain why prices and wages can become " sticky ", which means they do not adjust instantaneously to changes in economic conditions.

Wage and price stickiness, and the other market failures present in New Keynesian models , imply that the economy may fail to attain full employment . Therefore, New Keynesians argue that macroeconomic stabilisation by the government (using fiscal policy ) and the central bank (using monetary policy ) can lead to a more efficient macroeconomic outcome than a laissez faire policy would.

Overall views [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Liberalism in the United Kingdom Schools Classical Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Whiggist Conservative Muscular Economic Green Neo Radical Social Principles Capitalism Civil and political rights Due process Economic freedom Environmentalism Equality before the law Freedom of the press Freedom of religion Freedom of speech Laissez-faire Natural law Rule of law Social justice Welfare state History English Civil War Glorious Revolution Anti-Corn Law League Victorian era Chartism 1905–1915 liberal government Liberal welfare reforms Intellectuals Acton Arnold Bentham Berlin Beveridge Burke Byron Chesterton Collingwood Fawcett Freeden Green Hammond (Barbara) Hammond (John Lawrence) Hayek Hobhouse Keynes Locke Macaulay Mill (James) Mill (John Stuart) Muir Paine Priestley Ricardo Shelley Smith Spencer Taylor Mill Trevelyan (George) Trevelyan (George Macaulay) Wilson Wollstonecraft Politicians Asquith Bass Bright Burke Cable Campbell-Bannerman Chamberlain Clegg Cobden Fox Gladstone Hunt Jenkins Kennedy Lloyd George Mill (John Stuart) Muir Naoroji Rosebery Simon Steel Thorpe Parties Active Alliance Party of Northern Ireland Liberal Democrats Scottish Liberal Democrats Defunct Liberal Party Peelite Radicals Social Democratic Party Whigs Media The Economist Financial Times The Guardian The Independent The Sunday Times The Times Related topics Centrism Centre-left Centre-right Conservatism in the United Kingdom Liberal conservatism Politics of the United Kingdom Scottish Liberals for Independence Socialism in the United Kingdom Liberal socialism Liberalism portal United Kingdom portal v t e Praise [ edit ] On a personal level, Keynes's charm was such that he was generally well received wherever he went – even those who found themselves on the wrong side of his occasionally sharp tongue rarely bore a grudge.

[ 138 ] Keynes's speech at the closing of the Bretton Woods negotiations was received with a lasting standing ovation, rare in international relations, as the delegates acknowledged the scale of his achievements made despite poor health.

[ 32 ] Austrian School economist Friedrich Hayek was Keynes's most prominent contemporary critic, with sharply opposing views on the economy.

[ 24 ] : 482–485 Yet after Keynes's death, he wrote: "He was the one really great man I ever knew, and for whom I had unbounded admiration. The world will be a very much poorer place without him." [ 139 ] Colleague Nicholas Davenport recalled, "There were deep emotional forces about Maynard ... One could sense his humanity. There was nothing of the cold intellectual about him." [ 140 ] Lionel Robbins , former head of the economics department at the London School of Economics , who engaged in many heated debates with Keynes in the 1930s, had this to say after observing Keynes in early negotiations with the Americans while drawing up plans for Bretton Woods: [ 24 ] : 760–761 This went very well indeed. Keynes was in his most lucid and persuasive mood: and the effect was irresistible. At such moments, I often find myself thinking that Keynes must be one of the most remarkable men that have ever lived – the quick logic, the birdlike swoop of intuition, the vivid fancy, the wide vision, above all the incomparable sense of the fitness of words, all combine to make something several degrees beyond the limit of ordinary human achievement.

Douglas LePan , an official from the Canadian High Commission , wrote: [ 24 ] : 789 I am spellbound. This is the most beautiful creature I have ever listened to. Does he belong to our species? Or is he from some other order? There is something mythic and fabulous about him. I sense in him something massive and sphinx like, and yet also a hint of wings.

Bertrand Russell named Keynes one of the most intelligent people he had ever known, [ 141 ] commenting: [ 142 ] Keynes's intellect was the sharpest and clearest that I have ever known. When I argued with him, I felt that I took my life in my hands, and I seldom emerged without feeling something of a fool.

Keynes's obituary in The Times included the comment: "There is the man himself – radiant, brilliant, effervescent, gay, full of impish jokes ... He was a humane man genuinely devoted to the cause of the common good." [ 57 ] Critiques [ edit ] As a man of the centre described by some as having the greatest impact of any 20th-century economist, [ 50 ] Keynes attracted considerable criticism from both sides of the political spectrum. In the 1920s, Keynes was seen as anti-establishment and was mainly attacked from the right. In the "red 1930s", many young economists favoured Marxist views, even in Cambridge, [ 35 ] and while Keynes was engaging principally with the right to try to persuade them of the merits of more progressive policy, the most vociferous criticism against him came from the left, who saw him as a supporter of capitalism. From the 1950s and onwards, most of the attacks against Keynes have again been from the right.

Friedrich Hayek , one of Keynes's most prominent critics In 1931, Friedrich Hayek extensively critiqued Keynes's 1930 Treatise on Money .

[ 143 ] After reading Hayek's The Road to Serfdom , Keynes wrote to Hayek: "Morally and philosophically I find myself in agreement with virtually the whole of it." [ 144 ] He concluded the letter with the recommendation: What we need therefore, in my opinion, is not a change in our economic programmes, which would only lead in practice to disillusion with the results of your philosophy; but perhaps even the contrary, namely, an enlargement of them. Your greatest danger is the probable practical failure of the application of your philosophy in the United States.

On the pressing issue of the time, whether deficit spending could lift a country from depression, Keynes replied to Hayek's criticism [ 145 ] in the following way: I should... conclude rather differently. I should say that what we want is not no planning, or even less planning, indeed I should say we almost certainly want more. But the planning should take place in a community in which as many people as possible, both leaders and followers wholly share your moral position. Moderate planning will be safe enough if those carrying it out are rightly oriented in their minds and hearts to the moral issue.

Asked why Keynes expressed "moral and philosophical" agreement with Hayek's Road to Serfdom , Hayek stated: [ 146 ] Because he believed that he was fundamentally still a classical English liberal and wasn't quite aware of how far he had moved away from it. His basic ideas were still those of individual freedom. He did not think systematically enough to see the conflicts. He was, in a sense, corrupted by political necessity.

According to some observers, [ who?

] Hayek felt that the post-World War II "Keynesian orthodoxy" gave too much power to the state, and that such policies would lead toward socialism.

[ 147 ] While Milton Friedman described The General Theory as "a great book", he argues that its implicit separation of nominal from real magnitudes is neither possible nor desirable. Macroeconomic policy, Friedman argues, can reliably influence only the nominal.

[ 148 ] He and other monetarists have consequently argued that Keynesian economics can result in stagflation , the combination of low growth and high inflation that developed economies suffered in the early 1970s. More to Friedman's taste was the Tract on Monetary Reform (1923), which he regarded as Keynes's best work because of its focus on maintaining domestic price stability.

[ 148 ] Joseph Schumpeter was an economist of the same age as Keynes and one of his main rivals. He was among the first reviewers to argue that Keynes's General Theory was not a general theory, but a special case.

[ 149 ] He said the work expressed "the attitude of a decaying civilisation". After Keynes's death Schumpeter wrote a brief biographical piece Keynes the Economist – on a personal level he was very positive about Keynes as a man, praising his pleasant nature, courtesy and kindness. He assessed some of Keynes's biographical and editorial work as among the best he'd ever seen. Yet Schumpeter remained critical of Keynes's economics, linking Keynes's childlessness to what Schumpeter saw as an essentially short-term view. He considered Keynes to have a kind of unconscious patriotism that caused him to fail to understand the problems of other nations. For Schumpeter, "Practical Keynesianism is a seedling which cannot be transplanted into foreign soil: it dies there and becomes poisonous as it dies." [ 150 ] He "admired and envied Keynes, but when Keynes died in 1946, Schumpeter's obituary gave Keynes this same off-key, perfunctory treatment he would later give Adam Smith in the History of Economic Analysis , the "discredit of not adding a single innovation to the techniques of economic analysis." [ 151 ] Ludwig von Mises , an Austrian economist , describes a Keynesian system as believing it can solve most problems with "more money and credit" which leads to a system of " inflationism " in which "prices (of goods) rise higher and higher." [ 152 ] Murray Rothbard wrote that Keynesian-style governmental regulation of money and credit created a "dismal monetary and banking situation," since it allows for the central bankers that have the exclusive ability to print money to be "unchecked and out of control." [ 153 ] Rothbard went on to say in an interview that, "There is one good thing about (Karl) Marx : he was not a Keynesian." [ 154 ] President Harry S. Truman was sceptical of Keynesian theorising. He told Leon Keyserling , a Keynesian economist who chaired Truman's Council of Economic Advisers : "Nobody can ever convince me that government can spend a dollar that it's not got." [ 51 ] Views on race [ edit ] Some critics have sought to show that Keynes had sympathies towards Nazism , and a number of writers have described him as antisemitic . Keynes's private letters contain portraits and descriptions, some of which can be characterised as antisemitic, while others as philosemitic .

[ 155 ] [ 156 ] Scholars have suggested that these reflect clichés current at the time that he accepted uncritically, rather than any racism.

[ 157 ] On several occasions Keynes used his influence to help his Jewish friends, most notably when he successfully lobbied for Ludwig Wittgenstein to be allowed residency in the United Kingdom, explicitly to rescue him from being deported to Nazi-occupied Austria . Keynes was a supporter of Zionism , serving on committees supporting the cause.

[ 157 ] Allegations that he was racist or had totalitarian beliefs have been rejected by Robert Skidelsky and other biographers.

[ 32 ] Professor Gordon Fletcher wrote that "the suggestion of a link between Keynes and any support of totalitarianism cannot be sustained".

[ 59 ] Once the aggressive tendencies of the Nazis towards Jews and other minorities had become apparent, Keynes made clear his loathing of Nazism. As a lifelong pacifist he had initially favoured peaceful containment of Nazi Germany , yet he began to advocate a forceful resolution while many conservatives were still arguing for appeasement. After the war started, he roundly criticised the Left for losing their nerve to confront Adolf Hitler , saying: [ 24 ] : 586 The intelligentsia of the Left were the loudest in demanding that the Nazi aggression should be resisted at all costs. When it comes to a showdown, scarce four weeks have passed before they remember that they are pacifists and write defeatist letters to your columns, leaving the defence of freedom and civilisation to Colonel Blimp and the Old School Tie, for whom Three Cheers.

Personal life [ edit ] Painter Duncan Grant (left) with Keynes in 1912 Relationships [ edit ] Keynes's early romantic and sexual relationships were exclusively with men.

[ 158 ] Keynes had been in relationships while at Eton and Cambridge; significant among these early partners were Dilly Knox and Daniel Macmillan.

[ 26 ] : 27 [ 159 ] Keynes was open about his affairs, and from 1901 to 1915 kept separate diaries in which he tabulated his many sexual encounters.

[ 160 ] [ 161 ] Keynes's relationship and later close friendship with Macmillan was to be fortunate, as Macmillan's company first published his tract Economic Consequences of the Peace .

[ 26 ] : 18 Attitudes in the Bloomsbury Group , in which Keynes was avidly involved, were relaxed about homosexuality. Keynes, together with writer Lytton Strachey , had reshaped the Victorian attitudes of the Cambridge Apostles : "since [their] time, homosexual relations among the members were for a time common", wrote Bertrand Russell .

[ 162 ] The artist Duncan Grant has been described as "the supreme male love of Keynes's life", and their sexual relationship lasted from 1908 to 1915.

[ 163 ] Keynes was also involved with Lytton Strachey, [ 158 ] though they were, for the most part, love rivals rather than lovers. Keynes had won the affections of Arthur Hobhouse [ 164 ] and, as with Grant, fell out with a jealous Strachey over it.

[ 165 ] Strachey had previously found himself put off by Keynes, not least because of his manner of "treat[ing] his love affairs statistically".

[ 166 ] Political opponents have used Keynes's sexuality to attack his academic work.

[ 167 ] One line of attack held that he was uninterested in the long-term ramifications of his theories because he had no children.

[ 167 ] Donald Kagan , in On the Origins of War , quotes Sally Marks and Stephen A. Schuker to suggest that "[Keynes's] passion for Carl Melchior " distorted his position in favor of Germany.

[ 168 ] Keynes's friends in the Bloomsbury Group were initially surprised when, in his later years, he began pursuing affairs with women, [ 169 ] demonstrating himself to be bisexual .

[ 170 ] Ray Costelloe (who later married Oliver Strachey ) was an early heterosexual interest of Keynes.

[ 171 ] In 1906, Keynes had written of this infatuation that, "I seem to have fallen in love with Ray a little bit, but as she isn't male I haven't [been] able to think of any suitable steps to take." [ 28 ] : 104 Marriage [ edit ] Lydia Lopokova and Keynes in the 1920s In 1921, Keynes wrote that he had fallen "very much in love" with Lydia Lopokova , a well-known Russian ballerina and one of the stars of Sergei Diaghilev 's Ballets Russes .

[ 28 ] : 395 In the early years of his courtship, he maintained an affair with a younger man, Sebastian Sprott , in tandem with Lopokova, but eventually chose Lopokova exclusively.

[ 172 ] [ 173 ] They were married in 1925, with Keynes's former lover Duncan Grant as best man.

[ 141 ] [ 158 ] "What a marriage of beauty and brains, the fair Lopokova and John Maynard Keynes" was said at the time. Keynes later commented to Strachey that beauty and intelligence were rarely found in the same person, and that only in Duncan Grant had he found the combination.

[ 174 ] The union was happy, with biographer Peter Clarke writing that the marriage gave Keynes "a new focus, a new emotional stability and a sheer delight of which he never wearied".

[ 38 ] [ 175 ] The couple hoped to have children but this did not happen.

[ 38 ] Among Keynes's Bloomsbury friends, Lopokova was, at least initially, subjected to criticism for her manners, mode of conversation and supposedly humble social origins – the last of the ostensible causes being particularly noted in the letters of Vanessa and Clive Bell , and Virginia Woolf .

[ 176 ] [ 177 ] In her novel Mrs Dalloway (1925), Woolf bases the character of Rezia Warren Smith on Lopokova.

[ 178 ] E. M. Forster later wrote in contrition about "Lydia Keynes, whose every word should be recorded"; [ 179 ] "How we all used to underestimate her".

[ 176 ] Keynes had no children, and his wife outlived him by 35 years, dying in 1981.

46 Gordon Square , where Keynes often stayed while in London. Following his marriage, Keynes took out an extended lease on Tilton House , a farm in the countryside near Brighton , which became the couple's main home when not in the capital.

[ 180 ] Blue plaque , 46 Gordon Square Support for the arts [ edit ] Keynes thought that the pursuit of money for its own sake was a pathological condition, and that the proper aim of work is to provide leisure. He wanted shorter working hours and longer holidays for all.

[ 61 ] Keynes was interested in literature in general and drama in particular and supported the Cambridge Arts Theatre financially, which allowed the institution to become one of the major British stages outside London.

[ 141 ] Keynes's interest in classical opera and dance led him to support the Royal Opera House at Covent Garden and the Ballet Company at Sadler's Wells . During the war , as a member of CEMA (Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts), Keynes helped secure government funds to maintain both companies while their venues were shut. Following the war, Keynes was instrumental in establishing the Arts Council of Great Britain and was its founding chairman in 1946. From the start, the two organisations that received the largest grants from the new body were the Royal Opera House and Sadler's Wells.

Keynes built up a substantial collection of fine art, including works by Paul Cézanne , Edgar Degas , Amedeo Modigliani , Georges Braque , Pablo Picasso and Georges Seurat (some of which can now be seen at the Fitzwilliam Museum ).

[ 141 ] He enjoyed collecting books; he collected and protected many of Isaac Newton 's papers. In part on the basis of these papers, Keynes wrote of Newton as "the last of the magicians." [ 181 ] Philosophical and spiritual views [ edit ] Keynes, like other members of the Bloomsbury Group , was greatly influenced by the philosophy of G. E. Moore , which in 1938 he described as "still my religion under the surface".

[ 182 ] According to Moore, states of mind were the only valuable things in themselves, the most important being "the pleasures of human intercourse and the enjoyment of beautiful objects".

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] Virginia Woolf 's biographer tells an anecdote of how Virginia Woolf, Keynes and T. S. Eliot discussed religion at a dinner party, in the context of their struggle against Victorian era morality.

[ 185 ] Keynes may have been religiously confirmed , [ 186 ] but according to Cambridge University he was clearly an agnostic for all his life.

[ 187 ] According to one biographer, "he was never able to take religion seriously, regarding it as a strange aberration of the human mind" [ 186 ] but also added that he came to "value it for social and moral reasons" later in life.

[ 188 ] Another biographer writes that he "broke the family faith and became a 'ferocious agnostic ' " during his time at Eton.

[ 189 ] One Cambridge acquaintance remembered him as "an atheist with a devotion to King's chapel".

[ 29 ] At Cambridge, he was strongly associated with the Cambridge Heretics Society, an avowed atheist group which promoted secularism and humanism .

[ 190 ] Investments [ edit ] Keynes was ultimately a successful investor, building up a private fortune. His assets were nearly wiped out following the Wall Street crash of 1929 , which he did not foresee, but he soon recouped. At Keynes's death, in 1946, his net worth stood just short of £500,000 – equivalent to £23,000,000 in 2023. The sum had been amassed despite lavish support for various charities and philanthropies and despite his ethical reluctance to sell on a falling market in cases where he saw such behaviour as likely to deepen a slump.

[ c ] [ 24 ] : 520–521, 563–565 Keynes managed the endowment of King's College, Cambridge starting in the 1920s, initially with an unsuccessful strategy based on market timing but later shifting to focus in the publicly traded stock of small and medium-sized companies that paid large dividends .

[ 191 ] This was a controversial decision at the time, as stocks were considered high-risk and the centuries-old endowment had traditionally been invested in agricultural land and fixed income assets like bonds.

[ 192 ] Keynes was granted permission to invest a small minority of assets in stocks, and his adroit management resulted this portion of the endowment growing to become the majority of the endowment's assets.

[ 192 ] The active component of his portfolio outperformed a British equity index by an average of 6% [ 191 ] to 8% a year over a quarter century, earning him a favourable mention by later investors such as Warren Buffett and George Soros .

[ 193 ] Joel Tillinghast of Fidelity Investments describes Keynes as an early practitioner of value investing , a school of thought formalised in the US by Benjamin Graham and David Dodd at Columbia Business School during the 1920s and 1930s.

[ 191 ] However, Keynes is believed to have developed his ideas independently.

[ 192 ] Keynes is also regarded as a pioneer of financial diversification as he recognised the importance of holding assets with "opposed risks" as he wrote "since they are likely to move in opposite directions when there are general fluctuations"; [ 194 ] and also as an early international investor who avoided home country bias by investing substantially in stocks outside the United Kingdom.

[ 195 ] Ken Fisher characterised Keynes as an exception to the rule that economists usually make horrible investors.

[ 194 ] Keynes joined the Board of the National Mutual Life Assurance Society in 1919 and served as chairman from 1921 to 1938. Keynes introduced a policy of active trading of fixed interest stocks, coupled with investment in equities. "Keynes was the first to give [investment trading] the seal of respectability and to apply it to a life assurance fund".

[ 140 ] [ 196 ] Olivier Accominotti and David Chambers have pointed out that Keynes did not make use of currency trading and the carry trade in his investments.

[ 197 ] Keynes understood the strategy however, but considered that in his time the separation of the interest rates was not sufficient to pay for the costs of transporting the capital as gold, as he explained to the Macmillan Committee of 1930.

[ 198 ] [ 199 ] Political life [ edit ] Keynes was a lifelong member of the Liberal Party , which until the 1920s had been one of the two main political parties in the United Kingdom, and as late as 1916 had often been the dominant power in government. Keynes had helped campaign for the Liberals at elections from about 1906, yet he always refused to run for office himself, despite being asked to do so on three separate occasions in 1920. From 1926, when Lloyd George became leader of the Liberals, Keynes took a major role in defining the party's economic policy, but by then the Liberals had been displaced into third-party status by the growing workers-oriented Labour Party .

[ 24 ] : 380–384 In 1939 Keynes had the option to enter Parliament as an independent MP with the University of Cambridge seat . A by-election for the seat was to be held due to the illness of an elderly Tory , and the master of Magdalene College had obtained agreement that none of the major parties would field a candidate if Keynes chose to stand. Keynes declined the invitation as he felt he would wield greater influence on events if he remained a free agent.

[ 38 ] This article is part of a series on Eugenics Historical trajectory Ancient Jus trium liberorum Lex Papia Poppaea Jewish views on incest Incest in the Bible British eugenics Malthusian League Eugenic feminism Nazi eugenics " Racial hygiene " Law for the Prevention of Hereditarily Diseased Offspring Hereditary Health Court Lebensborn Romani Holocaust Aktion T4 Doctors' Trial US eugenics Slave breeding in the US Eugenics Survey of Vermont Oneida stirpiculture Immigration Act of 1924 US birth control movement Sterilization law in the United States Buck v. Bell Doe ex. rel. Tarlow v. District of Columbia Madrigal v. Quilligan Poe v. Lynchburg Training School & Hospital Skinner v. Oklahoma Stump v. Sparkman Virginia Sterilization Act of 1924 Canadian eugenics The Famous Five Sexual Sterilization Act French Eugenics Japanese eugenics Hispanic eugenics Mexican eugenics Swedish sterilization program (1906–1975) Peruvian sterilization program (1990–2000) Population planning in Singapore Neo-eugenics He Jiankui genome editing incident Human genetic enhancement Religious response to assisted reproductive technology Pre-war academic proponents Bell Brigham Burbank Carrell Davenport Darwin (Leonhard) DeCourcy Ward von Ehrenfels Elderton Evang Fisher Galton Gates Goldscheid Grant Gruber Günther Guyer Haldane Herseni Holmes Hrdlička Jennings Jordan Kang Key Kraepelin Lenz Lewis London Magnussen Manuilă Mittmann Moreira Munro Nordau Osborn Pan Pearson (Karl) Perkins Pérez Ploetz Quetelet Rainer Relgis Ross Schallmayer Scharffenberg Serebrovsky Sergi Slater Southard Stoddard Taussig Terman Tesla Thorndike Vacher de Lapouge Verschuer Yerkes Post-war academic remnants Agar Bell (Julia) Blacker Carl Carter Cattell Coleman Darlington Fleischman Garrett Glad Hardin Haldane Hanania Herndon Huxley Ingle Itzkoff José Figueredo Kallmann Kirkconnell Koch Laski Lederberg Lorenz Ludovici Lundman Lynn MacEachran Magnussen Miller Muller Murray Nijenhuis Nyborg Osborn Pearson (Roger) Pendell Pitt-Rivers Popenoe Rostand Savulescu Shapiro Shockley Verschuer Vining Jr.

Weiss Pamphlets and manifestos Hereditary Genius (1869) Degeneration (1892–1893) Gallia (1895) " The Blood of the Nation " (1901/1910) Anticipations (1901) The Training of the Human Plant (1907) Essays in Eugenics (1909) Heredity in Relation to Eugenics (1911) Mankind at the Crossroads (1923) Daedalus (1924) La raza cósmica (1925) Marriage and Morals (1929) The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection (1930) " Charter for Rationalists " (1932) Man, the Unknown (1935) After Us (1936) " Eugenics manifesto " (1939) New Bottles for New Wine (1950) The Marching Morons (1951) The Dance with the Devil (1958) Civilized Man's Eight Deadly Sins (1973) Beyondism (1987) Dysgenics (1996) Eugenics: A Reassessment (2001) Jewish Eugenics (2011) Selective Breeding and the Birth of Philosophy (2023) Organizations Without significant post-war activity ABCL Alberta Eugenics Board AASPIM AES Carnegie Institution for Science Carrel Foundation CSHL Co-operative Women's Guild EBNC ERO Fabian Society Galton Laboratory German Society for Racial Hygiene Heredity Commission HBF Human Betterment League Immigration Restriction League INED IAAEE International Eugenics Conference IFEO Kaiser Wilhelm Institute Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry PAA Progressive League Race Betterment Foundation RHA Rockefeller Foundation State Institute for Racial Biology With significant post-war activity Annals of Eugenics (1954) CIS The Eugenics Review (1968) FREED HDF J. Soc. Political Econ. Stud.

LCI Mankind Quarterly OpenPsych Project Prevention Repository for Germinal Choice Ulster Institute for Social Research Related Demographic engineering Dysgenics Fujimorism Genetic discrimination History of eugenics Idiocracy Pedigree chart Political views of Bertrand Russell Political views of H. G. Wells Raymond Cattell bibliography Ronald Fisher bibliography Selective breeding History of Science portal v t e Keynes was a proponent of eugenics .

[ 200 ] He served as director of the British Eugenics Society from 1937 to 1944. As late as 1946, shortly before his death, Keynes declared eugenics to be "the most important, significant and, I would add, genuine branch of sociology which exists." [ 201 ] Keynes once remarked that "the youth had no religion save communism and this was worse than nothing." [ 185 ] Marxism "was founded upon nothing better than a misunderstanding of Ricardo ", and, given time, he (Keynes) "would deal thoroughly with the Marxists" and other economists to solve the economic problems their theories "threaten to cause".

[ 185 ] In 1925, Keynes said "the class war will find me on the side of the educated bourgeoisie." [ 202 ] [ 203 ] In 1931 Keynes had the following to say on Leninism: [ 43 ] : 300 How can I accept a doctrine, which sets up as its bible, above and beyond criticism, an obsolete textbook [ Das Kapital ] which I know not only to be scientifically erroneous but without interest or application to the modern world? How can I adopt a creed which, preferring the mud to the fish, exalts the boorish proletariat above the bourgeoisie and the intelligentsia who, with whatever faults, are the quality of life and surely carry the seeds of all human advancement? Even if we need a religion, how can we find it in the turbid rubbish of the red bookshop? It is hard for an educated, decent, intelligent son of Western Europe to find his ideals here, unless he has first suffered some strange and horrid process of conversion which has changed all his values.

— "Politics §I. A Short View of Russia (1925)" pp. 297–311, Essays in Persuasion (1931) Keynes was a firm supporter of women's rights and in 1932 became vice-chairman of the Marie Stopes Society which provided birth control education. He also campaigned against job discrimination against women and unequal pay. He was an outspoken campaigner for reform of the laws against homosexuality .

[ 61 ] Heraldic arms [ edit ] Coat of arms of John Maynard Keynes Notes Granted 16 May 1944 [ 204 ] Motto Me Tutore Tutus Eris ['Under my leadership you will be safe'] [ 205 ] Death [ edit ] Tilton House, 2021 Throughout his life, Keynes worked energetically for the benefit both of the public and his friends; even when his health was poor, he laboured to sort out the finances of his old college.

[ 206 ] Helping to set up the Bretton Woods system , he worked to institute an international monetary system that would be beneficial for the world economy . In 1946, Keynes suffered a series of heart attacks, which ultimately proved fatal. They began during negotiations for the Anglo-American loan in Savannah, Georgia , where he was trying to secure favourable terms for the United Kingdom from the United States, a process he described as "absolute hell".

[ 50 ] [ 207 ] A few weeks after returning from the United States, Keynes died of a heart attack at Tilton, his farmhouse home near Firle , East Sussex, England, on 21 April 1946, at the age of 62.

[ 24 ] : 832 [ 208 ] Against his wishes (he wanted his ashes to be deposited in the crypt at King's), his ashes were scattered on the Downs above Tilton.

[ 209 ] Both of Keynes's parents outlived him: his father John Neville Keynes (1852–1949) by three years, and his mother Florence Ada Keynes (1861–1958) by twelve. Keynes's brother Sir Geoffrey Keynes (1887–1982) was a distinguished surgeon, scholar and bibliophile. Keynes's sister, Margaret Hill (1885–1970) was a prominent social reformer. His nephews include Richard Keynes (1919–2010), a physiologist, and Quentin Keynes (1921–2003), an adventurer and bibliophile. His niece, Polly Hill (1914–2005), was an economic anthropologist and emeritus fellow of Clare Hall, Cambridge .

Cultural representations [ edit ] In John Buchan 's novel Island of Sheep (1936) the character of the financier Barralty is based on Keynes.

[ 210 ] In the film Wittgenstein (1993), directed by Derek Jarman , Keynes was played by John Quentin.

[ 211 ] The docudrama Paris 1919 , based around Margaret MacMillan's book , featured Paul Bandey as Keynes.

[ 212 ] In the BBC series about the Bloomsbury Group, Life in Squares , Keynes was portrayed by Edmund Kingsley.

[ 213 ] The novel Mr Keynes' Revolution (2020) by E.J. Barnes is about Keynes's life in the 1920s.

[ 214 ] Love Letters , based on the correspondence of Keynes and Lydia Lopokova, was performed by Tobias Menzies and Helena Bonham-Carter at Charleston in 2021.

[ 215 ] Publications [ edit ] Books [ edit ] 1913 Indian Currency and Finance 1919 The Economic Consequences of the Peace 1921 A Treatise on Probability 1922 Revision of the Treaty 1923 A Tract on Monetary Reform 1926 The End of Laissez-Faire 1930 A Treatise on Money 1931 Essays in Persuasion 1933 Essays in Biography 1936 The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money 1940 How to Pay for the War: A radical plan for the Chancellor of the Exchequer 1949 Two Memoirs . Ed. by David Garnett (consists of two autobiographical essays: " Dr. Melchior : A Defeated Enemy" and "My Early Beliefs") Articles and pamphlets [ edit ] (A partial list.) 1915 The Economics of War in Germany (The Economic Journal) 1922 Inflation as a Method of Taxation (Manchester Guardian Commercial Reconstruction Supplement) 1925 Am I a Liberal?

(Nation & Athenaeum) 1926 Laissez-Faire and Communism (New Republic) 1929 Can Lloyd George Do It?

(Nation and Athenaeum) 1930 Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren (Nation and Athenaeum) 1930 The Great Slump of 1930 (Nation and Athenæum) 1931 The End of the Gold Standard (Sunday Express) 1933 The Means to Prosperity (Macmillan and Co.) 1933 An Open Letter to President Roosevelt (New York Times) 1937 The General Theory of Employment (The Quarterly Journal of Economics) See also [ edit ] Animal spirits (Keynes) – Factors that influence human behaviour Effective demand – Demand in a constrained marketplace Embedded liberalism – Global economic system, 1945 to 1970s Global financial system – Global framework for capital flows Liberalism in the United Kingdom – Overview of liberalism in the United Kingdom Keynes family – Noted English family Mariana Mazzucato – Italian-American economist and professor (born 1968) Post-war consensus – Period in British political history, 1945 to 1970s Stockholm School (economics) – School of economic thought (1930s) References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ In Essays in Persuasion , Keynes estimates that cancellation of all inter-ally debts after the First World War would have resulted in a net cost to the US of £2.0 billion and of £0.9 billion to the UK (figures not adjusted for subsequent cumulative inflation).

[ 43 ] : 32 See §3 – "Proposals for the Reconstruction of Europe (1919)": §§(ii) "The Settlement of Inter-Ally Indebtedness", [ 43 ] : 29–39 within chapter "The Treaty of Peace".

^ Marks also claims that the book is a "brilliant but warped polemic", [ 47 ] : 636 that is "long-discredited by scholars", and which Keynes regretted writing.

[ 47 ] : 656 ^ To Francis Nathaniel Curzon, his fellow director of the National Mutual, Keynes wrote in 1938: "...

It is the duty of a serious investor to accept the depreciation of his holding with equanimity ... any other policy is anti-social, destructive of confidence and incompatible with the working of the economic system." [ 24 ] : 565 Citations [ edit ] ^ Rosalsky, Greg (27 August 2019).

"The 'Strange, Unduly Neglected Prophet' " .

NPR . Retrieved 17 April 2025 .

^ Bharathan, Vipin (16 August 2020).

"Money That Rots Like Potatoes, Money That Rusts Like Iron, Hot Money And CBDCs" .

Forbes . Retrieved 17 April 2025 .

Gesell's solution to this was a proposal to impose a stamp tax, that cash becomes worthless unless it is renewed periodically through a stamp upon the notes. The stamp had to be paid for by giving a certain amount of that cash to the authorities. Essentially a negative interest rate that breaks the Zero Lower Bound (ZLB) on cash.

^ Mankiw, N. Gregory (18 April 2009).

"It May Be Time for the Fed to Go Negative" .

The New York Times .

John Maynard Keynes approvingly cited the idea of a carrying tax on money.

^ Bradley W. Bateman; Toshiaki Hirai; Maria Cristina Marcuzzo, eds. (2010).

The Return to Keynes . Harvard University Press. p. 146.

ISBN 978-0674053540 .

Archived from the original on 22 April 2017 . Retrieved 21 April 2017 .

^ Parsons, Wayne (2006).

The Cambridge History of Twentieth-Century Political Thought . Cambridge University Press. p. 46.

ISBN 978-1139053600 .

^ Cairncross, Alec. "Keynes, John Maynard, Baron Keynes (1883–1946)".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/34310 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ Yergin & Stanislaw 2002 , pp. 39–42.

^ Sloman, John (22 October 2008).

"How to kick-start a faltering economy the Keynes way" .

BBC News magazine .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2009 . Retrieved 13 November 2008 .

^ Cohn, Steven Mark (2015).

Reintroducing Macroeconomics: A Critical Approach . Taylor & Francis. p. 111.

ISBN 978-1317461203 .

Archived from the original on 22 April 2017 . Retrieved 21 April 2017 .

^ Davis, William L.; Figgins, Bob; Hedengren, David; Klein, Daniel B. (May 2011).

"Economic Professors' Favorite Economic Thinkers, Journals, and Blogs" (PDF) .

Econ Journal Watch .

8 (2): 126– 146.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 21 April 2017 .

^ Skidelsky, Robert (2010).

Keynes: The Return of the Master . Cambridge: Public affairs.

ISBN 978-1586488970 .

^ Wolf, Martin (23 December 2008). "Keynes offers us the best way to think about the financial crisis".

Financial Times .

(Columnist opinion) ^ a b Keynes, John Maynard (1936).

The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 November 2019 . Retrieved 7 May 2021 – via The University of Adelaide Library Electronic Texts Collection.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Maurin, Max (2011).

"J.M. Keynes, le libre-échange et le protectionnisme" [J.M. Keynes, Free Trade and Protectionism].

L'Actualité Économique (in French).

86 : 109– 129.

doi : 10.7202/045556ar .

^ a b c d e Maurin, Max (2013).

Les fondements non neoclassiques du protectionnisme (Thesis) (in French). Université Bordeaux-IV.

^ a b c d e Keynes, John Maynard (June 1933).

"National Self-Sufficiency" .

The Yale Review .

22 (4): 755– 769.

Archived from the original on 15 May 2011 . Retrieved 14 May 2021 .

^ Krugman, Paul (1995).

Peddling Prosperity: Economic Sense and Nonsense in the Age of Diminished Expectations . W.W. Norton. p. 43.

ISBN 978-0393312928 .

In 1968 in one of the decisive intellectual achievements of postwar economics, Friedman not only showed why the apparent tradeoff embodied in the idea of the Phillips curve was wrong; he also predicted the emergence of combined inflation and high unemployment ... dubbed 'stagflation.

^ "To Set the Economy Right" .

Time . 27 August 1979. Archived from the original on 4 April 2009 . Retrieved 13 November 2008 .

^ Chris Giles; Ralph Atkins; Krishna Guha.

"The undeniable shift to Keynes" .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on 20 October 2020 . Retrieved 23 January 2009 .

^ Reich, Robert (29 March 1999).

"The Time 100: John Maynard Keynes" .

Time .

Archived from the original on 24 May 2021 . Retrieved 18 June 2009 .

^ "The IMF in Britain: Toothless truth tellers" .

The Economist . 11 May 2013.

Archived from the original on 18 April 2021 . Retrieved 2 October 2013 .

^ "Maynard Keynes" . The Bloomsbury Group. 22 August 2007.

Archived from the original on 30 April 2021 . Retrieved 26 May 2012 .

^ Keynes, Geoffrey (1975).

"The Early Years" . In Milo Keynes (ed.).

Essays on John Maynard Keynes . London: Cambridge University Press. pp.

26– 35.

ISBN 978-0521205344 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab Skidelsky, Robert (2003).

John Maynard Keynes, 1883–1946: Economist, Philosopher, Statesman . New York: Penguin Books.

ISBN 978-0143036159 .

^ Sources: Hession, Charles Henry (1984).

John Maynard Keynes: A Personal Biography of the Man Who Revolutionized Capitalism . MacMillan Ltd. pp. 12–.

ISBN 0025513109 .

Archived from the original on 1 January 2016 . Retrieved 27 June 2015 .

Dostaler, Gilles (2007).

Keynes and His Battles . Edward Elgar Publishing. pp. 262–.

ISBN 978-1781008379 .

Archived from the original on 15 March 2015 . Retrieved 27 June 2015 .

O'Connor, J.J.; Robertson, E.F. (October 2003).

"John Maynard Keynes" . School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of St Andrews, Scotland: MacTutor History of Mathematics.

Archived from the original on 25 October 2019 . Retrieved 25 January 2014 .

"Timeline" .

John Maynard Keynes . §"Pre-Career Years – 1883 to 1905".

Gümüş, Erdal (2003).

"J.M. Keynes; Liberalism and Keynes; Keynes's Personal Life; Keynes's School Years" .

Dumlupinar University Journal of Social Sciences .

5 (9). Eskisehir Osmangazi University: 81– 100. MPRA Paper No. 42373.

Archived from the original on 14 February 2022 . Retrieved 25 January 2014 .

(cites Skidelsky) 130 years of Perse Girls – Stephen Perse Foundation , 2011, p. 8, archived from the original on 22 August 2015 , retrieved 25 January 2014 includes a photograph that is said to show Keynes as a child at the Perse School Kindergarten ^ a b c Thorpe, D.R. (2011).

Supermac: The Life of Harold Macmillan . London: Pimlico; Chatto & Windus.

ISBN 978-1844135417 .

^ McGee, Matt (2005).

Economics – In terms of The Good, The Bad and The Economist . S.l.: IBID Press. p. 354.

ISBN 1876659106 .

OCLC 163584293 .

^ a b c Moggridge, Donald Edward (1992).

Maynard Keynes: An Economist's Biography . Oxford: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415051415 . p. 395: I again fell very much in love with her. She seemed to me perfect in every way.

^ a b Robinson, Austin (1975). "A Personal View". In Milo Keynes (ed.).

Essays on John Maynard Keynes . London: Cambridge University Press. pp.

26– 35.

ISBN 978-0521205344 .

See p.

11 ^ Cave, Peter (2009).

Humanism: A Beginner's Guide . Oneworld Publications.

ISBN 978-1780740294 .

Archived from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 5 October 2020 .

^ David Gowland.

"Biography of Baron John Maynard Keynes" . LiberalHistory.org. Archived from the original on 16 June 2011 . Retrieved 29 May 2009 .

^ a b c Aschheim, J.; Tavlas, G.S.; Heinsohn, G.; Steiger, O. (1994).

"The Monetary Thought-Ideology Nexus: Simons verses Keynes; Marx and Keynes – Private Property and Money" . In Wood, John Cunningham (ed.).

John Maynard Keynes: Critical Assessments . Second. pp.

101– 120, 135.

ISBN 978-0415114158 .

Archived from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 25 August 2020 .

^ "No. 11879" .

The London Gazette . 6 November 1906. p. 1124.

^ Skidelsky 1983 , p. 205.

^ a b c d e f g h Hyman Minsky (2008). "Chapter 1".

John Maynard Keynes . and McGraw-Hill Professional.

ISBN 978-0071593014 .

Archived from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 5 October 2020 .

^ See Keynes, John Maynard (1913).

Indian Currency and Finance . London: Macmillan & Co.

^ "No. 28711" .

The London Gazette . 18 April 1913. p. 2809.

^ a b c d Mackrell, Judith (6 May 2013).

"Niall Ferguson is wrong: writing on Lopokova, Keynes' wife, I found evidence of a warm and loving relationship in which both wanted children" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 28 April 2021 . Retrieved 28 April 2021 .

^ Spiegel, Henry William (1991).

The Growth of Economic Thought . Durham, UK: Duke University Press. p. 602.

ISBN 0822309734 .

^ "No. 30111" .

The London Gazette (Supplement). 1 June 1917. p. 5456.

^ "No. 31928" .

The London Gazette (Supplement). 1 June 1920. p. 6175.

^ McDonough, Frank (1997).

The Origins of the First and Second World Wars . Cambridge University Press. pp.

43– 46.

ISBN 1405106646 .

^ a b c Keynes, John Maynard (1931).

Essays in Persuasion . New York, W.W. Norton & Co.

ISBN 0393001903 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ "John Maynard Keynes" . Policonomics. 29 March 2012.

Archived from the original on 15 May 2021 . Retrieved 26 May 2012 .

^ a b c d Keynes, John Maynard (December 1919). "V. Reparation"; "VII. Remedies".

The Economic Consequences of the Peace (First ed.). Macmillan & Co. Ch. V: pp. 103–210; Ch. VII: pp. 236–279.

^ Henig, Ruth (1995).

Versailles and After, 1919–1933 (second ed.). Routledge. p. 65.

ISBN 978-1134798735 .

Archived from the original on 15 June 2020 . Retrieved 10 May 2017 .

^ a b c Marks, Sally (September 2013). "Mistakes and Myths: The Allies, Germany, and the Versailles Treaty, 1918–1921".

The Journal of Modern History .

85 (3): 632– 659.

doi : 10.1086/670825 .

JSTOR 10.1086/670825 .

S2CID 154166326 . p. 632: For nearly forty years, historians of twentieth-century diplomacy have argued that the Versailles treaty was more reasonable than its reputation suggests and that it did not of itself cause the Depression, the rise of Hitler, or World War II ^ Schuker, Stephen A. (1988).

American 'Reparations' to Germany, 1919–33: Implications for the Third-World Debt Crisis . Princeton Studies in International Finance. International Finance Section, Department of Economics, Princeton University. p. 119.

ISBN 0881652334 .

^ Schumpeter, Joseph (2003).

Ten Great Economists . Simon Publications. p. 271.

ISBN 1932512098 .

^ a b c Pressman, Steven (1999).

Fifty Major Economists . Routledge. pp.

99– 104.

ISBN 978-1134780822 .

Archived from the original on 15 June 2020 . Retrieved 21 April 2017 .

^ a b c Cassidy, John (10 October 2011).

"The Demand Doctor" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on 17 November 2018 . Retrieved 16 November 2018 .

^ Tribe, Keith (1997).

Economic Careers: Economics and Economists in Britain, 1930–1970 . London: Routledge. p. 61.

ISBN 0415147085 .

^ Sangkuhl, Elfriede (January 2015).

"How the Macroeconomic Theories of Keynes influenced the Development of Government Economic Finance Policy after the Great Depression of the 1930's: Using Australia as the Εxample" .

Athens Journal of Law .

1 (1): 34.

doi : 10.30958/ajl.1.1.3 .

^ Clarida, Richard (1999). "The Science of Monetary Policy: a New Keynesian Perspective".

Journal of Economic Literature .

37 (4): 1661– 1707.

doi : 10.1257/jel.37.4.1661 .

hdl : 10230/360 .

S2CID 55045787 .

^ a b Kishtainy, Niall (2017).

A little history of economics . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0300206364 .

OCLC 980872123 .

^ Hazlitt, Henry (1995) [1960].

The critics of Keynesian Economics . Irvington-on-Hudson, New York: Foundation for Economic Education .

ISBN 978-1572460133 .

^ a b Harris, Seymour E. (2005).

The New Economics: Keynes's Influence on Theory and Public Policy . Kessinger Publishing. pp. xxii, 46.

ISBN 1419145347 .

^ Martin, Kingsley (16 March 1940). "Mr Keynes Has A Plan".

Picture Post .

^ a b c d e f g h Fletcher, Gordon A. (1989).

Keynesian Revolution and Its Critics: Issues of Theory and Policy for the Monetary Production Economy (second ed.). Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp.

xix– xxi, 88, 189– 191, 234– 238, 256– 261.

ISBN 978-1349201082 .

Archived from the original on 15 June 2020 . Retrieved 10 May 2017 .

[ page range too broad ] ^ See Markwell, Donald (2006).

John Maynard Keynes and International Relations: Economic Paths to War and Peace , Oxford University Press.

^ a b c Davenport-Hines 2015 , p.

[ page needed ] .

^ Gazettes: "No. 35279" .

The London Gazette . 19 September 1941. p. 5489.

"No. 35511" .

The London Gazette . 3 April 1942. p. 1540.

^ "No. 35586" .

The London Gazette . 5 June 1942. p. 2475.

^ "No. 35623" .

The London Gazette . 7 July 1942. p. 2987.

^ Duggan, M.C.

"Taking Back Globalization: A China-United States Counterfactual Using Keynes's 1941 International Clearing Union" .

Review of Radical Political Economics .

45 (4): 508– 516.

doi : 10.1177/0486613412475191 .

ISSN 0486-6134 .

S2CID 154224790 .

Archived from the original on 10 May 2021 . Retrieved 12 March 2018 .

^ Brad Delong (December 2000).

"Review of Robert Skidelsky, John Maynard Keynes: Fighting for Britain 1937–1946 " . Berkeley university. Archived from the original on 14 October 2009 . Retrieved 14 June 2009 .

DeLong, J. Bradford (1 February 2002). "Review of Skidelsky's John Maynard Keynes: Fighting for Britain ".

Journal of Economic Literature .

40 (1): 155– 162.

doi : 10.1257/0022051027010 .

^ Keynes, John Maynard (1980). "Speech by Lord Keynes in Moving to Accept the Final Act at the Closing Plenary Session, Bretton Woods, 22 July 1944". In Moggridge, Donald (ed.).

Activities 1941–1946: Shaping the post war world . The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes. Vol. 26. London: Macmillan. p. 103.

ISBN 0333107365 .

^ Griffin, G. Edward (2004).

The Creature from Jekyll Island: A Second Look at the Federal Reserve . American Media. pp.

85– 106.

ISBN 0912986409 .

^ a b "Timeline" .

John Maynard Keynes .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2021 . Retrieved 26 May 2012 .

§"After the War: The World Bank, the IMF, and the End – 1945 to 1946" "John Maynard Keynes – Career Timeline" .

Archived from the original on 6 February 2015 . Retrieved 8 August 2025 .

^ Sayers, Richard (1976).

The Bank of England, 1891–1944 . Vol. 1. CUP Archive.

ISBN 978-0521210676 .

Archived from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 25 August 2020 .

^ a b Stiglitz, Joseph (5 May 2010).

"Reform the euro or bin it" . [Opinion].

The Guardian . Retrieved 29 January 2025 .

^ a b c d Crowther, Geoffrey (1948).

An Outline Of Money (Revised ed.). Thomas Nelson and Sons Ltd.

^ "What Is Deregulation?" .

Investopedia . 25 June 2019.

Archived from the original on 8 June 2019 . Retrieved 5 September 2019 .

Deregulation is the reduction or elimination of government power in a particular industry, usually enacted to create more competition within the industry.

^ "What Is Trade Liberalization" .

Investopedia . 18 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 21 July 2019 . Retrieved 5 September 2019 .

Trade liberalization is the removal or reduction of restrictions or barriers on the free exchange of goods between nations.

^ Costabile, Lilia (December 2007).

"Current Global Imbalances and the Keynes Plan (PDF)" .

Political Economy Research Institute . Archived from the original on 28 February 2019 . Retrieved 5 September 2019 .

^ Grewal, David Singh (September 2009).

"What Keynes warned about globalization" .

Seminar Magazine . New Delhi, India.

ISSN 0971-6742 .

Archived from the original on 21 July 2020 . Retrieved 5 September 2019 .

^ Krugman, P; Wells, R (2006).

Economics . Worth Publishers.

^ Duncan, R (2005).

The Dollar Crisis: Causes, Consequences, Cures . Wiley.

ISBN 978-0470821701 .

^ Monbiot, George (18 November 2008).

"Clearing Up This Mess" .

George Monbiot Website .

Archived from the original on 23 January 2009 . Retrieved 5 September 2019 .

^ Tabb, William K. (2002).

Reconstructing Political Economy: The Great Divide in Economic Thought . Routledge. p. 151.

ISBN 978-0203049310 .

Archived from the original on 15 March 2015 . Retrieved 27 June 2015 .

^ Kishtainy, Niall (2025).

A Little History of Economics . Yale University Press. pp.

104– 108.

ISBN 978-0300283242 .

^ a b c Daniel Yergin , William Cran (writers; producer) (2002). "Episode One: The Battle of Ideas; Ch. 6: Worldwide War".

Commanding Heights (TV documentary series).

PBS . Archived from the original on 16 May 2011.

([Transcript at 7:00]: Onscreen title: "World War II, 1941") . Retrieved 28 June 2009 .

^ Clark, Barry Stewart (1998).

Political Economy: A Comparative Approach . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 101.

ISBN 978-0275958695 .

Archived from the original on 15 June 2020 . Retrieved 10 May 2017 .

Modern liberalism was the dominant ideology in Western nations from the end of World War II until the early 1970s. Its appeal stemmed from not only the success of Keynesian economics in maintaining prosperity during that period, but also from the postwar revulsion towards any pure form of ideology.

^ Wolfe, Alan (2009).

The Future of Liberalism . Alfred A. Knopf.

ISBN 978-0307266774 .

Archived from the original on 15 June 2020 . Retrieved 10 May 2017 .

If Adam Smith is the quintessential classical liberal, the twentieth-century British economist John Maynard Keynes, whose ideas paved the way for massive public works projects and countercyclical economic policies meant to soften the ups and downs of the business cycle, best represents the modern version.

^ Davidson, Paul (2009). "Reforming the world's international money". In Edward Fullbrook (ed.).

Crash: Why it happened and what to do about it (PDF) . Vol. 1. Real-world Economics Review. pp.

115– 128.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 5 April 2010 .

^ Davidson, Paul (2009).

The Keynes Solution: The Path to Global Economic Prosperity . St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 978-0230101012 .

Archived from the original on 15 June 2020 . Retrieved 10 May 2017 .

^ "We Are All Keynesians Now" .

Time . 31 December 1965. Archived from the original on 25 March 2009 . Retrieved 13 November 2008 .

^ Wright, A. Ll. (1956).

"The Genesis of the Multiplier Theory" .

Oxford Economic Papers .

8 (2): 181– 193.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordjournals.oep.a042261 .

ISSN 0030-7653 .

JSTOR 2661731 .

Archived from the original on 6 September 2021 . Retrieved 6 September 2021 .

^ Kahn, R. F. (1931).

"The Relation of Home Investment to Unemployment" .

The Economic Journal .

41 (162): 173– 198.

doi : 10.2307/2223697 .

ISSN 0013-0133 .

JSTOR 2223697 .

Archived from the original on 6 September 2021 . Retrieved 6 September 2021 .

^ Fernando; Boyle, Michael J.

"What Does 'Investment Multiplier' Mean?" .

Investopedia .

Archived from the original on 6 September 2021 . Retrieved 6 September 2021 .

^ Friedrich Hayek .

"interview: Friedrich Hayek on John Maynard Keynes – Part II" . hayekcenter.

Archived from the original on 31 March 2020 . Retrieved 3 July 2009 .

^ Larry Elliott; Dan Atkinson (2008).

The Gods That Failed: How Blind Faith in Markets Has Cost Us Our Future . The Bodley Head Ltd. p. 78.

ISBN 978-1847920300 .

^ Friedman, Milton (March 1968). "The Role of Monetary Policy".

American Economic Review .

^ Snowdon, Brian; Blinder, Alan (April–June 2001).

"Keeping the Keynesian Faith: Alan Blinder on the Evolution of Macroeconomics" (PDF) .

World Economics .

2 (2). (Interview by Brian Snowdon).

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 December 2010 . Retrieved 29 January 2025 – via Princeton University.

^ Madrick, Jeff (8 April 2008).

"The End of the Age of Milton Friedman" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on 28 October 2008 . Retrieved 13 November 2008 .

^ Robert Kuttner (23 October 2008).

"Capital Rues" .

The American Prospect .

Archived from the original on 13 January 2012 . Retrieved 23 November 2011 .

Reviewing Capital Rules: The Construction of Global Finance , by Rawi Abdelal , Harvard University Press, and The Bridge at the Edge of the World: Capitalism, the Environment, and Crossing From Crisis to Sustainability , by James Gustave Speth , Yale University Press ^ Peter Pugh & Chris Garratt (1993).

Keynes for Beginners . Icon. p. 155.

ISBN 1874166137 .

^ Hunter-Wade, Robert (2005). "11". In John Ravenhill (ed.).

Global Political Economy .

Oxford University Press . p. 293.

^ Ram, N (17 November 2008).

"Keynesian warning is one of seven 'big messages': Manmohan" .

The Hindu .

Archived from the original on 1 January 2016 . Retrieved 8 October 2015 .

^ Wolf, Martin (25 March 2008).

"The Rescue of Bear Stearns Marks Liberalization's Limit" .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on 14 February 2022 . Retrieved 13 November 2008 .

^ James K. Galbraith (31 March 2008).

The Collapse of Monetarism and the Irrelevance of the New Monetary Consensus (PDF) . 25th Annual Milton Friedman Distinguished Lecture at Marietta College, Marietta, Ohio. The University of Texas. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2009 . Retrieved 28 February 2009 .

^ Robert Shiller: The sub prime solution . Google Video . Retrieved 13 November 2008 .

^ Shiller, Robert J. (September 2008).

The Subprime Solution: How Today's Global Financial Crisis Happened, and What to Do about It . Princeton University Press. Archived from the original on 13 October 2008.

^ Shiller, Robert (19 May 2012).

"Reviving 'animal spirits' to raise confidence" .

Taipei Times .

Archived from the original on 2 October 2012 . Retrieved 26 May 2012 .

^ Krugman, Paul (5 January 2009).

"Fighting Off Depression" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 30 April 2011 . Retrieved 15 August 2009 .

^ Krugman, Paul (23 January 2009).

"Stuck in the Muddle" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 11 May 2011 . Retrieved 15 August 2009 .

^ Krugman, Paul (15 June 2009).

"Stay the Course" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 11 May 2011 . Retrieved 15 August 2009 .

^ Coy, Peter (22 March 2009).

"Kill or cure? US stimulus kicks up a storm" .

The Independent . UK.

Archived from the original on 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 8 June 2010 .

^ "Is Obama's stimulus working?" .

Los Angeles Times . 19 August 2009.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2014 . Retrieved 20 February 2020 .

^ "EconoMonitor " The Mini Depression and the Maximum-Strength Remedy" . Rgemonitor.com. 9 November 2008. Archived from the original on 4 October 2009 . Retrieved 26 May 2012 .

^ "Chasing Stiglitz: Obama's economic team is missing the one guy who's been right all along" .

Newsweek . 3 December 2008.

Archived from the original on 5 October 2013 . Retrieved 5 December 2013 .

^ a b Donald Markwell .

"Keynes and International Economic and Political Relations" (PDF) . Trinity College, University of Melbourne.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 March 2012 . Retrieved 3 July 2009 .

^ Leijonhufvud, Axel (1969).

On Keynesian Economics and the Economics of Keynes . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0195009487 .

^ Stratton, Allegra (20 October 2008).

"Darling invokes Keynes as he eases spending rules to fight recession" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 23 October 2008 . Retrieved 13 November 2008 .

^ Sam Coates (20 October 2008).

"Spend, spend, spend: Alistair Darling adopts John Maynard Keynes doctrine" .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011 . Retrieved 14 June 2009 .

(subscription required) ^ Paul Maidment (9 November 2008).

"China Announces Massive Stimulus Package" .

Forbes . Archived from the original on 12 November 2008 . Retrieved 11 November 2008 .

^ "A global survey of stimulus plans" . Vox EU.

Archived from the original on 17 June 2009 . Retrieved 14 June 2009 .

^ Chang, Ha-Joon (20 October 2008).

"The economics of hypocrisy" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 3 September 2013 . Retrieved 27 November 2008 .

^ Markwell, Donald (2006).

John Maynard Keynes and International Relations: Economic Paths to War and Peace . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0198292368 .

^ Antonio Spilimbergo; Steve Symansky; Olivier Blanchard; Carlo Cottarelli (29 December 2008).

Fiscal Policy for the Crisis (PDF) (Report).

International Monetary Fund . SPN/08/01.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 3 July 2009.

^ Chris Giles; Ralph Atkins; Krishna Guha.

"The undeniable shift to Keynes" .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on 27 May 2009 . Retrieved 23 January 2009 .

( registration required ) ^ Jamil Anderlini (23 March 2009).

"China calls for new reserve currency" .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on 15 April 2009 . Retrieved 13 April 2009 .

( registration required ) ^ Zhou Xiaochuan (23 March 2009).

"Reform the International Monetary System" .

People's Bank of China . Archived from the original on 24 September 2015 . Retrieved 13 April 2009 .

^ Norma Cohen (24 June 2009).

"OECD foresees end to global slide" .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on 26 June 2009 . Retrieved 26 June 2009 .

( registration required ) ^ Krishna Guha; Sarah O'Connor; Michael Mackenzie (8 July 2009).

"IMF says world is pulling out of recession" .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on 14 August 2009 . Retrieved 9 July 2009 .

( registration required ) ^ "Recession Loosens Grip But Weak Recovery Ahead" .

International Monetary Fund . 8 July 2009.

Archived from the original on 11 July 2009 . Retrieved 9 July 2009 .

^ Bertrand Benoit; Quentin Peel & Chris Bryant (28 March 2009).

"Merkel warns on stimulus" .

Financial Times . Archived from the original on 7 May 2015.

^ Mark Gilbert (17 July 2009).

"Keynes Arouses Fed as ECB Looks for Monetary Exit" .

Bloomberg News . Retrieved 22 July 2009 .

^ "The other-worldly philosophers" .

The Economist . 16 July 2009.

Archived from the original on 26 July 2009 . Retrieved 20 July 2009 .

^ Robert J. Barro, Gary Becker, Wall Street Journal editorials, 24 August 2011, and 2 September 2011 ^ Romer, Christina D. (7 November 2011).

"What do we know about the effects of fiscal policy? Separating evidence from ideology" (PDF) .

Lecture at Hamilton College .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 1 March 2018 .

^ Guajardo, Jaime; Leigh, Daniel; Pescatori, Andrea (July 2011).

"Expansionary Austerity: New International Evidence" (PDF) .

IMF Working Paper, WP/11/158 . International Monetary Fund.

SSRN 1886910 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 January 2012 . Retrieved 18 January 2012 .

Using this new dataset, our estimates suggest fiscal consolidation has contractionary effects on private domestic demand and GDP.

^ Woodford, Michael (January 2008).

"Convergence in Macroeconomics: Elements of the New Synthesis" (PDF) .

Columbia University .

^ Mankiw, N. Gregory (December 2006).

"The Macroeconomist as Scientist and Engineer" (PDF) .

Journal of Economic Perspectives .

20 (4): 29– 46.

doi : 10.1257/jep.20.4.29 .

ISSN 0895-3309 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 September 2024 – via Harvard University.

^ Goodfriend, Marvin; King, Robert G. (June 1997).

"The New Neoclassical Synthesis and The Role of Monetary Policy" (PDF) .

Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Papers (98). Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2014 . Retrieved 11 May 2022 .

^ Galí, Jordi (2018).

"The State of New Keynesian Economics: A Partial Assessment" .

Journal of Economic Perspectives .

32 (3): 87– 112.

doi : 10.1257/jep.32.3.87 .

hdl : 10230/35942 .

ISSN 0895-3309 .

S2CID 158736462 .

^ The role of imperfect competition in new Keynesian economics , Chapter 4 of Surfing Economics by Huw Dixon ^ McCann, Charles Robert (1998).

John Maynard Keynes – critical responses . Vol. 4. Taylor & Francis. p. 21.

ISBN 0415151937 .

^ Wapshott, Nicholas (2011).

Keynes Hayek: The Clash that Defined Modern Economics . W.W. Norton. p. 206.

ISBN 978-0393083118 .

^ a b Davenport, Nicholas (1974).

Memoirs of a city radical . Weidenfeld and Nicolson. p. 48.

ISBN 0297767968 .

OCLC 462160277 .

^ a b c d Hoggard, Liz (21 October 2008).

"Ten things you didn't know about Mr Keynes" .

Evening Standard . Archived from the original on 22 January 2010 . Retrieved 8 September 2019 .

^ Russell, Bertrand (1967).

The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell: 1872–1914 . Unwin Paperbacks. p. 97.

^ Hayek, Friedrick August von (August 1931).

"Reflections on the Pure Theory of Money of Mr. J.M. Keynes" (PDF) .

Economica .

11 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 28 May 2008 . Retrieved 20 May 2008 .

^ Hoover, Kenneth R. (2008).

Economics as Ideology .

Lanham, Maryland : Rowman & Littlefield . p. 152.

ISBN 978-0742531130 .

^ Heilbroner, Robert (2000).

The Worldly Philosophers . Simon & Schuster. p. 278.

ISBN 0671634828 .

^ Hazlett, Thomas W. (July 1992).

"The Road from Serfdom" .

Reason . Archived from the original on 13 October 2008 . Retrieved 20 May 2008 .

^ Dransfield, Robert; Dransfield, Don (2003).

Key Ideas in Economics . Nelson Thornes. p. 81.

ISBN 074877081X .

^ a b Friedman, Milton (Spring 1997).

"John Maynard Keynes" .

Economic Quarterly .

83/2 .

Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond .

Archived from the original on 18 September 2016 . Retrieved 17 September 2016 .

^ Thomas K. McCraw (7 February 2009).

"Dividends from Schumpeter's Noble Failure" . Harvard Business School.

Archived from the original on 2 June 2009 . Retrieved 21 June 2009 .

^ Symour E Harris; Joseph Schumpter (2005).

The New Economics: Keynes's Influence on Theory and Public Policy [ Keynes the Economist by Schumpter ]. and Kessinger Publishing. pp.

73– 101.

ISBN 978-1419145346 .

Archived from the original on 24 August 2021 . Retrieved 14 February 2022 .

^ Prophet of innovation: Joseph Schumpeter and creative destruction.

^ Hazlitt, Henry; Von Mises, Ludwig (1995).

The Critics of Keynesian Economics . Foundation for Economic Education. pp.

305– 306, 314.

ISBN 157246013X .

^ "The Mystery of Banking" . 7 March 2024. Archived from the original on 7 March 2024 . Retrieved 10 April 2024 .

^ "Interview with Murray Rothbard on Man, Economy, and State, Mises, and the Future of the Austrian School | Mises Institute" . 7 March 2024. Archived from the original on 7 March 2024 . Retrieved 10 April 2024 .

^ Reder, Melvin W. (2000). "The Anti-Semitism of Some Eminent Economists".

History of Political Economy .

32 (4): 833– 856.

doi : 10.1215/00182702-32-4-833 .

S2CID 153960185 .

^ Chandavarkar, A. (2000). "Was Keynes Anti-Semitic?".

Economic and Political Weekly .

35 (6 May 2000): 1619– 1624.

JSTOR 4409262 .

^ a b Nina Paulovicova.

"The Immoral Moral Scientist. John Maynard Keynes" . University of Alberta.

Archived from the original on 2 May 2010 . Retrieved 14 June 2009 .

^ a b c Heilbroner, Robert L. (11 May 1986).

"The man who made us all Keynesians" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2021 . Retrieved 20 May 2008 .

...

the private Keynes, emerging in the passionate homosexual involvements that would rule his emotional life until his marriage to the famous Russian ballerina Lydia Lopokova in 1925.

^ Strachey 1994 , pp. 123, 127, 715.

^ Zimroth, Evan (28 January 2008).

"The Sex Diaries of John Maynard Keynes: A Key for the Prurient" . More Intelligent Life.

The Economist . Archived from the original on 24 November 2009.

^ O'Grady, Sean (12 March 2015).

"John Maynard Keynes: New biography reveals shocking details about the economist's sex life" .

The Independent . Retrieved 19 November 2015.

Archived 15 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine ^ Strachey 1994 , p. 103.

^ Davenport-Hines 2015 , p. 219.

^ Strachey 1994 , pp. 108–110.

^ Strachey 1994 , pp. 181–183.

^ Strachey 1994 , p. 128.

^ a b Bartlett, Bruce (7 May 2013).

"Keynes's Biggest Mistake" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 28 July 2021 . Retrieved 9 March 2017 .

^ Donald Kagan, On the Origins of War and the Preservation of Peace , New york, Anchor Books, 1996, p. 290, n. 15 ^ Adam Trimingham, "A man of numbers" Archived 7 July 2013 at archive.today , The Argus , 12 November 2012.

^ Sources describing Keynes as bisexual include: John Maynard Keynes, The Economic Consequences of the Peace, Indo-European Publishing, 2011, see back book cover notes Archived 1 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine , ISBN 978-1604441161 Levy, Paul (1975).

"The Bloomsbury Group" . In Milo Keynes (ed.).

Essays on John Maynard Keynes . London: Cambridge University Press. pp.

60– 72.

ISBN 978-0521205344 .

. See p.

65 .

David Warsh, Economic Principles: The Masters and Mavericks of Modern Economics, Simon & Schuster , 2010, p. 3 Archived 1 November 2021 at the Wayback Machine , ISBN 978-1451602562 ^ Strachey 1994 , p. 129.

^ Christiansen, Rupert (25 April 2008).

"The unlikely Lydia Lopokova" Archived 29 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine The Telegraph .

^ Hughes, Kathryn (19 April 2008).

"The firebird of Gordon Square" , The Guardian .

Archived 29 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine ^ Justin Wintle (2002).

"Keynes, John Maynard" .

Makers of Modern Culture . Vol. 1. Psychology Press. p. 270.

ISBN 978-0415265836 .

Archived from the original on 15 June 2020 . Retrieved 18 March 2016 .

^ "Keynes, John Maynard (1883–1946)" . glbtq. Archived from the original on 2 October 2012 . Retrieved 21 November 2008 .

^ a b Light, Alison (18 December 2008). "Lady Talky".

London Review of Books . Vol. 30, no. 24.

^ Anand, Chandavarkar (25 August 1990). "Review: Keynes and the Celestial Dancer". "Reviewed work(s): Lydia and Maynard: Letters between Lydia Lopokova and Maynard Keynes by Polly Hill; Richard Keynes".

Economic and Political Weekly , Vol.

25 , No. 34 , p. 1896 ^ Polly Hill ; Richard Keynes , eds. (1989).

Lydia and Maynard: letters between Lydia Lopokova and John Maynard Keynes . André Deutsch. p.

97 .

ISBN 978-0233982830 .

^ Forster, E.M. (1987).

Commonplace Book . p. 195.

Lydia Keynes, whose every word should be recorded, said to me as I was leaving her flat the other night: 'You know I once tumbled from the stairs and believe me I paid the price.' I took the sentence down before I forgot it.

^ "Tilton House homepage" . Tiltonhouse.co.uk.

Archived from the original on 30 May 2013 . Retrieved 2 October 2013 .

^ Keynes, John Maynard (1956). James R. Newman (ed.).

The World of Mathematics (2000 ed.). Dover. p. 277.

ISBN 0486411532 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Skidelsky 1992 , p. 408.

^ Moore, George Edward (2019).

Principia Ethica . Forgotten Books.

ISBN 978-0243659753 .

OCLC 1147825165 .

^ Skidelsky 1983 , p. 138.

^ a b c Bell, Quentin (1972).

Virginia Woolf, A Biography . Vol. 2 (revised 1996 ed.). The Hogarth Press. p. 177.

^ a b Skidelsky 1983 , p.

86 .

^ Lubenow, William C.

(1998).

The Cambridge Apostles, 1820–1914 . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0521572134 .

^ Skidelsky, Robert (2000).

John Maynard Keynes . Vol. 3: Fighting for Freedom 1937–46 . Macmillan. p. 475.

ISBN 0142001678 .

^ Hession, Charles Henry (1984).

John Maynard Keynes: A Personal Biography of the Man who Revolutionized Capitalism and the Way We Live . Macmillan. p. 33.

ISBN 978-0025513105 .

^ "The Cambridge Heretics" .

Humanist Heritage .

Humanists UK .

Archived from the original on 2 August 2021 . Retrieved 30 April 2021 .

^ a b c Tillinghast, Joel (2017).

Big Money Thinks Small: Biases, Blind Spots, and Smarter Investing (1st ed.). New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0231544696 .

^ a b c Chambers, David; Dimson, Elroy (30 June 2013).

"John Maynard Keynes, Investment Innovator" .

Journal of Economic Perspectives .

27 (30). Rochester, New York: University of Cambridge: 1– 18.

doi : 10.1257/jep.27.3.213 .

SSRN 2287262 .

^ Chambers, David; Dimson, Elroy (Summer 2013).

"Retrospectives: John Maynard Keynes, Investment Innovator" .

Journal of Economic Perspectives .

27 (3). American Economic Association: 213– 228.

doi : 10.1257/jep.27.3.213 .

^ a b Fisher, Kenneth L.

(2007).

100 Minds That Made the Market . Hoboken, New Jersey, United States: John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-0470139516 .

^ David Chambers, Elroy Dimson, Justin Foo (2015).

Keynes, King's, and Endowment Asset Management Archived 24 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine , in How the Financial Crisis and Great Recession Affected Higher Education (2015), Jeffrey R. Brown and Caroline M. Hoxby, editors (pp. 127–150). Conference held 27–28 September 2012.

^ Street and Glenn, The National Mutual Life Assurance Society 1830-1980 , London, 1980 ^ Accominotti, Olivier; Chambers, David (June 2016).

"If You're So Smart: John Maynard Keynes and Currency Speculation in the Interwar Years" .

The Journal of Economic History .

76 (2): 342– 386.

doi : 10.1017/S0022050716000589 .

ISSN 0022-0507 .

S2CID 155280429 .

^ Keynes, John Maynard (2013).

The Collected Writings . Vol. XX. pp.

181– 184.

^ Read, Charles (2023), "Calming the Storms", Palgrave Studies in Economic History , Cham: Springer International Publishing, p. 289, ISBN 978-3031119132 ^ Freedland, Jonathan (17 February 2012).

"Eugenics: the skeleton that rattles loudest in the left's closet" . (Comment is free [opinion]).

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 15 June 2020 .

^ Keynes, John Maynard (1946).

"The Galton lecture, 1946: Presentation of the society's gold medal" .

Eugenics Review .

38 (1): 39– 40.

PMC 2986310 .

PMID 21260495 .

On February I4th, I946, before a large gathering of Fellows, Members and guests at Manson house, London, Lord Keynes, On behalf of the Eugenics Society, presented the first Galton Medal ... Opening the proceedings, Lord Keynes said: 'It is a satisfaction to take part in the presentation of the first Galton Gold Medal, both in piety to the memory of the great Galton and in recognition of a worthy and appropriate recipient of a medal established in his name.' ^ "Was John Maynard Keynes a liberal?" .

The Economist .

ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 25 January 2024 .

^ Mann, Geoff (29 January 2024).

"Socialism's Biggest Hero Is a Bourgeois British Capitalist" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved 25 January 2024 .

^ "The Coat of Arms No. 226" (PDF) . The Heraldry Society.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 January 2021 . Retrieved 11 October 2019 .

^ Velupillai, K. Vela (2016).

"Universal Man: A Review Article" (PDF) .

Algorithmic Social Sciences Research Unit: Discussion Paper Series .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 January 2022 . Retrieved 22 January 2022 .

^ Fraser, Nick (8 November 2008).

"John Maynard Keynes: Can the great economist save the world?" .

The Independent . United Kingdom.

Archived from the original on 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 20 November 2008 .

^ Marr, Andrew (2007).

A history of modern Britain . London: Macmillan. p. 12.

ISBN 978-1405005388 .

Archived from the original on 15 June 2020 . Retrieved 21 April 2017 .

^ "Lord Keynes Dies of Heart Attack. Noted Economist Exhausted by Strain of Recent Savannah Monetary Conference" .

The New York Times . 22 April 1946.

Archived from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 10 February 2010 .

^ Wilson, Scott.

Resting Places: The Burial Sites of More Than 14,000 Famous Persons , 3d ed.: 2 (Kindle Location 25430). McFarland & Company, Inc., Publishers. Kindle Edition.

^ Skidelsky, Robert (2001).

Fighting for freedom, 1937–1946 . Viking. p. 19.

ISBN 0670030228 .

OCLC 49730825 .

^ Elley, Derek (24 February 1993).

"Wittgenstein" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on 27 September 2021 . Retrieved 11 October 2021 .

^ Dixon, Guy (5 January 2009).

"Paris 1919: Years in the making, 10 days to film" .

The Globe and Mail .

Archived from the original on 29 October 2021 . Retrieved 11 October 2021 .

^ Mangan, Lucy (28 July 2015).

" Life in Squares review: 'absurd, beautiful characters in a ridiculously golden world' " .

The Guardian . Retrieved 11 October 2021 .

^ Tily, Geoff (5 July 2021).

"Mr Keynes' Revolution" .

Prime .

Archived from the original on 29 October 2021 . Retrieved 12 October 2021 .

^ "The love song of J. Maynard Keynes" .

The Economist . 17 July 2021.

ISSN 0013-0613 .

Archived from the original on 14 February 2022 . Retrieved 11 October 2021 .

Sources [ edit ] Library resources about John Maynard Keynes Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Backhouse, Roger E.

and Bateman, Bradley W. (2011).

Capitalist Revolutionary: John Maynard Keynes .

Barnett, Vincent (2013).

John Maynard Keynes . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415567695 .

Bateman, Bradley (2010).

The Return to Keynes .

Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0674035386 .

Beaudreau, Bernard C. (2006).

The Economic Consequences of Mr. Keynes: How the Second Industrial Revolution Passed Great Britain By . iUniverse.

ISBN 0595416616 Blaug, Mark (September 1994).

"Recent Biographies of Keynes." Archived 8 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine Journal of Economic Literature , vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 1204–1215.

JSTOR 2728608 Buchanan, James M.

and Richard E. Wagner (2008).

Democracy in Deficit: The Political Legacy of Lord Keynes.

The Collected Works of James M. Buchanan, Vol. 8. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund .

Clarke, Peter (2009).

Keynes: The Twentieth Century's Most Influential Economist . Bloomsbury.

ISBN 978-1408803851 Clarke, Peter (2009).

Keynes: The Rise, Fall and Return of the 20th Century's Most Influential Economist , Bloomsbury Press.

Davenport-Hines, Richard P.T.

(2015).

Universal Man: The Seven Lives of John Maynard Keynes . William Collins.

ISBN 978-0007519804 .

Davidson, Paul .

John Maynard Keynes (Great Thinkers in Economics). New York: Palgrave Macmillan , 2007.

ISBN 1403996237 .

Davidson, Paul (2007).

John Maynard Keynes (PDF) . Great Thinkers in Economics Series. Basingstoke, England: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0230229204 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 August 2016.

Dillard, Dudley (1948).

The Economics of John Maynard Keynes: The Theory of Monetary Economy .

Prentice-Hall . p. 384.

ISBN 978-1419128943 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Dimand, Robert W. and Harald Hagemann, eds.

The Elgar Companion to John Maynard Keynes (Edward Elgar, 20190 + 670 pp.

online review Harrod, R.F. (1951).

The Life of John Maynard Keynes . Macmillan.

ISBN 1125395982 .

Henderson, David R.

, ed. (2008).

"John Maynard Keynes (1883–1946)" .

The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics .

Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.).

Liberty Fund . pp.

549– 550.

ISBN 978-0865976665 .

Keynes, Milo , ed. (1975).

Essays on John Maynard Keynes . London: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521205344 .

ISBN 0521205344 Markwell, Donald (2006).

John Maynard Keynes and International Relations: Economic Paths to War and Peace .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0198292364 .

Markwell, Donald (2000).

Keynes and Australia Archived 18 March 2011 at the Wayback Machine .

Reserve Bank of Australia .

Moggridge, Donald Edward (1980).

Keynes . Macmillan.

ISBN 0333295242 .

Patinkin, Don & J. Clark Leith, eds. (1977).

Keynes, Cambridge and The General Theory: The Process of Criticism and Discussion Connected with the Development of The General Theory . London: Macmillan.

ISBN 0333227727 .

Patinkin, Don. "Keynes, John Maynard." In: The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics, Vol. 2.

Macmillan, 1987, pp. 19–41.

ISBN 0333372352 , 0935859101 .

Pecchi, Lorenzo & Gustavo Piga (2010).

Revisiting Keynes .

MIT Press .

ISBN 978-0262515115 .

Schuker, Stephen A. (1988). "American 'Reparations' to Germany, 1919–33." Princeton Studies in International Finance , No. 61.

Schuker, Stephen A. (2014). "J.M. Keynes and the Personal Politics of Reparations." Diplomacy & Statecraft , Vol. 25, Nos. 3/4.

doi : 10.1080/09592296.2014.936197 .

Skidelsky, Robert (1983).

John Maynard Keynes: A Biography . Vol. 1, Hopes Betrayed: 1883-1920 . London: Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0333115992 .

Via – Google Books Skidelsky, Robert Jacob Alexander (1992).

John Maynard Keynes, A Biography: The Economist as Saviour 1920–1937 . Penguin.

ISBN 978-0140238068 .

OCLC 796052814 .

Archived from the original on 14 June 2020 . Retrieved 10 May 2017 .

Skidelsky, Robert (2002).

John Maynard Keynes: Fighting for Britain, 1937–1946 .

Penguin .

ISBN 978-0142001677 .

Archived from the original on 15 June 2020 . Retrieved 10 May 2017 .

Skidelsky, Robert (2010) [2009].

Keynes: The Return of the Master .

PublicAffairs .

ISBN 978-1610390033 .

Archived from the original on 15 June 2020 . Retrieved 10 May 2017 .

Skidelsky, Robert (2003).

John Maynard Keynes: 1883–1946: Economist, Philosopher, Statesman (Abridged ed.). Pan MacMillan Ltd.

ISBN 0330488678 .

Skidelsky, Robert (2010).

Keynes: A Very Short Introduction .

Oxford : Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0199591640 .

Strachey, Lytton (1994). Michael Holroyd (ed.).

Lytton Strachey by Himself: A Self-portrait . Vintage.

ISBN 978-0099459415 .

Archived from the original on 15 June 2020 . Retrieved 10 May 2017 .

Syll, Lars Pålsson (2007).

John Maynard Keynes . SNS Förlag. p. 95.

ISBN 978-9185695270 .

Temin, Peter , and David Vines (2014).

Keynes: Useful Economics for the World Economy .

MIT Press .

Wapshott, Nicholas (2011).

Keynes Hayek: The Clash That Defined Modern Economics .

Yergin, Daniel ; Stanislaw, Joseph (2002).

The Commanding Heights: The Battle for the World Economy .

Simon and Schuster .

ISBN 978-0743229630 .

Archived from the original on 22 April 2017 . Retrieved 21 April 2017 .

Primary sources [ edit ] Keynes, John Maynard (1998).

The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes (30 volume hardback ed.).

Cambridge : Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0521307666 .

External links [ edit ] John Maynard Keynes at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource "Keynes on Inflation" . Extract from The Economic Consequences of the Peace by John Maynard Keynes (1919) – via PBS .

Archived 6 August 2009 at the Wayback Machine Works by John Maynard Keynes in eBook form at Standard Ebooks Works by John Maynard Keynes at Project Gutenberg Works by John Maynard Keynes at Faded Page (Canada) Works by or about John Maynard Keynes at the Internet Archive Works by John Maynard Keynes at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) "Archival material relating to John Maynard Keynes" .

UK National Archives .

John Maynard Keynes Archived 17 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine on Google Scholar Churchill, Keynes & The Gold Standard – UK Parliament Living Heritage Correspondence with John Maynard, Baron Keynes, four volumes held at The British Library [ permanent dead link ] Treaty of Versailles & Keynes – UK Parliament Living Heritage "John Maynard Keynes (1883–1946)" .

The Concise Encyclopedia of Economics .

Library of Economics and Liberty (2nd ed.).

Liberty Fund . 2008.

Peerage of the United Kingdom New creation Baron Keynes 1942–1946 Extinct v t e Bloomsbury Group Core members Clive Bell Vanessa Bell E. M. Forster Roger Fry Duncan Grant John Maynard Keynes Desmond MacCarthy Lytton Strachey Leonard Woolf Virginia Woolf Old Bloomsbury Cambridge Apostles and G. E. Moore Adrian Stephen Karin Stephen Saxon Sydney-Turner Mary MacCarthy Associated others Quentin Bell Dora Carrington Angelica Garnett David Garnett Lady Ottoline Morrell Frances Partridge Ralph Partridge Vita Sackville-West Thoby Stephen Projects Dreadnought hoax Hogarth Press Omega Workshops Notable addresses 33 Fitzroy Square 46 Gordon Square Charleston Farmhouse Monk's House Topics List of Bloomsbury Group people Bloomsbury Group in LGBT history v t e John Maynard Keynes Books The Economic Consequences of the Peace (1919) A Treatise on Probability (1921) A Tract on Monetary Reform (1923) A Treatise on Money (1930) The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money (1936) How to Pay for the War (1940) Family John Neville Keynes (father) Florence Ada Keynes (mother) Geoffrey Keynes (brother) Lydia Lopokova (wife) Richard Keynes (nephew) Quentin Keynes (nephew) Milo Keynes (nephew) Stephen Keynes (nephew) Keynes family Related Bloomsbury Group Categories John Maynard Keynes Links to related articles v t e Keynesians Founder John Maynard Keynes Neo-Keynesians Gardner Ackley William Baumol James Duesenberry Robert Eisner Trygve Haavelmo Alvin Hansen Roy Harrod Walter Heller John Hicks Lawrence Klein James Meade Lloyd Metzler Franco Modigliani Robert Mundell Arthur Melvin Okun Don Patinkin Bill Phillips William Poole Paul Samuelson Robert Solow James Tobin Post-Keynesians Victoria Chick Paul Davidson Evsey Domar James K. Galbraith John Kenneth Galbraith Wynne Godley Myron J. Gordon Geoff Harcourt Michael Hudson Richard Kahn Nicholas Kaldor Michał Kalecki Steve Keen Jan Kregel Marc Lavoie Abba P. Lerner Hyman Minsky Bill Mitchell Basil Moore Steven Pressman Joan Robinson G. L. S. Shackle Pavlina R. Tcherneva Anthony Thirlwall William Vickrey Sidney Weintraub L. Randall Wray New Keynesians George Akerlof Ben Bernanke Olivier Blanchard Alan Blinder Guillermo Calvo Richard Clarida Brad DeLong Huw Dixon Stanley Fischer Jordi Galí Mark Gertler Robert J. Gordon Stephany Griffith-Jones Nobuhiro Kiyotaki Paul Krugman Greg Mankiw Marc Melitz Maurice Obstfeld Edmund Phelps Ricardo Reis Kenneth Rogoff David Romer Julio Rotemberg Robert Shiller Andrei Shleifer Joseph Stiglitz Lawrence Summers John B. Taylor Michael Woodford Janet Yellen Related Keynesian economics v t e Economics Theoretical Microeconomics Decision theory Price theory Game theory Contract theory Mechanism design Macroeconomics Mathematical economics Complexity economics Computational economics Agent-based computational economics Behavioral economics Pluralism in economics Empirical Econometrics Economic statistics Experimental economics Economic history Applied Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Schools ( history ) Attention Mainstream Heterodox American (National) Ancient thought Austrian Behavioral Buddhist Chartalism Modern monetary theory Chicago Classical Critique of political economy Democratic Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgism Happiness Historical Humanistic Institutional Keynesian Neo- ( neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis ) New Post- Circuitism Malthusianism Marginalism Marxian Neo- Mercantilism Mixed Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne New classical Real business-cycle theory New institutional Physiocracy Socialist Stockholm Supply-side Thermo Economists de Mandeville Quesnay Smith Malthus Say Ricardo von Thünen List Bastiat Cournot Mill Gossen Marx Walras Jevons George Menger Marshall Edgeworth Clark Pareto von Böhm-Bawerk von Wieser Veblen Gesell Fisher Pigou Heckscher von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Knight Polanyi Frisch Sraffa Myrdal Hayek Kalecki Röpke Kuznets Tinbergen Robinson von Neumann Hicks Lange Leontief Galbraith Koopmans Schumacher Friedman Samuelson Simon Buchanan Arrow Baumol Solow Rothbard Greenspan Sowell Becker Ostrom Sen Lucas Stiglitz Thaler Hoppe Krugman Piketty more Lists Glossary Economists Publications ( journals ) Schools Category Index Lists Outline Publications Business portal v t e Presidents of the Econometric Society 1931–1950 Irving Fisher (1931–1934) François Divisia (1935) Harold Hotelling (1936–1937) Arthur Bowley (1938–1939) Joseph Schumpeter (1940–1941) Wesley Mitchell (1942–1943) John Maynard Keynes (1944–1945) Jacob Marschak (1946) Jan Tinbergen (1947) Charles Roos (1948) Ragnar Frisch (1949) Tjalling Koopmans (1950) 1951–1975 R. G. D. Allen (1951) Paul Samuelson (1952) René Roy (1953) Wassily Leontief (1954) Richard Stone (1955) Kenneth Arrow (1956) Trygve Haavelmo (1957) James Tobin (1958) Marcel Boiteux (1959) Lawrence Klein (1960) Henri Theil (1961) Franco Modigliani (1962) Edmond Malinvaud (1963) Robert Solow (1964) Michio Morishima (1965) Herman Wold (1966) Hendrik Houthakker (1967) Frank Hahn (1968) Leonid Hurwicz (1969) Jacques Drèze (1970) Gérard Debreu (1971) W. M. Gorman (1972) Roy Radner (1973) Don Patinkin (1974) Zvi Griliches (1975) 1976–2000 Hirofumi Uzawa (1976) Lionel McKenzie (1977) János Kornai (1978) Franklin M. Fisher (1979) J. Denis Sargan (1980) Marc Nerlove (1981) James A. Mirrlees (1982) Herbert Scarf (1983) Amartya K. Sen (1984) Daniel McFadden (1985) Michael Bruno (1986) Dale Jorgenson (1987) Anthony B. Atkinson (1988) Hugo Sonnenschein (1989) Jean-Michel Grandmont [ de ] (1990) Peter Diamond (1991) Jean-Jacques Laffont (1992) Andreu Mas-Colell (1993) Takashi Negishi (1994) Christopher Sims (1995) Roger Guesnerie (1996) Robert E. Lucas, Jr.

(1997) Jean Tirole (1998) Robert B. Wilson (1999) Elhanan Helpman (2000) 2001–present Avinash Dixit (2001) Guy Laroque [ fr ] (2002) Eric Maskin (2003) Ariel Rubinstein (2004) Thomas J. Sargent (2005) Richard Blundell (2006) Lars Peter Hansen (2007) Torsten Persson (2008) Roger B. Myerson (2009) John H. Moore (2010) Bengt Holmström (2011) Jean-Charles Rochet [ ru ] (2012) James J. Heckman (2013) Manuel Arellano (2014) Robert Porter (2015) Eddie Dekel (2016) Drew Fudenberg (2017) Tim Besley (2018) Stephen Morris (2019) Orazio Attanasio (2020) Pinelopi Koujianou Goldberg (2021) Guido Tabellini (2022) Rosa Matzkin (2023) Eliana La Ferrara (2024) Larry Samuelson (2025) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Taiwan Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea 2 Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH Google Scholar MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hj8fc
Cached time: 20250817043633
Cache expiry: 21600
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 4.093 seconds
Real time usage: 4.568 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 60368/1000000
Revision size: 197106/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 841621/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 92600/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 35/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 944241/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.424/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24728258/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3941.675      1 -total
 39.95% 1574.585      2 Template:Reflist
 15.93%  627.851     89 Template:Cite_book
 11.75%  463.173      1 Template:Infobox_economist
 10.94%  431.320     77 Template:R
 10.50%  414.033     84 Template:R/ref
  7.91%  311.721     39 Template:Cite_web
  6.93%  273.105     85 Template:R/superscript
  5.31%  209.158     16 Template:Sfn
  5.24%  206.468     38 Template:Cite_news Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:37973:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043633 and revision id 1306106116. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Maynard_Keynes&oldid=1306106116 " Categories : John Maynard Keynes 1883 births 1946 deaths 19th-century English LGBTQ people 20th-century English LGBTQ people 20th-century British economists 20th-century English businesspeople 20th-century English philosophers Philosophers of probability Alumni of King's College, Cambridge Barons created by George VI Bisexual academics Bisexual male writers Bisexual scientists Bloomsbury Group Bretton Woods Conference delegates British conscientious objectors British Empire in World War II British social liberals British Zionists Cambridge University Moral Sciences Club Companions of the Order of the Bath Chatham House people English atheists English agnostics English art collectors English bibliophiles English eugenicists 20th-century English farmers English investors English patrons of the arts Economics journal editors English stock traders Fellows of the British Academy Fellows of King's College, Cambridge Fellows of the Econometric Society Historians of economic thought Keynes family Keynesian economics Keynesians English bisexual men English bisexual writers English bisexual politicians English LGBTQ scientists LGBTQ peers LGBTQ philosophers Liberal Party (UK) hereditary peers Members of the Inner Temple Political realists People educated at Eton College People educated at St Faith's School Presidents of the Econometric Society Presidents of the Cambridge Union Probability theorists People from Firle Virtue ethicists Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Pages using cite ODNB with id parameter CS1 French-language sources (fr) Pages containing London Gazette template with parameter supp set to y CS1 errors: ISBN date Wikipedia articles needing more precise page number citations from January 2024 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2025 Pages containing links to subscription-only content Pages with login required references or sources Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template archiveis links CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from August 2011 Use dmy dates from January 2025 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2024 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2016 Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 00:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Maynard Keynes 135 languages Add topic

