Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Career 2 Education 3 Research 4 Honours 5 References Toggle the table of contents Simon Mitton 2 languages Français 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Simon Mitton" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Simon Mitton Mitton in 2013 Born ( 1946-12-18 ) 18 December 1946 (age 78) Bristol , England Alma mater Trinity College, Oxford St. Edmund's College, Cambridge Scientific career Fields Astronomer Institutions University of Cambridge Doctoral advisor John Shakeshaft Simon Mitton (born 18 December 1946) is a British astronomer and writer. He is based at St Edmund's College, Cambridge . He has written numerous astronomical works.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The most well known of these is his biography of fellow Cambridge astronomer Fred Hoyle .

[ 4 ] Career [ edit ] Mitton was elected to Council of the Royal Astronomical Society 2012–2016, and chairman of the RAS library committee. He is a College Fellow [ 5 ] of the Department of the History and Philosophy of Science, Cambridge.

[ 6 ] He is a founder director of Total Astronomy Limited, [ 7 ] a company based in Cambridge that provides media services for the astronomy and space industries.

Earlier in his career, while employed by the Cambridge University Press, he was the editor in question when Stephen Hawking famously put the success of his bestseller A Brief History of Time down to advice from his editor that for every equation in the book the readership would be halved. As a result, the book included only a single equation, E = mc2.

[ 8 ] Jointly with his wife Jacqueline Mitton , he occasionally gives astronomy lectures on cruise ships.

[ citation needed ] Education [ edit ] Mitton studied physics and astrophysics. His undergraduate studies were at the Clarendon Laboratory and Trinity College, Oxford . For his doctoral research in high-energy astrophysics, he studied at the Cavendish Laboratory , Cambridge, under Nobel Laureate Sir Martin Ryle FRS. His postdoctoral career started under Sir Fred Hoyle FRS at the Institute of Astronomy, Cambridge .

Research [ edit ] Recently his principal research project has been in the history of astronomy, now his academic field. He has completed a large biography of the British astronomer Sir Fred Hoyle (1915–2001), published in April 2005, and reissued in 2011.

Honours [ edit ] Awards Fellow, St Edmund's College, Cambridge (1973) Fifth Champness Lecturer, Worshipful Company of Spectacle Makers (1975) 35th Barringer Lecturer, University of Arkansas (March 2009) Named after him Asteroid 4027 Mitton (Awarded jointly with Jacqueline Mitton) References [ edit ] ^ The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Astronomy , 1978.

^ Exploring the Galaxies , 1974 ^ Cambridge Scientific Minds 2000 ^ "Fred Hoyle a life in Science, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2011 ^ dt243@cam.ac.uk.

"Simon Mitton - People - HPS" .

www.hps.cam.ac.uk .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Department of History and Philosophy of Science" .

www.hps.cam.ac.uk .

^ "Total Astronomy media consultancy : Home" .

www.totalastronomy.com .

^ Review of 'The Quantum Universe: Everything that can happen does happen.' by Brian Cox and Jeff Forshaw .[Hannah Devlin, Science Correspondent, The Times , October 31, 2011] Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Latvia Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics ORCID zbMATH People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Simon_Mitton&oldid=1306270802 " Categories : 20th-century British astronomers British science writers Alumni of Churchill College, Cambridge Alumni of St Edmund's College, Cambridge Alumni of Trinity College, Oxford 1946 births Living people Worshipful Company of Spectacle Makers Hidden categories: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Use dmy dates from April 2022 BLP articles lacking sources from February 2009 All BLP articles lacking sources Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2019 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 21:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Simon Mitton 2 languages Add topic

