Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Beginnings 2 Against Great-Russian chauvinism 3 Creation of socialist nations 4 End of korenizatsiia Toggle End of korenizatsiia subsection 4.1 Purges of national cadre 4.2 Reversal to Russification 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Citations 6.2 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Korenizatsiia 22 languages Башҡортса Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Español Français Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1920s Soviet policy of promoting its indigenous ethnic groups "Korenization" redirects here; not to be confused with Koreanization .

Part of a series on Stalinism Concepts Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Anti-revisionism Collectivization Cult of personality Five-year plans Great Break Korenizatsiia Marxism–Leninism New Soviet man Popular front Self-criticism Socialism in one country Socialist realism Soviet patriotism Stakhanovite Transformation of nature Vanguardism People Stalin Andreyeva Andreyev Berman Bierut Beria Ceaușescu Chervenkov Choibalsan Dimitrov Dugin Firin Foster Frinovsky Frenkel Kaganovich Kalinin Kim Kirov Khrulyov Khrushchev Kolmogorov Kotkin Kosygin Kryuchkov Kuybyshev Malenkov Merkulov Molotov Ochab Ordzhonikidze Petrovsky Pollitt Raikhman Rákosi Rosengolts Serov Sholokhov Thälmann Ulbricht Vyshinsky Voznesensky Yagoda Yenukidze Yezhov Yaroslavsky Zyuganov Theoretical works About the anti-Soviet elements Dialectical and Historical Materialism Dizzy with Success Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR Falsifiers of History Foundations of Leninism History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) Marxism and the National Question History Stalinist Era First five-year plan Great Break Collectivisation Industrialisation Great Purge Moscow trials Azerbaijan repressions Mongolia repressions Spanish Civil War World War II Soviet atomic bomb project Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Cominform Chinese Communist Revolution First Indochina War Korean War Doctors' plot Death and funeral of Stalin De-Stalinization 20th Congress of the Communist Party Khrushchev Thaw Parties Communist Party of Great Britain (Marxist–Leninist) All-Union Communist Party Bolsheviks Albanian Party of Labour Communist Party of Germany Communist Party of Greece Italian Marxist–Leninist Party CARC Party Communist Party of New Zealand Romanian Communist Party Workers' Party of Korea Communist Party of the Russian Federation National Bolshevik Party The Other Russia Stalin Bloc – For the USSR American Communist Party (2024) Related topics Anti-Stalinist left Joseph Stalin's rise to power Stalin and antisemitism Stalin Society Stalinist architecture Neo-Stalinism Anti-Soviet agitation Authoritarian socialism Comparison to Nazism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Juche Maoism National communism Red fascism Sino–Albanian split Sino–Soviet split Soviet–Albanian split Soviet–Yugoslav split Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal Soviet Union portal v t e The 1921 Soviet recruitment to the Military Education poster with the Ukrainization theme. The text reads: "Son! Enroll in the School of Red Commanders [ uk ] , and the defence of Soviet Ukraine will be ensured." The poster uses traditional Ukrainian imagery with Ukrainian-language text to reach a wider appeal. The School of Red Commanders in Kharkiv was organized to promote the careers of the Ukrainian national cadre in the army.

Korenizatsiia ( Russian : коренизация , romanized : korenizatsiya , pronounced [kərʲɪnʲɪˈzatsɨjə] ; transl.

"indigenization" or "nativization" [ 1 ] ) was an early policy of the Soviet Union for the integration of non-Russian nationalities into the governments of their specific Soviet republics . This term comes from the word korennoi in the phrase korennoi narod , which means "native people" or "indigenous population." [ 2 ] In the 1920s, the policy promoted representatives of the titular nation , and their national minorities, into the lower administrative levels of the local government, bureaucracy , and nomenklatura of their Soviet republics. The main idea of the korenizatsiia was to grow communist cadres for every nationality. In Russian , the term korenizatsiya ( коренизация ) derives from korennoye naseleniye ( коренное население , "native population"). The policy practically ended in the mid-1930s with the deportations of various nationalities .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Politically and culturally, the nativization policy aimed to eliminate Russian domination and culture in Soviet republics where ethnic Russians did not constitute a majority. This policy was implemented even in areas with large Russian-speaking populations; for instance, all children in Ukraine were taught in the Ukrainian language in school. The policies of korenizatsiia facilitated the Communist Party 's establishment of the local languages in government and education, in publishing, in culture, and in public life. In that manner, the cadre of the local Communist Party were promoted to every level of government, and ethnic Russians working in said governments were required to learn the local language and culture of the given Soviet republic.

Lenin believed that nationalism had the potential to attract class allies for the Bolsheviks and that the historical distrust of non-Russian peoples toward Great Russians could be overcome in this way.

[ 5 ] Korenizatsiia was a preventive policy designed to stop the rise of nationalism among the non-Russian peoples who had been oppressed in the past. The Bolsheviks believed that Great Russian chauvinism was a bigger danger than local national movements. Because of this, korenizatsiia also included criticism of Russian culture and the use of the Russian alphabet , which were linked to the colonial and Russification policies of the former Tsarist regime .

[ 6 ] Korenizatsiia was also designed to support the decolonization process, which the Bolsheviks saw as unavoidable, while at the same time helping to maintain the territorial unity of the former Russian Empire .

[ 5 ] Beginnings [ edit ] The nationalities policy [ 7 ] was formulated by the Bolshevik party in 1913, four years before they came to power in Russia.

Vladimir Lenin sent a young Joseph Stalin (himself a Georgian and therefore an ethnic minority member) to Vienna , which was a very ethnically diverse city due to its status as capital of the Austro-Hungarian empire . Stalin reported back to Moscow with his ideas for the policy. It was summarized in Stalin's pamphlet (his first scholarly publication), Marxism and the National Question (1913).

[ 8 ] The first clear and comprehensive expression of the policy was published by Joseph Stalin in an article in Pravda on October 10, 1920. In this article, Stalin stated that all Soviet institutions operating in the border regions—including courts, administration, economic bodies, local governments, and Party organizations—should be composed of individuals who understood the customs, way of life, and languages of the local populations. This statement marked a turning point in Soviet nationalities policy.

[ 9 ] Korenizatsiia was later systematically defined, especially during the Party Congresses of March 1921 and April 1923, and was shaped around two main objectives: Training of national cadres (elites): The goal was to create a class of administrators and specialists from among the local populations. In this way, greater representation of local people in the lower levels of the Soviet bureaucracy was encouraged.

Linguistic localization (linguistic korenizatsiia): It aimed to promote the use of local national languages in public administration, education, and the press. These     languages were intended to replace Russian and become dominant within their respective regions.

[ 9 ] As adopted in 1923 korenizatsiia involved teaching and administration in the language of the republic; and promoting non-Russians to positions of power in Republic administrations and the party, including for a time the creation of a special administrative units called natssovety ( нацсоветы , national selsoviets ) and natsrayony ( нацрайоны , national districts ) based on concentrations of minorities within what were minority republics.

[ 10 ] For example, in Ukraine in the late 1920s there were even natssovety for Russians and Estonians .

[ citation needed ] In 1920s, there still was animosity towards the Russians and towards other nationalities on the part of the Russians, but there were also conflicts and rivalries among other nationalities.

[ 11 ] Against Great-Russian chauvinism [ edit ] In 1923, at the 12th Party Congress , Stalin identified two threats to the success of the party's "nationalities policy": Great Power Chauvinism ( Russian : великодержавный шовинизм , romanized : velikoderzhavnyy shovinizm , chauvinism of the great power) and local nationalism.

[ 12 ] However, he described the former as the greater danger: [The] Great-Russian chauvinist spirit, which is becoming stronger and stronger owing to the N.E.P.

, . . . [finds] expression in an arrogantly disdainful and heartlessly bureaucratic attitude on the part of Russian Soviet officials towards the needs and requirements of the national republics. The multi-national Soviet state can become really durable, and the co-operation of the peoples within it really fraternal, only if these survivals are vigorously and irrevocably eradicated from the practice of our state institutions. Hence, the first immediate task of our Party is vigorously to combat the survivals of Great-Russian chauvinism.

The main danger, Great-Russian chauvinism, should be kept in check by the Russians themselves, for the sake of the larger goal of building socialism. Within the (minority) nationality areas new institutions should be organized giving the state a national (minority) character everywhere, built on the use of the nationality languages in government and education, and on the recruitment and promotion of leaders from the ranks of minority groups. On the central level the nationalities should be represented in the Soviet of Nationalities .

[ 11 ] Creation of socialist nations [ edit ] The main idea of the korenizatsiia was to grow communist cadres for every nationality. By the mid-1930s the percentage of locals in both the party and state service grew considerably.

[ 13 ] The initial period of korenizatsiia went together with the development of national-territorial administrative units and national cultures. The latter was reflected above all in the areas of language construction [ 14 ] and education.

[ 15 ] For several of the small nationalities in Russia that had no literary language, a "Committee of the North" [ 16 ] helped to create alphabets so that the national languages could be taught in schools and literacy could be brought to the people in their native languages—and the minorities would thereby be brought from backwardness to the modern world.

[ 17 ] And in the very large Ukrainian Republic, the program of Ukrainianization led to a profound shift of the language of instruction in schools to Ukrainian.

In 1930, Stalin proclaimed at the 16th Party Congress that building socialism was a period of blossoming of national cultures. The final goal would be to merge into one international culture with a common language. Meanwhile, the first five-year plan in 1928–1931 was a period of radicalism , utopianism and violence in an atmosphere of "cultural revolution".

[ verification needed ] Russian cultural heritage was under attack, churches were closed and demolished, old specialists were dismissed, and science and art were proletarianized.

[ 18 ] The Bolsheviks' tactics in their struggle to neutralise nationalist aspirations led to political results by the beginning of the 1930s. The old structure of the Russian Empire had been destroyed and a hierarchical federal state structure, based on the national principle, was created. The structure was nationality-based states in which nationality cultures were blossoming, and nationality languages were spoken and used at schools and in local administration.

[ 19 ] The transition was real, not merely a centralized Russian empire camouflaged.

[ 20 ] The 17th Party congress in 1934, proclaimed that the building of the material basis for a socialist society had succeeded. The Soviet Union first became an officially socialist society in 1936 when the new constitution was adopted. The new constitution stated that the many socialist nations had transformed on a voluntary basis into a harmonious union. According to the new constitution there were 11 socialist republics, 22 autonomous republics, nine autonomous regions and nine national territories. At the same time, administration was now greatly centralised. All the Republics were now harnessed to serve one common socialist state.

[ 21 ] End of korenizatsiia [ edit ] Purges of national cadre [ edit ] Between 1933 and 1938 korenizatsiia was not actually repealed. Its provisions merely stopped being enforced. There also began purges of the leaderships of the national republics and territories. The charge against non-Russians was that they had instigated national strife and oppressed the Russians or other minorities in the republics. In 1937, the Soviet government proclaimed that local elites had become hired foreign agents and their goal had become dismemberment of the Soviet Union and the restoration of capitalism. Now it was time to see that the Russians got fair treatment. National leaderships of the republics and autonomies were liquidated en masse.

[ 22 ] Reversal to Russification [ edit ] By the mid-1930s, with purges in some of the national areas, the policy of korenizatsiia took a new turn, and by the end of the 1930s the policy of promoting local languages began to be balanced by greater Russianization , though perhaps not overt Russification or attempts to assimilate the minorities.

[ 23 ] By this time, non-Russians found their appetite whetted rather than satiated by korenizatsiia and there was indication it was encouraging inter-ethnic violence to the extent that the territorial integrity of the USSR would be in danger. In addition, ethnic Russians resented the institutionalized and artificial "reverse discrimination" that benefited non-Russians and regarded them as ungrateful and manipulative as a result. Another concern was that the Soviet Union's westernmost minorities – Belarusians, Ukrainians, Poles, Finns etc. – who had been previously treated with conscious benevolence in order to provide propaganda value to members of their ethnic groups in nations bordering the USSR (and thus facilitating future national unification, which would then bring about territorial expansion of the USSR) were now instead increasingly seen as vulnerable to influence from across the border, "fifth columns" for expansionist states seeking to acquire Soviet territory inhabited by their own ethnic group.

[ 24 ] The adherence of the masses to national rather than class identity was as strong in Russia as in other republics and regions. Between 1937 and 1953, racial policies began to creep into nationality policies, with certain nationalities seen as having immutable traits, particularly nationalities in the unstable borderlands.

[ 25 ] Moreover, Stalin seemed set on greatly reducing the number of officially recognized nationalities by contracting the official list of nationalities in the 1939 census, compared with the 1926 census.

[ 26 ] The development of so-called "national schools" ( национальные школы ) in which the languages of minority nationalities were the main media of instruction continued, spreading literacy and universal education in many national minority languages, while teaching Russian as a required subject of study. The term korenizatsiia went out of use in the latter half of the 1930s, replaced by more bureaucratic expressions, such as "selection and placement of national cadres" ( подбор и расстановка национальных кадров ).

From 1937, the central press started to praise Russian language and Russian culture. Mass campaigns were organized to denounce the " enemies of the people ". " Bourgeois nationalists " were new enemies of the Russian people which had suppressed the Russian language. The policy of indigenization was abandoned. In the following years, the Russian language became a compulsory subject in all Soviet schools.

[ 27 ] Pre-revolution Russian nationalism was also rehabilitated. Many of the heroes of Russian history were re-appropriated for glorification.

[ 28 ] The Russian people became the "elder brother" of the "socialist family of nations" .

[ 28 ] A new kind of patriotism, Soviet patriotism , emerged, with national survival taking priority over ideological conflicts between communists and fascists.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] In 1938, Russian became a mandatory subject of study in all non-Russian schools. In general, the cultural and linguistic russification reflected the overall centralization imposed by Stalin. The Cyrillic script was instituted for a number of Soviet languages, including the languages of Central Asia that in the late 1920s had been given Latin alphabets to replace Arabic ones.

[ 29 ] Moldova became part of the USSR as a consequence of the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact . Soon after, the language of the country was renamed to "Moldavian" and it ceased being written in the Latin alphabet, changing to Cyrillic. This policy would only be reversed in 1989, after large demonstrations imbued with patriotic feeling.

[ 30 ] Romanian is an official language in the Moldovan constitution since its independence, and it is Moldova's sole official language today.

[ 31 ] Russian is still in use but not as important as it was in the Soviet era, since it has no special status in the country and its usage as mother tongue has been declining for some time.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] During the Soviet era, a significant number of ethnic Russians and Ukrainians migrated to other Soviet republics, and many of them settled there. According to the last census in 1989, the Russian 'diaspora' in the Soviet republics had reached 25 million.

[ 35 ] Some historians evaluating the Soviet Union as a colonial empire (" Soviet Empire "), applied the " prison of nations " idea to the USSR. Thomas Winderl wrote "The USSR became in a certain sense more a prison-house of nations than the old Empire had ever been." [ 36 ] See also [ edit ] National delimitation in the Soviet Union – Process of creating national territorial units from the ethnic diversity of USSR Great Russian chauvinism – Ideology Pages displaying short descriptions with no spaces Ukrainization – Efforts to promote the Ukrainian language and culture in Ukraine Russification – Measures to increase the influence of Russian culture and language Latinisation in the Soviet Union – 1920s–1930s campaign to develop Latin alphabets for the languages of the Soviet Union Cyrillisation in the Soviet Union – Move from Latin scripts to Cyrillic Bilingual education – Education conducted in two languages Declaration of Rights of Peoples of Russia Ethnopluralism – Political concept Affirmative action in China Liangshaoyikuan – Chinese government policy Sovietization – Adoption of Soviet political system and mentality ... of: the Baltic states , the Caucasus , Georgia , Armenia References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Liber, George (January 1991).

"Korenizatsiia: Restructuring Soviet nationality policy in the 1920s" .

Ethnic and Racial Studies .

14 (1): 15.

doi : 10.1080/01419870.1991.9993696 .

ISSN 0141-9870 .

In April 1923 the Russian Communist Party formalized the policy of korenizatsiia (indigenization or nativization) ...

^ Martin 2001 , p. 11.

^ Nicolaïdis, Kalypso; Sebe, Berny; Maas, Gabrielle (2014-12-23).

Echoes of Empire: Memory, Identity and Colonial Legacies .

Bloomsbury Publishing .

ISBN 978-0-85773-896-7 – via Google Books .

Elsewhere in the USSR, the late 1930s and the outbreak of World War II also saw some significant changes: elements of korenizatsiya were phased out... the Russians were officially anointed as the 'elder brothers' of the Soviet family of nations, whilst among historians Tsarist imperialism was rehabilitated as having had a 'progressive significance' ^ Chang, Jon K.

"Tsarist continuities in Soviet nationalities policy: A case of Korean territorial autonomy in the Soviet Far East, 1923–1937" .

Eurasia Studies Society of Great Britain & Europe Journal .

^ a b Kinville, Patrick James (2013).

Interwar Soviet Nationalities Policy: The Case of the Volga Germans . Budapest: CEU eTD Collection. p. 6.

^ Martin 2001 , p. 125.

^ Nationalities policy went through several stages. For a general timeline, see the Russian-language Wikipedia article on "Nationalities policy of Russia" ( ru:Национальная политика России )  For a substantive analysis, see Slezkine (1994). The korenizatsiya phase roughly spanned the period from the mid-1920s to the mid-1930s, though vestiges of it carried over.

^ A copy can be found here: http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/stalin/works/1913/03.htm .

^ a b Martin 2001 , p. 75.

^ For further discussion, see Yuri Slezkine, "The USSR as a Communal Apartment, Or How a Socialist State Promoted Ethnic Particularism," Slavic Review 53, No. 2 (Summer 1994): 414–452.

^ a b Timo Vihavainen: Nationalism and Internationalism. How did the Bolsheviks Cope with National Sentiments?

in Chulos & Piirainen 2000 , p. 79.

^ See "National Factors in Party and State Affairs – Theses for the Twelfth Congress of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks), Approved by the Central Committee of the Party," available here: http://www.marx2mao.com/Stalin/NF23.html .

^ Timo Vihavainen: Nationalism and Internationalism. How did the Bolsheviks Cope with National Sentiments?

in Chulos & Piirainen 2000 , p. 80.

^ For a highly informative yet compact summary see Slezkine (1994).

^ For a review of the national languages in education, see Barbara A. Anderson and Brian D. Silver, "Equality, Efficiency, and Politics in Soviet Bilingual Education Policy: 1934–1980," American Political Science Review 78 (December 1984): 1019–1039.

^ Committee for the Assistance to the Peoples of the Northern Borderlands.

^ Slezkine, Juri (1994).

Arctic Mirrors: Russia and the Small Peoples of the North . Ithaca: Cornell University Press .

ISBN 0-8014-8178-3 .

^ Timo Vihavainen: Nationalism and Internationalism. How did the Bolsheviks Cope with National Sentiments?

in Chulos & Piirainen 2000 , p. 81.

^ It's important to be aware of a terminological distinction. In the context of Soviet nationalities policy the term "national," which for clarity here has been rendered as "nationality," referred to ethnic minorities and minority territories, as opposed to central or all-Soviet institutions. In this sense, for example, when educational policy focused on expanding "national schools" (nacional'nje školu – национальные школу), it focused on schools in the traditional languages of the national minorities (Ukrainian, Tatar, Armenian, Karelian, and so forth), not on schools for the Soviet Union as a whole.

^ Timo Vihavainen: Nationalism and Internationalism. How did the Bolsheviks Cope with National Sentiments?

in Chulos & Piirainen 2000 , pp. 81–82.

^ Timo Vihavainen: Nationalism and Internationalism. How did the Bolsheviks Cope with National Sentiments?

in Chulos & Piirainen 2000 , p. 83.

^ Timo Vihavainen: Nationalism and Internationalism. How did the Bolsheviks Cope with National Sentiments?

in Chulos & Piirainen 2000 , p. 84.

^ This distinction can be attributed to Vernon Aspaturian: Russianization is the spread of Russian language and Russian culture (and, one might add, of Russian people) into non-Russian territories and societies; Russification is the psychological transformation of the self-identities of non-Russians into Russians. See Vernon V. Aspaturian, "The Non-Russian Peoples," in Allen Kassof, Ed., Prospects for Soviet Society (New York: Praeger, 1968): 143–198. While Russianization may be a factor that fosters Russification, it is not sufficient by itself to produce it and in some circumstances may even have the opposite effect.

^ Martin 2001 .

^ Law, Ian (2016).

Red racisms: racism in communist and post-communist contexts . Springer. p. 19.

^ This, however, would be mainly a change on paper, not in actual ethnic or national identities. The sharply contracted list in 1939 was later expanded again for the 1959 census, though not to the number of peoples listed in 1926; the director of the 1959 census criticized the earlier effort at contraction as artificial.

^ a b Timo Vihavainen: Nationalism and Internationalism. How did the Bolsheviks Cope with National Sentiments?

in Chulos & Piirainen 2000 , p. 85.

^ a b c Motyl 2001 , pp. 501.

^ Armenian and Georgian kept their original and unique scripts. Many so-called "scriptless" languages, mainly of smaller nationalities in Russia, were first given scripts in Latin alphabet and later changed to Cyrillic. Other languages, in particular in Central Asia, Azerbaijan , and the North Caucasus , first adopted Latin scripts to replace Arabic scripts, and later adopted Cyrillic scripts to replace Latin scripts. Thus, the move to the Cyrillic alphabet was delayed for most non-Russian nationalities until at least the late 1930s, and full implementation of this change took time.

^ Erizanu, Paula (27 August 2021).

"The Literary-musical Clubs that Sparked the Moldovan National Liberation Movement 30 Years Ago" . Retrieved 22 April 2023 .

^ "Moldova officially identifies its national language as Romanian" .

Romania Insider . 3 March 2023 . Retrieved 22 April 2023 .

^ CHINN, JEFFREY.

"The Politics of Language in Moldova" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2023-05-20 . Retrieved 2023-04-22 .

^ "Moldovan court overturns special status for Russian language" . Reuters . Retrieved 22 January 2021 .

^ "Population and Housing Census in the Republic of Moldova, May 12–25, 2014" .

National Bureau of Statistics of the Republic of Moldova . 2 August 2013 . Retrieved 22 April 2023 .

^ Pål Kolstø, "Political construction sites:  Nation-building in Russia and the post-Soviet States". Boulder, Colorado: Westview press 2000, pp. 81–104
uncorrected version, Chapter 2, par. "Nations and Nation-Building in Eastern Europe" Archived 19 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine and Chapter 5 Archived 2 January 2005 at the Wayback Machine ^ Bekus, Nelly (2010-01-01).

Struggle Over Identity: The Official and the Alternative "Belarusianness" . Central European University Press. p. 42.

ISBN 978-963-9776-68-5 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Anderson, Barbara A.; Silver, Brian D. (December 1984). "Equality, Efficiency, and Politics in Soviet Bilingual Education Policy: 1934–1980".

American Political Science Review .

78 (4): 1019– 1039.

doi : 10.2307/1955805 .

JSTOR 1955805 .

S2CID 145196057 .

Chulos, Chris J.; Piirainen, Timo, eds. (2000).

The Fall of an Empire, the Birth of a Nation . Helsinki: Ashgate Publishing .

ISBN 1-85521-902-6 .

Hirsch, Francine (2005).

Empire of Nations: Ethnographic Knowledge and the Making of the Soviet Union . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press .

ISBN 0-8014-4273-7 .

Martin, Terry D. (2001).

The Affirmative Action Empire: Nations and Nationalism in the Soviet Union, 1923-1939 . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press .

ISBN 0-8014-8677-7 .

Motyl, Alexander J.

(2001).

Encyclopedia of Nationalism, Volume II . Academic Press.

ISBN 0-12-227230-7 .

Slezkine, Yuri (Summer 1994). "The USSR as a Communal Apartment, Or How a Socialist State Promoted Ethnic Particularism".

Slavic Review .

53 (2): 414– 452.

doi : 10.2307/2501300 .

JSTOR 2501300 .

S2CID 163654746 .

Suny, Ronald Grigor ; Martin, Terry, eds. (2002).

A State of Nations: Empire and Nation-Making in the Age of Lenin and Stalin . New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 0-19-514423-6 .

, ISBN 0-19-514422-8 (hardcover).

Wixman, Ronald (1980).

Language Aspects of Ethnic Patterns and Processes in the North Caucasus . Geography Research Series.

University of Chicago Press .

v t e Cultural assimilation Africanisation Albanisation Americanisation immigrants names Native Americans Anglicisation Arabisation Armenians Berbers Blacks Jews Araucanisation Azerbaijanisation surnames Talysh Belarusisation soft Bengalisation placenames Bosniakisation Bulgarisation Canadianisation Celticisation Chilenisation Colombianisation Creolisation Croatisation Czechisation Dutchification Estonianisation Europeanisation Westernisation Finnicisation Francisation Brussels Gaelicisation Georgification Germanisation Hawaiianisation Hellenisation Hispanicisation or Castilianisation Filipinos Indianisation placenames Indigenisation Indonesation Israelisation names Italianisation Japanisation Japanification Javanisation Jewish assimilation Kazakhisation Koreanisation Kurdification Latvianization Lithuanisation Magyarisation or Hungarianisation Macedonianisation Malayisation Mexicanisation Mongolisation Montenegrinisation Norwegianisation Pakistanisation Pashtunisation Northern Afghanistan Persianisation societies Polonisation Romanianisation Romanisation or Latinisation names Russification Finland Saffronisation Sanskritisation Serbianisation Sinhalisation Sinicisation Manchus Tibet Vietnam Slavicisation Slovakisation Sovietisation Swahilisation Swedification Talibanisation Taiwanisation Tamilisation Thaification Turkification placenames surnames Turkmenisation Ukrainisation Uzbekisation Vietnamisation Westernisation Wolofisation Zairianisation Assimilation by religions Christianisation Hinduisation Islamisation Judaisation Assimilation by writings Cyrillisation Soviet Union Romanisation of the writings Soviet Union Opposite trends De-arabisation De-communisation De-stalinisation Dehellenization of Christianity De-nazification De-russification Korenizatsiia Latinisation Ukraine De-sinicisation Negation of the Diaspora Vergangenheitsbewältigung Related concepts Cultural genocide Cultural globalisation Cultural imperialism Dominant culture Forced assimilation Forced religious conversion Globalisation Identity politics Internal colonialism Jewish assimilation Language shift Melting pot Monoculturalism v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Korenizatsiia&oldid=1299962642 " Categories : Politics of the Soviet Union Ideology of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Linguistic rights Soviet internal politics Soviet ethnic policy Soviet phraseology Derussification Language policy in Ukraine Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Russian-language text Pages with Russian IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from April 2017 Pages displaying short descriptions with no spaces via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 12:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Korenizatsiia 22 languages Add topic

