Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work Toggle Life and work subsection 1.1 Modernism 2 The Mystical Element of Religion 3 The three elements 4 Hügel and Yeats 5 Hügel and Flannery O'Connor 6 Legacy 7 Works 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Friedrich von Hügel 11 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Español Français Hrvatski Italiano مصرى Norsk bokmål Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Austrian Catholic layman & religious writer (1852-1925) Friedrich von Hügel Born Friedrich Maria Aloys Franz Karl von Hügel ( 1852-05-05 ) 5 May 1852 Florence , Grand Duchy of Tuscany Died 27 January 1925 (1925-01-27) (aged 72) London , United Kingdom Nationality Austrian Other names Baron von Hügel Education private Known for Modernist Christian theologian Title Freiherr (Baron) Spouse Hon. Mary Catherine Herbert ​ ​ ( m.

1873) ​ Children three daughters: Gertrude, Hildegarde and Thekla Friedrich von Hügel (born Friedrich Maria Aloys Franz Karl Freiherr von Hügel , usually known as Baron von Hügel ; 5 May 1852 – 27 January 1925) was an influential Austrian Catholic layman, religious writer, and Christian apologist. Although classified with Modernists due to his friendships with Alfred Loisy and George Tyrrell , von Hügel rejected the Modernist theory of belief.

[ 1 ] Life and work [ edit ] Friedrich von Hügel was born in Florence , in 1852, to Charles von Hügel , who was serving as Austrian ambassador to the Grand Duchy of Tuscany , and a Scottish mother, Elizabeth Farquharson , who was a convert to Catholicism.

[ 2 ] The young Friedrich was educated privately, [ 3 ] and in 1867 moved with his family to England, when he was fifteen, [ 4 ] remaining there for the rest of his life. It has been suggested that Count Felix Sumarokov-Elston , an ataman of the Kuban Cossacks , was his elder half-brother; but as the Count was born in 1820 this is most unlikely, and the Count is more likely to have been his uncle, the son of Hügel's grandfather.

[ 5 ] In 1873 [ 6 ] he married Lady Mary Catherine Herbert (1849–1935), [ 2 ] daughter of the statesman Sidney Herbert, 1st Baron Herbert of Lea , by Elizabeth Ash à Court-Repington , an ardent convert to Roman Catholicism and a philanthropist.

[ 7 ] Mary, like Hügel's mother and her own, was also a convert.

[ 8 ] The couple had three daughters: Gertrude (1877–1915), Hildegarde (1879–1926), and Thekla (1886–1970), who became a Carmelite nun. Hügel remained an Austrian citizen until he found himself to be a "hostile alien" after Britain declared war on Austria-Hungary in August 1914. He applied for naturalisation and received it in December of the same year.

[ 9 ] Hügel was a Baron of the Holy Roman Empire , an inherited title, [ 4 ] and a frequent visitor to Rome.

[ 10 ] A self-taught biblical scholar, [ 11 ] he was fluent in French, German, and Italian, as well as his adopted English.

[ 12 ] A master of many subjects, he never held office in the church, nor any academic post, nor did he ever earn a university degree. However, he is often mentioned alongside John Henry Newman as one of the most influential Roman Catholic thinkers of his day. The scope of his learning was impressive, and the list of his correspondents reads like a "who's who" of nineteenth- and early twentieth-century European religious leadership (for example, Louis Duchesne , Alfred Loisy , Germain Morin , Maurice Blondel , Henri Brémond , John Henry Newman , William George Ward , Wilfrid Philip Ward , Lord Halifax , Cuthbert Butler , Claude Montefiore , George Tyrrell , Maude Petre , Evelyn Underhill , Antonio Fogazzaro , Ernesto Buonaiuti , Rudolf Christoph Eucken , Hans Vaihinger , Franz Xaver Kraus , and Ernst Troeltsch ). In Italy, Hügel frequently met two future popes, Achille Ratti and Eugenio Pacelli, later Pius XI and Pius XII .

[ 13 ] In Milan in 1901 Ratti helped him with his research at the Ambrosiana for The Mystical Element of Religion .

[ 14 ] Hügel did much to bring the work of the philosophers Eucken and Troeltsch to the attention of the English-speaking public, despite the hostility during and after the First World War to all things German.

Modernism [ edit ] Baron von Hügel was deeply engaged in theological discussions with a wide group of scholars associated with the turn-of-the-century Modernist controversy. "He shared with other modernists a belief that science had raised new questions for religious faith and that undermined any naïve suppositions that believers could rely purely on dogmatic authority as a source of truth." [ 2 ] His scholarly concerns included the relationship of Christianity to history, ecumenism , mysticism , the philosophy of religion , and the rejection of much of the immanentism in nineteenth-century theology. Von Hügel supported Alfred Loisy in his troubles with ecclesiastical authorities because he understood Loisy's biblical criticism as valid historical apologetics for the Catholic Church.

[ 15 ] He was a close friend of George Tyrrell , and the two would exchange and proof each other's writing.

[ 16 ] Under Pope Pius X , prompted by conservatives such as Cardinal Merry del Val y Zulueta , there was a backlash against many of the Modernist thinkers, and Hügel attempted to negotiate a middle way of restraint, while remaining true to the principles of intellectual rigour and free enquiry.

When the University of Oxford granted him an honorary Doctor of Divinity degree in 1920, it was the first time since the Reformation that a Roman Catholic had been so honoured by that university.

[ 17 ] The University of St Andrews , where the Hügel archives [ 18 ] are now located, had awarded him an honorary degree in 1914.

[ 19 ] Hügel died in 1925. He was buried, beside his mother and sister, with the Benedictines of Downside , beside the abbey.

[ 20 ] His tombstone in an English country churchyard bears the simple inscription: "Whom have I in heaven but Thee?" The Mystical Element of Religion [ edit ] Friedrich von Hügel's major work was The Mystical Element of Religion as Studied in St. Catherine of Genoa and Her Friends (1908). Writing in The Manchester Guardian after Hügel's death, William Temple gave his judgement of its value: It is quite arguable that this is the most important theological work written in the English language during the last half-century. Its greatness, like all true greatness in this field, consists in its combination of qualities usually found in separation from each other. It is a masterpiece of detailed critical study, yet it is a massive presentation of fundamental principle. It is a penetrating piece of psychological analysis, while it is also a great achievement in constructive philosophy. The most striking section of it — the introduction — has so deeply permeated the thought of our time that its leading conception has become a commonplace among many who have never read the book, or even who have never heard of it. This leading conception is, of course, the necessity of three elements in any religion which is to be both full and living — the mystical, the intellectual, the institutional. His statement of the necessity of each of these, and of the consequent need to harmonize and balance them, is unanswerable.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Hügel's The Mystical Element of Religion is a critical but largely appreciative philosophy of mysticism . Yet, in many ways throughout this work von Hügel counsels the reader of mysticism's potential dangers. The mystical impulse is but one of the three elements that together with the other two constitutes the rich complexity of existence.  Hügel cautions: "...mysticism would never be the whole of religion; it would become a dangerous error the very moment it claimed to be this whole; but, at the same time, it would be an element essential to religion in the long run and upon the whole, although it would… possess its own dangers, its own besetting sins, as indeed also the primitive, naïve type of religion possesses its own different dangers and different besetting sins." [ 23 ] The three elements [ edit ] Hügel's "three elements of religion" are his most enduring contribution to theological thinking.

[ 24 ] The human soul, the movements of western civilisation, and the phenomena of religion itself he characterised by these three elements: the historical/institutional element, the intellectual/speculative element, and the mystical/experiential element.

This typology provided for him an understanding of the balance, tension, and 'friction' that exists in religious thinking and in the complexity of reality and existence. It is an organising paradigm that remained central to his project. The effort to hold these sometimes disparate dimensions together is structurally and theologically dominant throughout his writing. His friend George Tyrrell observed, "All life, according to [Hügel] consists in a patient struggle with irreconcilables—a progressive unifying of parts that will never fit perfectly." [ 25 ] Hügel and Yeats [ edit ] William Butler Yeats addressed Friedrich von Hügel in the last stanza of "Vacillation": [ 26 ] Must we part, Von Hügel, though much alike, for we Accept the miracles of the saints and honour sanctity?

The body of Saint Teresa lies undecayed in tomb, Bathed in miraculous oil, sweet odours from it come, Healing from its lettered slab. Those self-same hands perchance Eternalised the body of a modern saint that once Had scooped out Pharaoh's mummy. I – though heart might find relief Did I become a Christian man and choose for my belief What seems most welcome in the tomb – play a predestined part.

Homer is my example and his unchristened heart.

The lion and the honeycomb, what has Scripture said?

So get you gone, Von Hügel, though with blessings on your head.

Hügel and Flannery O'Connor [ edit ] In The Habit of Being: Letters of Flannery O'Connor , published posthumously in 1979, O'Connor refers often to von Hügel, especially in writing to a correspondent in the process of conversion to Catholicism.

A Subversive Gospel by Michael Bruner also examines her Catholicism and Hügel's influence.

Legacy [ edit ] With a deep commitment to the life of prayer, von Hügel was an authority on the great mystical writers, particularly of the pre-Reformation period, and sympathetic to the emotional and spiritual burdens of humanity, so that he was sought out by many as a counsellor, guide, and spiritual mentor. His authority as a spiritual writer has endured through the posthumous publication of many of his letters: Selected Letters, 1896–1924, 1927, Letters from Baron Friedrich von Hügel to a Niece, 1928, and Spiritual Counsels and Letters of Baron Friedrich von Hügel , 1964.

The Von Hügel Institute, [ 27 ] a research centre for the study of Christianity and society at St Edmund's College, Cambridge , was founded in 1987, and is named in honour of Friedrich's brother, Anatole von Hügel , the first director of the Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, University of Cambridge .

A plaque was erected in 1968 by the Greater London Council outside his former home at 4 Holford Road, Hampstead, London, NW3 1AD, London Borough of Camden.

[ 28 ] Works [ edit ] In addition to extensive correspondence, his published works include: The Mystical Element of Religion: as studied in Saint Catherine of Genoa and her friends, 2 vols, (1908, revised 1923: Vol. I ; Vol. II ) Eternal Life (1912) The German Soul (1916) Essays and Addresses on the Philosophy of Religion (Vol. I 1921; Vol II 1926) Friedrich von Hügel (1928).

Letters from Baron Friedrich von Hügel to a Niece . J. M. Dent & Sons.

Some Notes on the Petrine Claims , Sheed & Ward, 1930.

The Reality of God and Religion and Agnosticism (1931). This last book contains two works that von Hügel left unfinished at his death: The Reality of God , which was to have been the Gifford Lectures of 1924–1925 and 1925–1926 at Edinburgh University , and Religion and Agnosticism , a study of the religious opinions and writings of Sir Alfred Comyn Lyall which was begun in 1912 and laid aside in 1915 (though retouched here and there later).

[ 29 ] References [ edit ] ^ The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica.

"Friedrich von Hügel, baron von Hügel" .

Britannica . Encyclopaedia Britannica . Retrieved 14 March 2022 .

{{ cite web }} : |last1= has generic name ( help ) ^ a b c "Friedrich von Hügel", The Gifford Lectures ^ de la Bedoyère 1951 , p. 16.

^ a b de la Bedoyère 1951 , p. 17.

^ Ficquelmont, Countess Dorothea (2009), Долли Фикельмон. Дневник 1829–1837. Весь пушкинский Петербург / Публикация и комментарии С. Мрочковской–Балашовой – М.: Минувшее , ISBN 978-5-902073-66-6 .

^ de la Bedoyère 1951 , p. 9.

^ de la Bedoyère 1951 , p. 7.

^ de la Bedoyère 1951 , p. 8.

^ de la Bedoyère 1951 , p. 279.

^ de la Bedoyère 1951 , p. 21, 101.

^ de la Bedoyère 1951 , p. 41, 55.

^ de la Bedoyère 1951 , p. 52.

^ de la Bedoyère 1951 , p. 125.

^ de la Bedoyère 1951 , p. 130.

^ Barmann 1972 , p. 119-137.

^ Barmann 1972 , p. 138-182.

^ de la Bedoyère 1951 , p. 317.

^ "Roman Catholic Modernist Movement", Manuscripts , UK: St Andrews University Library Special Collections, archived from the original on 8 October 2006 .

^ Barmann 1972 , p. 247.

^ de la Bedoyère 1951 , p. 356.

^ The Manchester Guardian , 6 February 1925 ^ de la Bedoyère 1951 , p. 223.

^ von Hügel, Friedrich.

The Reality of God and Agnosticism , 1931, p. 91 ^ von Hügel (1908).

The Mystical Element of Religion . Vol. I. pp.

50– 82.

^ Tyrrell, George (1909).

"Mysticism in Religion" .

The Hibbert Journal .

7 (3): 687– 9.

^ Vendler, Helen (2016).

Vacillation: Between What and What?

. Yeats Annual. Open Book Publishers. pp.

151– 168.

ISBN 9782821854017 .

^ The Von Hügel Institute , UK: St Edmund's .

^ "Von Hügel, Baron Friedrich", English Heritage ^ Gardner, Edmund (1931).

"Preface" .

The Reality of God . Archived from the original on 19 March 2012.

Further reading [ edit ] Christianity portal Arnold, Claus (2018). "Im Zentrum des reformkatholischen Netzwerks. Ein unerledigter Brief Friedrich von Hügels an Franz Xaver Kraus (1901)". In Gottsmann, Andreas (ed.).

Incorrupta monumenta ecclesiam defendunt. Studi offerti a mons. Sergio Pagano, prefetto dell'Archivio Segreto Vaticano . Vol. I, 1. Vatican City: Archivio Segreto Vaticano. pp.

33– 41.

ISBN 9788898638086 .

Barmann, Lawrence (1972).

Baron Friedrich von Hügel and the Modernist Crisis in England . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521081788 .

Barmann, Lawrence (1997). "The Modernist as Mystic: Baron Friedrich von Hügel".

Journal for the History of Modern Theology .

4 (2): 221– 250.

doi : 10.1515/znth.1997.4.2.221 .

S2CID 194048768 .

de la Bedoyère, Michael (1951), The Life of Baron von Hügel , London: J. M. Dent & Sons .

Johns, David L (2004), Mysticism and Ethics in Friedrich von Hügel , Lewiston, NY: The Edwin Mellen Press , ISBN 0-7734-6222-8 .

Kelly, James J (1983), Baron Friedrich von Hügel's Philosophy of Religion , Leuven: Leuven University Press , ISBN 90-6186-146-2 .

Leonard, Ellen M (2005), Creative Tension: the Spiritual Legacy of Friedrich von Hügel (hardback), Scranton, PA: University of Scranton Press , ISBN 0-940866-66-8 ; paperback ISBN 0-940866-67-6 Petre, M. D. (1937) Von Hügel and Tyrrell: The Story of a Friendship .

Cross, F. L., ed. (1957) The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church . London: Oxford University Press; p. 1429 "Von Hügel, Baron Friedrich" External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original works by or about: Friedrich von Hügel Works by Friedrich von Hügel at Faded Page (Canada) Jowett, Nick (15 November 2008).

"Face to faith: Von Hügel's writings help us to see why today's church is full of intellectuals and simpletons" .

The Guardian .

Works by Friedrich von Hügel at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) v t e Modernism in the Catholic Church Issues Biblical exegesis Historical-critical exegesis of the Bible Biblical inerrancy Synoptic problem Quest for the historical Jesus Thomism Social doctrine People Prosper Alfaric Pierre Batiffol Maurice Blondel Joseph Bonsirven Henri Brémond Ernesto Buonaiuti Louis Duchesne Antonio Fogazzaro Marcel Hébert Albert Houtin Friedrich von Hügel Lucien Laberthonnière Lucien Lacroix Marie-Joseph Lagrange Alfred Loisy Eudoxe Irénée Mignot Romolo Murri Maude Petre Fernand Portal Antonin Sertillanges Joseph Turmel George Tyrrell Anti-modernist reaction Pope Pius IX Quanta cura Syllabus of Errors Pope Leo XIII Pontifical Biblical Commission Pope Pius X Lamentabili sane exitu Pascendi Dominici gregis Oath Against Modernism Sodalitium Pianum Twenty-four Thomistic theses Louis Billot Umberto Benigni Rafael Merry del Val José de Calasanz Vives y Tutó Réginald Garrigou-Lagrange Publications Annales de philosophie chrétienne La Justice sociale La Quinzaine Revue du clergé français Temps présent Le Sillon ( Marc Sangnier ) Protestant equivalents Fundamentalist–Modernist controversy Historians Giuseppe Alberigo Pierre Colin Avery Dulles Étienne Fouilloux Maurilio Guasco François Laplanche René Marlé Jean-Marie Mayeur Émile Poulat Christoph Theobald Catholicism portal Vatican City portal Name Media Category Templates WikiProject v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Norway Korea Poland Vatican Israel Belgium People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Friedrich_von_Hügel&oldid=1300174906 " Categories : 1852 births 1925 deaths 19th-century Austrian male writers 19th-century Roman Catholics 20th-century Austrian male writers 20th-century Roman Catholics Austrian barons Austrian Roman Catholic writers Barons of the Holy Roman Empire Burials in Somerset Catholic philosophers Christian apologists English male non-fiction writers English people of Austrian descent English religious writers English Roman Catholic writers Modernism in the Catholic Church Mysticism scholars Naturalised citizens of the United Kingdom Von Hügel family Writers from Florence Hidden categories: CS1 errors: generic name Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from June 2017 Use dmy dates from June 2017 Articles with hCards Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 18:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Friedrich von Hügel 11 languages Add topic

