Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Discovery 2 Description 3 Classification 4 Paleobiology Toggle Paleobiology subsection 4.1 Hunting strategy 4.2 Lifestyle 4.3 Development 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Acanthostega 28 languages العربية Български Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Extinct genus of tetrapodomorphs Acanthostega Temporal range: Late Devonian ( Famennian ), 365 Ma PreꞒ Ꞓ O S D C P T J K Pg N ↓ Skeletal reconstruction Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Clade : Stegocephali Family: † Acanthostegidae Jarvik , 1952 Genus: † Acanthostega Jarvik, 1952 Species: † A. gunnari Binomial name † Acanthostega gunnari Jarvik, 1952 Acanthostega , from Ancient Greek ἄκανθα ( ákantha ), meaning "spine", and στέγη ( stégē ), meaning "roof", is an extinct genus of stem-tetrapod , among the first vertebrate animals to have recognizable limbs . It appeared in the late Devonian period ( Famennian age) about 365 million years ago, and was anatomically intermediate between lobe-finned fishes and those that were able to come onto land.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Discovery [ edit ] Holotype skull, Zoological Museum of Copenhagen The fossilized remains are generally well preserved, with the famous fossil by which the significance of this species  was discovered being found by Jennifer A. Clack in East Greenland in 1987, though fragments of the skull had been discovered in 1933 by Gunnar Säve-Söderbergh and Erik Jarvik .

Description [ edit ] Life restoration Simplified phylogeny of the fish–tetrapod transition.

The 60 cm (24 in) Acanthostega had eight digits on each hand (the number of digits on the feet is unclear) linked by webbing. It lacked wrists, and was generally poorly adapted for walking on land. It also had a remarkably fish-like shoulder and forelimb.

[ 3 ] The front limbs of Acanthostega could not bend forward at the elbow, and therefore could not be brought into a weight bearing position, appearing to be more suitable for paddling or for holding on to aquatic plants.

Acanthostega is the earliest stem-tetrapod to show the shift in locomotory dominance from the pectoral girdle to the pelvic girdle.

[ 4 ] There are many morphological changes that allowed the pelvic girdle of Acanthostega to become a weight-bearing structure. In more ancestral states the two sides of the girdle were not attached. In Acanthostega there is contact between the two sides and fusion of the girdle with the sacral rib of the vertebral column. These fusions would have made the pelvic region more powerful and equipped to counter the force of gravity when not supported by the buoyancy of an aquatic environment.

[ 4 ] It had internal gills that were covered like those of fish. It also had lungs, but its ribs were too short to support its chest cavity out of water.

[ 2 ] Classification [ edit ] An illustration of the Devonian speciation of lobe-finned fish Acanthostega is seen as part of widespread evolutionary radiation in the late Devonian period, starting with purely aquatic finned tetrapodomorphs, with their successors showing increased air-breathing capability and related adaptions to the jaws and gills, as well as more muscular neck allowing freer movement of the head than fish have, and use of the fins to raise the body of the fish.

[ 2 ] These features are displayed by the earlier Tiktaalik , which like Ichthyostega showed signs of greater abilities to move around on land, but is thought to have been primarily aquatic.

[ 2 ] In Late Devonian vertebrate speciation, descendants of pelagic lobe-finned fish –like Eusthenopteron – exhibited a sequence of adaptations: Panderichthys , suited to muddy shallows; Tiktaalik with limb-like fins that could take it onto land; stem-tetrapods in weed-filled swamps, such as Acanthostega , which had eight-digited feet; and Ichthyostega , with full limbs. Their descendants also included pelagic lobe-finned fish such as coelacanth species.

Paleobiology [ edit ] Hunting strategy [ edit ] Skull cast, Musee De L'Histoire Naturelle Brussels It has been inferred that Acanthostega probably lived in shallow, weed-choked swamps, its legs apparently being adapted for these specific ecosystems. Apart from the presence of limbs, it was not adapted in any way for walking on land.

Jennifer A. Clack interprets this as showing that Acanthostega was primarily an aquatic animal descended from fish which never left the sea, and the specializations of the tetrapod lineage were exaptations . These features would later be useful for terrestrial life, even if they originated for a different purpose. During that period, deciduous plants were flourishing and annually shedding leaves into the water, attracting small prey into warm oxygen-poor shallows which were difficult for larger fish to swim in. Clack remarks on how the lower jaw of Acanthostega shows a change from those fish that have two rows of teeth, with a large number of small teeth in the outer row, and two large fangs and some smaller teeth in the inner row. This difference likely corresponds to a shift in stem-tetrapods from feeding exclusively in the water to feeding with the head above water or on land.

[ 2 ] Acanthostega AMNH model - head detail Research based on analysis of the suture morphology in the skull of Acanthostega indicates that the species was able to bite prey at or near the water's edge. Markey and Marshall compared the skull with the skulls of fish, which use suction feeding as the main method of prey capture, and creatures known to have used the direct biting on prey typical of terrestrial animals . Their results indicate that Acanthostega was adapted for what they call terrestrial-style feeding, strongly supporting the hypothesis which the terrestrial mode of feeding first emerged in aquatic animals. If correct, this shows an animal specialized for hunting and living in shallow waters in the line between land and water.

[ 5 ] Lifestyle [ edit ] Model reconstruction at the State Museum of Natural History in Stuttgart , Germany While normally considered more basal than Ichthyostega , it is possible that Acanthostega was actually more derived. Since Acanthostega resembles juvenile Ichthyostega and shows a lot less differences from juveniles to adults than the latter, it has been suggested that Acanthostega might be descended from a neotenic lineage. Although it appears to have spent its whole life in water, its humerus also exhibits traits that resemble those of later, fully terrestrial stem-tetrapods (the humerus in Ichthyostega being somewhat derived from, and homologous with the pectoral and pelvic fin bones of earlier fishes). This could indicate that vertebrates evolved terrestrial traits earlier than previously assumed, and many times independently from another.

[ 6 ] Muscle scars on the forelimbs of Acanthostega were similar to those of crown-tetrapods, suggesting that it evolved from an ancestor which had more terrestrial adaptations than itself.

[ 7 ] Development [ edit ] A histological study of Acanthostega humeri, assisted by synchrotron scans, indicates that the animal matured slowly. Some individuals reached sexual maturity (based on a fully ossified humerus) at more than six years of age, and adult fossils are much rarer than juveniles. Late ossification of the humerus supports a fully aquatic lifestyle for Acanthostega . There is barely any correlation between humerus size and maturity, suggesting that there was significant size variation among individuals of the same age. This may be due to competitive pressures, differing adaptive strategies, or even sexual dimorphism . However, the small sample size prevents recognition of a bimodal distribution which could confirm the latter hypothesis.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Parmastega References [ edit ] Paleontology portal ^ Benton, Michael J. (2019). "Acanthostega".

Vertebrate Palaeontology (Kindle ed.). Wiley. p. 90.

^ a b c d e Clack, Jennifer A. (21 November 2005).

"Getting a Leg Up on Land" .

Scientific American . Archived from the original on 25 February 2007.

^ "Acanthostega gunneri" . Devonian Times. Archived from the original on 2010-01-10 . Retrieved 2013-11-04 .

^ a b Boisvert, Catherine A. (2005). "The pelvic fin and girdle of Panderichthys and the origin of tetrapod locomotion".

Nature .

438 (7071): 1145– 1147.

Bibcode : 2005Natur.438.1145B .

doi : 10.1038/nature04119 .

PMID 16372007 .

S2CID 4412211 .

^ Markey, M. J.; Marshall, C. R. (2007).

"Terrestrial-style feeding in a very early aquatic tetrapod is supported by evidence from experimental analysis of suture morphology" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

104 (17): 7134– 7138.

Bibcode : 2007PNAS..104.7134M .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0701706104 .

PMC 1855429 .

PMID 17438285 .

^ Fossils suggest earlier land-water transition of tetrapod ^ Callier, Viviane; Clack, Jennifer A.; Ahlberg, Per E. (2009-04-17).

"Contrasting Developmental Trajectories in the Earliest Known Tetrapod Forelimbs" .

Science .

324 (5925): 364– 367.

Bibcode : 2009Sci...324..364C .

doi : 10.1126/science.1167542 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 19372425 .

S2CID 28461841 .

^ Sanchez, Sophie; Tafforeau, Paul; Clack, Jennifer A.; Ahlberg, Per E. (2016).

"Life history of the stem tetrapod Acanthostega revealed by synchrotron microtomography" .

Nature .

537 (7620): 408– 411.

Bibcode : 2016Natur.537..408S .

doi : 10.1038/nature19354 .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

PMC 6485594 .

PMID 27602519 .

Sources [ edit ] Boisvert, C. A. (2005). "The pelvic fin and girdle of Panderichthys and the origin of tetrapod locomotion".

Nature .

438 (7071): 1145– 1147.

Bibcode : 2005Natur.438.1145B .

doi : 10.1038/nature04119 .

PMID 16372007 .

S2CID 4412211 .

Clack, J. A. (2006). "The emergence of early tetrapods".

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

232 ( 2– 4): 167– 189.

Bibcode : 2006PPP...232..167C .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2005.07.019 .

Clack, J. A. (2009). "The fin to limb transition: new data, interpretations, and hypotheses from paleontology and developmental biology".

Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences .

37 (1): 163– 179.

Bibcode : 2009AREPS..37..163C .

doi : 10.1146/annurev.earth.36.031207.124146 .

Laurin M. 2010. How Vertebrates Left the Water. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Steyer J-Sb. 2012. Earth Before the Dinosaurs. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

External links [ edit ] Tolweb.org Wikispecies has information related to Acanthostega .

v t e Tetrapodomorpha ( Pan-Tetrapoda ) Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Clade : Osteichthyes Clade : Sarcopterygii Clade : Rhipidistia Gnathostomata see Gnathostomata Tetrapodomorpha see below↓ Tetrapodomorpha Tetrapodomorpha † Bogdanovia † Chrysolepis † Geptolepis † Glyptopomus † Gogonasus † Greiserolepis † Gyroptychius † Harajicadectes † Kenichthys † Litoptychus † Lamprotolepis † Latvius † Medoevia † Megadonichthys † Muranjilepis † Osteolepis † Peregrina † Platyethmoidia † Shirolepis † Thaumatolepis † Thursius † Tungsenia † Viluichthys † Rhizodontida Archichthys Aztecia Barameda Gooloogongia Hongyu Letognathus Propycnoctenion Pycnoctenion Rhizodus Rossichthys Sauripterus Screbinodus Strepsodus Thysanolepis ?

Vorobjevaia ?

† Canowindridae Beelarongia Canowindra Koharalepis Marsdenichthys ?

Owensia ?

† Megalichthyidae Askerichthys Cladarosymblema Cryptolepis ?

Ectosteorhachis Lohsania ?

Mahalalepis Megalichthys Megapomus ?

Megistolepis ?

Palatinichthys Rhizodopsis Sengoerichthys Sterropterygion ?

Eotetrapodiformes † Palaeospondylus ?

† Tristichopteridae Bruehnopteron Cabonnichthys Callistipterus Canningius Devonosteus Edenopteron Eusthenodon Eusthenopteron Heddleichthys Hyneria Jarvikina Langlieria Litoptychus ?

Mandageria Marsdenichthys ?

Notorhizodon Platycephalichthys Spodichthys Tinirau Tristichopterus Elpistostegalia † Howittichthys ?

† Livoniana † Panderichthys † Parapanderichthys † Qikiqtania † Rubrognathus † Tiktaalik Stegocephali ( Tetrapoda sensu lato ) see below↓ Stegocephali ( Tetrapoda sensu lato ) Devonian taxa † Acanthostega † Brittagnathus † Densignathus † Elpistostege ?

† Hynerpeton † Ichthyostega † Jakubsonia † Metaxygnathus † Parmastega † Sinostega † Tiktaalik ?

† Tulerpeton † Tutusius † Umzantsia † Ventastega † Ymeria † Elginerpetontidae Elginerpeton Obruchevichthys Webererpeton Post- Devonian taxa † Antlerpeton † Aytonerpeton † Crassigyrinus † Diploradus † Doragnathus † Gaiasia † Ichthyerpeton † Koilops † Mesanerpeton † Occidens † Ossirarus † Perittodus † Sigournea † Tantallognathus † Aistopoda Andersonerpeton Lethiscus Ophiderpeton Oestocephalidae Coloraderpeton Oestocephalus Phlegethontioidea Pseudophlegethontia Phlegethontiidae Phlegethontia Sillerpeton † Whatcheeriidae Ossinodus ?

Pederpes Whatcheeria † Colosteidae Colosteus Deltaherpeton Greererpeton Pholidogaster † Adelospondyli Acherontiscus Adelogyrinidae Adelogyrinus Adelospondylus Dolichopareias Palaeomolgophis † " Nectridea " see Nectridea † Baphetoidea Eucritta ?

Spathicephalus Baphetidae Baphetes Kyrinion Loxomma Megalocephalus † Embolomeri Anthracosaurus Archeria Aversor Calligenethlon Carbonoherpeton " Cricotus " Diplovertebron Eobaphetes Eoherpeton ?

Leptophractus Neopteroplax Palaeoherpeton Papposaurus Pholiderpeton Proterogyrinus Pteroplax Seroherpeton Spondylerpeton † Gephyrostegidae Bruktererpeton Eusauropleura Gephyrostegus † Other " anthracosaurs " Caerorhachis Casineria ?

Eldeceeon Eoherpeton Silvanerpeton Termonerpeton Crown group Tetrapoda Temnospondyli ( Batrachomorpha see Temnospondyli includes Lissamphibia Reptiliomorpha ( Pan-Amniota ) see Reptiliomorpha includes Amniota Related topics Paraphyletic / Polyphyletic groups Stem tetrapoda Osteolepiformes Osteolepididae Megalichthyiformes ?

Tristichopteridae ?

Labyrinthodontia Rachitomi Ichthyostegalia Lepospondyli Holospondyli Phyllospondyli Anthracosauria Other topics Evolution of tetrapods Polydactyly in stem-tetrapods Romer's gap Timeline Zachelmie trackways Category Taxon identifiers Acanthostega Wikidata : Q131763 Wikispecies : Acanthostega EoL : 47578068 GBIF : 4817249 IRMNG : 1316846 Paleobiology Database : 36963 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Acanthostega&oldid=1304789088 " Categories : Stegocephali Monotypic prehistoric lobe-finned fish genera Late Devonian sarcopterygians Devonian sarcopterygians of North America Devonian Greenland Fossils of Greenland Fossil taxa described in 1952 Transitional fossils Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats Taxonbars of monotypic genera missing species This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 04:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Acanthostega 28 languages Add topic

