Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life and education 1.2 Preacher to the Papal Household 1.3 Cardinal 1.4 Conclaves 2 Film 3 Writings 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Raniero Cantalamessa 23 languages Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Deutsch Español Français Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Lombard Malagasy مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian Catholic cardinal and priest His Eminence Raniero Cantalamessa OFM Cap Cardinal , Preacher Emeritus of the Papal Household Cantalamessa in 2020 Church Latin Church Appointed 23 June 1980 Term ended 9 November 2024 Predecessor Alfredo Marchesi Successor Roberto Pasolini Other post(s) Cardinal-Deacon of Sant'Apollinare alle Terme Neroniane-Alessandrine (since 2020) Previous post(s) Preacher of the Papal Household (1980–2024) Orders Ordination 19 October 1958 by Gaetano Malchiodi [ it ] Created cardinal 28 November 2020 by Pope Francis Rank Cardinal-Deacon Personal details Born ( 1934-07-22 ) 22 July 1934 (age 91) Colli del Tronto , Ascoli Piceno , Italy Denomination Roman Catholic Alma mater University of Fribourg Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore Motto Veni Creator Spiritus (Come, Creator Spirit) Coat of arms Raniero Cantalamessa OFM Cap (born 22 July 1934) is an Italian Catholic cardinal , Capuchin priest , and theologian. He served as the Preacher to the Papal Household from 1980 until 2024, under Popes John Paul II , Benedict XVI , and Francis . A proponent of the Catholic charismatic renewal , he was elevated to the cardinalate by Pope Francis in 2020.

Biography [ edit ] Early life and education [ edit ] Raniero Cantalamessa was born in Colli del Tronto , Italy, on 22 July 1934.

[ 1 ] He was ordained as a priest in the Franciscan Capuchin order in 1958.

[ 2 ] He holds doctoral degrees in theology and classical literature . He formerly served as a professor of ancient Christian history and the director of the Department of Religious Sciences at the Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore in Milan , resigning in 1979. Cantalamessa also served as a member of the International Theological Commission from 1975 until 1981.

[ 3 ] In his 1988 book The Mystery of Christmas , Cantalamessa wrote that the Church must reassess its identity based upon its Jewish roots: "Quite a few in the Jewish religion have started to acknowledge Jesus as 'the glory of Israel.' They openly acknowledge Jesus as the Messiah and call themselves 'Messianic Jews.' ... These help us to overcome certain gloomy prospects of ours, making us realize that the great original schism afflicting the Church and impoverishing it is not so much the schism between East and West or between Catholics and Protestants, as the more radical one between the Church and Israel." He then wrote: "We are not saying this in a spirit of proselytism but in a spirit of conversion and obedience to the Word of God because it is certain that the rejoining of Israel with the Church will involve a rearrangement in the Church; it will mean a conversion on both sides. It will also be a rejoining of the Church with Israel." [ 4 ] Preacher to the Papal Household [ edit ] Cantalamessa was appointed the Preacher to the Papal Household by Pope John Paul II in 1980 and was confirmed in this position by Popes Benedict XVI and Francis. In this capacity, he provided meditations to the Pope and other high-ranking officials each Friday during Lent and Advent , [ 3 ] and was "the only person allowed to preach to the Pope." [ 5 ] In December 2006, Cantalamessa urged Pope Benedict XVI in an Advent sermon to declare a day of fasting and penitence in response to child sex crimes by clergy in the Roman Catholic Church. There was no reported reaction from the pope.

[ 5 ] In 2010, Cantalamessa's sermon during Good Friday prayers in St Peter's Basilica was reported as implying that the coverage of alleged child abuse and cover-ups within the Roman Catholic Church was evidence of anti-Catholicism and that this coverage bore similarities to the "more shameful aspects of anti-Semitism ".

[ 6 ] Cantalamessa responded that he was reading directly from a letter received earlier in the week from a Jewish friend who was expressing his contempt for what he considered a blatant media assault on the pope.

[ 7 ] Vatican spokesman Federico Lombardi issued a statement saying that Cantalamessa was not speaking as a Vatican official and that Cantalamessa's comparison could "lead to misunderstandings and is not an official position of the Catholic Church".

[ 6 ] On 29 March 2013, in a Good Friday homily delivered in St Peter's Basilica , Cantalamessa preached in favor of clearing away "the residue of past ceremonials, laws and disputes, now only debris". He then referred to Francis of Assisi as a model for the creative destruction of ecclesial traditions: As happens with certain old buildings, over the centuries, to adapt to the needs of the moment, they become filled with partitions, staircases, rooms and closets. The time comes when we realize that all these adjustments no longer meet the current needs, but rather are an obstacle, so we must have the courage to knock them down and return the building to the simplicity and linearity of its origins. This was the mission that was received one day by a man who prayed before the Crucifix of San Damiano: "Go, Francis, and repair my Church".

[ 8 ] Cantalamessa, a frequent speaker, is a member of the Catholic Delegation for Dialogue with the Pentecostal Churches.

[ 3 ] [ 5 ] He hosted [ when?

] a weekly program on Radiotelevisione Italiana .

At the suggestion of Pope Francis, Cantalamessa led a retreat for the bishops of the US at Mundelein Seminary from 2 to 8 January 2019 to seek spiritual guidance in addressing the clerical sex abuse crisis in the US Catholic Church.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Cardinal [ edit ] On 25 October 2020, Pope Francis announced he would raise him to the rank of cardinal at a consistory scheduled for 28 November 2020.

[ 12 ] On his request, [ 13 ] the pope granted Cantalamessa dispensation from the requirement that he be consecrated a bishop.

[ 14 ] At that consistory, Pope Francis made him Cardinal-Deacon of Sant'Apollinare alle Terme Neroniane-Alessandrine .

[ 15 ] Aged more than 80 at the time of his elevation to the cardinalate, Cantalamessa was never eligible to serve as a cardinal elector .

His office of Preacher to the Pontifical Household ceased on 9 November 2024, when his successor was appointed.

[ 16 ] He planned in retirement to live at the Hermitage of Merciful Love in Cittaducale and serve on occasion as chaplain to a community of Poor Clare nuns there.

[ 17 ] Conclaves [ edit ] Two papal conclaves were held while Cantalamessa was serving as preacher to the papal household, and both times he was invited to deliver one of the two public exhortations that begin a conclave , in 2005 and 2013 .

[ 18 ] Although he had retired as papal preacher, he was once again invited to give the second of the two exhortations at the 2025 conclave , which immediately precedes the casting of the first ballots in the conclave.

[ 19 ] Reportedly, Cantalamessa's remarks lasted for over an hour, delaying the start of the first ballot; at one point, Cardinal Pietro Parolin , presiding as the senior cardinal bishop who is an elector, asked the other cardinal electors present if they wanted to postpone the first vote until the next morning, but the vote proceeded that day without postponement.

[ 20 ] Film [ edit ] Cantalamessa is the primary subject of the award-winning [ 21 ] documentary The Preacher to the Popes: Raniero Cantalamessa from CMAX Media and Awakening the Domestic Church . The film premiered in December 2021 in Norfolk, VA. As of January 14, 2022 the documentary has won 8 awards in 12 different festivals.

Writings [ edit ] Cantalamessa is the author of numerous books on theological and spiritual topics. A selection follows: [ 22 ] Glorify God in Your Bodies: Our Call to Horizontal Holiness (1986) The Mystery of Christmas: A Commentary on the Magnificat (1988) Jesus Christ, the Holy One of God (1991) The Holy Spirit, Soul of Evangelization (1992) The Eucharist, Our Sanctification (1993) Easter in the Early Church (1993) The Mystery of Easter (1993) The Holy Spirit in the Life of Jesus, The Mystery of Christ's Baptism (1994) The Mystery of God's Word (1994) Virginity (1995) The Power of the Cross (1996) The Ascent to Mount Sinai (1996) Poverty (1997) Life in Christ: A Spiritual Commentary on the Letter to the Romans (1997) The Mystery of Pentecost (2002) Spiritual Healing (2003) Come, Creator Spirit: Meditations on the Veni Creator (2003) Loving the Church (2005) Sober Intoxication of the Spirit (2005) This Is My Body (2005) Contemplating the Trinity (2007) Beatitudes: Eight Steps to Happiness (2009) The Gaze of Mercy: A Commentary on Divine and Human Mercy (2015) The Power of the Cross:Good Friday Sermons from the Papal Preacher (2023) [ 23 ] Faith, Hope, and Charity (2024) [ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Cardinals created by Francis Prefecture of the Papal Household References [ edit ] ^ "Fr. Raniero Cantalamessa, OFMCap" .

Cantalamessa.org (in Italian) . Retrieved 13 March 2013 .

^ Hocken, Peter D. (2002). "Cantalamessa, Rainero". In Stanley M. Burgess (ed.).

The New International dDctionary of Pentecostal and Charismatic Movements (Rev. and expanded ed.). Grand Rapids, Michigan: Zondervan Pub. House. p. 454.

ISBN 0310224810 .

^ a b c "Fr. Raniero Cantalamessa, OFMCap" .

Cantalamessa.org . Retrieved 13 March 2013 .

^ The Mystery of Christmas . Sydney: St. Paul's Publications. 1988. p. 101.

^ a b c "Call for Church sex abuse penance" .

BBC News . 15 December 2006 . Retrieved 3 January 2011 .

^ a b "Pope's preacher compares abuse row to anti-Semitism" .

BBC News . 2 April 2010 . Retrieved 3 January 2011 .

^ Pentin, Edward (2 April 2010).

"What Fr. Cantalamessa Really Said" .

National Catholic Register . Archived from the original on 6 April 2010 . Retrieved 3 January 2011 .

^ Cantalamessa, Raniero.

"Good Friday 2013, Celebration of the Passion of Our Lord, Homily of Father Raniero Cantalamessa, OFM, Cap" . Retrieved 30 March 2013 .

^ Fair, Jim (3 January 2019).

"Chicago: US Bishops Gathered for Spiritual Retreat" .

Zenit . Retrieved 10 November 2024 .

^ "Father Cantalamessa preaching to US bishops on retreat this week" . Catholic News Agency. 2 January 2019 . Retrieved 9 November 2024 .

^ "U.S. Bishops Receive Letter from Pope Francis As They Gather for Spiritual Retreat; Cardinal Daniel DiNardo Offers Message to Holy Father on Behalf of U.S. Bishops" .

USCCB . 4 January 2019 . Retrieved 10 November 2024 .

^ O'Connell, Gerard (25 October 2020).

"Pope Francis names 13 new cardinals, including Wilton Gregory, the archbishop of Washington D.C." America . Retrieved 25 October 2020 .

^ Sanfrancesco, Antonio (11 November 2020).

"Cantalamessa chiede al papa di non essere ordinato vescovo: "voglio morire con il saio" " [Cantalamessa asks the pope not to be consecrated bishop: "I want to take till the end the tunic"] . Retrieved 17 April 2021 .

^ Glatz, Carol (19 November 2020).

"Majority of cardinals-designate expected to attend consistory" .

Crux . Catholic News Service . Retrieved 20 November 2020 .

^ "Concistoro Ordinario Pubblico: Assegnazione dei Titoli, 28.11.2020" .

Holy See Press Office (in Italian). 28 November 2020.

Archived from the original on 28 November 2020 . Retrieved 28 November 2020 .

^ "Resignations and Appointments, 09.11.2024" (Press release). Holy See Press Office. 9 November 2024 . Retrieved 9 November 2024 .

^ "Pope appoints Fr. Pasolini as new Preacher of Papal Household" .

Vatican News . 9 November 2024 . Retrieved 9 November 2024 .

^ "Concistoro: padre Cantalamessa chiede la dispensa dall'ordinazione episcopale, "Voglio morire con l'abito francescano" " (in Italian).

AgenSIR . 19 November 2020.

Archived from the original on 19 November 2020.

^ "Cardinals hold third General Congregation, begin conversation about Church" . 24 April 2025.

^ Horowitz, Jason; Bubola, Emma; Dias, Elizabeth; Mazzei, Patricia (11 May 2025).

"How a Quiet American Cardinal Became Pope" .

The New York Times – via NYTimes.com.

^ Zahorian, Ashley (18 December 2021), The Preacher to the Popes: Raniero Cantalamessa (Documentary, Biography), CMAX Media , retrieved 14 January 2023 ^ "Bibliography" .

Cantalamessa.org . Archived from the original on 14 March 2007 . Retrieved 3 January 2011 .

^ "The Power of the Cross" .

^ "Faith, Hope, and Charity" .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Raniero Cantalamessa .

"Cantalamessa Card. Raniero, O.F.M. Cap" .

Holy See Press Office .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2020.

Official website Catholic Church titles Preceded by Alfredo Marchesi Preacher for the Papal Household 23 June 1980 – 9 November 2024 Succeeded by Roberto Pasolini Preceded by Jean-Louis Tauran Cardinal-Deacon of Sant'Apollinare alle Terme Neroniane-Alessandrine 28 November 2020 – present Incumbent v t e College of Cardinals List of current cardinals Cardinals of the Catholic Church under Pope Leo XIV in order of precedence Cardinal bishops Re Sandri Arinze Bertone Martins Parolin (CC) Ouellet Filoni Stella Tagle Raï Sako Cardinal priests Kitbunchu Poupard Wetter López Rodríguez Mahony Ruini Darmaatmadja Wamala Maida Puljić Sandoval Stafford De Giorgi Rouco Pengo Schönborn Rivera Pujats Sepe Kasper Bačkis Errázuriz Napier Rodríguez Cipriani Herranz Scola Okogie Zubeir Wako Rigali Antonelli Turkson Bozanić Mẫn Barbarin Erdő Rodé Vallini Rosales Ricard Cañizares O'Malley (CC) Dziwisz Zen Lajolo Comastri Ryłko Farina Brady Martínez Sistach Bagnasco Sarr Gracias (CC) Robles DiNardo Scherer Njue Sarah Monterisi Burke Koch Piacenza Ravasi Romeo Wuerl Assis Nycz Ranjith Marx Brandmüller de Castro Abril Vegliò Bertello Coccopalmerio Aviz O'Brien Calcagno Versaldi Alencherry Collins Duka Eijk Betori Dolan Woelki Tong Mureșan Harvey Thottunkal Onaiyekan Salazar Baldisseri Müller Nichols Brenes Lacroix (CC) Kutwa Tempesta Bassetti Poli Yeom Ezzati Ouédraogo Quevedo Langlois Clemente Souraphiel Dew Menichelli Nhơn Suárez Bo Kovithavanij Montenegro Sturla Blázquez Lacunza Gomes Furtado Mafi Villalba Langa Nzapalainga Osoro Rocha (CC) Cupich D'Rozario Porras De Kesel Piat Aguiar Retes Ribat Tobin Zerbo Omella (CC) Arborelius Mangkhanekhoun Rosa De Donatis Coutts Marto Barreto Tsarahazana Petrocchi Maeda Ticona Suharyo Hardjoatmodjo García Ambongo Besungu (CC) Hollerich (CC) Ramazzini Zuppi López Romero Tamkevičius Kambanda Gregory Advincula Aós Lojudice Arizmendi Aveline Okpaleke Steiner Ferrão McElroy do Carmo da Silva Cantoni Poola Costa Goh Martínez Flores Marengo Jiménez Miglio Pizzaballa Brislin Rossi Rueda Ryś Mulla Cobo Rugambwa Francis Chow Bustillo Alves Aguiar Padrón Castillo Bokalic Cabrera Chomalí Kikuchi David Nemet Spengler Bessi Dogbo Vesco Mathieu Repole Reina Leo Bychok Battaglia Cardinal deacons Mamberti Zenari Farrell Simoni Ladaria Becciu Krajewski Bocos Mendonça Czerny Fitzgerald Grech Semeraro Gambetti Tomasi Cantalamessa Feroci Roche You Vérgez (CC) Ghirlanda Frezza Gugerotti Fernández Tscherrig Pierre Fernández Artime Marchetto Acerbi Makrickas Radcliffe Baggio Koovakad Cardinals ineligible to participate in a papal conclave in italics (CC): member of the Council of Cardinals See also: Titular Titular church List of titular churches List of creations of cardinals Category Media Catholic Church portal v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef RISM Yale LUX Portals : Biography Catholicism Italy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Raniero_Cantalamessa&oldid=1297886157 " Categories : 1934 births Living people 20th-century Italian male writers 20th-century Italian non-fiction writers 20th-century Italian Roman Catholic priests 20th-century Italian Roman Catholic theologians 21st-century Italian cardinals 21st-century Italian male writers 21st-century Italian non-fiction writers Capuchins Capuchin cardinals Cardinals created by Pope Francis International Theological Commission Italian male non-fiction writers Italian religious writers Italian Roman Catholic writers Officials of the Roman Curia Pentecostalism Academic staff of the Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore People from Ascoli Piceno Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2021 Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from May 2025 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia Pages using S-rel template with ca parameter This page was last edited on 29 June 2025, at 04:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Raniero Cantalamessa 23 languages Add topic

