Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Typical associates Toggle Typical associates subsection 1.1 Clauses 2 Classification Toggle Classification subsection 2.1 By structure 2.2 By function or speech act 2.3 Major and minor sentences 3 Length 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Sentence (linguistics) 112 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingála Magyar Madhurâ Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Перем коми Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Runa Simi Русский संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Walon Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Words expressing a complete thought For other uses, see Sentence .

In linguistics and grammar , a sentence is a linguistic expression , such as the English example " The quick brown fox jumps over the lazy dog ." In traditional grammar , it is typically defined as a string of words that expresses a complete thought, or as a unit consisting of a subject and predicate . In non-functional linguistics it is typically defined as a maximal unit of syntactic structure such as a constituent . In functional linguistics , it is defined as a unit of written texts delimited by graphological features such as upper-case letters and markers such as periods, question marks, and exclamation marks. This notion contrasts with a curve, which is delimited by phonologic features such as pitch and loudness and markers such as pauses; and with a clause, which is a sequence of words that represents some process going on throughout time.

[ 1 ] A sentence can include words grouped meaningfully to express a statement, question , exclamation, request, command , or suggestion .

[ 2 ] Typical associates [ edit ] Clauses [ edit ] A sentence is typically associated with a clause . A clause can either be a clause simplex or a clause complex . A clause simplex represents a single process going on through time. A clause complex represents a logical relation between two or more processes and is thus composed of two or more clause simplexes.

A clause (simplex) typically contains a predication structure with a subject noun phrase and a finite verb . Although the subject is usually a noun phrase, other kinds of phrases (such as gerund phrases) work as well, and some languages allow subjects to be omitted. In the examples below, the subject of the outmost clause simplex is in italics and the subject of boiling is in square brackets. There is clause embedding in the second and third examples.

[Water] boils at 100 degrees Celsius.

It is quite interesting that [water] boils at 100 degrees Celsius .

The fact that [water] boils at 100 degrees Celsius is quite interesting.

There are two types of clauses: independent and non-independent / interdependent . An independent clause realises a speech act such as a statement, a question, a command or an offer. A non-independent clause does not realise any act. A non-independent clause (simplex or complex) is usually logically related to other non-independent clauses. Together, they usually constitute a single independent clause (complex). For that reason, non-independent clauses are also called interdependent . For instance, the non-independent clause because I have no friends is related to the non-independent clause I don't go out in I don't go out, because I have no friends . The whole clause complex is independent because it realises a statement. What is stated is the causal nexus between having no friend and not going out. When such a statement is acted out, the fact that the speaker doesn't go out is already established, therefore it cannot be stated. What is still open and under negotiation is the reason for that fact. The causal nexus is represented by the independent clause complex and not by the two interdependent clause simplexes.

See also copula for the consequences of the verb to be on the theory of sentence structure.

Classification [ edit ] By structure [ edit ] One scheme for classifying English sentences is by clause structure , the number and types of clauses in the sentence with finite verbs.

A simple sentence consists of a single independent clause with no dependent clauses .

A compound sentence consists of multiple independent clauses with no dependent clauses. These clauses are joined together using conjunctions , punctuation , or both.

A complex sentence consists of one independent clause and at least one dependent clause.

A compound–complex sentence (or complex–compound sentence ) consists of multiple independent clauses, at least one of which has at least one dependent clause.

By function or speech act [ edit ] Sentences can also be classified based on the speech act which they perform. For instance, English sentence types can be described as follows: A declarative sentence makes a statement or assertion: "You are my friend." An interrogative sentence raises a question : "Are you my friend?" An imperative sentence makes a command: "Be my friend!" An exclamative or exclamatory sentence raises an exclamation: "What a good friend you are!" The form (declarative, interrogative, imperative, or exclamative) and meaning (statement, question, command, or exclamation) of a sentence usually match, but not always.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] For instance, the interrogative sentence "Can you pass me the salt?" is not intended to express a question but rather to express a command. Likewise, the interrogative sentence "Can't you do anything right?" is not intended to express a question on the listener's ability, but rather to make an exclamation about the listener's lack of ability, also called a rhetorical question .

Major and minor sentences [ edit ] A major sentence is a regular sentence; it has a subject and a predicate , e.g. "I have a ball." In this sentence, one can change the persons, e.g. "We have a ball." However, a minor sentence is an irregular type of sentence that does not contain a main clause, e.g. "Mary!", "Precisely so.", "Next Tuesday evening after it gets dark." Other examples of minor sentences are headings, stereotyped expressions ("Hello!"), emotional expressions ("Wow!"), proverbs, etc. These can also include nominal sentences like "The more, the merrier." These mostly omit a main verb for the sake of conciseness but may also do so in order to intensify the meaning around the nouns.

[ 5 ] Sentences that comprise a single word are called word sentences, and the words themselves sentence words .

[ 6 ] Length [ edit ] The 1980s saw a renewed surge in interest in sentence length, primarily in relation to "other syntactic phenomena".

[ 7 ] One definition of the average sentence length of a prose passage is the ratio of the number of words to the number of sentences.

[ 8 ] [ unreliable source?

] The textbook Mathematical Linguistics , by András Kornai , suggests that in "journalistic prose the median sentence length is above 15 words".

[ 9 ] The average length of a sentence generally serves as a measure of sentence difficulty or complexity.

[ 10 ] In general, as the average sentence length increases, the complexity of the sentences also increases.

[ 11 ] Another definition of "sentence length" is the number of clauses in the sentence, whereas the "clause length" is the number of phones in the clause.

[ 12 ] Research by Erik Schils and Pieter de Haan by sampling five texts showed that two adjacent sentences are more likely to have similar lengths than two non-adjacent sentences, and almost certainly have a similar length when in a work of fiction. This countered the theory that "authors may aim at an alternation of long and short sentences".

[ 13 ] Sentence length, as well as word difficulty, are both factors in the readability of a sentence; however, other factors, such as the presence of conjunctions, have been said to "facilitate comprehension considerably".

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Clause Constituent Discourse Periodic sentence Sentence arrangement Sentence function Syntax T-unit Utterance Conditional sentence References [ edit ] ^ Halliday, M. A. K. and Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. 2004.

An Introduction to Functional Grammar . Arnold: p. 6.

ISBN 9781444119084 ^ "Sentence" .

Dictionary.com . Retrieved 2008-05-23 .

^ Murray, Sarah; Starr, William (2021). "The structure of communicative acts".

Linguistics and Philosophy .

44 (2): 425– 474.

doi : 10.1007/s10988-019-09289-0 .

S2CID 54609990 .

^ Portner, Paul (2018).

Mood . Oxford University Press. Chapter 3.

^ "Sentences" .

GrammarChart . 2025-06-06.

^ Jan Noordegraaf (2001). "J. M. Hoogvliet as a teacher and theoretician". In Marcel Bax; C. Jan-Wouter Zwart; A. J. van Essen (eds.).

Reflections on Language and Language Learning . John Benjamins B.V. p. 24.

ISBN 90-272-2584-2 .

^ Těšitelová, Marie (1992).

Quantitative Linguistics . John Benjamins. p. 126.

ISBN 9027215464 . Retrieved December 15, 2011 .

^ "Language Log on Twitter and "Real trends in word and sentence length" " .

linguistics on Reddit . Jun 23, 2011 . Retrieved December 12, 2011 .

^ Kornai, András (10 November 2007).

Mathematical linguistics . Springer. p. 188.

ISBN 9781846289859 . Retrieved December 15, 2011 .

^ Perera, Katherine (January 1982).

The assessment of sentence difficulty . Routledge & K. Paul. p. 108.

ISBN 9780710091932 . Retrieved December 15, 2011 .

^ Troia, Gary A. (3 May 2011).

Instruction and assessment for struggling writers: evidence-based practices . Guilford Press. p. 370.

ISBN 9781609180300 . Retrieved December 15, 2011 .

^ Reinhard Köhler; Gabriel Altmann; Raĭmond Genrikhovich Piotrovskiĭ (2005).

Quantitative Linguistics . Walter de Gruyter. p. 352.

ISBN 9783110155785 . Retrieved December 15, 2011 .

(Caption) Table 26.3: Sentence length (expressed by the number of clauses) and clause length (expressed by the number of phones) in a Turkish text ^ Erik Schils; Pieter de Haan (1993).

"Characteristics of Sentence Length in Running Text" . Oxford University Press. Archived from the original on July 12, 2012 . Retrieved December 12, 2011 .

^ Perera, Katherine (January 1982).

The assessment of sentence difficulty . Routledge & K. Paul. p. 108.

ISBN 9780710091932 . Retrieved December 15, 2011 .

^ Fries, Udo (2010).

Sentence Length, Sentence Complexity, and the Noun Phrase in 18th-Century News Publications . Peter Lang. p. 21.

ISBN 9783034303729 . Retrieved December 15, 2011 .

v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sentence_(linguistics)&oldid=1302962907 " Categories : Semantic units Statements Syntactic entities Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from September 2014 This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 10:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sentence (linguistics) 112 languages Add topic

