Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Episode list Toggle Episode list subsection 1.1 Episode 1: Serengeti 1.2 Episode 2: Yellowstone 1.3 Episode 3: Amazon 2 Notes 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Unnatural Histories Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Unnatural Histories (TV series) ) 2011 British TV series or programme Unnatural Histories Directed by Andrew Murray, Susie Painter, Raquel Toniolo Narrated by Deborah Maclaren Country of origin United Kingdom Original language English No.

of series 1 No.

of episodes 3 Production Executive producers Neil Nightingale , Andrew Murray Producers Andrew Murray, Susie Painter, Raquel Toniolo Cinematography Jasper Montana, Owen Newman, Martyn Colbeck, Alastair MacEwan, Eric Janisch Editor Dilesh Korya Running time 60 minutes Production company BBC Original release Network BBC Four Release 9 June ( 2011-06-09 ) – 23 June 2011 ( 2011-06-23 ) Unnatural Histories is a 3-part British television documentary series produced by the BBC and BBC Natural History Unit . It takes a new look at three of the world's wildernesses; the Serengeti , Yellowstone National Park and the Amazon and discovers that far from being wild and untouched, each has been shaped over time by man.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It was first broadcast on BBC Four 9–23 June 2011.

[ 3 ] Episode list [ edit ] Episode 1: Serengeti [ edit ] First aired on Thursday 9 June 2011.
Investigates how the Serengeti became wild through the actions of a colonial disease that emptied the land of the people and livestock that had lived there for hundreds of years. This episode shows how this event allowed the modern vision of Africa as a pristine wilderness to take hold.

[ 4 ] Episode 2: Yellowstone [ edit ] First aired on Thursday 16 June 2011.
This episode looks at the American West and the park of Yellowstone, whose birth was the result of romantic European ideals that were transported to the homelands of Native Americans by ambitious politicians and railroad tycoons .

[ 1 ] Episode 3: Amazon [ edit ] Geoglyphs on deforested land in the Amazon rainforest.

First aired on Thursday 23 June 2011. The final episode looks at the Amazon rainforest – billed as the world's last great wilderness . However, the discovery of geoglyphs uncovered following deforestation in the 1970s and terra preta , provide growing evidence for ancient cities in the heart of the 'virgin forest'.

[ 5 ] Ondemar Dias is accredited with first discovering the geoglyphs in 1977 and Alceu Ranzi with furthering their discovery after flying over Acre .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The documentary presents evidence that Francisco de Orellana , rather than exaggerating his claims as previously thought, was correct in his observations that a complex civilization was flourishing along the Amazon in the 1540s. It is believed that the civilization was later devastated by the spread of diseases from Europe, such as smallpox . Some 5 million people may have lived in the Amazon region in 1500, divided between dense coastal settlements, such as that at Marajó , and inland dwellers.

[ 8 ] By 1900 the population  had fallen to 1 million and by the early 1980s it was less than 200,000.

[ 8 ] The documentary features interviews with Betty Meggers , William Balée , Anna Roosevelt , José Iriarte, Eduardo Góes Neves, Cristiana Barreto, Francis Mayle, Denise Schaan and Michael Heckenberger.

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b BBC – Press Office – BBC Four Spring/Summer 2011 Science & History Programming ^ BBC Four – Unnatural Histories ^ BBC Four – Unnatural Histories – Episode guide ^ BBC Four – Unnatural Histories, Serengeti ^ BBC press release ^ Junior, Gonçalo (October 2008).

"Amazonia lost and found" .

Pesquisa (Ed.220) . FAPESP.

^ "Unnatural Histories – Amazon" . BBC Four.

^ a b Chris C. Park (2003).

Tropical Rainforests . Routledge. p. 108.

ISBN 9780415062398 .

External links [ edit ] Unnatural Histories at IMDb Unnatural Histories at BBC Online v t e BBC Studios Natural History Unit Television Landmarks The Blue Planet Planet Earth Life Human Planet Frozen Planet Life Story Planet Earth II Blue Planet II Seven Worlds, One Planet A Perfect Planet The Green Planet Frozen Planet II Planet Earth III Life series (David Attenborough) Life on Earth The Living Planet The Trials of Life Life in the Freezer The Private Life of Plants The Life of Birds The Life of Mammals Life in the Undergrowth Life in Cold Blood British wildlife Living Britain British Isles Springwatch The Nature of Britain Secret Britain Birds Britannia Wild Wales Continents Wild Africa Wild New World Wild Australasia Wild Europe Wild Caribbean Wild China South Pacific Wild Arabia Wild Brazil Locations The First Eden Congo The Nile Egypt (TV series) Galápagos Ganges Yellowstone The Great Rift: Africa's Wild Heart Great Barrier Reef India: Nature's Wonderland Wild Burma: Nature's Lost Kingdom Japan: Earth's Enchanted Islands Atlantic: The Wildest Ocean on Earth Patagonia: Earth's Secret Paradise Locations (David Attenborough) Africa Asia Madagascar Great Barrier Reef Expeditions Pacific Abyss Lost Land of the Jaguar Lost Land of the Volcano Lost Land of the Tiger The Dark: Nature's Nighttime World Children's TV Animal Magic The Really Wild Show Roar Inside Life Deadly Deadly 60 episodes Nature specials Nature's Great Events Nature's Microworlds Nature's Epic Journeys Earth's Greatest Spectacles Weird Nature Supersense Lifesense Supernatural Unnatural Histories Wonders of the Monsoon Wildlife specials Dragons Alive Mountain Gorilla Shark The Secret Life of Elephants Ocean Giants Ingenious Animals Life in the Air The Hunt Earthflight Hidden Kingdoms Dynasties Life That Glows Animal behaviour (Gordon Buchanan) Tribes, Predators & Me The Bear Family & Me The Polar Bear Family & Me Others (David Attenborough) Attenborough and the Giant Dinosaur Attenborough and the Sea Dragon Attenborough in Paradise David Attenborough's Natural Curiosities Prehistoric Planet The Song of the Earth The Year Earth Changed Other Wildlife on One The World About Us Natural World BBC Wildlife Specials Big Cat Diary Orangutan Diary Last Chance to See Monkey Planet Monsters We Met Ice Age Giants Radio Last Chance to See World on the Move David Attenborough's Life Stories The Living World Film Earth: One Amazing Day Deep Blue Earth The Meerkats One Life Heads of the NHU Bruce Campbell Christopher Parsons Alastair Fothergill Keith Scholey Neil Nightingale Wendy Darke Julian Hector Other notable staff Mary Colwell Richard Matthews Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Unnatural_Histories&oldid=1204169531 " Categories : Documentary films about nature 2011 British television series debuts 2011 British television series endings BBC television documentaries British English-language television shows Hidden categories: Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata BBC programme template using Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 February 2024, at 15:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Unnatural Histories Add languages Add topic

