Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Current broadcasts 3 Awards 4 Alumni 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Cam FM Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°12′46″N 0°06′12″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.2127°N 0.1034°E ﻿ / 52.2127; 0.1034 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Student-run radio station at the University of Cambridge and Anglia Ruskin University This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) A major contributor to this article appears to have a close connection with its subject.

It may require cleanup to comply with Wikipedia's content policies, particularly neutral point of view . Please discuss further on the talk page .

( October 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may only interest a particular audience .

Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information, and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia's inclusion policy .

( February 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article contains promotional content .

Please help improve it by removing promotional language and inappropriate external links , and by adding encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view .

( April 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) CAM FM (Cambridge University Radio) Cambridge Broadcast area University of Cambridge & Anglia Ruskin University Frequency 97.2 MHz (FM) Programming Format Variety : rock/dance/indie/pop/news/arts/debates/comedy Ownership Owner Cambridge and Anglia Ruskin Student Radio Ltd History First air date February 1979 Links Webcast stream.camfm.co.uk/camfm www.camfm.co.uk/player Website www.camfm.co.uk Cam FM (formerly known as Cambridge University Radio and later CUR1350 ) is a student-run radio station at the University of Cambridge and Anglia Ruskin University . The station broadcasts online and has an FM frequency of 97.2 MHz. The station opened studios at Anglia Ruskin University and Fitzwilliam College and started broadcasting in 2012 from these locations [ 1 ] after having spent its first 32 years located in Churchill College . Cam FM once held the world record for the longest team broadcast marathon, at 76 hours, [ 2 ] and following the significant technical overhaul as a result of the two new studios in 2012, provided the first-ever broadcast media coverage of the Oxford vs Cambridge Women's Boat Race from Dorney Lake , as well as live outside broadcasts from Newmarket Races and the Varsity Ski Trip .

[ 1 ] In March 2009, Cam FM was awarded an FM Community Licence by the UK Broadcasting Regulator Ofcom .

[ 1 ] The station, then known as CUR1350, took on its current name and launched its FM service on 2 October 2010.

[ 1 ] The station is a wholly owned subsidiary of Cambridge and Anglia Ruskin Student Radio Ltd, which is also the FM licence holder.

Cam FM disaffiliated from the Student Radio Association in 2015, [ 3 ] despite once winning Best Station at the Association's Student Radio Awards 2007 as CUR1350 .

[ 4 ] However, Cam FM rejoined the Student Radio Association in 2019.

Cam FM is managed by a committee of annually elected students and alumni of the University of Cambridge and Anglia Ruskin University .

[ 5 ] It is transmitted from Cambridge University Library on West Road.

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] In early 1979, Simon Cooper, Ellie Buchanan, and David Clouter at the student-run Cambridge University Broadcasting Society [ 7 ] founded a radio station which was granted permission to install induction loops around the Cambridge colleges of Churchill and later New Hall , allowing residents to listen to Cambridge University Radio (as it was then known) over a short-range, mono, mediumwave broadcast. The station subsequently became CUR945 .

[ 1 ] Despite successfully applying for a number of short-term FM licences, CUR was unable to continuously broadcast to the university community, and so it struggled to achieve widespread popularity.

The explosive growth of the Internet, along with many colleges installing high-speed Ethernet connections in student rooms, prompted the station to launch a simultaneous webcast in 1998. This allowed students from throughout the University to listen whenever they were near a computer. In 2004, the Internet audio webcasts were upgraded, and in 2005, an enhanced online player was launched.

Additionally, in 2002, the station successfully applied for a long-term, low-powered AM licence.

[ 8 ] Broadcasting on 1350 kHz, the station was then known as CUR1350.

In 2006, CUR1350 launched a project to install a cable service to multiple sites across the University of Cambridge and Anglia Ruskin. Dubbed "CURintheBAR" , the station was distributed via the universities' LAN network to receiving units positioned in student bars and cafes, where it was relayed over loudspeakers.

In March 2009, the station was granted an FM Community Radio License by the UK regulator Ofcom to become the only FM radio station targeting members of Cambridge University and Anglia Ruskin University. Regular programmes began on the new frequency of 97.2 FM in October 2010; the station is now rebranded as Cam FM.

[ 9 ] Cam FM is financially self-sufficient via on-air and online advertising and a yearly membership fee. Profits are invested back into the station to improve the service for listeners and the experience for station members. The station receives no funding from either the university or any student union.

[ 10 ] Current broadcasts [ edit ] Currently, Cam FM broadcasts continuously, with an automated playout system filling the intervals between live broadcasts. During term time, much of the station's output is live between the hours of 8 am and 1 am. Programmes are produced and presented by undergraduate and postgraduate students and alumni at both the University of Cambridge and the Cambridge campus of Anglia Ruskin University . A majority of programmes are specialist music shows (e.g.

drum and bass , indie rock , UK garage ), though others are aimed at a wider audience (e.g. their breakfast show, theatre/film review show, or local news coverage).

Most of the technology used by Cam FM is developed in-house, such as their automated playout system, computerized playout systems and audio routing in the studio, enabling the station to be built to specification [ citation needed ] .

Awards [ edit ] Sports coverage earned the station a silver award in the 2003 Student Radio Awards for their annual coverage of the May Bumps . In 2004, the station won four awards: Val Mellon, who would be later heard on the national DAB station Core until it ceased broadcast in 2008, won a gold award for Best Entertainment Show , as well as a bronze award for Best Female Presenter .

A further gold award was presented to the station for Technical Achievement in recognition of the station's platform-independent webcast system.

A silver award was given to the station for Best Sports Programming for their live coverage of the annual Oxford vs Cambridge rugby union Varsity match .

In 2005, CUR1350 was nominated for four awards. These were: Technical Achievement - the station was nominated for its wireless internet link coverage of May Bumps 2005, Sports Broadcasting - Ed Bolton for The Sports Show, including interviews with Chris Eubank , Specialist Music - Samuel Green for "Kol Cambridge", the UK's then-only broadcast radio show dedicated to Israeli and Jewish Music - this show continues to the present day, now in the form of a podcast independent of Cam FM, Student Radio Station of the Year [ 11 ] In 2007, CUR1350 was nominated for an all-time company record of nine Student Radio Awards, making it the most nominated station of 2007: [ 12 ] Best Technical Innovation Three for Best Entertainment Programme - Charles Lyon's "Weekend Breakfast" , Jaine Sykes' "Rock Paper Scissors" , and Ella Belsham & Alex-James Painter's "Morning Glory" ), Best Specialist Music Programme - Tobias Bown's "Volume 11" , Newcomer of the Year - Jaine Sykes, Two for Best Female Presenter - Katherine Godfrey and Jaine Sykes, Student Radio Station of the Year Of these, CUR1350 won Bronze in the Best Entertainment Programme category with Charles Lyons' "Weekend Breakfast", Gold for Katherine Godfrey in the Best Female Presenter category, and Gold in Station of the Year.

[ 4 ] In 2008, CUR1350 was nominated for: Student Radio Station of the Year , Best Specialist Music Programme - Sandy Mill, Best Outside Broadcast - The 2008 May Bumps, Best Student Radio Chart Show - Charles Lyon Of these, the station won Gold in the Best Chart Show category.

Best Student Radio Chart Show was also a new category as of this year.

In 2009, CUR1350 received two nominations at the Student Radio Awards. These were for: Best Student Radio Chart Show - Tobias Bown and Simon Ruggles Best Outside Broadcast/Live Event - The 2009 May Bumps.

[ 13 ] In 2012, now known as Cam FM, the station was nominated at the Student Radio Awards for: Best Outside Broadcast/Live Event - the 2012 May Bumps, [ 14 ] Best Speech - "The Fo' Show" Student Radio Station of the Year .

[ 15 ] Of these, the station won gold in the Best Outside Broadcast/Live Event category.

The Kevin Greening Award is named in honour of the late BBC Radio One presenter whose career in radio started at CUR1350, as it was then known.

[ 16 ] Alumni [ edit ] Several of the station's members have subsequently achieved considerable success in the wider world of radio & television broadcasting. Notable examples include: Kevin Greening , a presenter on BBC Radio 1 throughout the latter half of the 1990s, went on to present on 102.2 Smooth FM , which broadcasts across Greater London , until his untimely death aged 44 in December 2007.

Matthew Price is now the BBC's Europe Correspondent, having previously been BBC's New York Correspondent and Middle East Correspondent.

Spencer Kelly is the presenter of the BBC TV programme Click Online and was formerly a presenter on Ocean FM broadcasting across Portsmouth and Southampton .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Rebecca Steers is the Station Manager of NLive Radio in Northampton, the Founder and Chair of the UK National Community Radio Awards , and the Founder and Manager of Scout Radio .

The station once held annual alumni days , on which former members were invited back to once again produce and present shows for listeners within the University.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e "Cam FM - 97.2 FM - Radio for Cambridge University and Anglia Ruskin" .

Cam FM . Retrieved 2 September 2023 .

^ DJs take a spin at world record Archived 26 March 2014 at the Wayback Machine ^ SRA Members. Student Radio Association. Retrieved on 2015-10-18.

^ a b Student Radio Awards - 2007 - Winners. Student Radio Association. Retrieved on 2008-06-16.

Archived 18 November 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ "2023/24 Cam FM committee" .

^ "mb21 - The Transmission Gallery" .

tx.mb21.co.uk . Retrieved 1 February 2025 .

^ Cam FM at 40. Retrieved on 06/01/21 ^ Ofcom Long-term RSL Licencees. Retrieved on 14/06/08 ^ Ofcom Radio Broadcast Update October 2010.

Archived 7 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ University of Cambridge Societies Guide. Retrieved on 14/06/08 Archived 4 July 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Student Radio Awards - 2005 - Winners. Student Radio Association. Retrieved on 2008-06-16.

^ Student Radio Awards - 2007 - Nominees. Student Radio Association. Retrieved on 2008-06-16.

Archived 23 July 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ The Student Radio Awards Nominees 2009 Archived 29 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ The Student Radio Awards Winners 2012 Archived 21 April 2013 at archive.today ^ The Student Radio Awards Nominees 2012 Archived 15 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ The Student Radio Awards, Kevin Greening Award Archived 2 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Do you know your cloud from your algorithm? And what exactly is AI? Key questions explained in new podcast Understand: Tech and AI on BBC Radio 4 and BBC Sounds" .

www.bbc.com . Retrieved 3 June 2024 .

^ "BBC News | UK | Pokemon baby swap offer" .

news.bbc.co.uk . Retrieved 3 June 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Official website 52°12′46″N 0°06′12″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.2127°N 0.1034°E ﻿ / 52.2127; 0.1034 v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category v t e Student radio in the United Kingdom Radio in the United Kingdom Stations Air3 Radio Bailrigg FM Blast 1386AM Blast Radio BurnFM.com Burst Radio Cam FM CSR 97.4FM Demon FM Forge Radio FreshAir Fresh FM (Petroc) Fuse FM Hub Radio Imperial College Radio Insanity Radio 103.2FM Leeds Student Radio Livewire Nerve Radio OSCAR Radio Oxide Radio Pulse! Radio Pure FM Purple Radio Queen's Radio Radio LaB 97.1FM RamAir Rare FM RAW 1251AM RED Radio Siren FM Source Radio Spark Sunderland Stag Radio Subcity Radio Surge Radio UKC Radio University Radio Bath University Radio Essex University Radio Nottingham University Radio York Xpression FM Organisations Student Radio Association Radio Academy Student Broadcast Network The Student Radio Awards Category Authority control databases ISNI Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cam_FM&oldid=1305396840 " Categories : Radio stations in Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Radio stations established in 1979 Organisations associated with the University of Cambridge Culture of the University of Cambridge Student radio in the United Kingdom Churchill College, Cambridge St John's College, Cambridge Anglia Ruskin University Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template archiveis links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2017 Use British English from February 2017 Wikipedia articles with possible conflicts of interest from October 2015 Wikipedia articles that are excessively detailed from February 2014 All articles that are excessively detailed Wikipedia articles with style issues from February 2014 All articles with style issues Articles with a promotional tone from April 2019 All articles with a promotional tone Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles using infobox radio station All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 20:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cam FM Add languages Add topic

