Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education and career 2 Philosophical work 3 Publications 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Timothy Williamson 14 languages العربية Català Deutsch فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British philosopher (born 1955) For other people named Timothy Williamson, see Timothy Williamson (disambiguation) .

Timothy Williamson FRSE FBA Williamson in 2014 Born ( 1955-08-06 ) 6 August 1955 (age 70) Uppsala , Sweden Academic background Alma mater Balliol College, Oxford Thesis The Concept of Approximation to the Truth (1980) Influences Ruth Barcan Marcus Academic work Era Contemporary philosophy Discipline Philosophy Sub-discipline Epistemology logic metaphysics philosophy of language School or tradition Analytic philosophy Institutions Trinity College, Dublin University College, Oxford University of Edinburgh New College, Oxford Doctoral students Maria Baghramian Amia Srinivasan Main interests Epistemology , metaphysics , vagueness Notable ideas Epistemicism knowledge as conceptually primitive knowledge-first epistemology modal logic as metaphysics Influenced John Hawthorne Jason Stanley Timothy Williamson (born 6 August 1955) is a British philosopher whose main research interests are in philosophical logic , philosophy of language , epistemology and metaphysics . He is the former Wykeham Professor of Logic at the University of Oxford , and a fellow of New College, Oxford .

Education and career [ edit ] Born on 6 August 1955, Williamson's education began at Leighton Park School and continued at Henley Grammar School (now the Henley College ). He then went to Balliol College , Oxford University . He graduated in 1976 with a Bachelor of Arts degree with first-class honours in mathematics and philosophy, and in 1980 with a doctorate in philosophy ( DPhil ) for a thesis entitled The Concept of Approximation to the Truth .

[ 1 ] Williamson was Professor of Logic and Metaphysics at the University of Edinburgh (1995–2000), fellow and lecturer in philosophy at University College, Oxford (1988–1994), and lecturer in philosophy at Trinity College, Dublin (1980–1988). He took up the Wykeham Professorship in 2000 and retired in 2023, when he took up a Senior Research and Teaching Fellowship in Philosophy.

[ 2 ] He has been visiting professor at Yale University , Princeton University , MIT , the University of Michigan , and the Chinese University of Hong Kong .

He was president of the Aristotelian Society from 2004 to 2005.

He is a Fellow of the British Academy (FBA), [ 3 ] the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters , [ 4 ] Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh (FRSE), and a Foreign Honorary Fellow of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences .

Since 2022 he is visiting professor at the Università della Svizzera Italiana .

Philosophical work [ edit ] Williamson has contributed to analytic philosophy of language , logic , metaphysics , epistemology , metaethics and metaphilosophy .

On vagueness , he holds a position known as epistemicism , which states that every seemingly vague predicate (like "bald" or "thin") actually has a sharp cutoff, which is impossible for us to know.

[ 5 ] For instance, there is some number of hairs such that anyone with that number is bald, and anyone with even one more hair is not. In actuality, this condition will be spelled out only partly in terms of numbers of hairs, but whatever measures are relevant will have some sharp cutoff. This solution to the difficult Sorites paradox was considered a surprising and unacceptable consequence, but has become a relatively mainstream view since his defence of it.

[ 6 ] Williamson is fond of using the statement, "no one knows whether I am thin" to illustrate his view.

[ 7 ] In epistemology , Williamson suggests that knowledge is unanalysable. This went against the common trend in philosophical literature up to that point, which was to argue that knowledge could be analysed into constituent concepts. (Typically, this would be justified true belief plus an extra factor.) He agrees that knowledge entails justification, truth and belief , but argues that it is conceptually primitive. He accounts for the importance of belief by discussing its connections with knowledge, but avoids the disjunctivist position of saying that belief can be analysed as the disjunction of knowledge with some distinct, non- factive mental state.

[ 8 ] Williamson also argues against the traditional distinction of knowing-how and knowing-that . He claims that knowledge-how is a type of knowledge-that. Williamson argues that knowledge-how does not relate one's ability. He provides the example of a ski instructor who knows how to perform a complex move without having the ability to do it himself.

[ 9 ] In metaphysics , Williamson defends necessitism, according to which necessarily everything is necessarily something; in short, that everything exists of necessity.

[ 10 ] Likewise, it is possible for something to have a property only if there is something which has that property. For instance, since it is possible for Wittgenstein to have had a child, there is something which is a possible child of Wittgenstein. Necessitism is a theoretical interpretation of the Barcan formula , which is a theorem of the modal logic S5. However, Williamson has also developed an ontology of “bare possibilia” which he argues accounts for the seemingly unintuitive consequences of necessitism.

[ 11 ] Publications [ edit ] Identity and Discrimination , Oxford: Blackwell, 1990.

Vagueness , London: Routledge , 1994.

Knowledge and Its Limits , Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.

The Philosophy of Philosophy , Oxford: Blackwell, 2007 The Philosophy of Philosophy (2nd ed.), Hoboken: Wiley Blackwell, 2022.

Modal Logic as Metaphysics , Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013.

Tetralogue: I'm Right, You're Wrong , Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015.

Doing Philosophy: From Common Curiosity to Logical Reasoning , Oxford University Press, 2017.

Suppose and Tell: The Semantics and Heuristics of Conditionals , Oxford University Press, 2020.

Debating the A Priori (with Paul Boghossian ), Oxford University Press, 2020.

Overfitting and Heuristics in Philosophy , Oxford University Press, 2024.

Good as Usual: Anti-Exceptionalist Essays on Values, Norms and Actions , Oxford University Press, 2025.

Williamson has also published more than 120 articles in peer-reviewed scholarly journals.

References [ edit ] ^ Timothy Williamson – New College, Oxford ^ "Timothy Williamson" .

University of Oxford Faculty of Philosophy . Retrieved 9 April 2024 .

^ British Academy Fellowship record Archived 6 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Gruppe 3: Idéfag" (in Norwegian).

Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters . Retrieved 16 January 2011 .

^ Williamson, Timothy (1996).

Vagueness . Problems of philosophy. New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-03331-2 .

^ Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Vagueness" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Phil 2511: Paradoxes ^ Williamson, Timothy (2002).

Knowledge and its Limits .

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/019925656x.001.0001 .

ISBN 9780199256563 .

^ Stanley, J.

, & T. Williamson (2001). "Knowing How", The Journal of Philosophy 98(8): pp. 411–444 .

^ Williamson, Timothy (2015).

Modal logic as metaphysics . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-870943-5 .

^ Williamson, Timothy (1998).

"Bare possibilia" .

Erkenntnis .

48 (2/3): 257– 273.

External links [ edit ] Profile at University of Oxford An in-depth autobiographical interview with Timothy Williamson Interview at 3:AM Magazine Università della Svizzera Italiana professors .

Academic offices Preceded by David Wiggins Wykeham Professor of Logic 2000–2023 Incumbent Professional and academic associations Preceded by Paul Snowdon President of the Aristotelian Society 2004–2005 Succeeded by Myles Burnyeat v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii ORCID Mathematics Genealogy Project PhilPeople MathSciNet People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Timothy_Williamson&oldid=1299971009 " Categories : 1955 births Living people 20th-century British philosophers 21st-century British philosophers Academics of the University of Edinburgh Analytic philosophers Philosophers of language British philosophers of mind Metaphysicians Fellows of New College, Oxford Fellows of the British Academy Fellows of the Royal Society of Edinburgh Fellows of University College, Oxford Academics of Trinity College Dublin Wykeham Professors of Logic Members of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters People from Uppsala Atheist philosophers Presidents of the Aristotelian Society British social philosophers Henry Wilde Prize winners Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Norwegian-language sources (no) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from September 2017 Use dmy dates from September 2017 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 13:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Timothy Williamson 14 languages Add topic

