Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Media attention 3 Rarity 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Blood moon prophecy 5 languages فارسی Bahasa Indonesia پنجابی ភាសាខ្មែរ اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Apocalyptic prophecy concerning the moon Preacher John Hagee , 2007 The neutrality of this article is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Blood moon prophecy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The blood moon prophecies were a series of prophecies by Christian preachers John Hagee and Mark Biltz , related to a series of four full moons in 2014 and 2015. The prophecies stated that a tetrad (a series of four consecutive lunar eclipses —all total and coinciding on Jewish holidays —with six full moons in between, and no intervening partial lunar eclipses) which began with the April 2014 lunar eclipse was the beginning of the end times as described in the Bible in the Book of Joel 2:32, Acts 2 :20, and Revelation 6 :12. The tetrad ended with the lunar eclipse on September 27–28, 2015 .

Overview [ edit ] On April 15, 2014, there was a total lunar eclipse which was the first of four consecutive total eclipses in a series, known as a tetrad; the second one took place on October 8, 2014, the third on April 4, 2015, and the fourth on September 28, 2015. It is the second of eight tetrads to take place during the 21st century AD.

[ 1 ] As with most lunar eclipses, the moon appeared red during the April 15, 2014, eclipse.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The red color is caused by Rayleigh scattering of sunlight through the Earth's atmosphere , the same effect that causes sunsets to appear red.

2014 Apr 15 (Saros 122) 2014 Oct 08 (Saros 127) 2015 Apr 04 (Saros 132) 2015 Sep 28 (Saros 137) The claim of a blood moon being a sign of the beginning of the end times originates in the Book of Joel , where it is written "the sun will turn into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of the Lord comes." [ 4 ] This prophecy was repeated by Peter during Pentecost , as stated in Acts , [ 5 ] though Peter says that the date of Pentecost, not a future date, was the fulfillment of Joel 's prophecy. The blood moon also is prophesied in the Book of Revelation chapter 6 verses 11–13, [ 6 ] where verse 12 states, "And I beheld when he had opened the sixth seal, and, lo, there was a great earthquake; and the sun became black as sackcloth of hair, and the moon became as blood." Hagee later wrote Four Blood Moons , that became a best-seller, being more than 150 days in Amazon.com 's top 150 by April 2014.

[ 3 ] For the week ending March 30, 2014, it was the ninth best selling paperback, according to Publishers Weekly .

[ 7 ] By mid-April, Hagee's book was No. 4 on The New York Times best-seller list in the advice category.

[ 3 ] Hagee's book (and subsequent preaching series at his home congregation, Cornerstone Church) did not claim that any specific "end times" event would occur but claimed that every prior tetrad of the last 500 years coincided with events in Jewish and Israeli history that were originally tragic, yet followed by triumph.

Media attention [ edit ] Hagee and Biltz's claims gained mainstream media attention in publications such as USA Today and The Washington Post .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Earth & Sky reported receiving "a number of inquiries about Blood Moon".

Rarity [ edit ] The frequency of tetrads varies by century with the frequency of total lunar eclipses.

Writing for Earth & Sky , Bruce McClure and Deborah Byrd point out that the referenced verse also says the "sun will be turned into darkness", an apparent reference to a solar eclipse . (There was a total solar eclipse on March 20, 2015 , but it appeared partial except near the North Pole.

Another occurred on March 9, 2016.) They note that since the Jewish Calendar is lunar, one-sixth of all eclipses will occur during Passover or Sukkot .

Furthermore, there have been 62 tetrads since the 1st century AD, though only eight of them have coincided with both feasts. There are eight tetrads between 1949 and 2051 (see Tetrad (astronomy) ). In these, half of the eclipses in the (Northern Hemisphere) spring coincide with Passover and the subsequent eclipse with Sukkot. We are currently in a period when tetrads are more common than average. As seen in the graph, such periods happen every 600 years or so. The eclipses of a tetrad occur around the time of Passover and Sukkot (halfway between the earth's perihelion and aphelion ).

Additionally, three of the four eclipses in the tetrad were not even visible in the biblical homeland of Israel , casting further doubt on Hagee and Biltz's interpretation; even then, only the very end of the last eclipse was visible in Israel.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Astronomy portal 2011 end times prediction List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Millennialism Unfulfilled Christian religious predictions Julie Rowe 2012 phenomenon References [ edit ] ^ a b Bruce McClure; Deborah Byrd (March 30, 2014).

"What is a Blood Moon?" .

Earth & Sky . Retrieved April 4, 2014 .

^ a b Elizabeth Weise (April 3, 2014).

"Blood moon eclipse on April 15 is a special event" .

USA Today . Retrieved April 3, 2014 .

^ a b c d Sarah Pulliam Bailey (April 15, 2014).

" 'Blood moon' sets off apocalyptic debate among some Christians" .

Washington Post . Religion News Service . Retrieved April 15, 2014 .

^ Joel 2:31 ^ Acts 2:20 ^ "Bible Gateway passage: Revelation 6:11-13 – King James Version" .

Bible Gateway .

^ "Bestsellers for week ending March 30" .

Newsday . April 3, 2014 . Retrieved April 6, 2014 .

Further reading [ edit ] Biltz, Mark (2014).

Blood Moons: Decoding the Imminent Heavenly Signs . Washington, DC: WND Books.

ISBN 9781936488117 .

Hagee, John (2013).

Four Blood Moons: Something Is About to Change . Brentwood, TN: Worthy Publishing.

ISBN 9781617952142 .

External links [ edit ] Robbins, Stuart.

"Exposing PseudoAstronomy Ep 85: Blood Moons, Jewish Holidays, and the End of All Things" . Exposing PseudoAstronomy Podcast.

v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Blood_moon_prophecy&oldid=1271165246 " Categories : Apocalypticism Lunar eclipses Prophecy in Christianity 2015 in Christianity September 2015 Book of Joel Acts of the Apostles Book of Revelation Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from December 2023 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Articles lacking reliable references from December 2023 All articles lacking reliable references This page was last edited on 22 January 2025, at 21:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Blood moon prophecy 5 languages Add topic

