Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Archaeological considerations 3 Other limitations to stratification and superposition 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 General sources Toggle the table of contents Law of superposition 21 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Português Slovenčina Slovenščina Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Law stating that newer strata stack above older ones For other uses, see Superposition (disambiguation) .

This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Layer upon layer of rocks on north shore of Isfjord (Svalbard) , Norway. Since there is no overturning, [ citation needed ] the rock at the bottom is older than the rock on the top by the law of superposition.

Part of a series on Geology Index Outline Category Glossary History ( Timeline ) Key components Minerals Rock ( Igneous Sedimentary Metamorphic ) Sediment Plate tectonics Strata Weathering Erosion Geologic time scale Laws, principles, theories Stratigraphic principles Principle of original horizontality Law of superposition Principle of lateral continuity Principle of cross-cutting relationships Principle of faunal succession Principle of inclusions and components Walther's law Topics Composition Geochemistry Mineralogy Sedimentology Petrology Structure of Earth Geophysics Landform structures Geomorphology Glaciology Structural Geology Volcanology Geologic history Geological history of Earth Research Branches of geology Geologist ( List) Methods Geological survey Applications Engineering Mining Forensics Military Planetary geology Lists of geological features of the Solar System Geology of solar terrestrial planets By planet and body Mercury Venus Moon Mars Vesta Ceres Io Titan Triton Pluto Charon Geology portal v t e The law of superposition is an axiom that forms one of the bases of the sciences of geology , archaeology , and other fields pertaining to geological stratigraphy . In its plainest form, it states that in undeformed stratigraphic sequences, the oldest strata will lie at the bottom of the sequence, while newer material stacks upon the surface to form new deposits over time. This is paramount to stratigraphic dating , which requires a set of assumptions, including that the law of superposition holds true and that an object cannot be older than the materials of which it is composed. To illustrate the practical applications of superposition in scientific inquiry, sedimentary rock that has not been deformed by more than 90° will exhibit the oldest layers on the bottom, thus enabling paleontologists and paleobotanists to identify the relative ages of any fossils found within the strata, with the remains of the most archaic lifeforms confined to the lowest. These findings can inform the community on the fossil record covering the relevant strata, to determine which species coexisted temporally and which species existed successively in perhaps an evolutionarily or phylogenetically relevant way.

History [ edit ] The law of superposition was first proposed in 1669 by the Danish scientist Nicolas Steno , and is present as one of his major theses in the groundbreaking seminal work Dissertationis prodromus (1669).

[ 1 ] In the English-language literature, the law was popularized by William "Strata" Smith , who used it to produce the first geologic map of Britain.

[ 2 ] It is the first of Smith's laws , which were formally published in Strata Identified by Fossils (1816–1819).

Archaeological considerations [ edit ] Superposition in archaeology and especially in stratification use during excavation is slightly different as the processes involved in laying down archaeological strata are somewhat different from geological processes. Human-made intrusions and activity in the archaeological record need not form chronologically from top to bottom or be deformed from the horizontal as natural strata are by equivalent processes. Some archaeological strata (often termed as contexts or layers) are created by undercutting previous strata. An example would be that the silt back-fill of an underground drain would form some time after the ground immediately above it. Other examples of non vertical superposition would be modifications to standing structures such as the creation of new doors and windows in a wall. Superposition in archaeology requires a degree of interpretation to correctly identify chronological sequences and in this sense superposition in archaeology is more dynamic and multi-dimensional.

Other limitations to stratification and superposition [ edit ] Original stratification induced by natural processes can subsequently be disrupted or permutated by a number of factors, including animal interference and vegetation, as well as limestone crystallization.

Stratification behaves in a different manner with surface-formed igneous depositions, such as lava flows and ash falls, and thus superposition may not always successfully apply under certain conditions.

See also [ edit ] The Wikibook Historical Geology has a page on the topic of: Steno's principles Harris matrix Principle of cross-cutting relationships Principle of faunal succession Principle of lateral continuity Principle of original horizontality Stratification (archeology) Stratigraphy Structural geology References [ edit ] ^ David Thomas, Robert Kelly, Archaeology , p. 153, Cengage Learning, 2005 ISBN 0155058991 .

^ Patrick Wyse Jackson, The Chronologers' Quest: The Search for the Age of the Earth , Cambridge University Press, 2006 ISBN 1139457578 , pp.127-8.

General sources [ edit ] Hamblin, W.K.

The Earth's Dynamic Systems: A Textbook in Physical Geology, by W. Kenneth Hamblin, BYU, Provo, UT, Illus. William L. Chesser, Dennis Tasa, (Burgess Publishing Company, Minneapolis, Minnesota), c.

1978, p. 115, "The Principle of Superposition and Original Horizontality;" p. 116: The Law of Faunal Succession , "The Principle of Crosscutting Relations;" pp. 116-17: "The Principle of Inclusion," (as in the Steno discussion above).

Principles of Archaeological Stratigraphy. 40 figs. 1 pl. 136 pp. London & New York: Academic Press ISBN 0-12-326650-5 v t e Chronology Key topics Archaeology Astronomy Geology History Big History Paleontology Time Periods Eras Epochs Calendar eras Human Era Ab urbe condita Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Mundi Bosporan era Bostran era Byzantine era Seleucid era Era of Caesar (Iberia) Before Present Hijri Egyptian Sothic cycle Hindu units of time ( Yuga ) Mesoamerican Long Count Short Count Tzolkʼin Haabʼ Regnal year Anka year Canon of Kings English and British regnal year Lists of kings Limmu Era names Chinese Japanese Korean Vietnamese Calendars Pre-Julian / Julian Pre-Julian Roman Original Julian Proleptic Julian Revised Julian Gregorian Gregorian Proleptic Gregorian Old Style and New Style dates Adoption of the Gregorian calendar Dual dating Astronomical Lunisolar ( Hebrew , Hindu ) Solar Lunar ( Islamic ) Astronomical year numbering Others Chinese sexagenary cycle Geologic Calendar Iranian ISO week date Mesoamerican Maya Aztec Winter count New Earth Time Astronomic time Cosmic Calendar Ephemeris Galactic year Metonic cycle Milankovitch cycles Geologic time Concepts Deep time Geological history of Earth Geological time units Standards Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA) Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) Methods Chronostratigraphy Geochronology Isotope geochemistry Law of superposition Luminescence dating Samarium–neodymium dating Chronological dating Absolute dating Amino acid racemisation Archaeomagnetic dating Dendrochronology Ice core Incremental dating Lichenometry Paleomagnetism Radiometric dating Lead–lead Potassium–argon Radiocarbon Uranium–lead Tephrochronology Luminescence dating Thermoluminescence dating Relative dating Fluorine absorption Nitrogen dating Obsidian hydration Seriation Stratigraphy Genetic methods Molecular clock Linguistic methods Glottochronology Related topics Chronicle New Chronology Synchronoptic view Timeline Year zero Floruit Terminus post quem ASPRO chronology v t e Geologic principles and processes Stratigraphic principles Principle of original horizontality Law of superposition Principle of lateral continuity Principle of cross-cutting relationships Principle of faunal succession Principle of inclusions and components Walther's law Petrologic principles Intrusive Extrusive Volcanic Exfoliation Weathering Soil formation Diagenesis Compaction Metamorphism Geomorphologic processes Plate tectonics Salt tectonics Tectonic uplift Subsidence Marine transgression Marine regression Sediment transport Fluvial processes Aeolian processes Glacial processes Mass wasting processes Geology portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Law_of_superposition&oldid=1305506330 " Categories : Dating methods Geological history of Earth Stratigraphy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2015 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 12:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Law of superposition 21 languages Add topic

