Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 As informal proceedings in sport 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Kangaroo court 24 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska ไทย Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Court with little or no judicial credibility For the song by Capital Cities, see Kangaroo Court (song) . For the EP by Ritual, see Kangaroo Court (EP) .

Kangaroo court is an informal pejorative term for a court that ignores recognized standards of law or justice, carries little or no official standing in the territory within which it resides, and is typically convened ad hoc .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] A kangaroo court may ignore due process and come to a predetermined conclusion. The term is also used for a court held by a legitimate judicial authority, but which intentionally or structurally disregards the court's legal or ethical obligations (compare show trial ).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Etymology [ edit ] The term is known to have been used in the United States in 1841: an article in The Daily Picayune , New Orleans quotes the Concordia Intelligencer reporting several lynchings "upon various charges instituted by the Kangaroo court", asking "Don't comprehend: What is a Kangaroo court?" [ 5 ] The term is not attested to have been used in Australia, native land of the kangaroo , or elsewhere before then.

[ 6 ] Some sources suggest that the term may have been popularized during the California Gold Rush of 1849 to which many thousands of Australians flocked. In consequence of the Australian miners' presence, it may have come about as a description of the hastily carried-out proceedings used to deal with the issue of claim-jumping miners.

[ 6 ] The derivation of the term is not known, although there has been speculation. One suggestion is that, as these courts are often convened quickly to deal with an immediate issue, they are called kangaroo courts since they have "jumped up" out of nowhere, like a kangaroo. Another possibility is that the phrase could refer to the pouch of a kangaroo, meaning the court is in someone's pocket.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Etymologist Philologos suggests that the term arose "because a place named Kangaroo sounded comical to its hearers, just as place names like Kalamazoo , and Booger Hole , and Okeefenokee Swamp , strike us as comical." [ 10 ] In 19th century United States, an alternative term was "mustang" court, after horses that roamed the plains, thus evoking the image of a court presided over by a wild beast.

[ 11 ] The term is still in common use in the Anglosphere .

[ 12 ] As informal proceedings in sport [ edit ] The term is sometimes used without any negative connotation. For example, many Major League Baseball and Minor League Baseball teams have a kangaroo court to punish players for errors on the field, being late for a game or practice, not wearing proper attire to road games, or having a messy locker in the clubhouse . Fines are allotted, and at the end of the year, the money collected is given to charity or used for a team party at the end of the season.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Basmanny justice Law portal References [ edit ] ^ Scharf, Michael P. (2006). "The United States and the International Criminal Court: A Recommendation for the Bush Administration".

ILSA Journal of International and Comparative Law .

2 : 385.

^ "What's the origin of "kangaroo court"? Is "kangaroo" aborigine for "I don't know"?" .

The Straight Dope . January 4, 1985 . Retrieved May 17, 2025 .

^ "Kangaroo court" .

Wex .

Cornell Law School .

Archived from the original on August 23, 2023 . Retrieved July 6, 2020 .

^ Stempel, Jeffrey W. (December 30, 2007).

"Keeping Arbitrations from Becoming Kangaroo Courts" .

Nevada Law Review .

8 . UNLV William S. Boyd School of Law Legal Studies: 251. Research Paper 08-05.

Archived from the original on August 23, 2023 . Retrieved June 30, 2023 .

^ "What is a Kangaroo court , neighbor?" .

The Daily Picayune . August 24, 1841. p. 2 – via Newspapers.com.

^ a b Adams, Cecil (January 4, 1985).

"What's the origin of "kangaroo court"? Is "kangaroo" aborigine for "I don't know"?" .

The Straight Dope .

Archived from the original on August 23, 2023 . Retrieved October 1, 2012 .

^ "Definition of kangaroo court " .

www.merriam-webster.com . Retrieved September 2, 2020 .

^ "Kangaroo court" .

Encyclopedia.com . Retrieved September 2, 2020 .

^ Mohr, Melissa (October 24, 2019).

" 'Kangaroo court' has a peculiarly American past" .

Christian Science Monitor .

ISSN 0882-7729 .

Archived from the original on October 1, 2020 . Retrieved September 2, 2020 .

^ Philologos (June 17, 2020).

"The origins of the phrase "kangaroo court" have been hiding in plain sight" .

Mosaic . Retrieved June 17, 2020 .

^ Poole, Steven (October 10, 2019).

" 'Kangaroo court': what have marsupials got to do with White House politics?" .

the Guardian . Retrieved December 25, 2024 .

^ Lehman, Jeffrey; Phelps, Shirelle (2005).

West's Encyclopedia of American Law . Vol. 1 (2 ed.). Detroit: Thomson/Gale. p. 57.

ISBN 9780787663742 .

^ Bouton, Jim (1990).

Ball Four (2nd ed.).

Wiley .

ISBN 0-02-030665-2 .

Further reading [ edit ] Carter, R.M. (1958).

The Kangaroo Court in American Jails . University of California, Berkeley.

288 pages.

External links [ edit ] Look up kangaroo court in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Miscarriage of justice Types of misconduct Prosecutorial misconduct Police misconduct Police corruption Selective prosecution Malicious prosecution Selective enforcement Abuse of process Attorney misconduct Bad apples Abuse of discretion Entrapment False arrest Gaming the system Justice delayed is justice denied Legal malpractice Kangaroo court Sentencing disparity Show trial Trial by media Sharp practice Jury tampering Witness tampering Brady disclosure Spoliation of evidence Civil wrong False evidence False confession Forced confession False accusation Rape Child sexual abuse Police perjury Mistaken identity Eyewitness memory Eyewitness identification Cross-race effect Misinformation effect Tampering with evidence Frameup Wrongful convictions List of wrongful convictions in the United States List of exonerated death row inmates List of miscarriage of justice cases Overturned convictions in the United States Wrongful execution Advocacy Innocence Project National Registry of Exonerations Investigating Innocence Contributing factors Correlates of crime Race and crime Race in the United States criminal justice system Sex differences in crime Judicial misconduct Innocent prisoner's dilemma Obstructionism Offender profiling Racial profiling Perverting the course of justice Blue wall of silence Loophole Ineffective assistance of counsel Prosecutor's fallacy Norms and remedies Legal ethics Exculpatory evidence Right to a fair trial Actual innocence Equal Protection Clause Innocence Protection Act Related concepts Capital punishment in the United States Batson v. Kentucky List of death row inmates in the United States Law portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kangaroo_court&oldid=1300896981 " Categories : Abuse of the legal system Courts by type Human rights abuses Metaphors referring to animals Political pejoratives Informal legal terminology Types of trials Vigilantism War crimes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from October 2019 This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 00:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kangaroo court 24 languages Add topic

