Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Land purchase 2 On site monitoring 3 Other methods of protection 4 Neighborhood leakage 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Forest protection 18 languages বাংলা Deutsch Eesti فارسی 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Ikinyarwanda Lietuvių 日本語 Polski සිංහල Српски / srpski Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of forestry You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in German .

(December 2013) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the German article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 1,945 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Waldschutz]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|de|Waldschutz}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Forest security in Lithuania Forest protection is  a branch of forestry which is concerned with the preservation or improvement of a forest and prevention and control of damage to forest by natural or man made causes like forest fires , plant pests , and adverse climatic conditions ( global warming ).

Forest protection also has a legal status and rather than protection from only people damaging the forests is seen to be broader and include forest pathology too. Due to the different emphases there exist widely different methods forest protection.

In German-speaking countries, forest protection would focus on the biotic and abiotic factors that are non-crime related. A protected forest is not the same as a protection forest . These terms can lead to some confusion in English, although they are clearer in other languages. As a result, reading English literature can be problematic for non-experts due to localization and conflation of meanings.

The types of man-induced abuse that forest protection seeks to prevent include: Aggressive or unsustainable intensive farming and logging Pollution of the forest soil Expanding city development caused by population explosion and the resulting urban sprawl There is considerable debate over the effectiveness of forest protection methods. Enforcement of laws regarding purchased forest land is weak or non-existent in most parts of the world. In the increasingly dangerous South America, home of major rainforests , officials of the Brazilian National Agency for the Environment (IBAMA) have recently been shot during their routine duties.

[ 1 ] Land purchase [ edit ] One simple type of forest protection is land acquisition by the state or conservation organisations in order to secure it, or for reforestation / afforestation . It can also mean forest management or the designation of areas such as natural reservoirs which are intended to be left to themselves.

[ 2 ] However, merely purchasing a piece of land does not prevent it from being used by others for poaching and illegal logging .

On site monitoring [ edit ] A better way to protect a forest, particularly old growth forests in remote areas, is to obtain a part of it and to live on and monitor the purchased land. Even in the United States, these measures sometimes do not suffice because arson can burn a forest to the ground, leaving burnt areas free for different use.

[ 3 ] Another issue about living on purchased forest-land is that there may not be a suitable site for a standard home without clearing land, which defies the purpose of protection. Alternatives include building a treehouse or an earthhouse . This is being done currently by indigenous people in South America to protect large reservoirs . In former times, North American Native Americans used to live in tipies or mandan earthhouses , which also require less land. An undertaking to develop modern treehouses is being taken by a company from Germany called "TrueSchool treehouses".

Other methods of protection [ edit ] A number of less successful methods of forest protection have been tried, such as the trade in certified wood . Protecting a small section of land in a larger forest may also have limited value. For example, tropical rainforests can die if they decrease in size, since they are dependent on the moist microclimate which they create. There is an excellent article in National Geographic October issue concerning redwood forest in California and their effort to maintain forest and rainforest.

[ 4 ] A compromise is to conduct agriculture and stock farming, or sustainable wood management . This ascribes different values to forest land and farmland, for which many areas are clear felled.

Neighborhood leakage [ edit ] Two conflicting studies on the idea that protecting forests only relocates deforestation. This is called 'neighborhood leakage'. According to the paradox of forest protection [ 3 ] protected areas such as rural settlements near protected zones grew at twice the rate of those elsewhere.  The IUCN implements such protocols that protect  over 670 eco-regions. 46% of the eco-regions had less than 10% forest protection. Which means that these areas are not being monitored as they should and the protection is not working. Considering forest protection within global priority areas was unsatisfactory. An example given was that the average protection of 8.4% in biodiversity hotspots. Results have policy relevance in terms of the target of the Convention on Biological Diversity , reconfirmed in 2008, to conserve in an effective manner that “at least 10% of each of the world’s forest types”.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Trees portal Environment portal Ecology portal Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures Conservation biology Conservation ethic Conservation movement Conservation reliant species Deep ecology Ecology Ecology movement Environmentalism Environmental movement Environmental protection Forest conservation Forest Principles Habitat conservation List of environmental organizations Natural environment Natural capital Natural landscape Natural resource Protection forest Renewable resource Sustainable development Sustainability Sustainable agriculture Urban forest Water conservation References [ edit ] ^ Schmitt, C.; Burgess, N. (2009). "Global analysis of the protection status of the world's forests".

Biological Conservation .

142 (10): 2122– 2130.

Bibcode : 2009BCons.142.2122S .

doi : 10.1016/j.biocon.2009.04.012 .

^ Lund, H. Gyde (2006).

Definitions of Forest, Deforestation, Afforestation, and Reforestation . Gainesville, VA: Forest Information Services.

^ a b "Forest protection paradox".

New Scientist .

203 (2716). Elsevier BV: 6. 2009.

doi : 10.1016/s0262-4079(09)61802-9 .

ISSN 0262-4079 .

^ Allen, CD; Savage, M (2002). "Ecological restoration of southwestern ponderosapine ecosystems: A broad perspective".

12 . Ecological Applications.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ 2020-2008-Ldoc "FSM 2000-National forest resourcemanagement" .

USDA Forest Service . October 2008.

{{ cite journal }} : Check |url= value ( help ) External links [ edit ] Forests in danger * Roadmap to Recovery: The World's Last Intact Forest Landscapes * Global Forest Resources Assessment 2005 CoolForests.org - Conservation Cools the Planet [ usurped ] v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Forest_protection&oldid=1288504944 " Categories : Forest conservation Environmental protection Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical CS1 errors: URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing translation from German Wikipedia This page was last edited on 3 May 2025, at 02:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Forest protection 18 languages Add topic

