Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Giovanni Arrighi 20 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مصرى Mirandés Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian economist and sociologist (1937–2009) Giovanni Arrighi Giovanni Arrighi giving a lecture at the Faculty of Humanities at Rhodes University , Grahamstown, South Africa (18 April 2007) Born ( 1937-07-07 ) 7 July 1937 Milan , Kingdom of Italy Died 18 June 2009 (2009-06-18) (aged 71) Baltimore, Maryland , U.S.

Nationality Italian Alma mater Bocconi University Known for Political Economy Historical Sociology Scientific career Fields Political economy , Historical sociology , International relations Institutions Johns Hopkins University Binghamton University Part of a series about Imperialism studies Theories Cultural imperialism Dependency theory Economic imperialism Expansionism Intercommunalism Irredentism Linguistic imperialism Neo-Gramscianism Neocolonialism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Ultra-imperialism World-systems theory Concepts Conquest Great power Hegemony North–South model Unequal exchange Balance of trade Global labor arbitrage Ecological Sphere of influence Superprofit Uneven and combined development War of aggression People Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Paul A. Baran Charles Bettelheim Nikolai Bukharin Arghiri Emmanuel John Bellamy Foster Andre Gunder Frank Michael Hardt Rudolf Hilferding Peter Gowan J. A. Hobson Vladimir Lenin Mirsaid Sultan-Galiev Li Minqi Rosa Luxemburg Antonio Negri Kwame Nkrumah Huey P. Newton Walter Rodney Paul Sweezy Leon Trotsky Immanuel Wallerstein Works The Accumulation of Capital Empire How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Imperialism Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism Monopoly Capital Multitude Naked Imperialism Related Banana republic Economic development Illicit financial flows List of irredentist claims or disputes Global North and Global South Neofunctionalism Prebisch–Singer hypothesis Third-worldism Category:Imperialism studies v t e Giovanni Arrighi (7 July 1937 – 18 June 2009) was an Italian economist , sociologist and world-systems analyst , from 1998 a Professor of Sociology at Johns Hopkins University . His work has been translated into over fifteen languages.

Biography [ edit ] Arrighi was born in Milan , Italy in 1937. He received his Laurea in economics from the Bocconi University in 1960.  Arrighi began his career teaching at the University College of Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe ) and later at the University College of Dar es Salaam in Tanzania , [ 1 ] where he developed arguments about how the labor supply and labor resistance affected the development of colonialism and national liberation movements , and where he met Immanuel Wallerstein with whom he late collaborated on a number of research projects. After returning to Italy in 1969, Arrighi and others formed the "Gruppo Gramsci" in 1971. In 1979 Arrighi joined Wallerstein and Terence Hopkins as a professor of sociology at the Fernand Braudel Center for the Study of Economies, Historical Systems, and Civilizations at Binghamton University . It was during this time that the Fernand Braudel Center became known as the main center of world-systems analysis , attracting scholars from all over the world.

[ citation needed ] His trilogy on the origins and transformations of global capitalism began in 1994 with a book that reinterpreted the evolution of capitalism, The Long Twentieth Century: Money, Power, and the Origins of Our Times . The book was published in at least ten languages. Giovanni completed a second edition of The Long Twentieth Century in 2009. In 1999, he published Chaos and Governance in the Modern World System with Beverly Silver , and in 2007, he published Adam Smith in Beijing: Lineages of the Twenty-First Century , comparing Western and East Asian economic development and exploring China ’s rise as an economic world power .

[ citation needed ] Although in many ways intellectually close to Immanuel Wallerstein , Arrighi tends to ascribe greater significance to the recent shift in economic power to East Asia . He also emphasized his debt to Adam Smith , Max Weber , Karl Marx , Antonio Gramsci , Karl Polanyi and Joseph Schumpeter .

[ citation needed ] Arrighi died in his home in Baltimore on 18 June 2009. He had been diagnosed with cancer in July 2008. His widow and collaborator is Professor Beverly Silver .

[ citation needed ] A retrospective interview by David Harvey on his intellectual trajectory, The Winding Paths of Capital , was published in the March/April 2009 issue of New Left Review .

Works [ edit ] Monographs 1967 The Political Economy of Rhodesia 1973 Essays on the Political Economy of Africa 1978 Geometry of Imperialism 1982 Dynamics of Global Crisis (with Samir Amin , Andre Gunder Frank and Immanuel Wallerstein ) 1985 Semiperipheral Development: The Politics of Southern Europe in the Twentieth Century 1989 Antisystemic Movements 1990 Transforming the Revolution: Social Movements and the World System (with Samir Amin , Andre Gunder Frank and Immanuel Wallerstein ) 1994 The Long Twentieth Century: Money, Power, and the Origins of Our Times 1999 Chaos and Governance in the Modern World System (with Beverly J. Silver ) 2003 The Resurgence of East Asia: 500, 150 And 50 Year Perspectives 2007 Adam Smith in Beijing: Lineages of the Twenty-First Century Journal articles and book chapters since 2001 Library resources about Giovanni Arrighi Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Giovanni Arrighi Resources in your library Resources in other libraries "Workers North and South" (with B.J. Silver) in C. Leys and L. Panich, eds., The Socialist Register 2001. London: The Merlin Press, 2000. Reprinted (abridged) in L. Amoore , ed., The Global Resistance Reader . London and New York: Routledge, 2005.

" Braudel, Capitalism and the New Economic Sociology Archived 2012-03-20 at the Wayback Machine ", Review , XXIV, 1, 2001.

" Capitalist development in World-historical Perspective ", (with Jason W. Moore ). In R. Albritton, M. Itoh, R. Westra, A. Zuege, (eds.), Phases of Capitalist Development: Booms, Crises and Globalization . London: Macmillan, 2001.

"Capitalism and World Dis(order)" (with B. J. Silver), Review of International Studies , XXVII, 2001.

"Global Capitalism and the Persistence of the North-South Divide", Science and Society , LXIV, 4, 2001.

"The African crisis: world systemic and regional aspects" .

New Left Review .

II (15). New Left Review. May–June 2002.

" Lineages of Empire ".

Historical Materialism 10, 3, 2002. Reprinted In G. Balakrishnan, ed., Debating Empire . London and New York: Verso, 2003.

" Industrial Convergence, Globalization, and the Persistence of the North-South Divide ".

Studies in Comparative International Development 38: 1 (2003) (with B.J. Silver and B.D. Brewer).

"Response".

Studies in Comparative International Development 38: 1 (2003) (with B.J. Silver and B.D. Brewer).

"The social and political economy of global turbulence" .

New Left Review .

II (20). New Left Review. March–April 2003.

"Kindai Sekai Shisutem no Keisei to Henyou ni okeru Hegemonii Kokka no Yakuwari" ("The Role of Hegemonic States in the Formation and Transitions of the Modern World-System"). In T. Matsuda and S. Akita, eds., Hegemonii Kokka to Sekai Shisutem ( Hegemonic States and the Modern World-System ). Tokyo: Yamakawa Publishing Company, 2002.

"Historical Capitalism East and West" (with P.K. Hui, H. Hung, and M. Selden). In G. Arrighi, T. Hamashita and M. Selden, eds., The Resurgence of East Asia: 500, 150 and 50 Year Perspectives . London and New York: Routledge, 2003.

"Global Inequalities and the Legacy of Dependency Theory".

Radical Philosophy Review 5: 1-2 (2002/2003).

"Polanyi’s ‘Double Movement’: The Belles Epoques of British and US Hegemony Compared" (with B.J. Silver).

Politics and Society 31: 2 (2003).

"Il lungo XX secolo. Una replica".

Contemporanea 6:4 (2003).

"Poza hegemoniami zachodnimi" (with I. Ahmad and M. Shih).

Lewa Noga 15 (2003).

"Hegemony and Antisystemic Movements". In I. Wallerstein, ed., The Modern World-System in the Longue Duree . Boulder, Co: {{Paradigm Publishers, 2004 "Globalization in World-Systems Perspective". In R. Appelbaum and W. Robinson, eds., Critical Globalization Studies . New York and London: Routledge, 2005.

"Hegemony unraveling–1" (PDF) .

New Left Review .

II (32). New Left Review. March–April 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2022-02-14.

"Hegemony unraveling–2" (PDF) .

New Left Review .

II (33). New Left Review. May–June 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2021-05-16.

"Rough Road to Empire". In F. Tabak, ed., Allies as Rivals: The U.S., Europe, and Japan in a Changing World-System . Boulder, Colorado: Paradigm Press, 2005.

" States, Markets and Capitalism, East and West ". In M. Miller, ed., Worlds of Capitalism. Institutions, Economic Performance, and Governance in the Era of Globalization . London: Routledge, 2005 " Industrial Convergence and the Persistence of the North-South Industrial Divide: A Rejoinder " (with Beverly J. Silver and Benjamin D. Brewer).

Studies in Comparative International Development , Summer 2005, in press.

"The world economy and the Cold War, 1970–1990".

In Melvyn P. Leffler and Odd Arne Westad, eds., The Cambridge History of the Cold War, Volume 3: Endings (pp. 23–44) . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . 2010.

ISBN 978-0-521-83721-7 .

See also [ edit ] World-systems theory References [ edit ] ^ "Giovanni Arrighi" .

The Globalist . Retrieved 2023-04-12 .

External links [ edit ] Johns Hopkins homepage .

Archived July 19, 2011, at the Wayback Machine .

Video on Giovanni Arrighi, David Harvey, and Joel Andreas , on Arrighi's Adam Smith in Beijing (2008) Article on Giovanni Arrighi , In memoriam, by Tom Reifer Giovanni Arrighi: Systemic Cycles of Accumulation, Hegemonic Transitions, and the Rise of China by William I. Robinson v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Giovanni_Arrighi&oldid=1268577910 " Categories : 1937 births Writers from Milan Bocconi University alumni Italian economists Italian sociologists Imperialism studies World system scholars 2009 deaths Writers about globalization Binghamton University faculty Academic staff of the University of Zimbabwe Max Weber scholars Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 10 January 2025, at 13:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Giovanni Arrighi 20 languages Add topic

