Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Background Toggle Background subsection 2.1 February Revolution 2.2 German support 2.3 Unrest by workers, peasants, and soldiers 2.4 Antiwar demonstrations 2.5 July days 2.6 Kornilov affair 3 Revolution Toggle Revolution subsection 3.1 Planning 3.2 Onset 3.3 Assault on the Winter Palace 3.4 Dybenko's disputed role 3.5 Later Soviet portrayal 4 Outcome Toggle Outcome subsection 4.1 New government established 4.2 Anti-Bolshevik sentiment 4.3 Governmental reforms 5 Timeline of the spread of Soviet power (Gregorian calendar dates) 6 Russian Civil War 7 Historiography Toggle Historiography subsection 7.1 Soviet historiography 7.2 Western historiography 7.2.1 "Totalitarian" historians 7.2.2 "Revisionist" historians 7.3 Effect of the dissolution of the Soviet Union on historical research 8 Legacy 9 See also 10 Explanatory notes 11 Citations Toggle Citations subsection 11.1 Sources 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents October Revolution 106 languages Ænglisc العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Лезги Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qırımtatarca Română Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sardu Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Võro 文言 Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Second of two 1917 revolutions in Russia "Red October" redirects here. For other uses, see Red October (disambiguation) , October Revolution (disambiguation) , and November Revolution (disambiguation) .

October Revolution Part of the Russian Revolution and the revolutions of 1917–1923 The Winter Palace of Petrograd, one day after the insurrection, 8 November Date 7 November 1917 [ O.S.

25 October] Location Petrograd , Russian Republic Result Bolshevik victory End of dual power Dissolution of the Russian Provisional Government The Second Congress of Soviets proclaims itself as the supreme governing body of the country Kerensky–Krasnov uprising fails to retake the capital 1917 Russian Constituent Assembly election held Beginning of the Russian Civil War Belligerents Bolsheviks Left Socialist-Revolutionaries Anarchists Russian Republic Commanders and leaders Vladimir Lenin Leon Trotsky Lev Kamenev Vladimir Ovseenko Pavel Dybenko Yakov Sverdlov Alexander Kerensky Pyotr Krasnov Strength 10,000 Red sailors 20,000–30,000 Red Guard soldiers Unknown number of workers [ a ] 500–1,000 volunteer soldiers 1,000 soldiers of the women's battalion Casualties and losses Few Red Guard soldiers wounded [ 3 ] All imprisoned or deserted v t e Russian Revolution February Revolution Kronstadt mutiny April Crisis July Days Kornilov affair October Revolution Kerensky–Krasnov uprising Junker mutiny Russian Civil War Kolchak Coup v t e Theaters of the Russian Civil War Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War October Revolution Left-wing uprisings Allied intervention Central Powers intervention Northern Finland North Russia Heimosodat Kronstadt Eastern Karelia Western Estonia Latvia Lithuania Petrograd Poland Southern Ukraine Ukrainian-Soviet War Western Ukraine South Russia Bessarabia South Caucasus Ossetia Georgia Armenia and Azerbaijan Azerbaijan Armenia Tambov Eastern Czechoslovak Legionary Revolt Siberia 1st Kazan 2nd Kazan 1st Perm Spring 1919 offensive of the White Army Spring 1919 counteroffensive of the Red Army Great Siberian Ice March Chita Mongolia Yakut revolt Central Asian Bukhara Khiva Basmachi Red Guard unit of the Vulkan factory in Petrograd, October 1917 Bolshevik (1920) by Boris Kustodiev The New York Times headline from 9 November 1917 The October Revolution , [ b ] also known as the Great October Socialist Revolution [ c ] (in Soviet historiography ), October coup , [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Bolshevik coup , [ 5 ] or Bolshevik revolution , [ 6 ] [ 7 ] was the second of two revolutions in Russia in 1917. It was led by Vladimir Lenin 's Bolsheviks as part of the broader Russian Revolution of 1917–1923. It began through an insurrection in Petrograd (now Saint Petersburg ) on 7 November 1917 [ O.S.

25 October]. It was the precipitating event of the Russian Civil War . The initial stage of the October Revolution, which involved the assault on Petrograd, occurred largely without any casualties.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] The October Revolution followed and capitalized on the February Revolution earlier that year, which had led to the abdication of Nicholas II and the creation of the Russian Provisional Government . The provisional government, led by Alexander Kerensky , had taken power after Grand Duke Michael , the younger brother of Nicholas II, declined to take power. During this time, urban workers began to organize into councils ( soviets ) wherein revolutionaries criticized the provisional government and its actions. The provisional government remained unpopular, especially because it was continuing to fight in World War I , and had ruled with an iron fist throughout mid-1917 (including killing hundreds of protesters in the July Days ). It declared the Russian Republic on 1 [N.S. 14] September 1917.

The situation grew critical in late 1917 as the Directorate , led by the left-wing Party of Socialist-Revolutionaries (SRs), controlled the government. The far-left Bolsheviks were deeply unhappy with the government, and began spreading calls for a military uprising. On 10 [N.S. 23] October 1917, the Petrograd Soviet , led by Leon Trotsky , voted to back a military uprising. On 24 October [N.S. 6 November], the government closed numerous newspapers and closed Petrograd, attempting to forestall the revolution; minor armed skirmishes ensued. The next day, a full-scale uprising erupted as a fleet of Bolshevik sailors entered the harbor and tens of thousands of soldiers rose up in support of the Bolsheviks. Bolshevik Red Guards under the Military-Revolutionary Committee began to occupy government buildings. In the early morning of 26 October [N.S. 8 November], they captured the Winter Palace — the seat of the Provisional government located in Petrograd, then capital of Russia.

As the revolution was not universally recognized, the country descended into civil war , which lasted until late 1922 and led to the creation of the Soviet Union . The historiography of the event has varied. The victorious Soviet Union viewed it as a validation of its ideology and the triumph of the working class over capitalism . On the other hand, the western allies later intervened against the Bolsheviks in the civil war. The Revolution inspired many cultural works and ignited communist movements globally.

October Revolution Day was a public holiday in the Soviet Union , marking its key role in the state's founding, and many communist parties around the world still celebrate it.

Etymology [ edit ] Despite occurring in November of the Gregorian calendar , the event is most commonly known as the "October Revolution" ( Октябрьская революция ) because at the time Russia still used the Julian calendar . The event is sometimes known as the "November Revolution", after the Soviet Union modernized its calendar .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] To avoid confusion, both O.S. and N.S. dates have been given for events. For more details see Old Style and New Style dates . It was sometimes known as the Bolshevik Revolution, or the Communist Revolution.

[ 14 ] Initially the event was referred to as the "October coup" ( Октябрьский переворот ) or the "Uprising of the 3rd", as seen in contemporary documents, for example in the first editions of Lenin 's complete works.

[ citation needed ] Background [ edit ] February Revolution [ edit ] Main article: February Revolution The February Revolution had toppled Tsar Nicholas II of Russia and replaced his government with the Russian Provisional Government . However, the provisional government was weak and riven by internal dissension. It continued to wage World War I , which became increasingly unpopular. There was a nationwide crisis affecting social, economic, and political relations. Disorder in industry and transport had intensified, and difficulties in obtaining provisions had increased. Gross industrial production in 1917 decreased by over 36% of what it had been in 1914. In the autumn, as much as 50% of all enterprises in the Urals , the Donbas , and other industrial centers were closed down, leading to mass unemployment. At the same time, the cost of living increased sharply. Real wages fell to about 50% of what they had been in 1913. By October 1917, Russia's national debt had risen to 50 billion roubles . Of this, debts to foreign governments constituted more than 11 billion roubles. The country faced the threat of financial bankruptcy .

German support [ edit ] See also: April Crisis Vladimir Lenin, who had been living in exile in Switzerland, with other dissidents organized a plan to negotiate a passage for them through Germany, with whom Russia was then at war. Recognizing that these dissidents could cause problems for their Russian enemies, the German government agreed to permit 32 Russian citizens, among them Lenin and his wife, to travel in a sealed train carriage through their territory.

Upon his arrival in Petrograd on 3 April 1917, Lenin issued his April Theses that called on the Bolsheviks to take over the Provisional Government, usurp power, and end the war.

Unrest by workers, peasants, and soldiers [ edit ] Throughout June, July, and August 1917, it was common to hear working-class Russians speak about their lack of confidence in the Provisional Government. Factory workers around Russia felt unhappy with the growing shortages of food, supplies, and other materials. They blamed their managers or foremen and would even attack them in the factories. The workers blamed many rich and influential individuals for the overall shortage of food and poor living conditions. Workers saw these rich and powerful individuals as opponents of the Revolution and called them "bourgeois", "capitalist", and "imperialist".

[ 15 ] In September and October 1917, there were mass strike actions by the Moscow and Petrograd workers, miners in the Donbas, metalworkers in the Urals, oil workers in Baku , textile workers in the Central Industrial Region , and railroad workers on 44 railway lines. In these months alone, more than a million workers took part in strikes. Workers established control over production and distribution in many factories and plants in a social revolution .

[ 16 ] Workers organized these strikes through factory committees . The factory committees represented the workers and were able to negotiate better working conditions, pay, and hours. Even though workplace conditions may have been increasing in quality, the overall quality of life for workers was not improving. There were still shortages of food and the increased wages workers had obtained did little to provide for their families.

[ 15 ] By October 1917, peasant uprisings were common. By autumn, the peasant movement against the landowners had spread to 482 of 624 counties, or 77% of the country. As 1917 progressed, the peasantry increasingly began to lose faith that the land would be distributed to them by the Social Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks . Refusing to continue living as before, they increasingly took measures into their own hands, as can be seen by the increase in the number and militancy of the peasant's actions. Over 42% of all the cases of destruction (usually burning down and seizing property from the landlord's estate) recorded between February and October occurred in October.

[ 17 ] While the uprisings varied in severity, complete uprisings and seizures of the land were not uncommon. Less robust forms of protest included marches on landowner manors and government offices, as well as withholding and storing grains rather than selling them.

[ 18 ] When the Provisional Government sent punitive detachments, it only enraged the peasants. In September, the garrisons in Petrograd, Moscow, and other cities, the Northern and Western fronts, and the sailors of the Baltic Fleet declared through their elected representative body Tsentrobalt that they did not recognize the authority of the Provisional Government and would not carry out any of its commands.

[ 19 ] Soldiers' wives were key players in the unrest in the villages. From 1914 to 1917, almost 50% of healthy men were sent to war, and many were killed on the front, resulting in many females being head of the household. Often—when government allowances were late and were not sufficient to match the rising costs of goods—soldiers' wives sent masses of appeals to the government, which went largely unanswered. Frustration resulted, and these women were influential in inciting "subsistence riots"—also referred to as "hunger riots", " pogroms ", or "baba riots". In these riots, citizens seized food and resources from shop owners, who they believed to be charging unfair prices. Upon police intervention, protesters responded with "rakes, sticks, rocks, and fists." [ 20 ] Antiwar demonstrations [ edit ] In a diplomatic note of 1 May, the minister of foreign affairs, Pavel Milyukov , expressed the Provisional Government's desire to continue the war against the Central Powers "to a victorious conclusion", arousing broad indignation. On 1–4 May, about 100,000 workers and soldiers of Petrograd, and, after them, the workers and soldiers of other cities, led by the Bolsheviks, demonstrated under banners reading "Down with the war!" and "All power to the soviets!" The mass demonstrations resulted in a crisis for the Provisional Government.

[ 21 ] 1 July saw more demonstrations, as about 500,000 workers and soldiers in Petrograd demonstrated, again demanding "all power to the soviets," "down with the war," and "down with the ten capitalist ministers." The Provisional Government opened an offensive against the Central Powers on 1 July, which soon collapsed. The news of the offensive's failure intensified the struggle of the workers and the soldiers.

July days [ edit ] Main article: July Days A scene from the July Days. The army has just opened fire on street protesters.

On 16 July, spontaneous demonstrations of workers and soldiers began in Petrograd, demanding that power be turned over to the soviets. The Central Committee of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party provided leadership to the spontaneous movements. On 17 July, over 500,000 people participated in what was intended to be a peaceful demonstration in Petrograd, the so-called July Days . The Provisional Government, with the support of Socialist-Revolutionary Party - Menshevik leaders of the All-Russian Executive Committee of the Soviets, ordered an armed attack against the demonstrators, killing hundreds.

[ 22 ] A period of repression followed. On 5–6 July, attacks were made on the editorial offices and printing presses of Pravda and on the Palace of Kshesinskaya , where the Central Committee and the Petrograd Committee of the Bolsheviks were located. On 7 July, the government ordered the arrest and trial of Vladimir Lenin , who was forced to go underground, as he had done under the Tsarist regime. Bolsheviks were arrested, workers were disarmed, and revolutionary military units in Petrograd were disbanded or sent to the war front. On 12 July, the Provisional Government published a law introducing the death penalty at the front. The second coalition government was formed on 24 July, chaired by Alexander Kerensky and consisted mostly of Socialists.

[ 23 ] Kerensky's government introduced a number of liberal rights, such as freedom of speech , equality before the law, and the right to form unions and arrange labor strikes .

[ citation needed ] In response to a Bolshevik appeal, Moscow's working class began a protest strike of 400,000 workers. They were supported by strikes and protest rallies by workers in Kiev , Kharkov , Nizhny Novgorod , Ekaterinburg , and other cities.

Kornilov affair [ edit ] Main article: Kornilov affair In what became known as the Kornilov affair, General Lavr Kornilov , who had been Commander-in-Chief since 18 July, with Kerensky's agreement directed an army under Aleksandr Krymov to march toward Petrograd to restore order.

[ 24 ] According to some accounts, Kerensky appeared to become frightened by the possibility that the army would stage a coup, and reversed the order. By contrast, historian Richard Pipes has argued that the episode was engineered by Kerensky.

[ 25 ] On 27 August, feeling betrayed by the government, Kornilov pushed on towards Petrograd. With few troops to spare at the front, Kerensky turned to the Petrograd Soviet for help. Bolsheviks, Mensheviks, and Socialist Revolutionaries confronted the army and convinced them to stand down.

[ 26 ] The Bolsheviks' influence over railroad and telegraph workers also proved vital in stopping the movement of troops. The political right felt betrayed, and the left was resurgent. The first direct consequence of Kornilov's failed coup was the formal abolition of the monarchy and the proclamation of the Russian Republic on 1 September.

[ 27 ] With Kornilov defeated, the Bolsheviks' popularity in the soviets grew significantly, both in the central and local areas. On 31 August, the Petrograd Soviet of Workers and Soldiers Deputies—and, on 5 September, the Moscow Soviet Workers Deputies—adopted the Bolshevik resolutions on the question of power. The Bolsheviks were able to take over in Briansk , Samara , Saratov , Tsaritsyn , Minsk , Kiev, Tashkent , and other cities.

[ citation needed ] Revolution [ edit ] Planning [ edit ] Cruiser Aurora Forward gun of Aurora that fired the signal shot On 10 October 1917 (O.S.; 23 October, N.S.), the Bolsheviks' Central Committee voted 10–2 for a resolution saying that "an armed uprising is inevitable, and that the time for it is fully ripe." [ 28 ] At the Committee meeting, Lenin discussed how the people of Russia had waited long enough for "an armed uprising," and it was the Bolsheviks' time to take power. Lenin expressed his confidence in the success of the planned insurrection. His confidence stemmed from months of Bolshevik buildup of power and successful elections to different committees and councils in major cities such as Petrograd and Moscow.

[ 29 ] Membership of the Bolshevik party had risen from 24,000 members in February 1917 to 200,000 members by September 1917.

[ 30 ] The Bolsheviks created a revolutionary military committee within the Petrograd soviet, led by the Soviet's president, Leon Trotsky . The committee included armed workers, sailors, and soldiers, and assured the support or neutrality of the capital's garrison. The committee methodically planned to occupy strategic locations through the city, almost without concealing their preparations: the Provisional Government's President Kerensky was himself aware of them; and some details, leaked by Lev Kamenev and Grigory Zinoviev , were published in newspapers.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Onset [ edit ] Vladimir Lenin , founder of the Soviet Union and the leader of the Bolshevik party .

Leon Trotsky , founder of the Red Army and a key figure in the October Revolution.

In the early morning of 24 October (O.S.; 6 November N.S.), a group of soldiers loyal to Kerensky's government marched on the printing house of the Bolshevik newspaper, Rabochiy put ( Worker's Path ), seizing and destroying printing equipment and thousands of newspapers. Shortly thereafter, the government announced the immediate closure of not only Rabochiy put but also the left-wing Soldat , as well as the far-right newspapers Zhivoe slovo and Novaia Rus . The editors and contributors of these newspapers were seen to be calling for insurrection and were to be prosecuted on criminal charges.

[ 33 ] In response, at 9 a.m. the Bolshevik Military Revolutionary Committee issued a statement denouncing the government's actions. At 10 a.m., Bolshevik-aligned soldiers successfully retook the Rabochiy put printing house. Kerensky responded at approximately 3 p.m. that afternoon by ordering the raising of all but one of Petrograd's bridges, a tactic used by the government several months earlier during the July Days . What followed was a series of sporadic clashes over control of the bridges, between Red Guard militias aligned with the Military-Revolutionary Committee and military units still loyal to the government. At approximately 5 p.m. the Military-Revolutionary Committee seized the Central Telegraph of Petrograd, giving the Bolsheviks control over communications through the city.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] On 25 October (O.S.; 7 November, N.S.) 1917, the Bolsheviks led their forces in the uprising in Petrograd (now St. Petersburg, then capital of Russia) against the Provisional Government. The event coincided with the arrival of a pro-Bolshevik flotilla—consisting primarily of five destroyers and their crews, as well as marines—in Petrograd harbor. At Kronstadt , sailors announced their allegiance to the Bolshevik insurrection. In the early morning, from its heavily guarded and picketed headquarters in Smolny Palace, the Military-Revolutionary Committee designated the last of the locations to be assaulted or seized. The Red Guards systematically captured major government facilities, key communication installations, and vantage points with little opposition. The Petrograd Garrison and most of the city's military units joined the insurrection against the Provisional Government.

[ 32 ] The insurrection was timed and organized to hand state power to the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies , which began on this day.

After the majority of the petrograd Soviet passed into the hands of the Bolsheviks, [Trotsky] was elected its chairman and in that position organized and led the insurrection of October 25.

Lenin on the organization of the October Revolution, Vol.XIV of the Collected Works .

[ 35 ] Kerensky and the Provisional Government were virtually helpless to offer significant resistance. Railways and railway stations had been controlled by Soviet workers and soldiers for days, making rail travel to and from Petrograd impossible for Provisional Government officials. The Provisional Government was also unable to locate any serviceable vehicles. On the morning of the insurrection, Kerensky desperately searched for a means of reaching military forces he hoped would be friendly to the Provisional Government outside the city and ultimately borrowed a Renault car from the American embassy, which he drove from the Winter Palace, along with a Pierce Arrow . Kerensky was able to evade the pickets going up around the palace and to drive to meet approaching soldiers.

[ 33 ] As Kerensky left Petrograd, Lenin wrote a proclamation To the Citizens of Russia , stating that the Provisional Government had been overthrown by the Military-Revolutionary Committee. The proclamation was sent by telegraph throughout Russia, even as the pro-Soviet soldiers were seizing important control centers throughout the city. One of Lenin's intentions was to present members of the Soviet congress, who would assemble that afternoon, with a fait accompli and thus forestall further debate on the wisdom or legitimacy of taking power.

[ 33 ] Assault on the Winter Palace [ edit ] A final assault against the Winter Palace —against 3,000 cadets, officers, cossacks, and female soldiers—was not vigorously resisted.

[ 33 ] [ 36 ] The Bolsheviks delayed the assault because they could not find functioning artillery.

[ 37 ] At 6:15 p.m., a large group of artillery cadets abandoned the palace, taking their artillery with them. At 8:00 p.m., 200 cossacks left the palace and returned to their barracks.

[ 33 ] "Pogrom in the Winter Palace" by Ivan Vladimirov While the cabinet of the provisional government within the palace debated what action to take, the Bolsheviks issued an ultimatum to surrender. Workers and soldiers occupied the last of the telegraph stations, cutting off the cabinet's communications with loyal military forces outside the city. As the night progressed, crowds of insurgents surrounded the palace, and many infiltrated it.

[ 33 ] At 9:45 p.m, the cruiser Aurora fired a blank shot from the harbor. Some of the revolutionaries entered the palace at 10:25 p.m. and there was a mass entry 3 hours later.

By 2:10 a.m. on 26 October, Bolshevik forces had gained control. The Cadets and the 140 volunteers of the Women's Battalion surrendered rather than resist the 40,000 strong attacking force.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] After sporadic gunfire throughout the building, the cabinet of the Provisional Government surrendered, and were imprisoned in Peter and Paul Fortress . The only member who was not arrested was Kerensky himself, who had already left the palace.

[ 33 ] [ 40 ] With the Petrograd Soviet now in control of government, garrison, and proletariat, the Second All Russian Congress of Soviets held its opening session on the day, while Trotsky dismissed the opposing Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries (SR) from Congress.

Dybenko's disputed role [ edit ] Some sources contend that as the leader of Tsentrobalt , Pavlo Dybenko played a crucial role in the revolt and that the ten warships that arrived at the city with ten thousand Baltic Fleet mariners were the force that took the power in Petrograd and put down the Provisional Government. The same mariners then dispersed by force the elected parliament of Russia, [ 41 ] and used machine-gun fire against demonstrators in Petrograd, [ citation needed ] killing about 100 demonstrators and wounding several hundred.

[ citation needed ] Dybenko in his memoirs mentioned this event as "several shots in the air". These are disputed by various sources, such as Louise Bryant , [ 42 ] who claims that news outlets in the West at the time reported that the unfortunate loss of life occurred in Moscow, not Petrograd, and the number was much less than suggested above. As for the "several shots in the air", there is little evidence suggesting otherwise.

Later Soviet portrayal [ edit ] While the seizure of the Winter Palace happened almost without resistance, Soviet historians and officials later tended to depict the event in dramatic and heroic terms.

[ 32 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] The historical reenactment titled The Storming of the Winter Palace was staged in 1920. This reenactment, watched by 100,000 spectators, provided the model for official films made later, which showed fierce fighting during the storming of the Winter Palace, [ 45 ] although, in reality, the Bolshevik insurgents had faced little opposition.

[ 36 ] Later accounts of the heroic "storming of the Winter Palace" and "defense of the Winter Palace" were propaganda by Bolshevik publicists. Grandiose paintings depicting the "Women's Battalion" and photo stills taken from Sergei Eisenstein 's staged film depicting the "politically correct" version of the October events in Petrograd came to be taken as truth.

[ 46 ] Historical falsification of political events such as the October Revolution and the Brest-Litovsk Treaty became a distinctive element of Stalin's regime. A notable example is the 1938 publication, History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) , [ 47 ] in which the history of the governing party was significantly altered and revised including the importance of the leading figures during the Bolshevik revolution. Retrospectively, Lenin's primary associates such as Zinoviev, Trotsky, Radek and Bukharin were presented as "vacillating", "opportunists" and "foreign spies" whereas Stalin was depicted as the chief discipline during the revolution. However, in reality, Stalin was considered a relatively unknown figure with secondary importance at the time of the event.

[ 48 ] In his book, The Stalin School of Falsification , Leon Trotsky argued that the Stalinist faction routinely distorted historical events and the importance of Bolshevik figures especially during the October Revolution. He cited a range of historical documents such as private letters, telegrams, party speeches, meeting minutes , and suppressed texts such as Lenin's Testament .

[ 49 ] Outcome [ edit ] See also: Russian Revolution , Kerensky–Krasnov uprising , Moscow Bolshevik Uprising , and Kiev Bolshevik Uprising Petrograd Milrevcom proclamation about the deposing of the Russian Provisional Government The elections to the Constituent Assembly took place in November 1917. The Bolsheviks won 24% of the vote.

[ 50 ] The dissolution of the Constituent Assembly on 6 January 1918. The Tauride Palace is locked and guarded by Trotsky , Sverdlov , Zinoviev , and Lashevich .

New government established [ edit ] Lenin initially turned down the leading position of Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars when the Bolsheviks formed a new government, after the October Revolution in 1917, and suggested Trotsky for the position. However, Trotsky refused the position and other Bolsheviks insisted that Lenin assume principal responsibility which resulted in Lenin eventually accepting the role of chairman.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] The Second Congress of Soviets consisted of 670 elected delegates: 300 were Bolsheviks and nearly 100 were Left Socialist-Revolutionaries , who also supported the overthrow of the Alexander Kerensky government.

[ 54 ] When the fall of the Winter Palace was announced, the Congress adopted a decree transferring power to the Soviets of Workers', Soldiers' and Peasants' Deputies, thus ratifying the Revolution.

The transfer of power was not without disagreement. The center and right wings of the Socialist Revolutionaries, as well as the Mensheviks, believed that Lenin and the Bolsheviks had illegally seized power and they walked out before the resolution was passed. As they exited, they were taunted by Trotsky who told them "You are pitiful isolated individuals; you are bankrupts; your role is played out. Go where you belong from now on—into the dustbin of history!" [ 55 ] The following day, 26 October, the Congress elected a new cabinet of Bolsheviks, pending the convocation of a Constituent Assembly . This new Soviet government was known as the council (Soviet) of People's Commissars ( Sovnarkom ), with Lenin as a leader. Lenin allegedly approved of the name, reporting that it "smells of revolution".

[ 56 ] The cabinet quickly passed the Decree on Peace and the Decree on Land . This new government was also officially called "provisional" until the Assembly was dissolved.

Anti-Bolshevik sentiment [ edit ] That same day, posters were pinned on walls and fences by the Socialist Revolutionaries, describing the takeover as a "crime against the motherland" and "revolution"; this signaled the next wave of anti-Bolshevik sentiment. The next day, the Mensheviks seized power in Georgia and declared it an independent republic; the Don Cossacks also claimed control of their government. The Bolshevik strongholds were in the cities, particularly Petrograd, with support much more mixed in rural areas. The peasant-dominated Left SR party was in coalition with the Bolsheviks. There were reports that the Provisional Government had not conceded defeat and were meeting with the army at the Front.

Anti-Bolshevik sentiment continued to grow as posters and newspapers started criticizing the actions of the Bolsheviks and repudiated their authority. The executive committee of Peasants Soviets "[refuted] with indignation all participation of the organized peasantry in this criminal violation of the will of the working class".

[ 57 ] This eventually developed into major counter-revolutionary action, as on 30 October (O.S., 12 November, N.S.) when Cossacks , welcomed by church bells, entered Tsarskoye Selo on the outskirts of Petrograd with Kerensky riding on a white horse. Kerensky gave an ultimatum to the rifle garrison to lay down weapons, which was promptly refused. They were then fired upon by Kerensky's Cossacks, which resulted in 8 deaths. This turned soldiers in Petrograd against Kerensky as being the Tsarist regime. Kerensky's failure to assume authority over troops was described by John Reed as a "fatal blunder" that signaled the final end of his government.

[ 58 ] Over the following days, the battle against the anti-Bolsheviks continued. The Red Guard fought against Cossacks at Tsarskoye Selo, with the Cossacks breaking rank and fleeing, leaving their artillery behind. On 31 October 1917 (13 November, N.S.), the Bolsheviks gained control of Moscow after a week of bitter street-fighting. Artillery had been freely used, with an estimated 700 casualties. However, there was continued support for Kerensky in some of the provinces.

After the fall of Moscow, there was only minor public anti-Bolshevik sentiment, such as the newspaper Novaya Zhizn , which criticized the Bolsheviks' lack of manpower and organization in running their party, let alone a government. Lenin confidently claimed that there is "not a shadow of hesitation in the masses of Petrograd, Moscow and the rest of Russia" in accepting Bolshevik rule.

[ 59 ] Governmental reforms [ edit ] On 10 November 1917 (23 November, N.S.), the government applied the term "citizens of the Russian Republic" to Russians, whom they sought to make equal in all possible respects, by the nullification of all "legal designations of civil inequality, such as estates, titles, and ranks." [ 60 ] The long-awaited Constituent Assembly elections were held on 12 November (O.S., 25 November, N.S.) 1917. In contrast to their majority in the Soviets, the Bolsheviks only won 175 seats in the 715-seat legislative body, coming in second behind the Socialist Revolutionary Party , which won 370 seats, although the SR Party no longer existed as a whole party by that time, as the Left SRs had gone into coalition with the Bolsheviks from October 1917 to March 1918 (a cause of dispute of the legitimacy of the returned seating of the Constituent Assembly, as the old lists, were drawn up by the old SR Party leadership, and thus represented mostly Right SRs, whereas the peasant soviet deputies had returned majorities for the pro-Bolshevik Left SRs). The Constituent Assembly was to first meet on 28 November (O.S.) 1917, but its convocation was delayed until 5 January (O.S.; 18 January, N.S.) 1918 by the Bolsheviks. On its first and only day in session, the Constituent Assembly came into conflict with the Soviets, and it rejected Soviet decrees on peace and land, resulting in the Constituent Assembly being dissolved the next day by order of the Congress of Soviets.

[ 61 ] On 16 December 1917 (29 December, N.S.), the government ventured to eliminate hierarchy in the army, removing all titles, ranks, and uniform decorations. The tradition of saluting was also eliminated.

[ 60 ] On 20 December 1917 (2 January 1918, N.S.), the Cheka was created by Lenin's decree.

[ 62 ] These were the beginnings of the Bolsheviks' consolidation of power over their political opponents. The Red Terror began in September 1918, following a failed assassination attempt on Lenin. The French Jacobin Terror was an example for the Soviet Bolsheviks. Trotsky had compared Lenin to Maximilien Robespierre as early as 1904, when Trotsky was a critic of Lenin and his political opponent within the Marxist movement.

[ 63 ] In his book, Terrorism and Communism: A Reply to Karl Kautsky , Trotsky argued that the reign of terror began with the White Terror under the White Guard forces and the Bolsheviks responded with the Red Terror .

[ 64 ] The Decree on Land ratified the actions of the peasants who throughout Russia had taken private land and redistributed it among themselves. The Bolsheviks viewed themselves as representing an alliance of workers and peasants signified by the Hammer and Sickle on the flag and the coat of arms of the Soviet Union .
Other decrees: All private property was nationalized by the government.

All Russian banks were nationalized.

Private bank accounts were expropriated.

The properties of the Russian Orthodox Church (including bank accounts) were expropriated.

All foreign debts were repudiated.

Control of the factories was given to the soviets.

Wages were fixed at higher rates than during the war, and a shorter, eight-hour working day was introduced.

Timeline of the spread of Soviet power (Gregorian calendar dates) [ edit ] See also: Establishment of Soviet power in Russia (1917–1918) 5 November 1917: Tallinn .

7 November 1917: Petrograd , Minsk , Novgorod , Ivanovo-Voznesensk and Tartu 8 November 1917: Ufa , Kazan , Yekaterinburg , and Narva; ( failed in Kiev ) 9 November 1917: Vitebsk , Yaroslavl , Saratov , Samara , and Izhevsk 10 November 1917: Rostov , Tver , and Nizhny Novgorod 12 November 1917: Voronezh , Smolensk , and Gomel 13 November 1917: Tambov 14 November 1917: Orel and Perm 15 November 1917: Pskov , Moscow, and Baku 27 November 1917: Tsaritsyn 1 December 1917: Mogilev 8 December 1917: Vyatka 10 December 1917: Kishinev 11 December 1917: Kaluga 14 December 1917: Novorossisk 15 December 1917: Kostroma 20 December 1917: Tula 24 December 1917: Kharkov (invasion of Ukraine by the Muravyov Red Guard forces, the establishment of Soviet Ukraine and hostilities in the region ) 29 December 1917: Sevastopol (invasion of Crimea by the Red Guard forces, the establishment of the Taurida Soviet Socialist Republic ) 4 January 1918: Penza 11 January 1918: Yekaterinoslav 17 January 1918: Petrozavodsk 19 January 1918: Poltava 22 January 1918: Zhitomir 26 January 1918: Simferopol 27 January 1918: Nikolayev 29 January 1918: ( failed again in Kiev) 31 January 1918: Odessa and Orenburg (establishment of the Odessa Soviet Republic ) 7 February 1918: Astrakhan 8 February 1918: Kiev and Vologda (defeat of the Ukrainian government) 17 February 1918: Arkhangelsk 25 February 1918: Novocherkassk Russian Civil War [ edit ] European theatre of the Russian Civil War in 1918 Main article: Russian Civil War Bolshevik-led attempts to gain power in other parts of the Russian Empire were largely successful in Russia proper—although the fighting in Moscow lasted for two weeks—but they were less successful in ethnically non-Russian parts of the Empire, which had been clamoring for independence since the February Revolution. For example, the Ukrainian Rada , which had declared autonomy on 23 June 1917, created the Ukrainian People's Republic on 20 November, which was supported by the Ukrainian Congress of Soviets. This led to an armed conflict with the Bolshevik government in Petrograd and, eventually, a Ukrainian declaration of independence from Russia on 25 January 1918 .

[ 65 ] In Estonia , two rival governments emerged: the Estonian Provincial Assembly , established in April 1917, proclaimed itself the supreme legal authority of Estonia on 28 November 1917 and issued the Declaration of Independence on 24 February 1918; [ 66 ] but Soviet Russia recognized the executive committee of the Soviets of Estonia as the legal authority in the province , although the Soviets in Estonia controlled only the capital and a few other major towns.

[ 67 ] After the success of the October Revolution transformed the Russian state into a soviet republic, a coalition of anti-Bolshevik groups attempted to unseat the new government in the Russian Civil War from 1918 to 1922. In an attempt to intervene in the civil war after the Bolsheviks' separate peace with the Central Powers ( Germany and the Ottoman Empire ), the Allied Powers (the United Kingdom , France , Italy , the United States , and Japan ) occupied parts of the Soviet Union for over two years before finally withdrawing.

[ 68 ] By the end of the violent civil war, Russia's economy and infrastructure were heavily damaged, and as many as 10 million perished during the war, mostly civilians.

[ 69 ] Millions became White émigrés , [ 70 ] and the Russian famine of 1921–1922 claimed up to five million victims.

[ 71 ] The United States did not recognize the new Russian government until 1933. The European powers recognized the Soviet Union in the early 1920s and began to engage in business with it after the New Economic Policy (NEP) was implemented.

[ citation needed ] Historiography [ edit ] Part of a series on Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type Collective farming Collective leadership Commanding heights of the economy Democratic centralism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Intensification of the class struggle under socialism Labor aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism New Soviet man One-party state Partiinost' Popular front Proletarian internationalism Protracted people's war Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Yugoslav State socialist Soviet republic Totalitarianism Theory of the productive forces Third Period Vanguardism Wars of national liberation Unified power Variants Browderism Camilism Fidelismo Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kádárism Kaysone Phomvihane Thought Khrushchevism Machelism Maoism Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Prachanda Path Sankarism Socialism with Chinese characteristics Stalinism Neo- Titoism Politicians Lenin Stalin Foster Dimitrov Thälmann Hồ Pollitt Browder Rákosi Nosaka Bierut Tito Togliatti Ulbricht Kaganovich Mao Khrushchev Choibalsan Díaz Ibárruri Gottwald Thorez Chervenkov Gheorghiu-Dej Zachariadis Deng Gomułka Brezhnev Hoxha Namboodiripad Hall Giáp Zhivkov Bakdash Kim Kádár Honecker Husák Koliševski Qasim Taraki Ceaușescu Barre Adhikari Kaysone Neto Jaruzelski Aidit Mugabe Chin Pot Habash Castro Jiang (Zemin) Guevara Lara Garang Gorbachev Kérékou Machel Mengistu Bains Brar Wijeweera Bishop Zyuganov Ortega Cano Kaypakkaya Sankara Xi Dahal Intellectuals Marx Engels Lukács Roy Bukharin Dutt Haywood Chen Trường Bettelheim Dutta Hinton Camilo Parenti Hirschman Guzmán Badiou Andreyeva Sison Losurdo Newton Avakian Davis Trọng Ghandy Dean Jiang (Shigong) Li Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism (1924) Dialectical and Historical Materialism (1938) The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) (1938) Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR (1951) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism (1960) Guerrilla Warfare (1961) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) President Ho Chi Minh's Testament (1969) The Governance of China (2014) History Soviet Union 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War World War II Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Revolution China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Korean War Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency Revolutions of 1989 Nepalese Civil War By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia 1975–79 1979–92 China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia Czechia Slovakia East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia South Yemen Soviet Union Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan Vietnam Yugoslavia Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia Organizations Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam French Communist Party IMCWP Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Party of Labour of Albania Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Workers' Front (Spain) Workers' Party of Korea Related topics All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism Mass killings Bolshevism Crimes against humanity under communist regimes Mass killings Criticism of communist party rule Cult of personality Intercommunalism Leninism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism New class Post-communism Red fascism Red Scare Second Second World State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union State capitalism State socialism Tankie Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Trotskyism Communism portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e There have been few events where the political opinions of researchers have influenced their historical research as significantly as the October Revolution.

[ 72 ] Generally, the historiography of the Revolution generally divides into three camps: Soviet-Marxist, Western-Totalitarian, and Revisionist.

[ 73 ] Soviet historiography [ edit ] Soviet historiography of the October Revolution is intertwined with Soviet historical development. Many of the initial Soviet interpreters of the Revolution were themselves Bolshevik revolutionaries.

[ 74 ] Bolshevik figures such as Anatoly Lunacharsky , Moisei Uritsky and Dmitry Manuilsky agreed that Lenin's influence on the Bolshevik party was decisive but the October insurrection was carried out according to Trotsky's, not to Lenin's plan.

[ 75 ] After the initial wave of revolutionary narratives, Soviet historians worked within "narrow guidelines" defined by the Soviet government. The rigidity of interpretive possibilities reached its height under Stalin.

[ 76 ] Soviet historians of the Revolution interpreted the October Revolution as being about establishing the legitimacy of Marxist ideology and the Bolshevik government. To establish the accuracy of Marxist ideology, Soviet historians generally described the Revolution as the product of class struggle and that it was the supreme event in a world history governed by historical laws. The Bolshevik Party is placed at the center of the Revolution, as it exposes the errors of both the moderate Provisional Government and the spurious "socialist" Mensheviks in the Petrograd Soviet. Guided by Lenin's leadership and his firm grasp of scientific Marxist theory , the Party led the "logically predetermined" events of the October Revolution from beginning to end. The events were, according to these historians, logically predetermined because of the socio-economic development of Russia, where monopolistic industrial capitalism had alienated the masses. In this view, the Bolshevik party took the leading role in organizing these alienated industrial workers, and thereby established the construction of the first socialist state .

[ 77 ] Although Soviet historiography of the October Revolution stayed relatively constant until 1991, it did undergo some changes. Following Stalin's death, historians such as E. N. Burdzhalov and P. V. Volobuev published historical research that deviated significantly from the party line in refining the doctrine that the Bolshevik victory "was predetermined by the state of Russia's socio-economic development".

[ 78 ] These historians, who constituted the "New Directions Group", posited that the complex nature of the October Revolution "could only be explained by a multi-causal analysis, not by recourse to the mono-causality of monopoly capitalism".

[ 79 ] For them, the central actor is still the Bolshevik party, but this party triumphed "because it alone could solve the preponderance of 'general democratic' tasks the country faced" (such as the struggle for peace and the exploitation of landlords).

[ 80 ] During the late Soviet period, the opening of select Soviet archives during glasnost sparked innovative research that broke away from some aspects of Marxism–Leninism, though the key features of the orthodox Soviet view remained intact.

[ 76 ] Following the turn of the 21st century, some Soviet historians began to implement an "anthropological turn" in their historiographical analysis of the Russian Revolution. This method of analysis focuses on the average person's experience of day-to-day life during the revolution, and pulls the analytical focus away from larger events, notable revolutionaries, and overarching claims about party views.

[ 81 ] In 2006, S. V. Iarov employed this methodology when he focused on citizen adjustment to the new Soviet system. Iarov explored the dwindling labor protests, evolving forms of debate, and varying forms of politicization as a result of the new Soviet rule from 1917 to 1920.

[ 82 ] In 2010, O. S. Nagornaia took interest in the personal experiences of Russian prisoners-of-war taken by Germany , examining Russian soldiers and officers' ability to cooperate and implement varying degrees of autocracy despite being divided by class, political views, and race.

[ 83 ] Other analyses following this "anthropological turn" have explored texts from soldiers and how they used personal war-experiences to further their political goals, [ 84 ] as well as how individual life-structure and psychology may have shaped major decisions in the civil war that followed the revolution.

[ 85 ] Western historiography [ edit ] See also: Soviet and communist studies and Totalitarianism § Politics of historical interpretation "Totalitarian" historians [ edit ] During the Cold War , Western historiography of the October Revolution developed in direct response to the assertions of the Soviet view. As a result, Western historians exposed what they believed were flaws in the Soviet view, thereby undermining the Bolsheviks' original legitimacy, as well as the precepts of Marxism.

[ 86 ] The view which originated in the early years of the Cold War became known as "traditionalist" and "totalitarian" as well as "Cold War" historians for relying on concepts and interpretations rooted in the early years of the Cold War and even in the sphere Russian White émigrés of the 1920s.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] These "traditionalist" historians described the revolution as the result of a chain of contingent accidents. Examples of these accidental and contingent factors they say precipitated the Revolution included World War I 's timing, chance, and the poor leadership of Tsar Nicholas II as well as that of liberal and moderate socialists.

[ 76 ] According to "totalitarian" historians, it was not popular support, but rather a manipulation of the masses, ruthlessness, and the party discipline of the Bolsheviks that enabled their triumph. For these historians, the Bolsheviks' defeat in the Constituent Assembly elections of November–December 1917 demonstrated popular opposition to the Bolsheviks' revolution, as did the scale and breadth of the Civil War.

[ 89 ] "Totalitarian" historians saw the organization of the Bolshevik party as totalitarian. Their interpretation of the October Revolution as a violent coup organized by a totalitarian party which aborted Russia's experiment in democracy.

[ 90 ] Thus, Stalinist totalitarianism developed as a natural progression from Leninism and the Bolshevik party's tactics and organization.

[ 91 ] To these historians, Soviet Russia in 1917 was as totalitarian as the USSR under Joseph Stalin in 1930s.

[ 88 ] More to it, such historians have blamed Lenin and the Bolsheviks for inventing policies further implemented by totalitarian regimes of the 20th century, such as the Holocaust : for example, according to Richard Pipes , a prominent "totalitarian", "The Stalinist and Nazi holocausts" stemmed from Lenin's Red Terror and had "much greater decorum" than the latter.

[ 92 ] "Revisionist" historians [ edit ] The 1960s-1970s saw a rise of a young historians who opposed the "totalitarian" historians and began challenging, revising and refuting the dominant and accepted conceptions, as well as criticizing the bias towards the USSR and the Left in general; they lacked a full-fledged doctrine or philosophy of history, but were distinguished as "revisionists"; in contrast with the focus of "totalitarian" historians on "politics" "from above" and on personalities of the leaders of political movements, "the one man", the revisionists have produced "history from below" and put attention on social history.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] These historians tend to see a rupture between Stalinist totalitarianism and Leninism and refute the definition of the Revolution as a totalitarian coup carried out by a minority group; the 'revisionists' stress the genuinely 'popular' nature of the Bolshevik Revolution. According to Evan Mawdsley , "the 'revisionist’ school had been dominant from the 1970s" in academic circles, and achieved "some success" in challenging the traditionalists; [ 88 ] however, they continued to be criticized by "totalitarians" who accused them of "Marxism" and failing to see the primary reason of political events, the personality of the leaders. During the rise of the "revisionists", "totalitarians" retained popularity and influence outside academic circles, especially in politics and public spheres of the United States , where they supported harder policies towards the USSR: for example, Zbigniew Brzezinski served as National Security Advisor to President Jimmy Carter , while Richard Pipes headed the CIA group Team B ; after 1991, their views have found popularity not only in the West, but also in the former USSR.

[ 32 ] Effect of the dissolution of the Soviet Union on historical research [ edit ] The dissolution of the Soviet Union affected historical interpretations of the October Revolution. Since 1991, increasing access to large amounts of Soviet archival materials has made it possible to re‑examine the October Revolution.

[ 74 ] Though both Western and Russian historians now have access to many of these archives, the effect of the dissolution of the USSR can be seen most clearly in the work of the latter. While the disintegration essentially helped solidify the Western and Revisionist views, post-USSR Russian historians largely repudiated the former Soviet historical interpretation of the Revolution.

[ 93 ] As Stephen Kotkin argues, 1991 prompted "a return to political history and the apparent resurrection of totalitarianism, the interpretive view that, in different ways...revisionists sought to bury".

[ 74 ] Legacy [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "October Revolution" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Lenin , Trotsky and Kamenev celebrating the second anniversary of the October Revolution Anniversary of October Revolution in Riga , Soviet Union in 1988 The October Revolution marks the inception of the first communist government in Russia, and thus the first large-scale and constitutionally ordained socialist state in world history. After this, the Russian Republic became the Russian SFSR , which later became part of the Soviet Union.

The October Revolution also made the ideology of communism influential on a global scale in the 20th century. Communist parties would start to form in many countries after 1917.

Ten Days That Shook the World , a book written by American journalist John Reed and first published in 1919, gives a firsthand exposition of the events. Reed died in 1920, shortly after the book was finished.

Dmitri Shostakovich wrote his Symphony No. 2 in B major , Op. 14, and subtitled it To October , for the 10th anniversary of the October Revolution. The choral finale of the work, "To October", is set to a text by Alexander Bezymensky, which praises Lenin and the revolution. The Symphony No. 2 was first performed on 5 November 1927 by the Leningrad Philharmonic Orchestra and the Academy Capella Choir under the direction of Nikolai Malko .

Sergei Eisenstein and Grigori Aleksandrov 's film October: Ten Days That Shook the World , first released on 20 January 1928 in the USSR and on 2 November 1928 in New York City, describes and glorifies the revolution, having been commissioned to commemorate the event.

The Hollywood film , Reds , released in 1981 was based on Reed's account of the October Revolution and featured interviews with historical contemporaries from the period for the film.

[ 94 ] The term "Red October" (Красный Октябрь, Krasnyy Oktyabr ) has been used to signify the October Revolution. "Red October" was given to a steel factory that was made notable by the Battle of Stalingrad , [ 95 ] a Moscow sweets factory that is well known in Russia, and a fictional Soviet submarine in both Tom Clancy 's 1984 novel The Hunt for Red October and the 1990 film adaptation of the same name .

The date 7 November, the anniversary of the October Revolution according to the Gregorian Calendar, was the official national day of the Soviet Union from 1918 onward and still is a public holiday in Belarus and the breakaway territory of Transnistria . Communist parties both in and out of power celebrate 7 November as the date Marxist parties began to take power.

The Russian Revolution was perceived as a rupture with imperialism for various civil rights and decolonization struggles and providing a space for oppressed groups across the world. This was given further credence with the Soviet Union supporting many anti-colonial third world movements with financial funds against European colonial powers.

[ 96 ] See also [ edit ] Soviet Union portal Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War Index of articles related to the Russian Revolution and Civil War Revolutions of 1917–1923 Russians in Toruń Soviet Decree Explanatory notes [ edit ] ^ 50,000 workers passed a resolution in favour of Bolshevik demand for transfer of power to the soviets .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] ^ Russian : Октябрьская революция , romanized : Oktyabrskaya revolyutsiya , IPA: [ɐkˈtʲabrʲskəjə rʲɪvɐˈlʲutsɨjə] .

^ Russian : Великая Октябрьская социалистическая революция , romanized : Velikaya Oktyabrskaya sotsialisticheskaya revolyutsiya , [vʲɪˈlʲikəjə ɐkˈtʲabrʲskəjə sətsɨəlʲɪˈsʲtʲitɕɪskəjə rʲɪvɐˈlʲutsɨjə] Citations [ edit ] ^ Head, Michael (12 September 2007).

Evgeny Pashukanis: A Critical Reappraisal . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-1353-0787-5 .

[ page needed ] ^ Shukman 1994 , p.

21 The Workers: February–October 1917 .

^ "Russian Revolution" .

HISTORY . 9 November 2009. Archived from the original on 26 August 2023.

^ Figes 1996 , Section 6: The October Revolution 1917 .

^ a b "The Russian Revolution" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ "What Was the Bolshevik Revolution?" . American Historical Association . Retrieved 1 June 2024 .

^ "Russian Revolution, 1917" .

Holocaust Encyclopedia .

^ Shukman 1994 , p.

343 .

^ Bergman, Jay (2019).

The French Revolutionary Tradition in Russian and Soviet Politics, Political Thought, and Culture . Oxford University Press. p. 224.

ISBN 978-0-1988-4270-5 .

^ McMeekin, Sean (30 May 2017).

The Russian Revolution: A New History . Basic.

ISBN 978-0-4650-9497-4 .

[ page needed ] ^ "Russian Revolution – Causes, Timeline & Definition" .

www.history.com . Retrieved 15 October 2020 .

^ "Russian Revolution | Definition, Causes, Summary, History, & Facts" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 15 October 2020 .

^ Bunyan & Fisher 1934 , p. 385.

^ Samaan, A.E. (2013).

From a "Race of Masters" to a "Master Race": 1948 to 1848 . A.E. Samaan. p. 346.

ISBN 978-0-6157-4788-0 . Retrieved 9 February 2017 .

^ a b Steinberg, Mark (2017).

The Russian Revolution 1905–1921 . New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

143– 146.

ISBN 978-0-1992-2762-4 .

^ Mandel 1984 .

^ Trotsky 1932 , pp. 859–864.

^ Steinberg 2017 , pp. 196–197.

^ Upton, Anthony F. (1980).

The Finnish Revolution: 1917–1918 . Minneapolis, Minnesota: University of Minnesota Press. p. 89.

ISBN 978-1-4529-1239-4 .

^ Steinberg 2017 , pp. 193–194.

^ Pipes, Richard (1990).

The Russian Revolution . Knopf Doubleday. p. 407.

ISBN 978-0-3077-8857-3 .

^ Kort, Michael (1993).

The Soviet colossus: the rise and fall of the USSR . Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe. p. 104.

ISBN 978-0-8733-2676-6 .

^ Hickey, Michael C. (2010).

Competing Voices from the Russian Revolution: Fighting Words: Fighting Words . ABC-CLIO. p. 559.

ISBN 978-0-3133-8524-7 .

^ Beckett 2007 , p. 526 ^ Pipes 1997 , p. 51: "There is no evidence of a Kornilov plot, but there is plenty of evidence of Kerensky's duplicity." ^ Service 1998 , p. 54 ^ "Провозглашена Российская республика" .

Президентская библиотека имени Б.Н. Ельцина (in Russian) . Retrieved 6 November 2021 .

^ "Central Committee Meeting" .

www.marxists.org . 10 October 1917.

^ Steinberg, Mark (2001).

Voices of the Revolution, 1917 . Binghamton, New York: Yale University Press. p. 170.

ISBN 978-0-3001-0169-0 .

OL 9360660M .

^ Cohen, Stephen (1980).

Bukharin and the Bolshevik Revolution: A Political Biography 1888–1938 . London: Oxford University Press. p. 46.

^ "1917 – La Revolution Russe" . Arte TV. 16 September 2007. Archived from the original on 1 February 2016 . Retrieved 25 January 2016 .

^ a b c d Suny, Ronald Grigor (2011).

The Soviet Experiment . Oxford University Press. pp.

63– 67.

^ a b c d e f g h Rabinowitch 2004 , pp. 273–305 ^ Bard College: Experimental Humanities and Eurasian Studies.

"From Empire To Republic: October 24 – November 1, 1917" . Retrieved 24 February 2018 .

^ Trotsky, Leon (1962).

The Stalin School of Falsification . Pioneer Publishers. p. 12.

^ a b Beckett 2007 , p. 528 ^ Rabinowitch 2004 ^ Lynch, Michael (2015).

Reaction and revolution : Russia 1894–1924 (4th ed.). London: Hodder Education.

ISBN 978-1-4718-3856-9 .

OCLC 908064756 .

^ Raul Edward Chao (2016).

Damn the Revolution!

. Washington DC, London, Sydney: Dupont Circle Editions. p. 191.

^ "1917 Free History" .

Yandex Publishing . Archived from the original on 8 November 2017 . Retrieved 8 November 2017 .

^ "ВОЕННАЯ ЛИТЕРАТУРА – [ Мемуары ] – Дыбенко П.Е. Из недр царского флота к Великому Октябрю" .

militera.lib.ru (in Russian).

^ Bryant, Louise (1918).

Six Red Months in Russia: An Observer's Account of Russia Before and During the Proletarian Dictatorship . New York: George H. Doran Company. pp.

60– 61 . Retrieved 5 December 2021 .

^ Schell, Jonathan (2003).

"The Mass Minority in Action: France and Russia' " (PDF) .

The Unconquerable World. Power, nonviolence and the will of the people . London: Penguin. pp.

167– 185.

ISBN 9780805044577 .

OL 36779W .

^ (See a first-hand account by British General Alfred Knox .) ^ Eisenstein, Sergei M.

; Aleksandrov, Grigori (1928).

October: Ten Days That Shook the World (Motion picture). First National Pictures.

^ Argumenty I Fakty newspaper ^ Suny, Ronald Grigor (2 January 2022).

"Stalin, Falsifier in Chief: E. H. Carr and the Perils of Historical Research Introduction" .

Revolutionary Russia .

35 (1): 11– 14.

doi : 10.1080/09546545.2022.2065740 .

ISSN 0954-6545 .

^ Bailey, Sydney D. (1955).

"Stalin's Falsification of History: The Case of the Brest-Litovsk Treaty" .

The Russian Review .

14 (1): 24– 35.

doi : 10.2307/126074 .

ISSN 0036-0341 .

JSTOR 126074 .

^ Trotsky, Leon (13 January 2019) [1932]. Shachtman, Max (ed.).

The Stalin School of Falsification . Pickle Partners Publishing. pp. vii-89.

ISBN 978-1-7891-2348-7 .

^ "The Constituent Assembly" .

jewhistory.ort.spb.ru .

^ Pipes, Richard (1990).

The Russian Revolution . New York : Knopf. p. 499.

ISBN 978-0-3945-0241-0 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Deutscher, Isaac (1954).

The prophet armed: Trotsky, 1879-1921 . New York, Oxford University Press. p. 325.

^ Sukhanov, Nikolai Nikolaevich (14 July 2014).

The Russian Revolution 1917: A Personal Record by N.N. Sukhanov . Princeton University Press. p. 266.

ISBN 978-1-4008-5710-4 .

^ Service, Robert (1998). A history of twentieth-century Russia. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 0-6744-0347-9 p. 65 ^ Reed 1997 , p. 217 ^ Steinberg 2001 , pp. 251.

^ Reed 1997 , p. 369 ^ Reed 1997 , p. 410 ^ Reed 1997 , p. 565 ^ a b Steinberg 2001 , p. 257 ^ Llewellyn, Jennifer; Rae, John; Thompson, Steve (2014).

"The Constituent Assembly" . Alpha History . Retrieved 7 March 2022 .

^ Figes 1996 .

^ Pipes, Richard (2011).

The Russian Revolution . Knopf Doubleday. p.

789 .

ISBN 978-0-3077-8857-3 .

^ Kline, George L. (1992). "In Defence of Terrorism". In Brotherstone, Terence; Dukes, Paul (eds.).

The Trotsky reappraisal . Translated by Drummond, Andrew; Pearce, Brian; Brine, J. J. Edinburgh University Press. p. 158.

ISBN 978-0-7486-0317-6 .

^ See Encyclopedia of Ukraine online ^ Miljan, Toivo (2015).

Historical Dictionary of Estonia." Historical Dictionary of Estonia . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 169.

ISBN 978-0-8108-7513-5 .

^ Raun, Toivo U. (2002). "7. The Emergence of Estonian Independence 1917–1920".

Estonia and the Estonians . Hoover Inst. Press. p. 102.

ISBN 978-0-8179-2853-7 .

^ Ward, John (2004).

With the "Die-Hards" in Siberia . Dodo Press. p. 91.

ISBN 1-4099-0680-9 .

^ "Russian Civil War – Casualties and consequences of the war" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . 29 May 2024.

^ Schaufuss, Tatiana (May 1939). "The White Russian Refugees".

Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science .

203 .

SAGE Publishing : 45– 54.

doi : 10.1177/000271623920300106 .

JSTOR 1021884 .

S2CID 143704019 .

^ Haller, Francis (8 December 2003).

"Famine in Russia: the hidden horrors of 1921" .

Le Temps .

International Committee of the Red Cross .

^ Acton 1997 , p. 5 ^ Acton 1997 , pp. 5–7 ^ a b c Kotkin, Stephen (1998). "1991 and the Russian Revolution: Sources, Conceptual Categories, Analytical Frameworks".

The Journal of Modern History .

70 (2). University of Chicago Press: 384– 425.

doi : 10.1086/235073 .

ISSN 0022-2801 .

S2CID 145291237 .

^ Deutscher, Isaac (5 January 2015).

The Prophet: The Life of Leon Trotsky . Verso Books. p. 1283.

ISBN 978-1-7816-8721-5 .

^ a b c Acton 1997 , p. 7.

^ Acton 1997 , p. 8.

^ Litvin, Alter (2001).

Writing History in Twentieth-Century Russia . New York: Palgrave. pp.

49– 50.

^ Markwick, Roger (2001).

Rewriting History in Soviet Russia: The Politics of Revisionist Historiography . New York: Palgrave. p. 97.

^ Markwick 2001 , p. 102.

^ Smith, S. A. (2015). "The historiography of the Russian Revolution 100 Years On".

Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History .

16 (4): 733– 749.

doi : 10.1353/kri.2015.0065 .

S2CID 145202617 .

^ Iarov, S.V. (2006). "Konformizm v Sovetskoi Rossii: Petrograd, 1917–20".

Evropeiskii Dom (in Russian).

^ Nagornaia, O. S. (2010). "Drugoi voennyi opyt: Rossiiskie voennoplennye Pervoi mirovoi voiny v Germanii (1914–1922)".

Novyi Khronograf (in Russian).

^ Morozova, O. M. (2010). "Dva akta dreamy: Boevoe proshloe I poslevoennaia povsednevnost ' veteran grazhdanskoi voiny".

Rostov-on-Don: Iuzhnyi Nauchnyi Tsentr Rossiiskoi Akademii Nauk (in Russian).

^ Morozova, O. M. (2007). "Antropologiia grazhdanskoi voiny".

Rostov-on-Don: Iuzhnyi Nauchnyi Tsentr RAN (in Russian).

^ Acton 1997 , pp. 6–7.

^ a b Acton 1997 , pp. 4–13.

^ a b c d Mawdsley, Evan (2011).

The Russian Civil War . Birlinn.

ISBN 9780857901231 .

^ Acton 1997 , pp. 7–9.

^ Francis, Norbert.

"Revolution in Russia and China: 100 Years" (PDF) .

International Journal of Russian Studies .

6 (July 2017): 130– 143.

^ Hanson, Stephen E. (1997).

Time and Revolution: Marxism and the Design of Soviet Institutions . University of North Carolina Press. p.

130 .

ISBN 978-0-8078-4615-5 .

^ Suny, Ronald Grigor (2017).

Red Flag Unfurled: History, Historians and the Russian Revolution . Verso Books.

^ Litvin 2001 , p. 47.

^ Berger, Hanno (20 September 2022).

Thinking Revolution Through Film: On Audiovisual Stagings of Political Change . Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG. pp.

123– 130.

ISBN 978-3-1107-5470-4 .

^ Ivanov, Mikhail (2007).

Survival Russian . Montpelier, VT: Russian Life Books. p. 44.

ISBN 978-1-8801-0056-1 .

OCLC 191856309 .

^ Thorpe, Charles (28 February 2022).

Sociology in Post-Normal Times . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-1-7936-2598-4 .

Sources [ edit ] Acton, Edward (1997).

Critical Companion to the Russian Revolution .

Beckett, Ian F. W. (2007).

The Great war (2 ed.). Longman.

ISBN 978-1-4058-1252-8 .

Bunyan, James; Fisher, Harold Henry (1934).

The Bolshevik Revolution, 1917–1918: Documents and Materials . Palo Alto: Stanford University Press .

OCLC 253483096 .

Figes, Orlando (1996).

A People's Tragedy: The Russian Revolution: 1891–1924 . Pimlico.

ISBN 978-0-8050-9131-1 .

Mandel, David (1984).

The Petrograd Workers and the Soviet Seizure of Power :From the July Days, 1917 to July 1918 . New York: St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 978-0-3126-0395-3 .

OCLC 9682585 .

OL 3171762M .

Pipes, Richard (1997).

Three "whys" of the Russian Revolution .

Vintage Books .

ISBN 978-0-6797-7646-8 .

Rabinowitch, Alexander (2004).

The Bolsheviks Come to Power: The Revolution of 1917 in Petrograd .

Pluto Press .

ISBN 978-0-7453-2268-1 .

Reed, John (1997) [1919].

Ten Days that Shook the World . New York: St. Martin's Press.

Service, Robert (1998).

A history of twentieth-century Russia . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 0-6744-0347-9 .

Shukman, Harold , ed. (1994).

The Blackwell Encyclopedia of the Russian Revolution . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-0-6311-9525-2 .

Trotsky, Leon (1932) [1930].

The History of the Russian Revolution . Vol. III: The Triumph of the Soviets. Translated by Eastman, Max . London: Gollancz .

OCLC 605191028 .

Wade, Rex A. "The Revolution at One Hundred: Issues and Trends in the English Language Historiography of the Russian Revolution of 1917." Journal of Modern Russian History and Historiography 9.1 (2016): 9–38.

doi : 10.1163/22102388-00900003 Further reading [ edit ] Ascher, Abraham (2014).

The Russian Revolution: A Beginner's Guide . Oneworld Publications.

Bone, Ann (trans.) (1974).

The Bolsheviks and the October Revolution: Central Committee Minutes of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks) August 1917 – February 1918 . Pluto Press.

ISBN 0-9028-1854-6 .

Chamberlin, William Henry (1935).

The Russian Revolution . Vol. I: 1917–1918: From the Overthrow of the Tsar to the Assumption of Power by the Bolsheviks.

online vol 1 ; also online vol 2 Guerman, Mikhail (1979).

Art of the October Revolution .

Kollontai, Alexandra (1971).

"The Years of Revolution" .

The Autobiography of a Sexually Emancipated Communist Woman . New York: Herder and Herder .

OCLC 577690073 .

Krupskaya, Nadezhda (1930).

"The October Days" .

Reminiscences of Lenin . Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House .

OCLC 847091253 .

Luxemburg, Rosa (1940) [1918].

The Russian Revolution . Translated by Bertram Wolfe . New York City: Workers Age.

OCLC 579589928 .

Radek, Karl (1995) [First published 1922 as "Wege der Russischen Revolution"].

"The Paths of the Russian Revolution" . In Bukharin, Nikolai ; Richardson, Al (eds.).

In Defence of the Russian Revolution: A Selection of Bolshevik Writings, 1917–1923 . London: Porcupine Press. pp.

35– 75.

ISBN 1-8994-3801-7 .

OCLC 33294798 .

Read, Christopher (1996).

From Tsars to Soviets .

Serge, Victor (1972) [1930].

Year One of the Russian Revolution . London: Penguin Press .

OCLC 15612072 .

Swain, Geoffrey (2014).

Trotsky and the Russian Revolution . Routledge.

Trotsky, Leon (1930).

"XXVI: From July to October" .

My Life . London: Thornton Butterworth.

OCLC 181719733 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to October Revolution .

free books on Russian Revolution Read, Christopher: Revolutions (Russian Empire) , in: 1914–1918 online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War .

Peeling, Siobhan: July Crisis 1917 (Russian Empire) , in: 1914–1918 online. International Encyclopedia of the First World War .

The October Revolution Archive Let History Judge Russia's Revolutions , commentary by Roy Medvedev , Project Syndicate , 2007 October Revolution and Logic of History Maps of Europe Archived 16 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine and Russia Archived 21 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine at time of October Revolution at omniatlas.com How the Bolshevik party elite crushed the democratically elected workers and popular councils – soviets – and established totalitarian state capitalism .

v t e Annual Great October Socialist Revolution Parade By year 1941 1957 1963 1967 1972 1975 1976 1977 1981 1987 1988 1989 1990 Related October Revolution Day List of October Revolution Parades in Moscow Moscow Victory Day Parade Participating units Corps of Drums of the Moscow Military Music College Military Band Service of the Armed Forces of the Soviet Union Frunze Military Academy V.I.

Lenin Military-Political Academy Felix Dzerzhinsky Artillery Academy Military Armored Forces Academy Marshal Rodion Malinovsky Military Engineering Academy Military Academy of Chemical Defense and Control Yuri Gagarin Air Force Academy Zhukovsky Air Force Engineering Academy Naval Engineering School Moscow Border Guards Institute of the Border Defence Forces of the KGB "Moscow City Council 98th Guards Airborne Division OMSDON 336th Marine Regiment of the Baltic Fleet Suvorov Military School Nakhimov Naval School Moscow Military High Command Training School "Supreme Soviet of the Russian SFSR 2nd Guards Motor Rifle Division 4th Guards Tank Division 27th Guards Rocket Army v t e 1917 Bolshevik uprisings November 1917 Petrograd (7 November) Moscow (7–15 November) Kiev (8–13 November) Tashkent (10–14 November) Vinnytsia (10–12 November) v t e Russian Revolution and Civil War Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War Events Revolution February Revolution July Days Kornilov affair October Revolution Kerensky–Krasnov uprising Junker mutiny Civil War Russian Civil War Red Terror (Outline) Ukrainian War of Independence Ukrainian–Soviet War Kiev Bolshevik Uprising Polish–Ukrainian War Finnish Civil War Finnish Socialist Workers' Republic Heimosodat Polish–Soviet War Estonian War of Independence Latvian War of Independence Lithuanian Wars of Independence Red Army invasion of Georgia Armenian–Azerbaijani war (1918–1920) Left SR uprising Tambov Rebellion Workers' Opposition Kronstadt rebellion Interventions Allied Central Powers Siberian Groups Provisional Committee of the State Duma Russian Provisional Government White movement Pro-independence movements Mossoviet Petrograd Soviet All-Russian Central Executive Committee First All-Russian Congress Second All-Russian Congress Third All-Russian Congress Council of the People's Commissars Red Army Military Revolutionary Committee Petrograd MRC Moscow MRC Russian Constituent Assembly elections Black Guards Revolutionary Insurgent Army of Ukraine Green armies Red Guards Group of forces in battle with the counterrevolution in the South of Russia Tsentralna Rada Ukrainian People's Republic Parties Kadets Nabat Russian Social Democratic Labour Party Bolsheviks Mensheviks Socialist Revolutionary Party Left SRs Union of October 17 General Jewish Labour Bund Figures Monarchists Nicholas II of Russia Nikolai Golitsyn Provisional Government Georgy Lvov Alexander Kerensky Pavel Milyukov Alexander Guchkov White movement Pyotr Wrangel Alexander Kolchak Anton Denikin Pyotr Krasnov Nikolai Yudenich Lavr Kornilov Bolsheviks Vladimir Lenin Lev Kamenev Grigory Zinoviev Leon Trotsky Mikhail Frunze Joseph Stalin Semyon Budyonny Yakov Sverdlov Nikolai Bukharin Felix Dzerzhinsky Alexei Rykov Right SRs Viktor Chernov Alexander Kerensky Boris Savinkov Boris Sokoloff Left SRs Yakov Blumkin Boris Kamkov Mark Natanson Maria Spiridonova Alexander Antonov Anarchists Nestor Makhno Maria Nikiforova Stepan Petrichenko Lev Chernyi Semen Karetnyk Fedir Shchus Viktor Bilash Fanya Baron Peter Kropotkin International Revolutions of 1917–1923 German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic Hungarian Soviet Republic Hungarian–Romanian War Workers' Councils in Poland Polish–Ukrainian War Polish–Soviet War Slovak Soviet Republic Belarusian-Soviet conflict v t e Soviet Union topics Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War Bibliography of Stalinism and the Soviet Union Bibliography of the Post Stalinist Soviet Union History Index of Soviet Union–related articles Outline Russian Revolution February October Russian Civil War Russian SFSR Creation treaty New Economic Policy Stalinism Great Purge Great Patriotic War (World War II) Evacuation The Holocaust Cold War Khrushchev thaw Sino-Soviet split Soviet space program Caribbean Crisis Stagnation Soviet–Afghan War Perestroika Glasnost Chernobyl disaster Revolutions of 1989 August Coup Parade of sovereignties Dissolution Transition period and cessation of the existence Succession, continuity and legacy Post-Soviet states Nostalgia Geography Subdivisions Republics Autonomous Krais Oblasts Autonomous Autonomous okrugs Closed city Regions Baltic States Caspian Sea Caucasus Mountains Central Asia Crimea European Russia North Caucasus Russian Far East Siberia Transcaucasia Ural Mountains Volga Region West Siberian Plain Politics General Conscription Constitution 1924 1936 1977 Elections Foreign relations Brezhnev Doctrine Gun control Government List Ministries State Committees Human rights LGBT Law Capital punishment Leaders Collective leadership National delimitation Passport system Propiska Political parties State ideology Marxism–Leninism Leninism Stalinism Soviet anti-Zionism Bodies Communist Party organisation Congress Central Committee Presidium/Politburo Secretariat General Secretary Congress of Soviets (1922–1936) Supreme Soviet (1938–1991) Congress of People's Deputies (1989–1991) Supreme Court Military Collegium All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions Creative unions Offices Heads of state President Premier Deputy Premier First Deputy Premier Security services Cheka GPU NKVD Destruction battalions MVD Militsiya MGB KGB Chairmen Soviet Border Troops Soviet Armed Forces Soviet Army / Spetsnaz GRU • Soviet Navy • Soviet Air Forces / Soviet Airborne Forces Political repression Red Terror Collectivization Great Purge Population transfer Forced labor Foreign forced labor POW labor Gulag List Holodomor Political abuse of psychiatry Anti-abuse struggle War crimes Atrocities against prisoners of war Ideological repression Persecution of Christians Eastern Catholics Science Censorship Censorship of images Economy Agriculture Banking Central Bank State Labor Savings Banks System Economic planning Energy policy Enterprises Five-year plans Industrialization Internet domain Inventions Net material product OGAS Economic reforms 1956–1962 Wage reform 1957 1965 1973 1979 Rouble (currency) Monetary reforms 1947 1961 1991 Automotive industry Construction Transport Ministry of Railways Railway system Rail transport Railway electrification List of metro systems Vehicle registration plates Science Communist Academy Cybernetics Academy of Sciences Academy of Medical Sciences Lenin All-Union Academy of Agricultural Sciences Sharashkas Naukograds List Society Antisemitism Crime Demographics Soviet people Working class 1989 census Drug policy Ethnic conflicts Family Languages Linguistics Cyrillisation Prohibition Racism Culture Ballet Cinema Fashion Literature Music Opera Phraseology Printed media Propaganda Publishing houses Religion Islam Sports Stalinist architecture Broadcasting Radio Television Opposition Anti-Soviet agitation Soviet dissidents and their groups List Symbols Anthem Republics Emblem Republics Flag Republics Hammer and sickle Soviet Union portal Category Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐8qj7m
Cached time: 20250817043608
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.474 seconds
Real time usage: 1.745 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10007/1000000
Revision size: 84007/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 389571/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14514/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 32/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 371375/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.906/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21843439/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1395.711      1 -total
 32.48%  453.386      2 Template:Reflist
 25.05%  349.677     57 Template:Cite_book
 11.83%  165.162      3 Template:Efn
  6.49%   90.529     20 Template:Sfn
  6.28%   87.649      2 Template:Langx
  6.25%   87.233      1 Template:Infobox_military_conflict
  5.34%   74.541      2 Template:Campaignbox
  5.29%   73.777      1 Template:Campaignbox_Russian_Revolution
  4.96%   69.253      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:22661:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043608 and revision id 1304282062. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=October_Revolution&oldid=1304282062 " Categories : 1910s coups d'état and coup attempts 1917 in Russia Bolshevik uprisings Communist revolutions Dissolution of the Russian Empire November 1917 in Europe Russian Provisional Government Russian Revolution Russian Revolution in Petrograd October Revolution Hidden categories: Articles containing Russian-language text Pages with Russian IPA Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2024 CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2022 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles with unsourced statements from February 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2019 Articles needing additional references from November 2018 All articles needing additional references CS1: long volume value Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 02:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents October Revolution 106 languages Add topic

