Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Breeds and capabilities used in hunting 2 Gallery 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Hunting dog 49 languages Ænglisc العربية Asturianu Català Чӑвашла Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Furlan Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Igbo Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Seediq Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Tyap Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Functional type of dog For other uses, see Hunting dog (disambiguation) .

Hunting dog Black Labrador Retriever standing in cornfield while pheasant hunting in South Dakota.

A hunting dog is a dog that hunts with or for hunters . There are several different types of hunting dog developed for various tasks and purposes. The major categories of hunting dog include hounds , terriers , cur type dogs, and gun dogs . Further distinctions within these categories can be made, based upon the dog's skills and capabilities. They are usually larger and have a more sensitive smell than normal dogs.

Breeds and capabilities used in hunting [ edit ] For a list of breeds of each type, see the detailed articles for each category: Main category Subcategory Example Summary Hounds Hounds are further divided into sighthounds and scenthounds depending upon the primary sense used to locate quarry. Many mammals such as jackrabbits , raccoons , coyotes , deer , and other large predators are hunted with hounds.

Sighthounds Whippet Sighthounds are tall and lean running hounds, adapted for visual acuity and speed. Their method of hunting is called coursing , where prey is sighted from a distance, chased, and caught.

[ 1 ] : 36, 102 Scenthounds Redbone Coonhound Scenthounds are hounds that primarily hunt by scent . Scenthounds are used to trail and sometimes kill game. They hunt in packs, leading the hunters on a chase that may end in the quarry being chased into a tree or killed. Some of these breeds have deep, booming barks and use them when following a scent trail .

Lurchers Lurcher A Lurcher is a sighthound crossed with a working dog breed—usually a pastoral dog or terrier bred selected for working.

Gun dogs Gun dogs are used primarily by small game hunters using shotguns . Gun dogs are classified as retrievers , spaniels , and pointing breeds .

Retrievers Chesapeake Bay Retriever Once classified as a water spaniel, a retriever's primary role is to find and return shot game to the hunter. Retrievers can spend long hours in a duck blind and visually spot and remember the location of downed birds. Upon command, they retrieve the birds. They may be able to follow hand, verbal, and whistle commands to the downed bird. They typically have large, gentle muzzles.

Setters English Setter Setters have a long history as upland gun dogs. They appear to have an innate ability to locate and point at upland game birds. They flush the birds at the hunter's command.

Spaniels English Cocker Spaniel Spaniels have been used as hunting dogs. Flushing spaniels are used to locate and flush game for a hunter.

Pointers German Shorthaired Pointer Pointers are dogs trained to locate and point at small game, allowing the hunter to approach and flush the game. Pointing breeds have greater range than spaniels.

Water dogs Poodle Water dogs are a subclass of retrievers. Typically, they are strong swimmers with great stamina, bred to hunt all manner of waterfowl.

Curs Catahoula Leopard Dog Curs hunt similarly to terriers, though usually larger game. Curs are used to hunt raccoons , as well as feral pigs , cougars and other large mammals.

Dachshund Dachshund The standard dachshund was bred to scent, chase, and flush out badgers, foxes, and other burrow-dwelling animals, while the miniature dachshund was developed to hunt smaller prey such as rabbits . In the American West, they have also been used to hunt prairie dogs . In Europe, dachshunds are widely used for hunting deer , boar , and smaller game such as rabbits and hares . They are also excellent scent dogs and are often used to track down wounded animals after car accidents, for example. The dachshund is also the only breed of dog to hunt both above and below ground.

Feists Feist Feists are small dogs that hunt small game, especially squirrels , in a similar manner to large hounds hunting raccoons and large game. Feists may hunt in packs and "bark up"  trees to alert the hunter.

Laikas Karelian Bear Dog Laikas are hunting dogs from northern Russia , with origins in Siberia . Laika breeds are primitive dogs that flourish with minimal care even in hostile weather and hunt in a variety of styles depending on the size of the game: they tree small game, point and bay larger game, and work in teams to corner bear and boar.

[ 2 ] Several other Spitz-type dogs , such as the Norwegian Elkhound, Shiba Inu, and Taiwan Dog are also used for hunting.

Terriers Lakeland Terrier Terriers are used to hunt small mammals , such as rats . Terriers locate the den or set of the target animal and then bolt, capture, or kill the animal. A working terrier may go underground to kill or drive out game. Hunters who use terriers are referred to as terriermen. Larger members of this type, such those of the bull and terrier family, are sometimes used to hunt larger game, like razorbacks : the hunter will send in scenthounds to corner the pig, and the more heavily built catch dog will charge at it, bite it, and hold it down until the hunter can come and kill it.

Gallery [ edit ] Wolf hunt depicted in a 12th-century bestiary Medieval women hunting, illustration from a period manuscript Hunting Dog by Li Di , 12th-century Chinese painting Boar hunting, tacuinum sanitatis casanatensis (14th century) Hunting the hart (16th Century) from Turbervile , copied from Jaques du Fouilloux.

Filas Brasileiros hunting a jaguar .

See also [ edit ] Canes Venatici – Constellation in the northern celestial hemisphere, hunting dogs constellation Wolf hunting with dogs – Method of wolf hunting Working dog – Dog trained to perform practical tasks Dogs portal Key Underwood Coon Dog Memorial Graveyard References [ edit ] ^ Fogle, Bruce (2000) [1995].

The Encyclopedia of the Dog .

Dorling Kindersley .

ISBN 0-7513-0471-9 .

^ Bergovoy, Vladimir.

"HUNTING WITH LAIKA" .

Hunting Laika of Russia .

Archived from the original on 2021-08-31.

Further reading [ edit ] Deeley, Martin. "Working Gundogs: An Introduction to Training and Handling. (1990, reprinted 2002) The Crowood Press.

ISBN 1-85223-764-3 .

Fergus, Charles.

Gun Dog Breeds, A Guide to Spaniels, Retrievers, and Pointing Dogs , The Lyons Press, 2002.

ISBN 1-58574-618-5 Roettger, Anthony Z. and Schleider, Benjamin H. III. (2004) Urban Gun Dogs: Training flushing dogs for home and field. The Writer's Collective.

ISBN 1-59411-050-6 v t e Dogs Types African village dog Free-ranging dog Pye-dog Street dog Hairless dog Herding dog Collie Livestock guardian dog Sheep dog Hunting dog Cur Feist Lurcher Gun dog Pointer Retriever Setter Spaniel Water dog Hound Scenthound Basset Coonhound Foxhound Sighthound Longdog Terrier Bull-type terrier Pinscher Schnauzer Mastiff Bulldog Spitz Husky Laika Tugou Toy dog Bichon Turnspit dog Breeds List of breeds List of crossbreeds Mixed-breed dog Crossbreed Extinct breeds Most popular Roles Assistance dog Autism dog Guide dog Hearing dog Medical response dog Seizure dog Mobility assistance dog Therapy dog Psychiatric assistance dog Attack dog Bay dog Carriage dog Catch dog Companion dog Detection dog Fighting dog Guard dog Lap dog Meat dog Mercy dog Police dog usage by country Search and rescue dog Sled dog War dog Behavior Communication Barking Body language Howling Intelligence Dog–cat relationship Human–dog interaction Animal testing Baiting Breed-specific legislation Cynanthropy Dog bite Dog beach Dog daycare Dog fighting Dog food dog biscuit 2007 recalls Dog grooming Dogs in religion Dogs in space Dog licence Dog meat Dog park Dog show Dog theft Dog sports Dog walking Fear of dogs Human–canine bond Origin of the domestic dog Therapy Health Aging ( List of longest-living dogs ) Anatomy Breeding Coat Conformation Diseases Dog food Odor Rabies in animals Rage syndrome Reproduction Skin disorders Vaccination Training Clicker Crate training Housebreaking Socialization Related Domesticated silver fox List of individual dogs List of fictional dogs Lists of dogs Category Portal v t e Working animals Dog Assistance Detection Drafting Guard Guide Herding Hunting Livestock guardian Mercy Military working Police Search and rescue Sled Therapy Working Horse Draft Driving Guide Municipal Packhorse Pit pony Riding Stock Other species Asian elephant Bali cattle Camel Bactrian Dromedary Donkey Gayal Llama Mule Ox Reindeer Truffle hog Water buffalo Working rat Yak Related topics Human uses of animals Domestication list Livestock Military animal Pack animal Service animal Category:Working animals Commons images Authority control databases : National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hunting_dog&oldid=1304137741 " Categories : Dog roles Hunting dogs Working dogs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles using infobox templates with no data rows This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 06:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hunting dog 49 languages Add topic

