Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Trump's 2012 accusations of electoral fraud 1.2 Uncertainty over Trump accepting an electoral loss in 2016 1.3 Uncertainty over Trump accepting an electoral loss in 2020 2 Refusal to accept 2020 electoral loss Toggle Refusal to accept 2020 electoral loss subsection 2.1 Refusal to accept 2020 electoral loss by Donald Trump 2.1.1 Before results declared 2.1.2 After results declared 2.1.3 After leaving office 2.2 Refusal to accept 2020 electoral loss by Trump's allies and supporters 2.2.1 Stop the Steal 2.2.2 Conspiracy theories 3 November 2020 Toggle November 2020 subsection 3.1 "Fake" electors 3.2 Lame duck firings and hirings 3.3 Lawsuits 3.4 Michigan officials pressured to not certify 3.5 Attempt to seize voting machines in Michigan 3.6 Georgia Secretary of State pressured to disqualify ballots 3.7 Wisconsin recount-obstruction 3.8 Partisan hearings with Republican legislatures 3.9 Conspiracy allegations 3.10 Threats of violence by Trump supporters 4 December 2020 Toggle December 2020 subsection 4.1 Trump's attempt to pressure state officials 4.2 Supreme Court petitions 4.3 Consideration of special counsel and martial law 4.4 Planning for Congress to overturn the election on January 6 4.5 Pressure on Pence 4.5.1 "Pence card" theory 4.5.2 December timeline 4.6 Pressure on Justice Department 4.7 Pressure on Defense Department 4.8 Plan to seize voting machines 4.9 Ellis memos 4.10 Plan to obtain National Security Agency data 5 January 2021 Toggle January 2021 subsection 5.1 Gohmert v. Pence 5.2 Calls with state officials 5.3 Justice Department pressured and efforts made to replace acting attorney general 5.4 Preparations by chief of staff 5.5 More pressure on Pence 5.6 January 6 joint session 5.6.1 Senate efforts 5.6.2 House votes 5.6.3 Report by Rep. Zoe Lofgren 5.7 Capitol attack 5.8 Trump operatives breach Coffee County, Georgia election system 5.9 Lindell memo 6 Later developments Toggle Later developments subsection 6.1 Taxpayer costs 6.2 Security concerns over March 4, 2021 6.3 Election audits 6.3.1 Arizona 6.3.2 Georgia 6.3.3 Idaho 6.3.4 Pennsylvania 6.3.5 Texas 6.3.6 Wisconsin 6.4 Mike Lindell reinstatement prediction 6.5 Senate Judiciary Committee report 6.6 Election law reform efforts 6.7 Post-election voter restriction efforts by Republicans 6.8 Impact on secretaries of state 6.9 House Select Committee on the January 6 Attack 6.10 2021 German federal election 6.11 Justice Department investigations 6.12 Civil lawsuits 6.13 Continuing subversion efforts and 2024 predictions 6.14 Post-election allegations of statistical improbabilities 7 Reactions Toggle Reactions subsection 7.1 Republican critiques of the "big lie" 7.1.1 Administration dissenters 7.1.2 Consistent critics 7.1.3 Others 7.2 Description as attempted coup 7.2.1 Before the Capitol attack 7.2.2 During or after the Capitol attack 7.3 "Trump won" and "big lie" 7.4 Corporate reactions 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Attempts to overturn the 2020 United States presidential election 10 languages العربية فارسی Français 한국어 עברית Português Русский Simple English Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American political event This article may be too long to read and navigate comfortably .  When this tag was added, its readable prose size was 20,916 words.

Consider splitting content into sub-articles, condensing it, or adding subheadings . Please discuss this issue on the article's talk page .

( July 2025 ) Attempts to overturn the 2020 United States presidential election Part of the first presidency of Donald Trump , transition of Joe Biden , democratic backsliding in the United States The electoral map for the 2020 election. Blue denotes the 306 electoral votes for Biden, while red denotes the 232 electoral votes for Trump.

Date Main phase: November 4, 2020 [ 1 ] – January 7, 2021 (2 months and 3 days) Later developments: January 7, 2021 [ 2 ] – January 20, 2025 (4 years, 1 week and 6 days) Location Nationwide, especially in Pennsylvania , Georgia , Michigan , Wisconsin , Arizona , Nevada , New Mexico , and Washington, D.C.

Caused by Fabricated claims of electoral fraud by Donald Trump [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Goals To overturn the results of the 2020 United States presidential election and install Donald Trump as president.

Methods Big lie Legal challenges Conspiracy (according to federal indictment) Racketeering (according to Georgia indictment) Resulted in Failure to overturn election, Joe Biden inaugurated .

January 6 United States Capitol attack Second impeachment of Donald Trump Republican efforts to restrict voting Third indictment of Donald Trump Fourth indictment of Donald Trump Casualties Charged Donald Trump , Mark Meadows , Rudy Giuliani , Jenna Ellis , Sidney Powell , January 6 rioters 2020 U.S. presidential election Timeline 2017–2019 January–October 2020 November 2020 – January 2021 Presidential debates Parties Polling national statewide News media endorsements primary general Fundraising Russian interference Presidential electors Electoral College vote count Presidential transition Subsequent voting restrictions Attempts to overturn Protests inauguration week Lawsuits pre-election post-election Texas v. Pennsylvania Fake electors plot Chesebro memos Eastman memos Jeffrey Clark letter January 6 Capitol attack timeline reactions domestic international aftermath Democratic Party Primaries timeline Candidates Debates Forums Results Positions Polling national statewide Endorsements Nominee VP candidate selection Convention automatic delegates Republican Party Primaries Debates Results Polling Endorsements Nominee Convention Reactions to Trump's fraud claims Third parties Libertarian Party primaries convention nominee Green Party primaries debates results convention nominee Third-party and independent candidates Related races Senate House Governors ← 2016 2020 2024 → v t e January 6 United States Capitol attack Timeline • Planning Background 2020 presidential election and other causes Previous claims of election fraud by President Trump in 2012 in 2016 Republican reactions Michigan State Capitol storming 2020–21 presidential election protests 2021 Electoral College vote count Attempts to overturn the presidential election Trump fake electors plot Chesebro memos Eastman memos Jeffrey Clark letter Democratic backsliding in the US Social media use by Donald Trump Trumpism QAnon Donald Trump and fascism Related groups and persons Ali Alexander Ray Epps Nick Fuentes Rudy Giuliani Jericho March Alex Jones Sedition Caucus Enrique Tarrio Donald Trump Donald Trump Jr.

Participants Notable people Ashli Babbitt Joe Biggs Richard Barnett Jacob "QAnon Shaman" Chansley Derrick Evans Tim "Baked Alaska" Gionet Simone Gold Klete Keller Ethan Nordean Rick Saccone Jon Schaffer John Earle Sullivan Organizations Boogaloo movement Groypers Oath Keepers Proud Boys Three Percenters Law enforcement response Capitol Police Harry Dunn Aquilino Gonell Eugene Goodman Brian Sicknick Howard Liebengood Steven Sund Department of Defense Michael C. Stenger Paul D. Irving Christopher C. Miller Ryan D. McCarthy Walter E. Piatt Charles A. Flynn Daniel Hokanson William J. Walker D.C. National Guard DC Muriel Bowser Robert Contee Michael Fanone Daniel Hodges Jeffrey L. Smith Virginia Ralph Northam Aftermath Biden inauguration 2021 inauguration week protests Security preparations Investigations and charges Justice Department investigation Criminal proceedings list Fischer v. United States January 6 commission House Select Committee public hearings Smith special counsel investigation federal prosecution of Donald Trump Trump's pardon of defendants Corporate actions List of companies that halted political contributions Social media suspensions of Donald Trump permanent suspension Suspensions of other social media accounts shutdown of Parler Facebook Reactions Domestic Antifa culpability conspiracy theory International Impeachment and 2024 presidential election Second impeachment of Donald Trump trial Presidential eligibility of Donald Trump Trump v. Anderson v t e This article is part of a series about Donald Trump Business and personal Age and health Business career The Trump Organization wealth tax returns cryptocurrency Conspiracy theories Endorsements Eponyms Family Foundation grants American football Golf Honors John McCain comments Legal affairs indictments Media career The Apprentice bibliography filmography Nicknames Voters Obama–Trump voters Sanders–Trump voters Public image in popular culture in music SNL parodies baby balloon dance handshakes pseudonyms Racial views antisemitism Religious views Residences Rhetoric Security incidents Sexual misconduct allegations Epstein ties Trump–Musk feud 45th and 47th President of the United States Presidencies first second timeline Transitions first second Inaugurations first second Portraits Presidential library Tenure First 100 days first term second term Executive actions executive orders first term second term proclamations pardons first term second term Trips foreign first term '17 '18 '19 '20–'21 Riyadh summit North Korea summits Singapore Hanoi DMZ Helsinki summit Namaste Trump second term '25 Middle East visit Shutdowns January 2018 2018–2019 Opinion polls first term second term Legal affairs as president first term second term Protests federal law enforcement deployment St. John's Church photo op No Kings Social media Twitter False or misleading statements Trumpism TikTok controversy American Civil War Attempts to overturn the 2020 presidential election fake electors plot Eastman memos lawsuits Texas v. Pennsylvania Jeffrey Clark letter Fascism Mar-a-Lago face Policies Domestic first term second term Economy first term tax cuts tariffs USMCA farmer bailouts second term One Big Beautiful Bill Act tariffs China Canada and Mexico Liberation Day TACO Environment Paris Agreement withdrawal America's Water Infrastructure Act of 2018 Foreign policy first term Syria strikes 2017 2018 Kosovo–Serbia agreements second term Russian invasion of Ukraine Putin call Saudi Arabia summit Zelenskyy Oval Office meeting minerals agreement peace talks Putin summit in Alaska Armenia–Azerbaijan agreement America First Saudi Arabia arms deal Iran first term nuclear deal withdrawal second term Iran negotiations Iran–Israel war June 2025 strikes Iran–Israel war ceasefire Israel Jerusalem recognition Golan Heights recognition Palestine peace plan Abraham Accords Killings al-Baghdadi Soleimani Afghanistan withdrawal Taliban deal American expansionism Proposed Venezuela invasion Immigration first term second term travel ban border wall family separation policy migrant detentions troop deployments national emergency Infrastructure Social issues First Step Act cannabis Space COVID-19 pandemic Taskforce Communication Government response stimulus bills CARES Act Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 Operation Warp Speed Interference with science agencies Targeting of political opponents and civil society AI Appointments ( first second ) Cabinets first second Ambassadors first second Federal judges inferior courts Supreme Court candidates Gorsuch Kavanaugh Barrett Executives first second U.S. Attorneys first second Presidential campaigns 2000 primaries 2016 election primaries endorsements rallies Las Vegas incident convention debates foreign policy Make America Great Again Never Trump movement people Access Hollywood tape wiretapping allegations Spygate 2020 election primaries endorsements political non-political opposition rallies convention debates GOP reactions to election fraud claims Raffensperger phone call 2024 election primaries endorsements opposition eligibility Agenda 47 rallies convention debates assassination attempts PA perpetrator photographs FL suspect Impeachments Efforts to impeach Donald Trump resolutions First impeachment Zelenskyy phone call Ukraine scandal House inquiry Senate trial Second impeachment Capitol attack Senate trial Proposed expungements Legal proceedings 2020 election federal indictment Classified documents federal indictment Special counsel investigation FBI investigation FBI search of Mar-a-Lago Trump v. United States New York felony conviction for falsifying business records Stormy Daniels scandal New York investigations Georgia election indictment Georgia election investigation mug shot v t e After Democratic nominee Joe Biden won the 2020 United States presidential election , [ 6 ] Republican nominee and then-incumbent president Donald Trump pursued an unprecedented [ 7 ] [ 8 ] effort to overturn the election, [ a ] with support from his campaign , proxies, political allies, and many of his supporters. These efforts culminated in the January 6 Capitol attack by Trump supporters in an attempted self-coup d'état .

[ 20 ] Trump and his allies used the " big lie " propaganda technique to promote false claims and conspiracy theories asserting that the election was stolen by means of rigged voting machines , electoral fraud and an international conspiracy.

[ b ] Trump pressed Department of Justice leaders to challenge the results and publicly state the election was corrupt.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] However, the attorney general , director of national intelligence , and director of the cybersecurity and infrastructure security agency – as well as some Trump campaign staff – dismissed these claims. State and federal judges, election officials, and state governors also determined the claims to be baseless.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] Trump loyalists, including Chief of Staff Mark Meadows , personal lawyer Rudy Giuliani , and several Republican lawmakers attempted to keep Trump in power. At the state level, they targeted legislatures with the intent of changing the results or delaying electoral vote certification at the Capitol.

[ 37 ] Nationally, they promoted the idea Vice President Mike Pence could refuse to certify the results on January 6, 2021. Pence repeatedly stated the Vice President has no such authority [ 38 ] [ 39 ] and verified Biden and Harris as the winners. Hundreds of other elected Republicans, including members of Congress and governors, refused to acknowledge Biden's victory, [ 40 ] though a growing number acknowledged it over time.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] Trump's legal team sought to bring a case before the Supreme Court , but none of the 63 lawsuits they filed were successful.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] They pinned their hopes on Texas v. Pennsylvania , but on December 11, 2020, the Supreme Court declined to hear the case.

[ 48 ] Afterward, Trump considered ways to remain in power, including military intervention, seizing voting machines, and another appeal to the Supreme Court.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] In June 2022, the House Select Committee on the January 6 Attack said it had enough evidence to recommend that the Department of Justice indict Trump, [ 52 ] and on December 19, the committee formally made the criminal referral to the Justice Department.

[ 53 ] On August 1, 2023, Trump was indicted by a D.C.

grand jury for conspiracy to defraud the United States , obstructing an official proceeding , conspiracy to obstruct an official proceeding, and conspiracy against rights ; [ 54 ] he pleaded not guilty to all charges.

[ 55 ] On August 14, Trump and 18 co-defendants were indicted in Fulton County, Georgia , for their efforts to overturn the election results in that state.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] Ten leaders of the far-right Proud Boys and Oath Keepers groups have been convicted of seditious conspiracy for their roles in the Capitol attack.

[ 58 ] Trump continues to insist the election was stolen, [ 59 ] telling a group of historians in mid-2021 that the election was "rigged and lost", [ 60 ] stating in 2022 that he should be declared president or a new election held "immediately".

[ 61 ] As late as 2022, Trump supporters continued their attempts to overturn the election, pushing for state legislature resolutions and new lawsuits, raising concerns among legal experts that public confidence in democracy is being undermined to lay the groundwork for baselessly challenging future elections.

[ 62 ] Background See also: Presidential Advisory Commission on Election Integrity and Election denial movement in the United States Trump's 2012 accusations of electoral fraud Main article: Election denial movement in the United States § President In the aftermath of the 2012 presidential election , in which incumbent president Barack Obama won re-election against Mitt Romney , Donald Trump tweeted that "The electoral college is a disaster for a democracy", that the election was a "total sham ", and that the United States was "not a democracy".

[ 63 ] Uncertainty over Trump accepting an electoral loss in 2016 Main article: Donald Trump 2016 presidential campaign § Uncertainty over accepting the election results Trump at a campaign rally on October 20, 2016, stating, "I will totally accept the results of this great and historic presidential election, if I win" Trump repeatedly suggested that the election is "rigged" against him, and in the final debate he cast doubt on whether he would accept the results of the election should he lose, saying "I'll keep you in suspense".

[ 64 ] His comment touched off a media and political uproar, in which he was accused of "threatening to upend a fundamental pillar of American democracy" and "rais(ing) the prospect that millions of his supporters may not accept the results on Nov.

8 if he loses".

[ 65 ] Rick Hasen of University of California, Irvine School of Law , an election-law expert, described Trump's comments as "appalling and unprecedented" and feared there could be "violence in the streets from his supporters if Trump loses." [ 66 ] The next day Trump said, "Of course, I would accept a clear election result, but I would also reserve my right to contest or file a legal challenge in the case of a questionable result." He also stated that he would "totally" accept the election results "if I win." [ 67 ] Uncertainty over Trump accepting an electoral loss in 2020 Main article: Big lie § Donald Trump's false accusations of a stolen election See also: Presidential transition of Joe Biden § Preparations for potential disputed election During the 2020 campaign, Trump indicated in Twitter posts , interviews and speeches that he might refuse to recognize the outcome of the election if he were defeated and suggested that the election would be rigged against him.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] In July 2020, Trump declined to state whether he would accept the results, telling Fox News anchor Chris Wallace that "I have to see. No, I'm not going to just say yes. I'm not going to say no." [ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] Trump also proposed delaying the presidential election due to COVID-19 , until Americans could vote "properly, securely and safely".

[ 74 ] [ c ] Trump repeatedly claimed that if he lost the election, it was "rigged" against him and repeatedly refused to commit to a peaceful transition of power after the election.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Trump also criticized mail-in voting throughout the campaign, falsely claiming that the practice contained high rates of fraud.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] At one point, Trump said: "We'll see what happens...Get rid of the ballots and you'll have a very peaceful – there won't be a transfer, frankly. There will be a continuation." [ 80 ] Trump's statements have been described as a threat "to upend the constitutional order".

[ 81 ] In September 2020, Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Director Christopher A. Wray , a Trump appointee, testified under oath that the FBI has "not seen, historically, any kind of coordinated national voter fraud effort in a major election, whether it's by mail or otherwise".

[ 82 ] A number of congressional Republicans insisted that they were committed to an orderly and peaceful transition of power, but declined to criticize Trump for his comments.

[ 83 ] On September 24, the Senate unanimously passed a resolution affirming the Senate's commitment to a peaceful transfer of power.

[ 84 ] However, on October 8 Republican senator Mike Lee tweeted "We're not a democracy" and "Democracy isn't the objective; liberty, peace, and prospefity [ sic ] are. We want the human condition to flourish. Rank democracy can thwart that." [ 85 ] Trump also stated that he expected the U.S. Supreme Court to decide the election and that he wanted a conservative majority in the event of an election dispute, reiterating his commitment to quickly install a ninth justice following the death of Ruth Bader Ginsburg .

[ 86 ] Refusal to accept 2020 electoral loss See also: Timeline of the 2020 United States presidential election (November 2020–January 2021) § November 2020 Refusal to accept 2020 electoral loss by Donald Trump Before results declared CNN fact checker Daniel Dale reported that through June 9, 2021, Trump had issued 132 written statements since leaving office, of which "a third have included lies about the election", more than any other subject.

[ 87 ] To sow election doubt, Trump escalated use of "rigged election" and "election interference" statements in advance of the 2024 election compared to the previous two elections—the statements described as part of a "heads I win; tails you cheated" rhetorical strategy.

[ 88 ] At 2 am on Wednesday, November 4, 2020, with the election results still unclear, Trump held a press conference at the White House in which he stated: "This is a fraud on the American public. This is an embarrassment to our country. We were getting ready to win this election. Frankly, we did win this election." [ 89 ] The statement was condemned almost immediately. The statement was also described as having been months in the making.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] At 9 am on Thursday, November 5, 2020, Trump tweeted "STOP THE COUNT!" [ 92 ] However, at that time Biden was already leading in enough states such that stopping the count would have resulted in a Biden victory.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] After all major news organizations declared Biden the President-elect on November 7, [ 94 ] Trump refused to accept his loss, declaring "this election is far from over" and alleging election fraud without providing evidence.

[ 95 ] Privately, according to reporting by Maggie Haberman , he told one aide "I'm just not going to leave", and he told another aide, "We're never leaving. How can you leave when you won an election?" [ 96 ] After results declared In the months between the election and Inauguration Day (January 20), Trump engaged in multiple efforts to overturn the results. He filed numerous lawsuits, urged local and state authorities to overturn the results in their jurisdiction, pressed the Justice Department to verify unsupported claims of election fraud, and worked with congressional allies to overturn the results in Congress on January 6.

[ 97 ] He indicated that he would continue legal challenges in key states, [ 95 ] but all were dismissed by the courts.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] His legal team, led by Rudy Giuliani , made numerous false and unsubstantiated assertions revolving around an international communist conspiracy, rigged voting machines, and polling place fraud to claim that the election had been stolen from Trump.

[ 24 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ d ] Trump blocked government officials from cooperating in the presidential transition to Joe Biden .

[ 102 ] Attorney General William Barr authorized the Justice Department to initiate investigations "if there are clear and apparently credible allegations of irregularities that, if true, could potentially impact the outcome of a federal election in an individual state".

[ 103 ] Trump and his allies encouraged state officials to throw out ballots they thought were not legally cast, challenge vote-certification processes, and overturn certified election results.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] [ 106 ] In an early January 2021 phone call, he pressed the Georgia secretary of state to "find" the 11,780 votes needed to secure his victory in the state.

[ 107 ] He repeatedly urged Georgia Governor Brian Kemp to convene a special session of the legislature to overturn Biden's certified victory in the state, and he made a similar plea to the Pennsylvania Speaker of the House .

[ 19 ] [ 108 ] [ 109 ] [ 110 ] On a conference call, he asked 300 Republican state legislators to seek ways to reverse certified election results in their states.

[ 111 ] Republican officials in seven states, directed by Trump's personal attorney, created fraudulent electoral certificates of ascertainment to falsely assert Trump had been reelected.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] [ 114 ] By December 30, 2020, multiple Republican members of the House and Senate indicated they would try to force both chambers to debate whether to certify the Electoral College results.

[ 115 ] [ 116 ] [ 117 ] Mike Pence , who as vice president would preside over the proceedings, signaled his endorsement of the effort, stating on January 4, "I promise you, come this Wednesday, we will have our day in Congress". Additionally, Trump and some supporters promoted a false "Pence card" theory that, even if Congress were to certify the results, the vice president had the authority to reject them.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] [ 120 ] After leaving office Since leaving office, Trump has continued to insist that he won the 2020 election. He reportedly dislikes the term "former president", and his official statements refer to him as "the 45th President" or simply as "45", as on his new website, www.45office.com.

[ 121 ] During his public speeches, he insists that massive election fraud caused his loss, saying, "This was the scam of the century and this was the crime of the century" [ 122 ] and "We won the election twice [2016 and 2020] and it's possible we'll have to win it a third time [2024]." [ 123 ] In a September 2023 interview with Kristen Welker for NBC's Meet the Press , Trump said, regarding the attorneys who told him he lost the election, that he "didn't respect them as lawyers" but "did respect others" who told him he won. He said that, ultimately, his effort to overturn the election results "was my decision." He maintained: "I say I won the election." [ 124 ] Refusal to accept 2020 electoral loss by Trump's allies and supporters Stop the Steal Further information: 2020–21 United States election protests § Pro-Trump protests A protestor holding a "Stop the Steal" sign in St. Paul, Minnesota , on November 14, 2020 Stop the Steal is a far-right campaign and protest movement in the United States promoting the conspiracy theory [ 125 ] that widespread electoral fraud occurred during the 2020 presidential election . Trump and his supporters have asserted, without evidence, [ 126 ] [ 127 ] that he is the winner of the election, and that large-scale voter and vote counting fraud took place in several swing states .

[ 127 ] The Associated Press , ABC News , CBS News , CNN , Decision Desk HQ , NBC News , The New York Times , and Fox News projected Biden as the president-elect , having surpassed the 270 Electoral College votes needed to claim victory.

[ 6 ] [ 128 ] A New York Times survey of state election officials found no evidence of significant voting fraud, nor did the Justice Department , and dozens of lawsuits filed by Trump and his proxies to challenge voting results in several states failed.

[ 34 ] [ 129 ] [ 130 ] [ 131 ] "Stop the Steal" was created by Republican political operative Roger Stone in 2016, [ 132 ] in anticipation of potential future election losses that could be portrayed as stolen by alleged fraud. A Facebook group with that name was created during the 2020 counting of votes by pro-Trump group "Women for America First" co-founder and Tea Party movement activist Amy Kremer .

[ 133 ] Facebook removed the group on November 5, describing it as "organized around the delegitimization of the election process".

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] It was reported to have been adding 1,000 new members every 10 seconds [ 135 ] with 360,000 followers before Facebook shut it down.

[ 136 ] [ 137 ] Some "Stop the Steal" Facebook groups had discussed extreme violence, incitement to violence, and other threats.

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] CounterAction, a social media analytics firm, provided ProPublica and the Washington Post an audit of Facebook groups and posts which identified 650,000 election delegitimization posts leading up to January 6.

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] On January 11, 2021, Facebook announced that it would remove content containing the phrase "stop the steal" from Facebook and Instagram.

[ 142 ] Stop the Steal protesters gathered outside the Minnesota State Capitol on December 12, 2020. A Boogaloo movement member was charged in connection to the event.

Several "Stop the Steal" groups were founded by right-wing groups [ 127 ] after Trump published tweets on Twitter encouraging his supporters to "Stop the Count".

[ 92 ] Many unorganized "Stop the Steal" groups protested in various U.S. cities, including Washington, D.C.; [ 143 ] Detroit, Michigan; [ 144 ] Lansing, Michigan; [ 145 ] Las Vegas, Nevada; [ 146 ] [ 147 ] Madison, Wisconsin; [ 148 ] Atlanta, Georgia; [ 149 ] and Columbus, Ohio.

[ 150 ] Several of these protests included members of extremist groups such as the Three Percenters , the Proud Boys and the Oath Keepers , which CNN reported was an illustration of "the thinning of a line between the mainstream right and far-right extremists".

[ 151 ] In Michigan on December 7, 2020, "Stop the Steal" protestors gathered outside the private home of Michigan's Secretary of State Jocelyn Benson to shout obscenities and chant threatening speech into bullhorns.

Biden 's Michigan win by 154,000 votes had been officially certified by the Michigan Board of State Canvassers in November.

[ 152 ] On December 12, 2020, post-election protests were held in Washington, D.C. At least nine people were transported from the protest by D.C. Fire and emergency medical service workers for hospital treatment. Among the injured were four people who suffered stab wounds and were said to be in critical condition. Two police officers suffered non-life-threatening injuries, and two others suffered minor injuries [ clarification needed ] . An additional 33 people were arrested, including one for assault with a dangerous weapon. Earlier in the day, large groups of protesters and counter-protestors assembled outside the Supreme Court and Freedom Plaza .

[ 153 ] By March 2021, organizations linked to the Stop the Steal movement, including the Proud Boys and the boogaloo movement , had largely shifted their efforts to spreading misinformation about COVID-19 vaccines as a way of undermining government credibility.

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] On April 7, 2021, the U.S. District Court of Minnesota charged self-proclaimed boogaloo bois member Michael Paul Dahlager with illegal possession of a machine gun . Dahlager had traveled to the Minnesota State Capitol in Saint Paul for a December 12, 2020, "Stop the Steal" rally where he scouted law enforcement positions and numbers. Dahlager had discussed with confidential informants his willingness to kill law enforcement members and incite violent uprisings against the government.

[ 156 ] [ 157 ] Dahlager had allegedly planned to carry out an attack in early 2021 on the state's capitol building, but abandoned it after he believed that informants were among his inner circle. Dahlager pleaded guilty to federal weapons charges in July 2021.

[ 158 ] In the days after the election, Ginni Thomas , wife of Supreme Court justice Clarence Thomas , exchanged 29 text messages with Trump chief of staff Mark Meadows, urging him to pursue efforts to overturn the election. Thomas asserted "The majority knows Biden and the Left is attempting the greatest Heist of our History" and recited a message circulating in right-wing media that the "Biden crime family & ballot fraud co-conspirators" were being arrested "to face military tribunals for sedition" at Guantanamo Bay detention camp . Thomas wrote, "Do not concede. It takes time for the army who is gathering for his back." In March 2022, Thomas acknowledged she had attended the January 6 Stop the Steal rally but there was no evidence she had been involved in its organization.

[ 159 ] [ 160 ] [ 161 ] Conspiracy theories Multiple conspiracy theories were promoted, such as the claim that billionaire donor George Soros "stole the election".

[ 162 ] Another is Italygate , a QAnon -adjacent [ 163 ] [ 164 ] theory originating from a fake news website , which claimed that the election was rigged in Biden's favor by the U.S. Embassy in Rome , using satellites and military technology to remotely switch votes from Trump to Biden. There is no evidence to support this.

[ 163 ] [ 165 ] Republican congressman Scott Perry texted White House Chief of Staff Mark Meadows a link to a YouTube video making the allegation.

[ 163 ] [ 166 ] The New York Times later reported that, during Trump's last weeks in office, Meadows emailed the video to the Department of Justice , seeking an investigation.

[ 167 ] These conspiracy theories had multiple origins. They were promoted by Trump and other individuals, and were heavily pushed and expanded on by far-right news organizations such as One America News Network (OANN), Newsmax , and The Gateway Pundit , as well as by Sean Hannity and some other Fox News commentators.

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] RT , a Russian state media outlet, also promoted the Trump campaign's false claims of electoral fraud.

[ 170 ] Attempts by Facebook and other mainstream social networks to restrict groups that spread false election claims led to a surge in the popularity of Parler , a right-leaning alternative social networking site that has attracted supporters of Stop the Steal.

[ 171 ] [ 172 ] Parler subsequently went offline after Amazon Web Services withdrew support for the app on January 9.

[ 173 ] As of June 2021, Trump continued to echo the conspiracy theory that the election was "stolen"; particularly focusing on the efforts of Arizona Senate Republicans to audit the results of the election in Maricopa County and on a lawsuit disputing the results of the election in Georgia. The efforts of Arizona Republicans to audit the results have drawn the attention and support of some Republican politicians, including Marjorie Taylor Greene , Matt Gaetz , and the former president. Trump had reportedly told associates he could be "reinstated" as president by August 2021; however, there is no constitutional mechanism to reinstate a president after the results of an election have been certified by Congress.

[ 174 ] [ 175 ] However, several Trump allies denied reports that Trump would be reinstated as president in August, including Lara Trump , Jenna Ellis , Jason Miller , Corey Lewandowski , and Marjorie Taylor Greene.

[ 176 ] The Gateway Pundit published an August 2021 article reporting analysis conducted by Seth Keshel, a former Army intelligence officer, purporting to prove election fraud and that Trump actually won seven states carried by Biden. The analysis was false. Keshel was among a group of military-intelligence veterans including former Trump national security advisor Michael Flynn who played central roles in spreading false information about the election.

[ 177 ] [ 178 ] [ 179 ] November 2020 On at least one occasion in November 2020, Trump privately acknowledged that he lost the election.

Alyssa Farah Griffin , a White House aide to Trump, recalls him exclaiming "Can you believe I lost to this guy?" while watching Biden on television.

[ 180 ] This, however, was not Trump's public position.

The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency had a website called Rumor Control to combat disinformation, [ 181 ] and on November 12, CISA Director Chris Krebs called the election "the most secure in American history". Trump fired Krebs, [ 182 ] and Trump attorney Joseph diGenova called for his execution .

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] [ 185 ] (Years later, on April 9, 2025, Trump directed Attorney General Pam Bondi and Homeland Security Secretary Kristi Noem to investigate Krebs and revoke his security clearance.) [ 181 ] Emily Murphy , the administrator of the General Services Administration , delayed the start of the presidential transition until sixteen days after most media outlets had projected Biden to be the winner.

[ 186 ] [ 187 ] "Fake" electors Main article: Trump fake electors plot On November 3, Gregory Jacob wrote to Marc Short that it would be undesirable for the public to perceive Vice President Pence as if he had prejudged "questions concerning disputed electoral votes".

[ 188 ] On November 4, White House Chief of Staff Mark Meadows received a text message calling for an "aggressive strategy" of having the Republican-led legislatures of three uncalled states "just send their own electors to vote and have it go to the [Supreme Court]". This was reportedly sent by Trump's secretary of energy, Rick Perry .

[ 189 ] On November 5, Donald Trump Jr.

sent a text message to Meadows outlining paths to subvert the Electoral College process and ensure his father a second term. Excerpts from the message are: It's very simple. We have multiple paths. We control them all. We have operational control. Total leverage. Moral high ground. POTUS must start second term now. Republicans control 28 states Democrats 22 states. Once again Trump wins. We either have a vote WE control and WE win OR it gets kicked to Congress 6 January 2021.

Biden had not yet been declared the winner at the time of the text.

[ 190 ] Trump Jr. testified to the House select committee on May 3, 2022, that he had not written the message and did not recall who had, but that the idea had "sounded plausible" and was "the most sophisticated" plan he'd heard, although it concerned "things I don't necessarily, you know, know too much about".

[ 191 ] On November 9, Ginni Thomas, wife of Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas, emailed 29 Arizona lawmakers, including Russell Bowers and Shawnna Bolick , encouraging them to pick "a clean slate of Electors" and telling them that the responsibility was "yours and yours alone".

[ 192 ] On November 18, James R. Troupis , a lawyer for the Trump campaign in Wisconsin, received a memo from Boston attorney Kenneth Chesebro outlining a plan to create and submit alternate slates of electors in contested states.

[ 193 ] [ 194 ] Another memo three weeks later went to Wisconsin and several other contested states. The memos are evidence that within weeks of the election, the Trump campaign was focusing on January 6, 2021, as the "hard deadline" for determining the outcome of the election.

[ 195 ] The White House Counsel's Office reportedly reviewed the plans to use alternate electors and deemed them not to be legally sound.

[ 196 ] Lame duck firings and hirings After vote counts showed a Biden victory, Trump engaged in what has been called a "post-election purge", firing or forcing out at least a dozen officials and replacing them with loyalists.

[ 197 ] Secretary of Defense Mark Esper was fired by tweet on November 9.

[ 198 ] [ 199 ] Undersecretary for Defense Joseph D. Kernan and Acting Undersecretary for Policy James H. Anderson resigned in protest or were forced out.

[ 197 ] The White House sought to learn the names of political appointees who had applauded Anderson upon his departure, so they could be fired.

[ 200 ] The DOD chief of staff, Jen Stewart, was replaced by a former staffer to Representative Devin Nunes .

[ 197 ] On November 30, Christopher P. Maier, the head of the Pentagon's Defeat ISIS Task Force, was ousted and the task force was disbanded; a White House official told him that the United States had won the war against the Islamic State, so the task force was no longer needed.

[ 201 ] Trump's allegations of election fraud in battleground states were refuted by judges, state election officials, and his own administration's Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA).

[ 98 ] After CISA director Chris Krebs contradicted Trump's voting-fraud allegations, Trump fired him on November 17.

[ 202 ] [ 203 ] Three other Department of Homeland Security officials – CISA's deputy director Matthew Travis , CISA's assistant director for cybersecurity, Bryan Ware, and the DHS's assistant secretary of international affairs Valerie Boyd – were also forced out.

[ 197 ] Bonnie Glick , the deputy administrator of the United States Agency for International Development , was abruptly fired on November 6; she had prepared a transition manual for the next administration. She was due to become acting administrator of the department on November 7. Firing her left the position of acting administrator vacant, so that Trump loyalist John Barsa could become acting deputy administrator.

[ 204 ] [ 205 ] Career climate scientist Michael Kuperberg, who for the past five years has produced the annual National Climate Assessment issued by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), was demoted on November 9 and returned to his previous position at the Department of Energy. Several media outlets reported that David Legates, a deputy assistant secretary at NOAA who claims that global warming is harmless, would be appointed to oversee the congressionally mandated report in place of Kuperberg, based on information obtained from "people close to the Administration", including Myron Ebell , the head of President Trump's Environmental Protection Agency transition team and director of the Center for Energy and Environment at the Competitive Enterprise Institute .

[ 206 ] As of May 18, 2021, the Biden administration reappointed Kuperberg as executive director of the U.S. Global Change Research Program.

[ 207 ] On November 5, Neil Chatterjee was removed from his post as chair of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission .

[ 197 ] On November 11, Lisa Gordon-Hagerty resigned from her posts as Under Secretary of Energy for Nuclear Security and administrator of the quasi-independent National Nuclear Security Administration , reportedly due to longstanding tensions and disagreements with Secretary of Energy Dan Brouillette .

[ 208 ] In October 2020, Trump signed an executive order that created a new category of federal employee, Schedule F , which included all career civil servants whose job includes "policymaking". Such employees would no longer be covered by civil service protections against arbitrary dismissal, but would be subject to the same rules as political appointees. The new description could be applied to thousands of nonpartisan experts, such as scientists who give advice to the political appointees who run their departments.

[ 209 ] Heads of all federal agencies were ordered to report by January 19, 2021, a list of positions that could be reclassified as Schedule F. The Office of Management and Budget submitted a list in November that included 88 percent of the office's workforce.

[ 210 ] Federal employee organizations and Congressional Democrats sought to overturn the order via lawsuits or bills. House Democrats warned in a letter that "The executive order could precipitate a mass exodus from the federal government at the end of every presidential administration, leaving federal agencies without deep institutional knowledge, expertise, experience, and the ability to develop and implement long-term policy strategies".

[ 211 ] Observers predicted that Trump could use the new rule to implement a "massive government purge on his way out the door".

[ 212 ] Meanwhile, administration officials had ordered the Budget Office to begin work on a 2022 budget proposal that they would submit to Congress in February, ignoring the fact that Biden would have already taken over by that point.

[ 213 ] Lawsuits Rudy Giuliani , head of Trump's failed legal efforts, falsely asserted that the election had been subject to massive fraud.

Main article: Post-election lawsuits related to the 2020 United States presidential election After the 2020 United States presidential election, the campaign for incumbent president Donald Trump filed a number of lawsuits contesting election processes, vote-counting, and the vote-certification process in multiple states, including Arizona, Georgia, Michigan, Nevada, Pennsylvania, Texas, and Wisconsin.

[ 214 ] Many such cases were quickly dismissed, [ 100 ] and lawyers and other observers noted that the lawsuits were unlikely to have an effect on the outcome of the election.

[ 215 ] [ 216 ] [ 217 ] By November 19, more than two dozen of the legal challenges filed since Election Day had failed.

[ 105 ] On November 21, U.S. District Court in Pennsylvania Judge Matthew Brann , a Republican, dismissed the case before him with prejudice , ruling: In this action, the Trump Campaign and the Individual Plaintiffs ... seek to discard millions of votes legally cast by Pennsylvanians from all corners – from Greene County to Pike County, and everywhere in between. In other words, Plaintiffs ask this Court to disenfranchise almost seven million voters. This Court has been unable to find any case in which a plaintiff has sought such a drastic remedy in the contest of an election, in terms of the sheer volume of votes asked to be invalidated. One might expect that when seeking such a startling outcome, a plaintiff would come formidably armed with compelling legal arguments and factual proof of rampant corruption, such that this Court would have no option but to regrettably grant the proposed injunctive relief despite the impact it would have on such a large group of citizens.

That has not happened. Instead, this Court has been presented with strained legal arguments without merit and speculative accusations, unpled in the operative complaint and unsupported by evidence. In the United States of America, this cannot justify the disenfranchisement of a single voter, let alone all the voters of its sixth most populated state. Our people, laws, and institutions demand more.

[ 218 ] [ 219 ] Michigan officials pressured to not certify Prior to November 17, the four-member board of canvassers of Wayne County, Michigan , was deadlocked on election-result certification along party lines with the two Republican members refusing to certify, but on November 17 the board voted unanimously to certify its results.

[ 220 ] Trump and Republican National Committee Chair Ronna McDaniel called the two Republican members of the board that day to pressure them to not sign the official statement of votes; the next day the two Republicans sought but failed to rescind their votes for certification, signing affidavits stating that they had voted for certification only because the two Democratic members had promised a full audit of the county's votes.

[ 221 ] [ 222 ] The two denied Trump's call had influenced their reversal.

[ 223 ] A recording of the phone call surfaced in December 2023, on which McDaniel can be heard telling the two Republicans, "We will get you attorneys," to which Trump added, "We'll take care of that." Trump can also be heard to say, "We've got to fight for our country. We can't let these people take our country away from us." [ 224 ] Trump issued an invitation to Michigan lawmakers to travel to Washington.

[ 225 ] Michigan House Speaker Lee Chatfield , State Senate Majority Leader Mike Shirkey and State Representative Jim Lilly were photographed in the lobby of the D.C. Trump Tower, where they were drinking $500-a-bottle champagne and were not wearing masks.

[ 226 ] After the meeting, Chatfield and Shirkey released a joint statement indicating that they would "follow the law" and would not attempt to have the legislature intervene in selecting electoral votes.

[ 227 ] Chatfield later floated the possibility of a "constitutional crisis" in Michigan, while Shirkey suggested that certification be delayed; however, neither took any concrete action to invalidate Biden's victory.

[ 228 ] [ 229 ] On November 21, Ronna McDaniel and Michigan Republican Party Chair Laura Cox publicly called upon the Michigan State Board of Canvassers to not proceed with the planned certification of election results.

[ 230 ] On November 23, the State Board of Canvassers certified the election.

[ 231 ] Attempt to seize voting machines in Michigan Further information: Post-election lawsuits related to the 2020 United States presidential election from Michigan § Bailey v. Antrim County Starting in November 2020, the Trump campaign attempted to get local law enforcement agencies to seize voting machines for the Trump operation to review. In one Michigan county, Trump advisors including Rudy Giuliani phoned the county prosecutor on or about November 20, 2020. They asked him to obtain the county's voting machines and turn them over to the Trump team. He refused, but a judge later ordered the machines to be made available to Trump representatives. They later produced a "forensic report" claiming evidence of fraud; election experts have said the conclusion was false and the report "critically flawed".

[ 232 ] At least one person was indicted for trying to illegally access voting machines after the election.

[ 233 ] Georgia Secretary of State pressured to disqualify ballots Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-SC) contacted the Georgia Secretary of State about invalidating ballots.

The 2020 United States presidential election in Georgia produced an initial count wherein Biden defeated Trump by around 14,000 votes, triggering an automatic recount due to the small margin. On November 13, 2020, while the recount was ongoing, Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina privately called Georgia Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger to discuss Georgia's vote counting.

[ 104 ] [ 234 ] Raffensperger, a Republican, told The Washington Post that Graham had asked whether Raffensperger could disqualify all mail-in ballots in counties that had more signature errors.

[ 104 ] Gabriel Sterling , a Republican election official and staffer to Raffensperger, was present for the call, and Sterling confirmed that Graham had asked that question.

[ 235 ] Raffensperger viewed Graham's question as a suggestion to throw out legally cast ballots, although Graham denied suggesting that. Graham acknowledged calling Raffensperger to find out how to "protect the integrity of mail-in voting" and "how does signature verification work?", but declared that if Raffensperger "feels threatened by that conversation, he's got a problem".

[ 104 ] Graham stated that he was investigating in his own capacity as a senator, although he is the head of the Senate Judiciary Committee. Graham also claimed that he had spoken to the Secretaries of State in Arizona and Nevada. The Secretaries, however, denied this, and Graham then contradicted himself, stating that he had talked to the Governor of Arizona but no official in Nevada.

[ 236 ] Wisconsin recount-obstruction Further information: 2020 United States presidential election in Wisconsin § Aftermath Dane County recount being conducted at Monona Terrace in Madison, Wisconsin On November 5, 2020, Andrew Iverson, head of Trump's Wisconsin campaign, told other campaign operatives in a strategy session: "Here's the deal: Comms is going to continue to fan the flame and get the word out about Democrats trying to steal this election. We'll do whatever they need. Just be on standby if there's any stunts we need to pull." [ e ] [ 237 ] The Trump campaign requested a recount in Milwaukee and Dane counties, both Democratic strongholds. On November 20, 2020, Wisconsin election officials reported that Trump campaign observers were attempting to obstruct the recount. According to officials, observers were "constantly interrupting vote-counters with questions and comments". At one table, a Republican representative was objecting to every ballot that was pulled for recount. At other tables, there were two Republican observers when only one was allowed; it was also reported that some Republicans had been posing as independents.

[ 238 ] Completed by November 29, the recounts ended up increasing Biden's lead by 87 votes.

[ 239 ] Partisan hearings with Republican legislatures On November 25, 2020, one day after Pennsylvania certified its election results, a Republican state senator requested a hearing of the State Senate Majority Policy Committee to discuss election issues. The event, described as an "informational meeting", was held at a hotel in Gettysburg and featured Rudy Giuliani asserting that the election had been subject to massive fraud. Trump also spoke to the group by speakerphone, repeating his false claim that he had actually won in Pennsylvania and other swing states, and saying "We have to turn the election over".

[ 240 ] In Arizona, a state won by Biden, Republican members of the Arizona Senate promoted Trump's false claims of election fraud. In mid-December 2020, Eddie Farnsworth , Chairman of the State Senate Judiciary Committee, claimed that "tampering" or "fraud" might have marred the election, despite the testimony given by election officials, attorneys, and the Arizona Attorney General Election Integrity Unit at a six-hour hearing, all of whom testified that there was no evidence for such claims.

[ 241 ] Hearings held in the Michigan Legislature similarly presented no evidence of any fraud or other wrongdoing.

[ 242 ] Conspiracy allegations Days before the 2020 presidential election, Dennis Montgomery , a software designer with a history of making dubious claims, asserted that a program called Scorecard, running on a government supercomputer called Hammer, would be used to switch votes from Trump to Biden on voting machines. Trump legal team attorney Sidney Powell promoted the conspiracy theory on Lou Dobbs Tonight on November 6, [ 243 ] [ 244 ] and again two days later on Maria Bartiromo 's Fox Business program, claiming to have "evidence that that is exactly what happened".

[ 244 ] She also asserted that the CIA ignored warnings about the software, and urged Trump to fire director Gina Haspel .

[ 245 ] Christopher Krebs, director of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), characterized the supercomputer claim as "nonsense" and a "hoax". CISA described the 2020 election as "the most secure in American history", with "no evidence that any voting system deleted or lost votes, changed votes or was in any way compromised".

[ 244 ] [ 246 ] A few days later, Trump fired Krebs by tweet, claiming that Krebs' analysis was "highly inaccurate".

[ 247 ] On November 13, 2020, the Trump campaign's deputy director of communications, Zach Parkinson, asked his staff to review the claims regarding the voting machines; the staff concluded these claims were baseless.

[ 36 ] During a November 19, 2020, press conference, Powell alleged without evidence that an international Communist plot had been engineered by Venezuela, Cuba, China, Hugo Chávez (who died in 2013), George Soros , the Clinton Foundation , and antifa to rig the 2020 elections.

[ 248 ] [ 27 ] [ 249 ] She also alleged that Dominion Voting Systems "can set and run an algorithm that probably ran all over the country to take a certain percentage of votes from President Trump and flip them to President Biden".

[ 25 ] The source for many of these claims appeared to be the far-right news organization One America News Network (OANN). She also repeated a conspiracy theory [ 169 ] spread by Texan Congressman Louie Gohmert , OANN and others: [ 250 ] that accurate voting results had been transmitted to the German office of the Spanish electronic voting firm Scytl , where they were tabulated to reveal a landslide victory for Trump nationwide (which included implausible Trump victories in Democratic strongholds such as California , Colorado , Maine statewide, Minnesota , and New Mexico ), after which a company server was supposedly seized in a raid by the United States Army. The U.S. Army and Scytl refuted those claims: [ 251 ] Scytl has not had any offices in Germany since September 2019, and it does not tabulate any U.S. votes.

[ 252 ] [ 253 ] In a March 2021 report, the Justice and Homeland Security Departments flatly rejected accusations of voting fraud conducted by foreign nations.

[ 254 ] Rudy Giuliani also spoke at this press conference. In a private text message, Rupert Murdoch described the Powell–Giuliani presentation as "really crazy stuff, and damaging".

[ 255 ] In a subsequent interview with Newsmax on November 21, 2020, [ 256 ] Powell accused Georgia's Republican governor, Brian Kemp , of being "in on the Dominion scam" and suggested financial impropriety.

[ 257 ] Powell additionally alleged that fraud had prevented Doug Collins from winning a top-two position in the November 2020 nonpartisan blanket primary against incumbent Kelly Loeffler in the Senate race in Georgia .

[ 258 ] She also claimed that the Democratic Party had used rigged Dominion machines to defeat Bernie Sanders in the 2016 primary and that Sanders had learned of this but had "sold out".

[ 259 ] She stated that she would "blow up" Georgia with a "biblical" court filing.

[ 260 ] Powell suggested that candidates "paid to have the system rigged to work for them".

[ 261 ] On the basis of these claims, Powell called for Republican-controlled state legislatures in swing states to disregard the election results and appoint a slate of "loyal" electors who would vote to re-elect Trump, [ 262 ] based on authority supposedly resting in Article Two of the Constitution .

[ 263 ] The Washington Post reported that on December 5 Trump asked Kemp to convene a special session of the Georgia legislature for that purpose, but Kemp declined.

[ 108 ] Trump also pressured Pennsylvania Speaker of the House Bryan Cutler to overturn the result and use electors loyal to Trump, but Cutler declined, saying that the legislature had no power to overturn the state's chosen slate of electors.

[ 19 ] Conservative television outlets amplified baseless allegations of voting machine fraud. Fox News host Lou Dobbs had been outspoken during his program supporting the allegations, but on December 18 his program aired a video segment debunking the allegations, although Dobbs himself did not comment. Fox News hosts Jeanine Pirro and Maria Bartiromo had also been outspoken in supporting the allegations, and both their programs aired the same video segment debunking the allegations over the following two days.

[ 264 ] Smartmatic , a company accused of conspiring with Dominion, demanded a retraction from Fox News. Smartmatic wanted corrections to be "published on multiple occasions" during prime time to "match the attention and audience targeted with the original defamatory publications". They also threatened legal action.

[ 264 ] [ 265 ] [ 266 ] On February 4, 2021, Smartmatic filed a lawsuit against Dobbs, Bartiromo, Pirro, and Fox News itself, as well as against Rudy Giuliani and Sidney Powell, seeking $2.7 billion in total damages.

[ 267 ] In December 2020, Dominion sent a similar letter to Sidney Powell, demanding that she retract her allegations and retain all relevant records; the Trump legal team later instructed dozens of staffers to preserve all documents for any future litigation.

[ 268 ] [ 269 ] The company filed $1.3 billion defamation suits against Powell in January 2021.

[ 270 ] While fighting the lawsuit in March 2021, Powell's attorneys claimed that her speech was protected because she was sharing her "opinion" and that, because she was serving as an attorney for the Trump campaign, it was her role to make accusations against Dominion. Dominion had complained that Powell's comments were "wild", "outlandish", and "impossible". Powell's attorneys seemed to concede that Powell had been obviously lying, saying that "reasonable people would not accept such statements as fact" and therefore that she had not defamed Dominion.

[ 271 ] In internal Fox News communications, several prominent network hosts and senior executives—including chairman Rupert Murdoch and CEO Suzanne Scott —discussed their knowledge that the election fraud allegations they were reporting were false. The communications showed the network was concerned that not reporting the falsehoods would alienate viewers and cause them to switch to rival conservative networks, impacting corporate profitability.

[ 272 ] In a deposition in the Dominion Voting Systems lawsuit, Murdoch said: "I would have liked us to be stronger in denouncing it [the false allegations], in hindsight".

[ 273 ] The communications and deposition were reported in February 2023.

Threats of violence by Trump supporters After Biden won the election, angry Trump supporters threatened election officials, election officials' family members, and elections staff in at least eight states via emails, telephone calls and letters; some of the menacing and vitriolic communications included death threats . Officials terrorized by the threats included officials in the swing states of Wisconsin, Pennsylvania, Michigan, Nevada, and Arizona, as well as a few less competitive states.

[ 274 ] Some officials had to seek police protection [ 274 ] [ 275 ] or move from their homes due to the threats.

[ 274 ] The director of the nonpartisan, nonprofit Center for Election Innovation & Research, described the threats as frightening and said, "These threats often go into areas related to race or sex or anti-Semitism . More than once they specifically refer to gun violence." Prominent Republicans ignored or said little about the threats of violence.

[ 274 ] On November 15, the Georgia Secretary of State reported that he and his wife were receiving death threats.

[ 104 ] On November 30, Trump attorney Joseph diGenova said the recently fired head of the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, Chris Krebs , should be "taken out and shot" for disputing the president's claims about election fraud.

[ 183 ] On December 1, Republican Georgia elections official Gabriel Sterling publicly condemned Trump and Georgia Senators Perdue and Loeffler for making unsubstantiated claims and for failing to condemn the threats of violence against election workers, including those made against a young, low-level Dominion employee and his family.

[ 276 ] After Democratic Georgia State Senator Elena Parent spoke out against the false claims of voter fraud, she was targeted by online vitriol, threatened with death and sexual violence, and had her home address widely circulated online. Parent attributed the onslaught to Trump, saying, "He has created a cult-like following and is exposing people like me across the country to danger because of his unfounded rhetoric on the election".

[ 275 ] In early December, an "enemies list" circulated on the web falsely accusing various government officials and voting systems executives of rigging the election, providing their home addresses, and superimposing red targets on their photos.

[ 277 ] The Arizona Republican Party twice tweeted that supporters should be willing to "die for something" or "give my life for this fight". Ann Jacobs, chairwoman of the Wisconsin Elections Commission , said she had received constant threats, including a message mentioning her children, and photos of her house had been posted on the web.

[ 278 ] On January 1, 2021, Vice President Mike Pence asked a federal judge to dismiss a suit naming him as the defendant; filed by Texas Republican congressman Louis Gohmert and others, the ultimately unsuccessful suit asserted that the vice president had the sole constitutional authority to conduct the congressional certification of Electoral College results without restriction.

[ 279 ] Attorney Lin Wood , a conspiracy theorist and QAnon promoter who had worked with Trump attorney Sidney Powell to file baseless lawsuits alleging election fraud, tweeted that day that Pence and other prominent Republican officials should be arrested for treason and that Pence should "face execution by firing squad".

[ 280 ] Two weeks earlier, Wood had tweeted that people should stock up on survival goods, including "2nd Amendment supplies".

Emerald Robinson , a White House correspondent for pro-Trump One America News , tweeted "Folks, when [Lin Wood] tells people to prep, I listen".

[ 281 ] After Trump urged his supporters to protest in Washington as Congress convened to certify the election results, some posters in far-right online forums interpreted it as a call to action, with one asserting, "We've got marching orders", while others made references to possible violence and to bringing firearms to the protest. In a discussion of how to evade police blockades and the District of Columbia's gun laws, one poster remarked, "We The People, Will not tolerate a Steal. No retreat, No Surrender. Restore to my President what you stole or reap the consequences!!!" [ 282 ] [ 283 ] December 2020 On December 1, 2020, U.S. Attorney General William Barr said U.S. attorneys and FBI agents had investigated complaints and allegations of fraud, but found none of significance.

[ 34 ] [ 97 ] [ 284 ] [ 285 ] On December 3, 2020, Director of National Intelligence John Ratcliffe said no evidence had yet been found of foreign interference .

[ 286 ] [ 287 ] Former Trump National Security Advisor Michael Flynn , who had received a presidential pardon shortly after the election, on December 1 publicly called on the president to suspend the Constitution , silence the press, and hold a new election under military supervision.

[ 288 ] Trump's attempt to pressure state officials On December 5, Trump placed a call to Georgia governor Brian Kemp in which he urged the governor to call a special session of the state legislature to override the election results and appoint electors who would support Trump.

[ 108 ] He also called the Pennsylvania speaker of the house with similar objectives, and had earlier invited Michigan Republican state officials to the White House to discuss election results in that state.

[ 108 ] [ 289 ] The Georgia and Pennsylvania contacts were made after Biden's victories had been certified in those states; Biden's Michigan victory was certified three days after the Trump White House meeting.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] [ 290 ] After Georgia had twice recounted and twice certified its results, Republican secretary of state Brad Raffensperger received death threats. He was pressured to resign by others in his party, including the state's two senators.

[ 291 ] [ 292 ] On December 23, Trump called the investigations chief in the Georgia Secretary of State's office, who was then investigating allegations of mail ballot fraud, and urged the official to "find the fraud" (a misquote that was amended by The Washington Post in March 2021 to "[you would] find things that are gonna be unbelievable"); [ 293 ] the investigation ultimately concluded that the allegations had no merit.

[ 294 ] Texas attorney general Ken Paxton sued the state and three others, asking the U.S. Supreme Court to invalidate the states' voting results, alleging that they had violated the Constitution, citing a litany of complaints that had already been rejected by other courts.

[ 295 ] [ 296 ] Trump and seventeen Republican state attorneys general filed motions to support the case, the merits of which were sharply criticized by legal experts and politicians.

[ 297 ] [ 298 ] The day the suit was filed, Trump warned Georgia attorney general Chris Carr to not rally other Republican officials in opposition to the suit.

[ 299 ] On December 4, 2020, 64 Republican members of the Pennsylvania General Assembly signed a letter urging the state's congressional delegation to reject Biden's electoral votes.

Kim Ward , the Republican majority leader of the Pennsylvania senate, said that Trump had called her to say there had been fraud in the election, but she had not seen the letter before it had been released. She stated that Republican leaders were expected to support Trump's claims and if she had announced opposition to the letter, "I'd get my house bombed tonight".

[ 300 ] [ 301 ] On December 10, 2020, after several lawsuits had been dismissed, Trump tweeted, "This is going to escalate dramatically. This is a very dangerous moment in our history. ... The fact that our country is being stolen. A coup is taking place in front of our eyes, and the public can't take this anymore." [ 302 ] Supreme Court petitions Main article: Texas v. Pennsylvania Before and after the election, Trump said he expected the outcome would be decided by the Supreme Court , where conservative justices held a 6–3 majority, with three of the justices having been appointed by Trump.

[ 303 ] [ 129 ] On November 21, a group of Republican legislators in Pennsylvania petitioned the U.S. Supreme Court in appeal of a Pennsylvania Supreme Court decision against the legislators, who had asked to nullify mailed ballots after they had been cast, or to direct the legislature to select Pennsylvania's electors. The high court denied the request in a one-sentence, unsigned order on December 8. By the time of the high court's decision, the Pennsylvania election results had been certified in Biden's favor. Lawyers for Pennsylvania argued to the high court that the legislators' request was "an affront to constitutional democracy" and that "Petitioners ask this court to undertake one of the most dramatic, disruptive invocations of judicial power in the history of the Republic; no court has ever issued an order nullifying a governor's certification of presidential election results".

[ 46 ] [ 109 ] On December 8, 2020, Texas attorney general Ken Paxton sued the states of Georgia, Michigan, Wisconsin and Pennsylvania , where certified results showed Joe Biden had won, [ 304 ] alleging a variety of unconstitutional actions in their presidential balloting, arguments that had already been rejected in other courts . Paxton asked the U.S. Supreme Court to invalidate those states' 62 electoral votes, allowing Trump to be declared the winner of a second presidential term.

[ 46 ] This case, Texas v. Pennsylvania , was hailed by Trump as "the big one".

[ 48 ] Seventeen Republican state attorneys general filed amicus briefs to support the case and 126 Republican members of the House of Representatives signed onto it.

[ 305 ] On December 11, the Supreme Court said it would not hear the case. In denying the plaintiff's motion to invalidate those votes, it said that "the state of Texas' motion" had "lack of standing".

[ 304 ] [ 306 ] [ 307 ] Ted Cruz, who had previously argued nine cases before the Supreme Court, agreed to Trump's request to argue the Paxton suit should it come before the Court.

[ 308 ] [ 309 ] In late December attorneys Chesebro and Troupis asked the Supreme Court to review whether competing slates of electors from seven contested states could be considered by Congress on January 6. The Supreme Court declined their request for an opinion.

[ 195 ] On December 31, lawyer Kenneth Chesebro emailed other members of Trump's legal team, saying that U.S. Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas was "key" and proposing that they "frame things so that Thomas could be the one to issue" an order to undermine Georgia's election results. Trump lawyer John Eastman responded in agreement.

[ 310 ] Consideration of special counsel and martial law After legal efforts by Trump and his proxies had failed in numerous state and federal courts, including the Supreme Court, [ 311 ] some right-wing activists and Trump allies – including Michael Flynn , Sidney Powell , and L. Lin Wood – suggested that Trump could suspend the Constitution, declare martial law and "rerun" the election.

[ 312 ] [ 313 ] Many retired military officers, attorneys, and other commentators expressed horror at such a notion.

[ 314 ] [ f ] Trump held an Oval Office meeting on December 18 with Rudy Giuliani, Chief of Staff Mark Meadows, White House Counsel Pat Cipollone , Powell, and Flynn. At the meeting, Trump entertained the idea of naming Powell, who has promoted election conspiracy theories and falsehoods, as special counsel to investigate election matters, though most advisors in attendance strongly opposed the idea. Two executive orders were drafted to appoint a special counsel and confiscate voting machines, which Trump falsely claimed were rigged against him. One order called for the Pentagon to seize machines, while the other tasked the Department of Homeland Security . At Trump's direction, Giuliani called Ken Cuccinelli , the second in command at DHS, on December 17 to ask if the department could seize the machines, but Cuccinelli said it did not have the authority. On Giuliani's advice, Trump had rejected a recommendation from Flynn and Powell to have the Pentagon seize the machines, and Bill Barr flatly rejected the president's suggestion that the Justice Department do it.

[ 319 ] [ 51 ] [ 320 ] [ 321 ] Flynn reportedly discussed his idea to declare martial law, although others also resisted that idea, and Trump's opinion on the matter was unclear. That same day, Flynn appeared on Newsmax TV to suggest that Trump had the power to deploy the military to "rerun" the election in the swing states that Trump had lost.

[ 311 ] Trump dismissed reports about a discussion of martial law as "fake news", but it remained unclear whether he had endorsed the notion.

[ 322 ] An attempt by Trump to invoke martial law to invalidate the results of the election would be illegal and unconstitutional.

[ 323 ] [ 324 ] In late December 2020, legal scholars Claire O. Finkelstein and Richard Painter wrote that while it was very unlikely that Trump would actually "attempt to spark a military coup", Acting Attorney General Jeffrey A. Rosen should be prepared to direct federal law enforcement "to arrest anyone, including if necessary the president, who ... conspired to carry out this illegal plan". Likening a hypothetical invocation of martial law to overturn the election to the 1861 firing on Fort Sumter , Finkelstein and Painter wrote that any such plan would constitute seditious conspiracy and possibly other crimes, and that any military officers or enlisted personnel ordered to assist in such a plan would be required, under the Uniform Code of Military Justice , to disregard such an illegal order .

[ 323 ] On December 18, Army Secretary Ryan McCarthy and General James McConville , the Army chief of staff , issued a joint statement saying, "There is no role for the US military in determining the outcome of an American election".

[ 325 ] On January 3, all ten living former secretaries of defense – Ashton Carter , Dick Cheney , William Cohen , Mark Esper , Robert Gates , Chuck Hagel , James Mattis , Leon Panetta , William Perry and Donald Rumsfeld – published an op-ed in The Washington Post calling for the orderly and peaceful transfer of power , noting that "efforts to involve the US armed forces in resolving election disputes would take us into dangerous, unlawful and unconstitutional territory", and noting that "civilian and military officials who direct or carry out such measures would be accountable, including potentially facing criminal penalties, for the grave consequences of their actions on our republic". The former defense secretaries wrote that "acting defense secretary Christopher C. Miller and his subordinates – political appointees, officers and civil servants – are each bound by oath, law and precedent to facilitate the entry into office of the incoming administration, and to do so wholeheartedly. They must also refrain from any political actions that undermine the results of the election or hinder the success of the new team." [ 326 ] Elizabeth Neumann , an adviser at Defending Democracy Together and a former assistant secretary of Homeland Security under Trump, stated that "In the conspiratorial conservative base supporting Trump, there are calls for using the Insurrection Act to declare martial law. When they hear that the president is actually considering this, there are violent extremist groups that look at this as a dog whistle , an excuse to go out and create ... violence." [ 322 ] Planning for Congress to overturn the election on January 6 On December 21, Congressman Mo Brooks , who had been the first member of Congress to announce he would object to the January 6, 2021 certification of the Electoral College results, [ 327 ] [ 328 ] organized three White House meetings between Trump, Republican lawmakers, and others. Attendees included Trump, Vice President Pence, representatives Jody Hice (R-Ga.), Jim Jordan (R-Ohio), and Andy Biggs (R-Ariz.), representative-elect Marjorie Taylor Greene (R-Ga.), and members of the Trump legal team. The purpose of the meetings was to strategize about how Congress could overturn the election results on January 6. Brooks confirmed after one such meeting that it had been "a back-and-forth concerning the planning and strategy for January the 6th.".

[ 329 ] Talking Points Memo reported in December 2022 that it had obtained the 2,319 text messages Meadows had provided to the January 6 committee , including 450 showing Meadows communicating with 34 Republican members of Congress about plans to overturn the election.

[ 330 ] Pressure on Pence See also: 2021 United States Electoral College vote count § Pressure on Vice President Pence to obstruct the certification of electoral votes In the run-up to election certification on January 6, attempts to uncover significant election fraud bore no fruit and related legal challenges were rejected by the courts. Hence, those seeking to overturn the election focused attention increasingly on then-vice-president Mike Pence. The Twelfth Amendment to the United States Constitution requires the President of the Senate, which was Pence for the January 6 certification of the presidential election, to supervise the counting of electoral ballots at a joint session of the Congress.

[ 331 ] The Trump team developed multiple theories about how the Vice President might act on January 6 to aid the overturning of election results; and repeatedly encouraged him to act accordingly.

[ citation needed ] "Pence card" theory Main articles: Eastman memos and Trump fake electors plot Beginning in late December, false legal theories went viral on pro-Trump social media suggesting that Vice President Pence could invoke a "Pence Card", a supposed legal loophole that would enable him, in his capacity as president of the Senate , to reject electoral votes for Biden from contested swing states on the grounds that they had been cast by fraudulently appointed electors.

[ 332 ] [ 333 ] These theories originated from Ivan Raiklin , an attorney and former Green Beret who was among a small group of military-intelligence veterans associated with Michael Flynn who were instrumental in spreading false information alleging the 2020 election had been stolen from Trump.

[ 179 ] [ 111 ] [ 334 ] The theory stems from a misreading of sections 2 and 12 of title 3, United States Code ; the first of these sections (now since-repealed) concerned a state's failure to make an electoral choice on the prescribed day and the latter directs the vice president to request electoral vote certificates from any state that has not yet sent these votes to the National Archives by the fourth Wednesday in December. Under the theory, Pence had unilateral authority to declare that state certificates from contested states had not in fact been received, and that new certificates (presumably supporting President Trump) should be issued, or that those states had a "failed election" for which new certificates (again, presumably supporting President Trump) should likewise be issued.

[ 335 ] [ 336 ] Trump retweeted a post of Raiklin's calling for the invocation of the Pence Card on December 23, [ 111 ] the day specified in statute, but Pence took no action consistent with the theory. In late December, Pence called former vice president Dan Quayle for advice, and Quayle told him (according to reporters Bob Woodward and Robert Costa): "Mike, you have no flexibility on this. None. Zero. ... I do know the position you're in. I also know what the law is. ... You have no power." [ 337 ] Although the fourth Wednesday had passed, Trump still believed that Pence had the authority to reject electoral votes, and kept asking him to do so; however, over lunch on January 5, Pence informed Trump that he did not believe he had any such authority.

[ 338 ] [ 339 ] Attorney John Eastman incorrectly told Pence in a January 5 Oval Office meeting that Pence had the constitutional authority to block the certification, which Trump reportedly urged Pence to consider.

[ 340 ] [ 341 ] Eastman also sent to Republican senator Mike Lee a six-point plan of action for Pence to set aside electors in seven states, which Lee rejected.

[ 341 ] By January 5, Trump was continuing to assert that Pence had unilateral power to throw out states' official electoral certificates on grounds of fraud.

[ 119 ] During the Capitol attack , numerous rioters chanted "Hang Mike Pence", and the phrase trended on Twitter until the website banned it.

[ 342 ] In March, when ABC News' Jonathan Karl asked Trump if he was worried about Pence while the crowd was chanting, Trump defended the crowd, saying they were "very angry" and that it was "common sense" that they would want to stop Congress from certifying the election result. Of Pence, Trump said, "I thought he was well protected and I had heard that he was in good shape".

[ 343 ] [ g ] Dozens of lawmakers from five key states wrote Pence on January 5 asking him to delay for ten days the final certification of electors scheduled for the following day, to allow them an opportunity to open special legislative sessions to decertify their electors and submit a new slate of electors. This came three days after Trump, Giuliani, and Eastman held a conference call with 300 legislators to present them purported evidence of election fraud.

[ 111 ] Ted Cruz, a decades-long friend of Eastman, proposed a complementary plan in the Senate, garnering the support of ten other senators.

[ 308 ] In January 2022, as Congress began debating whether to amend the 1887 Electoral Count Act to make it clearer that the vice-president has no power to overturn an election, [ 344 ] Trump released a statement asserting, falsely, that Pence did have such power: "Unfortunately, he didn't exercise that power, he could have overturned the Election!" and "they now want to take that right away".

[ 345 ] [ 346 ] Pence responded several days later while addressing the Federalist Society : "President Trump is wrong. ... Under the Constitution, I had no right to change the outcome of our election." [ 38 ] December timeline John Eastman, author of the Eastman memos , began working with the Trump team in November 2020.

[ 347 ] Trump adviser Peter Navarro claimed that the " Green Bay Sweep " plan was developed over weeks prior to January 6, 2021.

[ 348 ] On December 13, Trump allies in the House were developing a plan involving Pence "to use Congress's tallying of electoral results on Jan. 6 to tip the election to President Trump".

[ 349 ] Kenneth Chesebro emailed Rudy Giuliani and others pointing out that, if Pence were to recuse himself, Republican senator Chuck Grassley of Iowa would be in charge of certifying the election, and if Grassley were to delay doing so, this would give Trump more time for court battles. Chesebro's subject line called this the "'President of the Senate' strategy".

[ 350 ] On December 21, Trump's legal advisors, Pence, and multiple members of Congress at a White House meeting discussed ways to challenge the January 6 certification process and results.

[ 351 ] On December 23, Trump re-tweeted the Ivan Raiklin "Operation Pence Card" memo while stating "America @VP @Mike_Pence MUST do this, tomorrow To defend our Constitution from our enemies ... Let him know!" [ 352 ] On December 24, a Trump aide contacted John Eastman to request documentation of his legal theories concerning the certification process including the role of the vice president, resulting in the Eastman memos .

[ 347 ] On December 27, a lawsuit seeking to force action by Pence during the January 6 certification, Gohmert v. Pence (see below), was filed in a Texas court.

On December 31, then-White House Chief of Staff Mark Meadows e-mailed a memo prepared by Jenna Ellis , a legal advisor to the Trump campaign, to one of Pence's top aides.

[ 353 ] The memo claimed that the Vice President should not open electoral ballots from six states "that have electoral delegates in dispute", and should defer the eventual count of electoral delegates until January 15.

[ 354 ] Pressure on Justice Department On December 14, two weeks after Barr stated there was no evidence of significant election fraud, Trump announced that Barr would be leaving as attorney general by Christmas.

[ 34 ] [ 355 ] Before Trump's announcement, he enlisted Chief of Staff Mark Meadows and other aides to pressure deputy attorney general Jeffrey Rosen , who would replace Barr on December 23, and other Justice Department officials to challenge the election results. Meadows and a top Trump aide emailed allegations of voting anomalies in three states to Rosen and other officials. Meadows also sought to have Rosen investigate a conspiracy theory , promoted by a Giuliani ally, that satellites and military technology had been used in Italy to remotely change votes from Trump to Biden. Trump also enlisted a private attorney, Kurt Olsen, to seek a meeting with Rosen to propose a legal challenge he had drafted; it was similar to a challenge initiated by Texas attorney general Ken Paxton and supported by dozens of Republican members of Congress and state attorneys general, that attempted unsuccessfully to have the Supreme Court reject election results in four states. Trump also spoke to Rosen about Olsen's proposal. Rosen and his deputy Richard Donoghue resisted the efforts, exchanging emails mocking them, in one case, as "pure insanity".

[ 30 ] [ 356 ] [ 357 ] Rosen later testified to Congress, "During my tenure, no special prosecutors were appointed, whether for election fraud or otherwise; no public statements were made questioning the election; no letters were sent to State officials seeking to overturn the election results; [and] no DOJ court actions or filings were submitted seeking to overturn election results".

[ 358 ] In late December, Trump reportedly phoned Rosen "nearly every day" to tell him about claims of voter fraud or improper vote counts.

[ 358 ] Donoghue took notes of a December 27, 2020, phone call between him, Rosen and Trump in which he characterized the president saying, "Just say that the election was corrupt + leave the rest to me and the R. Congressmen".

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] The next day Jeffrey Clark , acting assistant attorney general for the civil division, approached Rosen and Donoghue with a draft letter and requested them to sign it. The letter was addressed to officials in the state of Georgia, saying that the Justice Department had evidence that raised "significant concerns" about the outcome of the presidential election, contrary to what Barr had publicly announced weeks earlier, and suggesting that the Georgia legislature "call itself into special session for [t]he limited purpose of considering issues pertaining to the appointment of Presidential Electors". Both Rosen and Donoghue refused to sign the letter, and it was never sent.

[ 359 ] The Associated Press reported in December that Heidi Stirrup, an ally of Trump advisor Stephen Miller , who months earlier had been quietly installed at the Justice Department as the White House's "eyes and ears", had in recent days been banned from the building after it was learned she pressured officials for sensitive information about potential election fraud and other matters she could relay to the White House. Stirrup had also circumvented Justice Department management to extend job offers to political allies for senior Department positions and interfered with the hiring of career officials.

[ 360 ] Pressure on Defense Department According to ABC News reporter Jonathan Karl , Michael Flynn called senior Trump intelligence official Ezra Cohen and told him to take extreme actions, including seizing ballots, to prevent the election results from favoring the Democrat. Cohen did not entertain Flynn's orders, responding, "Sir, the election is over. It's time to move on." Flynn replied, "You're a quitter! This is not over! Don't be a quitter!" [ 361 ] [ 362 ] Trump attorney Sidney Powell called Cohen shortly thereafter and attempted to enlist his help with a far-fetched claim involving then-CIA Director Gina Haspel . According to Karl's book, Powell told Cohen that "Haspel has been hurt and taken into custody in Germany. You need to launch a special operations mission to get her." The claim, a conspiracy theory, had been circulating among Powell's QAnon following for some time.

[ 362 ] The conspiracy theory falsely claimed that Haspel had been injured while on a secret CIA operation to seize an election-related computer server that belonged to a company named Scytl. Powell alleged to Cohen that the server contained evidence of "hundreds of thousands, maybe millions, of votes had been switched using rigged voting machines". Powell was under the impression that Haspel had been engaged in this operation with the aim of destroying the nonexistent evidence on that nonexistent server. According to the book, Cohen thought Powell sounded "out of her mind" and he quickly reported the call to the acting defense secretary.

[ 361 ] A December 18, 2020, memo proposed that the Trump administration seek evidence that there had been foreign interference in favor of Biden. The memo laid out a plan for Acting Secretary of Defense Christopher Miller to use National Security Agency and Defense Department powers to seize phone and email records. One of Trump's informal advisers, Michael Pillsbury, described this as "amateur hour" perpetrated by people with no existing connection to Trump who were raising topics that the government had already "said there was no evidence for".

[ 363 ] In May 2021, Miller testified to the January 6 House committee that he had feared Trump might "invoke the Insurrection Act to politicize the military in an antidemocratic manner".

[ 364 ] Plan to seize voting machines The then-President's team also developed plans to have federal authorities seize voting machines from states where the election had been closely contested but won by Biden. News reports indicate that, at various points in the planning, the Justice Department, the Department of Defense, Department of Homeland Security, and the National Guard were considered as entities that would conduct the seizures. Several versions of a draft Executive Order that would authorize the seizures were prepared. Then-President Trump was reported to have reviewed the draft Executive Order authorizing seizure by the National Guard but, based on advice by (among others) Patrick Cipollone and Rudy Giuliani, he did not sign and issue it.

[ 321 ] [ 365 ] In June 2022, an email dated November 21, 2020 surfaced, sent by British biopharmaceuticals executive Andrew Whitney, who in August 2020 pitched to Trump in the Oval Office the toxic botanical extract oleandrin as a cure for COVID-19. The email included a draft "authorizing letter" to be presented by the president allowing three armed private companies to seize all voting machines and related materials, with assistance from U.S. Marshals. The email was sent to Doug Logan, the president of Cyber Ninjas , which later conducted the 2021 Maricopa County presidential ballot audit that sought but failed to find election fraud in that county, and to cybersecurity expert Jim Penrose, who had worked with Sidney Powell, Michael Flynn and Patrick M. Byrne , who were seeking access to voting machines in an attempt to find proof of election fraud.

[ 366 ] [ 367 ] Ellis memos On New Year's Eve, Chief of Staff Mark Meadows sent a memo drafted by Trump attorney Jenna Ellis to a top Pence aide containing a detailed plan to overturn the election results. The plan entailed Pence returning the electoral results to six battleground states on January 6, with a deadline of January 15 for the states to return them. If any state did not return their electoral slate by that date, neither Trump nor Biden would hold a majority, so the election would be thrown to the House for a vote to determine the winner. Per the Constitution, in such a scenario the vote would be conducted on the basis of party control of state legislatures, with Republicans holding 26 of 50, presumably giving Trump the victory.

[ 353 ] Ellis drafted a second memo dated January 5 which she shared with Trump personal attorney, Jay Sekulow . The memo argued that certain provisions of the Electoral Count Act that restricted Pence's authority to accept or reject selected electors were unconstitutional. She proposed that when Pence reached Arizona in the alphabetical order during the certification, he could declare the state's results as disputed and send all the electoral slates back to the states for "the final ascertainment of electors to be completed before continuing". Sekulow did not agree that Pence had such authority.

[ 354 ] Plan to obtain National Security Agency data In February 2022, The Washington Post obtained a memo of unknown provenance dated December 18, 2020, that had circulated among Trump allies and was shared with some Republican senators. The memo called for Trump to direct acting defense secretary Christopher Miller to obtain " NSA unprocessed raw signals data" in an effort to prove foreign interference in the election. The proposal called for Miller to direct three men named in the document to acquire the data. At least two Republican senators received the memo after a January 4 meeting at the Trump International Hotel attended by at least three senators and others, which had been arranged by Mike Lindell. The meeting centered around voting machines and alleged interference by China, Venezuela and other countries. The three men involved were not close to Trump and their names had not been previously reported in efforts to subvert the election. Miller said he was not aware of the memo and Trump did not act on it.

[ 363 ] January 2021 On New Year's Day, White House director of personnel John McEntee sent a series of bullet points via text message to Pence's chief of staff to incorrectly assert that Thomas Jefferson "Used His Position as VP to Win" the 1801 election, which McEntee claimed "proves that the VP has, at a minimum, a substantial discretion to address issues with the electoral process".

Jonathan Karl , the ABC News chief White House correspondent for the duration of the Trump administration, wrote a November 2021 profile of McEntee, characterizing him as particularly powerful because "Trump knew he was the one person willing to do anything Trump wanted".

[ 368 ] [ 353 ] Trump reportedly reached out to Steve Bannon for advice on his quest to overturn the election results.

[ 369 ] In early January, Bannon, John Eastman and Rudy Giuliani were operating what they called a "war room" or "command center" at the Willard Hotel near the White House with the goal of overturning the election results.

Christina Bobb of the pro-Trump One America News was also a participant.

[ 111 ] Further related details of the effort to deny and overturn the election were also reported.

[ 370 ] [ 371 ] [ 372 ] [ 373 ] Justice Department officials pressured Atlanta's top federal prosecutor, B. J. Pak , to say there had been widespread voter fraud in Georgia, warning him that he would be fired if he did not.

[ 374 ] The White House forced Pak to resign on January 4, 2021.

[ 375 ] On January 6, 2021, a joint session of Congress presided over by Vice President Pence and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi took place to count the electoral votes . Normally a ceremonial formality, the session was interrupted by a mob that attacked the Capitol .

[ 376 ] [ 377 ] Trump had held a simultaneous rally on the Ellipse where he encouraged his supporters to march to the Capitol building .

[ citation needed ] Five lawyers who represented Trump resigned at the end of January 2021 after claiming he coerced them to repeat false claims of voter fraud.

[ 378 ] Gohmert v. Pence See also: Post-election lawsuits related to the 2020 United States presidential election § Gohmert et al. v. Pence On December 27, 2020, Republican representative Louie Gohmert of Texas and the slate of Republican presidential electors for Arizona filed a lawsuit in the US District Court for the Eastern District of Texas against Vice President Mike Pence , seeking to force him to decide the election outcome.

[ 379 ] [ 380 ] Gohmert argued that the Electoral Count Act of 1887 was unconstitutional, that the Constitution gave Vice President Pence the "sole" power to decide the election outcome, and that Pence had the power to "count elector votes certified by a state's executive", select "a competing slate of duly qualified electors", or "ignore all electors from a certain state".

[ 379 ] [ 381 ] [ 382 ] Pence, represented by the Justice Department, moved to dismiss the case, since Congress, and not the vice president, was a more suitable defendant. The Justice Department also argued that "the Vice President – the only defendant in this case – is ironically the very person whose power [plaintiffs] seek to promote. A suit to establish that the Vice President has discretion over the count, filed against the Vice President, is a walking legal contradiction." [ 383 ] [ 384 ] Lawyers for Congress also supported Pence's position.

[ 384 ] On January 1, 2021, U.S. District Judge Jeremy Kernodle dismissed the suit saying that due to the plaintiffs' lack of standing , the court lacked subject matter jurisdiction relating to the constitutional status of the Electoral Count Act.

[ 380 ] [ 384 ] [ 385 ] On appeal, the next day, the US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit dismissed Gohmert's appeal in a unanimous decision by a three-judge panel.

[ 386 ] Calls with state officials Main article: Trump–Raffensperger phone call On January 2, 2021, Trump, Giuliani, Eastman and others held a conference call with 300 legislators of key states to provide them purported evidence of election fraud to justify calling special sessions of their legislatures in an attempt to decertify their electors. Three days later, dozens of lawmakers from five key states wrote Pence to ask he delay the January 6 final certification of electors for ten days to allow legislators the opportunity to reconsider their states' certifications.

[ 111 ] That same day, Trump held a one-hour phone call with Georgia Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger.

[ 387 ] [ 388 ] Trump was joined by Chief of Staff Mark Meadows, trade adviser Peter Navarro , Justice Department official John Lott Jr.

, law professor John Eastman , and attorneys Rudy Giuliani, Cleta Mitchell and Kurt Hilbert. Raffensperger was joined by his general counsel Ryan Germany.

[ 389 ] Raffensperger recorded the call, reportedly doing so while recalling his November 13 call with Trump ally and South Carolina Senator Lindsey Graham, after which Graham made public statements about the discussion that were at odds with Raffensperger's recollection.

[ 390 ] In the call with Raffensperger, Trump repeatedly referred to disproven claims of election fraud and urged Raffensperger to overturn the election, saying, "I just want to find 11,780 votes".

[ 107 ] Raffensperger refused, noting that Georgia had certified its results after counting the votes three times, [ 391 ] and said at one point in the conversation, "Well, Mr. President, the challenge you have is the data you have is wrong".

[ 391 ] [ 392 ] Trump issued a vague threat suggesting that Raffensperger and his general counsel Ryan Germany might be subject to criminal liability.

[ 393 ] After the Georgia call, Trump and his team spoke on Zoom with officials in Arizona, Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin.

[ 394 ] Raffensperger told his advisers that he did not wish a recording or a transcript to be made public unless Trump made false claims about the conversation or attacked Georgia officials. On the morning of January 3, Trump tweeted that Raffensperger "was unwilling, or unable, to answer questions" about various election-related conspiracy theories endorsed by Trump. Raffensperger replied by tweet, "Respectfully, President Trump: what you're saying is not true. The truth will come out." [ 395 ] Later that day, The Washington Post reported on the call and published the full audio and transcript [ 389 ] [ 396 ] (the Associated Press also obtained the recording that day).

[ 391 ] Two months later, it was revealed that Trump had also called Raffensperger's chief investigator, Frances Watson, on December 23. He spoke to her for six minutes, during which he told her: "When the right answer comes out, you'll be praised".

[ 397 ] [ 398 ] Legal experts stated that Trump's attempt to pressure Raffensperger could have violated election law, [ 391 ] including federal and state laws against soliciting election fraud or interference in elections.

[ 394 ] [ 399 ] Election-law scholar Edward B. Foley called Trump's conduct "inappropriate and contemptible" while the executive director of Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington called Trump's attempt "to rig a presidential election ... a low point in American history and unquestionably impeachable conduct".

[ 400 ] Democrats condemned Trump's conduct.

[ 391 ] Vice President-elect Harris, as well as Representative Adam Schiff , [ 401 ] (the chief prosecutor at Trump's first impeachment trial ) said that Trump's attempt to pressure Raffensperger was an abuse of power .

[ 391 ] [ 402 ] Senator Dick Durbin as well as Representatives Ted Lieu and Kathleen Rice requested a criminal investigation, [ 403 ] while others called Trump's conduct an impeachable offense.

[ 404 ] More than 90 House Democrats supported a formal censure resolution , introduced by Representative Hank Johnson of Georgia, to "censure and condemn" Trump for having "misused the power of his office by threatening an elected official with vague criminal consequences if he failed to pursue the president's false claims" and for attempting "to willfully deprive the citizens of Georgia of a fair and impartial election process in direct contravention" of state and federal law.

[ 405 ] [ 406 ] In February 2021, Fulton County District Attorney Fani Willis opened a criminal investigation into the phone call along with the phone call made by Lindsey Graham.

[ 407 ] In January 2022, a panel of Fulton County judges agreed to Willis's request to impanel a special grand jury to compel testimony from individuals who had refused to cooperate.

[ 408 ] Several House and Senate Republicans also condemned Trump's conduct, [ 391 ] [ 409 ] although no Republican described the conduct as criminal or an impeachable offense as of January 4.

[ 409 ] [ needs update ] Republican senator Pat Toomey , who was not seeking reelection in 2022, called it a "new low in this whole futile and sorry episode", and commended "Republican election officials across the country who have discharged their duties with integrity over the past two months while weathering relentless pressure, disinformation, and attacks from the president and his campaign".

[ 409 ] Other congressional Republicans ignored or sought to defend Trump's Georgia call, including House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy [ 406 ] and Georgia Senator David Perdue , who told Fox News in an interview that he thought releasing the tape of the call was "disgusting".

[ 410 ] Justice Department pressured and efforts made to replace acting attorney general The day after Attorney General William Barr said he intended to resign, Trump began to pressure his planned replacement, Jeffrey Rosen , to help him fight the election results. In particular, Trump asked Rosen to file legal briefs supporting lawsuits against the election results; to announce Justice Department investigations of alleged serious election fraud; and to appoint special prosecutors to investigate Trump's unfounded allegations of voter fraud and accusations against Dominion Voting Systems.

[ 411 ] Rosen refused, as did his deputy, Richard Donoghue , as the Justice Department had already determined and announced that there was no evidence of widespread voter fraud.

[ 34 ] However, Trump continued to pressure them.

[ 411 ] Despite these disagreements, Rosen became acting U.S. Attorney General on December 24 as originally planned. Trump continued to pressure Rosen, asking him to go to the Supreme Court directly to invalidate the election results, but Rosen – along with his predecessor Barr and former acting Solicitor General Jeffrey Wall – said such a case would have no basis and refused to file it.

[ 412 ] [ 413 ] Meanwhile, assistant attorney general Jeffrey Clark , acting head of the Civil Division , proposed himself as Rosen's replacement, suggesting to Trump that he would support the president's efforts to overturn the election results. Clark told Rosen and other top Justice Department officials that the Department should announce it was investigating serious election fraud issues. Clark drafted a letter to Georgia officials claiming the DOJ had "identified significant concerns that may have impacted the outcome of the election in multiple States" and urging the Georgia legislature to convene a special session for the "purpose of considering issues pertaining to the appointment of Presidential Electors".

[ 414 ] Rosen and his deputy Richard Donoghue rejected the suggestion, as the Department had previously determined and announced that there was no significant fraud.

[ 34 ] On January 3, Clark revealed to Rosen that Trump intended to appoint him in Rosen's place. Rosen, Donoghue, and head of the Office of Legal Counsel Steven Engel made a pact to resign if Rosen was removed. Confronted with the threat of mass resignations, the president backed away from the plan.

[ 411 ] [ 415 ] In early August 2021, Rosen and Donoghue told the Justice Department inspector general and members of the Senate Judiciary Committee that Clark attempted to help Trump subvert the election.

[ 416 ] [ 417 ] Rosen also told the Committee that Trump opened a January 3 Oval Office meeting with Rosen, Donoghue and Clark by saying, "One thing we know is you, Rosen, aren't going to do anything to overturn the election".

[ 418 ] During the closing weeks of the Trump presidency, White House chief of staff Mark Meadows sent multiple emails to Rosen, asking him to investigate conspiracy theories, including that satellites had been used from Italy to remotely switch votes from Trump to Biden. Rosen did not open the investigation.

[ 419 ] Preparations by chief of staff During the days leading up to January 6, Chief of Staff Mark Meadows sent messages in support of preparing alternate Republican electors to replace those in some states in which Biden might win. He also claimed in an email that the National Guard would be ready to "protect pro Trump people".

[ 420 ] Additionally, a PowerPoint presentation on how the election could be overturned was sent by email to Meadows on January 5. The presentation, circulated by retired Army Colonel Phil Waldron [ 421 ] and apparently inspired by the ideas of Jovan Hutton Pulitzer , alleged foreign interference in the election and recommended that the president declare a national emergency to delay the certification, that Pence provide alternate electors, and that the military count votes. When Meadows was subpoenaed in September 2021 by the United States House Select Committee on the January 6 Attack , he provided the document to the Committee and stated that he had not acted on the plan it described.

[ 422 ] [ 423 ] Of the broader context, U.S. Representative Ro Khanna said on December 15: "There were 20, 30 people who knew about it and were close to going through with it".

[ 424 ] More pressure on Pence In early January 2021, Trump and his supporters continued to pressure Pence into aiding their attempts to overturn election results during the January 6 certification. In early January, Trump criticized Pence for being "too honest" and warned him that people would "hate" him and believe he was "stupid".

[ 425 ] On January 1 , Trump aide John McEntee sent a memo to Pence's chief of staff, Marc Short, titled "Jefferson used his position as VP to win", suggesting that Pence could emulate Thomas Jefferson by taking the actions encouraged by Trump and his supporters.

[ 353 ] On January 2 in an appearance on Fox News, Trump aide Peter Navarro claimed that Pence had authority to delay election certification and to require an audit of the states' election results.

[ 426 ] Navarro, a promoter of the Green Bay Sweep , was intimately involved with the election-overturn effort. His remarks elicited a public response from the Vice President's office.

[ 427 ] On January 3 , Eastman memos author John Eastman briefed Marc Short and vice-presidential counsel Greg Jacob on the arguments he had been presenting to Trump about the Vice President's certification role.

[ 347 ] On January 4 , Trump tweeted, "the vice president has the power to reject fraudulently chosen electors".

[ 428 ] Later that day, Trump told an audience of thousands at a January 4 rally in Georgia, "I hope Mike Pence comes through for us ... Of course, if he doesn't come through, I won't like him quite as much".

[ 428 ] On January 4 and 5 , Trump met with Pence at the White House several times, attempting to persuade Pence to act as recommended by the Eastman memos ; Eastman was present for at least one of the meetings.

[ 429 ] [ 339 ] Also, on January 5 – following a January 2 call between Trump, Giuliani, Eastman, and about 300 state legislators – several dozen of those legislators from five key states wrote to Pence and requested a 10-day delay of certification to allow reconsideration of the electoral results previously certified by those state legislatures.

[ 111 ] Also on January 5 , Eastman communicated with Jacob.

[ 347 ] That day, Jacob wrote a memo to Pence stating that Eastman's plan would violate multiple provisions of the Electoral Count Act and would assuredly be blocked in court, or if not considered by a court, would create an unprecedented political crisis and "the vice president would likely find himself in an isolated standoff against both houses of Congress...with no neutral arbiter available to break the impasse".

[ 430 ] On January 5 or the early morning of January 6 , after hearing from Pence and that he did not agree that the Vice President's power extended to actions that would change election results, Trump issued a statement falsely claiming that Pence was "in total agreement" with his contention that "the vice president has the power to act".

[ 339 ] On January 6 in the morning, Trump called Pence and again attempted to secure his cooperation. Trump reportedly told Pence, "You can either go down in history as a patriot or you can go down in history as a pussy".

[ 429 ] On January 6 at the rally preceding the 2021 United States Capitol attack , Trump said, "If Mike Pence does the right thing, we win the election", "Mike Pence is going to have to come through for us, and if he doesn't, that will be a sad day for our country", and "All Vice President Pence has to do is send it back to the states to recertify and we become president ...".

[ 431 ] Other speakers at the January 6 rally, notably Giuliani and Eastman, also highlighted the actions being requested of Pence.

[ 432 ] After the rally, during the 2021 United States Capitol attack , rioters chanted "Hang Mike Pence" and displayed gallows complete with a hanging noose.

During the Capitol attack on January 6 , Eastman emailed Jacob, who was with Pence in the Capitol, saying that the siege was occurring "because YOU and your boss did not do what was necessary".

[ 370 ] Also, during the January 6 Capitol attack and resulting interruption of the certification process, Trump tweeted, "Mike Pence didn't have the courage to do what should have been done to protect our Country and our Constitution".

[ 429 ] The certification process was interrupted for about 5 hours and 53 minutes (from 2:13 p.m. to 8:06 p.m.) .

In a meeting arranged by Senior presidential advisor Jared Kushner , Trump and Pence met each other on January 11 for the purpose of reconciliation.

[ 433 ] January 6 joint session Main article: 2021 United States Electoral College vote count Senate efforts In December 2020, several Republican members of the House, led by Representative Mo Brooks of Alabama, [ 33 ] [ 434 ] as well as Republican senator Josh Hawley of Missouri, [ 435 ] declared that they would formally object to the counting of the electoral votes of five swing states won by Biden during the January 6, 2021, joint session.

[ 33 ] [ 376 ] [ 434 ] The objections would then trigger votes from both houses.

[ 376 ] At least 140 House Republicans reportedly planned to vote against the counting of electoral votes, despite the lack of any credible allegation of an irregularity that would have impacted the election, and the allegations' rejections by courts, election officials, the Electoral College and others, [ 33 ] and despite the fact that almost all of the Republican objectors had "just won elections in the very same balloting they are now claiming was fraudulently administered".

[ 118 ] Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell , who on December 15 had acknowledged Biden's victory the day after the Electoral College vote, privately urged his Republican Senate colleagues not to join efforts by some House Republicans to challenge the vote count, [ 33 ] but he was unable to persuade Hawley not to lodge an objection.

[ 436 ] Hawley used his objection stance in fundraising emails.

[ 437 ] [ 438 ] Eleven Republican senators and senators-elect Ted Cruz , Ron Johnson , James Lankford , Steve Daines , John Kennedy , Marsha Blackburn , Mike Braun , Cynthia Lummis , Roger Marshall , Bill Hagerty , and Tommy Tuberville – one-quarter of Senate Republicans – announced that they would join Hawley's challenge. However, many senators acknowledged that it would not succeed. On January 2, 2021, Vice President Pence had expressed support for the attempt to overturn Biden's victory. Neither Pence nor the 11 senators planning to object made any specific allegation of fraud; rather, they vaguely suggested that some wrongdoing might have taken place.

[ 118 ] Other Senate Republicans were noncommittal or opposed to the attempt by the 11 Republican senators to subvert the election results.

[ 436 ] Objections to the electoral votes had virtually no chance of success, as Democrats had a majority in the House of Representatives [ 33 ] and, although the Senate had a Republican majority, there was no majority for overturning the election results.

[ 436 ] Trevor Potter , a Republican former chairman of the Federal Election Commission and the president of the Campaign Legal Center , wrote that the counting joint session "gives Trump's die-hard supporters in Congress an opportunity to again provide more disinformation about the election on national television".

[ 376 ] After Senator John Thune , the second highest-ranking Senate Republican, said that the challenge to the election results would fail "like a shot dog" in the Senate, Trump attacked him on Twitter.

[ 118 ] [ 439 ] In early January, Trump began to pressure Pence to take action to overturn the election. As vice president, Pence presides over the Congressional session to count the electoral votes – normally a non-controversial, ceremonial event. For days beforehand, Trump demanded both in public and in private that Pence use that position to overturn the election results in swing states and declare Trump–Pence the winners of the election.

[ 440 ] Pence demurred that the law does not give him that power, but Trump insisted that "The vice president and I are in total agreement that the vice president has the power to act".

[ 339 ] Pence ultimately released a statement stating: "It is my considered judgment that my oath to support and defend the Constitution constrains me from claiming unilateral authority to determine which electoral votes should be counted and which should not".

[ 441 ] An hour before the joint session was set to start, the president's lawyer Rudy Giuliani tried to call freshman senator Tommy Tuberville but accidentally left a message in the voicemail of another senator, which was subsequently leaked to The Dispatch , stating that "we need you, our Republican friends, to try to just slow it down ... So if you could object to every state and, along with a congressman, get a hearing for every state, I know we would delay you a lot, but it would give us the opportunity to get the legislators who are very, very close to pulling their vote ... they have written letters asking that you guys adjourn and send them back the questionable ones and they'll fix them up".

[ 442 ] [ 443 ] House votes At the January 6 session, after Republican senators had raised objections to Biden's electoral victory, the House debated and voted. A majority of Republicans, totaling 139 and including Republican leader Kevin McCarthy and his deputy Steve Scalise , voted to support at least one objection.

[ 444 ] [ 445 ] Report by Rep. Zoe Lofgren At the end of February 2021, Democratic Rep.

Zoe Lofgren , chair of the House Administration Committee, released a nearly 2,000-page report that examined the social media posts between election night and January 6 of Republican leaders who had voted against certifying the election results, writing "Many of former President Trump's false statements were made in very public settings. Had Members made similar public statements in the weeks and months before the January 6th attack? Statements which are readily available in the public arena may be part of any consideration of Congress' constitutional prerogatives and responsibilities." [ 446 ] Capitol attack Main article: January 6 United States Capitol attack Protesters on Capitol grounds, January 6, 2021 Rioters attacking the Capitol Starting in December, Trump repeatedly encouraged his supporters to protest in Washington, D.C., on January 6 in support of his campaign to overturn the election results, [ 447 ] telling his supporters to "Be there, will be wild!" [ 448 ] The Washington Post editorial board criticized Trump for urging street protests, referring to previous violence by some Trump supporters at two rallies and his statement during a presidential debate telling the Proud Boys to "stand back and stand by".

[ 449 ] Multiple groups of die-hard Trump supporters staged rallies in Washington on that day: Women for America First; the Eighty Percent Coalition (also at Freedom Plaza) (the group's name refers to the belief that approximately 80% of Trump voters do not accept the legitimacy of Biden's win); and "The Silent Majority" (a group organized by a South Carolina conservative activist).

[ 447 ] [ 450 ] George Papadopoulos and Roger Stone , ardent allies of Trump, headlined some of the events. In addition to the formally organized events, the Proud Boys, other far-right groups, and white supremacists vowed to descend on Washington on January 6, with some threatening violence and pledging to carry weapons.

[ 447 ] Proud Boys leader Enrique Tarrio said that his followers would "be incognito" and would "spread across downtown DC in smaller teams".

[ 450 ] On January 4, Tarrio was arrested by District police on misdemeanor and felony charges.

[ 451 ] As the certification process was underway, Trump gave a speech encouraging his supporters to march to the Capitol. Many of them did, whereupon they joined other protesters already gathered in the area and violently breached and stormed the Capitol, eventually entering the Senate chamber as well as numerous offices. The Congressional proceedings were suspended, the legislators were taken to secure locations, and Nancy Pelosi was evacuated.

[ 452 ] Protestors penetrated the Senate chamber.

[ 453 ] One unarmed woman was shot and killed by Capitol Police inside the Capitol building after she attempted to climb through a broken door into the Speaker's Lobby, leading to the House chamber; the officer who shot her was placed on administrative leave pending an investigation, and was ultimately cleared of any wrongdoing.

[ 454 ] [ 455 ] Another rioter died of a drug overdose, and three succumbed to natural causes.

[ 456 ] A Capitol Police officer died from a stroke the next day.

[ 457 ] As the attack progressed, Pence was evacuated from the Senate chamber to a basement room, as Trump tweeted, "Mike Pence didn't have the courage to do what should have been done to protect our Country and our Constitution". The Secret Service prepared to evacuate Pence to Andrews Air Force Base .

Carol Leonnig and Philip Rucker reported in their book I Alone Can Fix It that Pence was brought to his armored limousine but told his security chief Tim Giebels, "I'm not leaving the Capitol...If I get in that vehicle, you guys are taking off. I'm not getting in the car." Pence remained at the Capitol and certified the election results late that night.

[ 458 ] [ 459 ] [ 460 ] On January 3, 2022, Newsweek reported, for the first time, the deployment of undercover commandos at the Capitol on January 6, 2021, to manage the "most extreme possibilities", including an attack on President Donald Trump or Vice President Mike Pence.

[ 461 ] [ citation needed ] According to a January 3, 2022, CNN News report, the United States House Select Committee on the January 6 Attack has learned that Trump did nothing to stop the attack as it was unfolding. Leaders of the committee Bennie Thompson (D- MS ) and Liz Cheney (R- WY ) have characterized his failure to intervene, despite being asked to do so, as "dereliction of duty".

[ 462 ] In April 2022, Cheney stated: It's absolutely clear that what President Trump was doing, what a number of people around him were doing, that they knew it was unlawful ... I think what we have seen is a massive and well-organized and well-planned effort that used multiple tools to try to overturn an election.

[ 463 ] [ 464 ] Trump operatives breach Coffee County, Georgia election system Main article: Prosecution of Donald Trump in Georgia § Coffee County election equipment breach On January 1, 2021, lawyers on Trump's team asked a Georgia tech firm to assist them in looking into voting systems in Coffee County, Georgia.

[ 465 ] On January 7, one of the fake electors in Georgia escorted two Trump operatives into the county's election office, and the Trump team copied data from the office.

[ 466 ] Fani Willis examined this incident as part of the 2020 Georgia election investigation . On August 14, 2023, Trump and 18 co-defendants were indicted in the Georgia case , and four of the 19 defendants— Sidney Powell , Misty Hampton, Cathleen Latham, and Scott G. Hall—were charged in the Coffee County breach.

[ 467 ] Lindell memo Main article: Mike Lindell § Attempts to overturn 2020 presidential election On January 15, Trump ally and My Pillow CEO Mike Lindell visited the White House, where he was photographed carrying notes that appeared to suggest an additional attempt to overturn the election.

[ 468 ] The document bore a heading containing the words "taken immediately to save ... Constitution" [ 469 ] and called for 780th Military Intelligence Brigade (Cyber) civilian lawyer [ 468 ] "Frank Colon NOW as Acting National Security [ illegible ]", and mentioned the "Insurrection Act" and "martial law".

[ 468 ] It further recommended "[m]ov[ing] Kash Patel to CIA Acting" [ 470 ] and made reference to Trump loyalist Sidney Powell .

[ 471 ] Later developments Taxpayer costs According to a Washington Post assessment published February 6, 2021, Trump's falsehoods about fraud had cost taxpayers more than half a billion dollars in spending to enhance security, resolve legal disputes and repair property, among other things.

[ 472 ] Security concerns over March 4, 2021 Main article: Concerns over March 4, 2021 Security was bolstered in Washington, D.C., in preparation for March 4, which QAnon adherents, adopting a false belief from sovereign citizen ideology, believed would be the day Trump was re-inaugurated as president.

[ 473 ] The House prematurely ended its work for the week following an announcement by the Capitol Police of intelligence on a "possible plot" by an identified militia group to breach the Capitol building on that day.

[ 474 ] Ultimately, March 4 passed without any serious incidents being reported.

Election audits Alleging fraud, during 2021 Republicans initiated or proposed audits in several states, in addition to the election audits done normally in some states, which do not always include the presidency.

An audit in Maricopa County, Arizona that began in April inspired Republicans in other states to pursue similar efforts, with some calling for audits in all fifty states.

[ 475 ] [ 476 ] More than a year after the election, Trump supporters continued to pressure state election officials to investigate or decertify the outcome, even in states where Trump won by a large margin.

[ 477 ] An Associated Press analysis published in December 2021 examined every potential case of voter fraud in the six battleground states that Trump had challenged. The analysis found 473 potential incidents. Even if all the incidents involved votes for Biden, which they did not, and involved ballots that were actually counted, which they did not, the number was far smaller than would have been necessary to change the election outcome. The analysis found no evidence of organized fraud but rather in virtually every case it involved an individual acting alone.

[ 478 ] Arizona Main articles: 2020 United States presidential election in Arizona § Audits and Recounts by Election Officials , and 2021 Maricopa County presidential ballot audit On March 31, 2021, the Arizona Senate Republican caucus hired four firms to perform an audit of the presidential ballots in Maricopa County , with a Florida -based company called Cyber Ninjas being the lead firm.

[ 479 ] There was no stated purpose of overturning the election, and there is no mechanism under the Constitution by which the Congressional certification of the result could be reversed. Arizona Senate President Karen Fann said that the audit was not intended to overturn the state's election results, including at a July 15 hearing.

[ 480 ] Nevertheless, Trump and some of his supporters expressed the hope that the Arizona result would be changed and that there might be a "domino effect" in which other states changed their results.

[ 481 ] The auditors released a report on September 24, 2021, finding no proof of fraud and that their ballot recount increased Biden's margin of victory by 360 votes.

[ 482 ] [ 483 ] [ 484 ] Following the audit, Arizona Governor Doug Ducey rejected calls for the state's election to be decertified or overturned.

[ 485 ] In January 2022, Maricopa County election officials released a final report finding nearly every claim the auditors made was false or misleading.

[ 486 ] The next day, Cyber Ninjas announced it was shutting down, as a Maricopa County judge imposed a $50,000 contempt fine on the company for every day it refused to hand over documents as it had been ordered to do months earlier.

[ 487 ] After a six-month investigation into alleged fraud by Maricopa County election officials in the 2020 presidential election, Arizona attorney general Mark Brnovich said in April 2022 that he found no proof of fraud.

[ 488 ] He released an interim report claiming that "serious vulnerabilities" had been identified, omitting his investigators' findings to the contrary and withholding the more complete report. Brnovich was succeeded by Kris Mayes . When Brnovich left office in January 2023, Mayes released the more complete report that had been written during Brnovich's tenure showing that none of the allegations against the Maricopa County election board had merit.

[ 489 ] On April 23, 2024, Arizona indicted 11 fake electors and seven Trump allies and described five unindicted coconspirators.

Georgia Main article: 2020 United States presidential election in Georgia § Statewide audit and recount A group called VoterGA filed a lawsuit requesting to examine by microscope 150,000 Fulton County ballots that it asserted might be counterfeit. The suit arose after four Republican auditors involved with the November 2020 statewide audit and manual recount claimed to see what they asserted were "pristine" absentee ballots which they suspected might have been computer-generated, though an October 2021 investigation by the Georgia secretary of state's office found that there were no counterfeit ballots in the batches named by the complainants.

[ 490 ] After an initial ruling in favor of the suit by a superior court judge in May 2021, it was ultimately dismissed in October because the plaintiffs "failed to allege a particularized injury". The dismissal of the suit marked the end of the last remaining lawsuit challenging the Georgia election results until another suit making largely the same argument was subsequently filed. In December 2021, that suit was joined by David Perdue , who had announced his candidacy for Georgia governor days earlier. Perdue lost his bid to be reelected as a United States senator in 2020 and asserted that he, like Trump, had been cheated.

[ 491 ] [ 492 ] [ 493 ] [ 494 ] Trump had claimed that about 5,000 dead people had voted in Georgia, but an examination by the State Election Board released in December 2021 found that four absentee ballots of dead people had been mailed in by relatives.

[ 495 ] Idaho In September 2021, Bonner County, Idaho announced it would perform a recount of ballots cast in the election, in response to an allegation by election conspiracy theorist Mike Lindell that all 44 Idaho counties had been digitally hacked. Lindell provided a detailed list of IP addresses he asserted had been compromised. County Clerk Mike Rosedale stated that all county voting machines were fully airgapped from the Internet, also noting that seven Idaho counties don't use voting machines. Lindell alleged that a specific formula had been applied by hackers to flip votes from Trump to Biden. Rosedale said Lindell had not contacted his office before presenting his allegations.

[ 496 ] The Bonner audit, and audits of two other counties that don't use voting machines, affirmed the accuracy of the ballot count. Chief Deputy Secretary of State Chad Houck said Lindell would be sent a bill for the audits.

[ 497 ] [ 498 ] [ importance?

] Pennsylvania Main article: 2020 United States presidential election in Pennsylvania § Official audits and recounts The Republican Commissioners agreed to a ballot audit in Fulton County, PA due to a subpoena threat from State Senator Doug Mastriano .

[ 499 ] [ 500 ] Fulton County's audit was funded by Defending The Republic an organization founded by Trump's lawyer Sidney Powell .

[ 501 ] Defying a directive from the State's Board of Elections, the County allowed Wake Technology Services, Inc. to access voting machines. The company had originally performed the hand recount in Maricopa County's ballot audit .

[ 502 ] The original draft of its audit report concluded that Fulton's "election was well run [and] followed all Commonwealth and Federal guidelines." [ 499 ] At a state Senate hearing, the Republican chairman of Fulton County's Board of Commissioners testified that his county's audit found nothing wrong.

[ 503 ] By August 2021, Pennsylvania Republican lawmakers were preparing to hold formal hearings on the election and conduct a "full forensic investigation". Prior to the investigation, Senate President pro tempore Jake Corman made a statement asserting that the investigation is not meant to overturn the results of Pennsylvania's election and that the legislature does not have the authority to do so.

[ 504 ] The next month, Republicans approved subpoenas for a wide range of personal information on millions of voters who cast votes in the May primary and November general election. Republicans intended to hire private firms to manage the data.

[ 505 ] [ 506 ] [ 507 ] On September 23, 2021, Pennsylvania Attorney General Josh Shapiro filed a lawsuit seeking to block the subpoenas from being issued.

[ 508 ] On October 7, 2021, Corman said that he accepted the results of the election but also reaffirmed his support for the investigation.

[ 509 ] [ needs update ] Texas The Texas attorney general's office, led by ardent Trump ally Ken Paxton , spent more than 22,000 staff hours investigating potential voting fraud in 2020. The investigation identified and prosecuted sixteen cases of false addresses on voter registration forms, among nearly 17 million registered voters in the state. This was half as many cases as two years earlier. A 2021 investigation found only three prosecutable cases among all elections in the state.

[ 510 ] [ 511 ] In September 2021, hours after Trump wrote to Texas governor Greg Abbott demanding an audit of the state's election results, the Texas secretary of state's office announced that audits had begun in four major counties. County officials and others in the secretary of state's office initially said they were unaware of any audit underway.

[ 512 ] The audits were conducted by secretary of state John Scott , whom Abbott appointed in October 2021. Scott is a former state litigator who briefly joined Trump's legal team in 2020 to challenge the election results. He released preliminary findings of the audits in December 2021 that found few issues, including 17 votes cast by deceased voters and 60 cross-state duplicate votes among 3.9 million ballots cast. The duplicate votes remained under investigation.

[ 513 ] [ 514 ] [ needs update ] Wisconsin Main article: 2020 United States presidential election in Wisconsin § Aftermath By May 2021, state election officials had identified 27 potential cases of voting fraud among 3.3 million ballots cast. Sixteen of those cases involved people using a UPS Store rather than their residence for their mailing address.

[ 515 ] Trump and his allies filed multiple lawsuits challenging Wisconsin election results but lost all of them, including a series of decisions by the state Supreme Court. State Republicans initiated multiple types of investigations beginning in February 2021. That month, the Republican majority legislature voted to direct the nonpartisan Legislative Audit Bureau to conduct an examination of some election procedures.

[ 516 ] In May 2021, Robin Vos , the Republican speaker of the Wisconsin state assembly , hired three retired police officers and an attorney to examine reported tips of potential election irregularities.

[ 517 ] Janel Brandtjen , who chairs the Assembly elections committee, opened a "forensic audit" modeled after the Maricopa County, Arizona audit . She had traveled to Arizona to review that audit. Brandtjen issued subpoenas to two major counties for ballots and voting machines, but they were rejected because Vos had not signed them, as required by law. Vos indicated he did not intend to sign the subpoenas, which requested information that doesn't exist or doesn't apply to Wisconsin elections. Milwaukee County Clerk George Christenson asserted the subpoena he received was "clearly a cut and paste job" from similar election-related legal moves by Republicans in other states.

[ 518 ] In June 2021, Vos selected Republican former Wisconsin Supreme Court justice Michael Gableman to conduct an investigation of the election.

[ 519 ] Gableman had been considered for a position in the Trump administration in 2017.

[ 520 ] Soon after the election, Gableman had voiced conspiracy theories about the outcome and had attended an August conference hosted by election conspiracy theorist Mike Lindell . He also consulted Shiva Ayyadurai , a conspiracy theorist whose work on the Arizona audit was discredited. Gableman issued subpoenas, later withdrawn, some of which contained errors and requested information that was already public. He later stated, "Most people, myself included, do not have a comprehensive understanding or even any understanding of how elections work". Gableman sent emails to election officials across the state asking them to retain information, but they came from a Gmail account associated with a different name and in some cases were blocked as a security concern or spam. Gableman compared a newspaper's coverage of his investigation to Nazi propaganda . In October, the office of Wisconsin attorney general Josh Kaul sent Gableman a nine-page letter characterizing the investigation as unlawful and called for it to be closed.

[ 521 ] [ 522 ] [ 518 ] On October 22, 2021, the nonpartisan Legislative Audit Bureau released their findings of an audit ordered by Republicans in February 2021. The findings reported that there was no evidence of widespread voter fraud, and that State Senator Robert Cowles said that the election was "safe and secure". State Senator Kathy Bernier said that the audit found no evidence of any "attempt at vote fraud".

[ 523 ] A ten-month review by the conservative Wisconsin Institute for Law and Liberty found in December 2021 that certain election procedures weren't adequately followed, but there was "little direct evidence of fraud, and for the most part, an analysis of the results and voting patterns does not give rise to an inference of fraud".

[ 524 ] Gableman's 13-month investigation found no evidence of election fraud and cost taxpayers $2 million. Vos fired Gableman and multiple parties referred him to the Office of Lawyer Regulation of the Wisconsin Supreme Court on ethics complaints.

[ 525 ] Mike Lindell reinstatement prediction Main article: Mike Lindell § Attempts to overturn 2020 presidential election On March 29, 2021, businessman and Trump supporter Mike Lindell predicted on Steve Bannon's podcast that Trump would be back in office on "August 13", the day after his three-day cyber fraud conference in Sioux Falls , stating "it'll be the talk of the world". When President Joe Biden remained in office, Lindell moved his prediction for Trump's return to September 30, and then to the end of 2021.

[ 526 ] [ 527 ] Senate report on Trump's efforts to overturn the election Senate Judiciary Committee report Main article: Aftermath of the January 6 United States Capitol attack § U.S. Senate investigation On October 7, 2021, the Senate Committee on the Judiciary published their report on Trump's efforts to pressure the Department of Justice to overturn the results of the 2020 election.

[ 528 ] Election law reform efforts The controversies surrounding the election prompted calls to improve federal election laws. The Democratic led House of Representatives passed the For the People Act on March 3, 2019, but it was blocked from being heard in the Republican-led Senate by Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell .

[ 529 ] [ original research?

] The Electoral Count Reform and Presidential Transition Improvement Act was passed on December 23, 2022.

[ 530 ] The Enhanced Election Security and Protection Act was also proposed in July 2022 [ 531 ] but was not passed.

[ 532 ] Post-election voter restriction efforts by Republicans This paragraph is an excerpt from Republican efforts to restrict voting following the 2020 United States presidential election .

[ edit ] Following the 2020 United States presidential election and the unsuccessful attempts by Donald Trump and various other Republican officials to overturn it, Republican lawmakers initiated a sweeping effort to make voting laws more restrictive within several states across the country.

[ 533 ] [ 534 ] According to the Brennan Center for Justice , as of October 4, 2021, more than 425 bills that would restrict voting access have been introduced in 49 states—with 33 of these bills enacted across 19 states so far.

[ 535 ] The bills are largely centered around limiting mail-in voting , strengthening voter ID laws , shortening early voting , eliminating automatic and same-day voter registration , curbing the use of ballot drop boxes , and allowing for increased purging of voter rolls .

[ 536 ] [ 537 ] Republicans in at least eight states have also introduced bills that would give lawmakers greater power over election administration after they were unsuccessful in their attempts to overturn election results in swing states won by Democratic candidate Joe Biden in the 2020 election.

[ 538 ] [ 539 ] [ 540 ] [ 541 ] The efforts garnered press attention and public outrage from Democrats, and by 2023 Republicans had adopted a more "under the radar" approach to achieve their goals.

[ 542 ] Impact on secretaries of state In multiple U.S. states, officials who work for the secretary of state received threats following the election and were still receiving threats as of October 2021. Law enforcement generally was not prepared to provide ongoing security for these officials, as their positions had never before been considered high-risk.

[ 543 ] House Select Committee on the January 6 Attack Main article: United States House Select Committee on the January 6 Attack In July 2021, the House Select Committee on the January 6 Attack was formed, largely along party lines.

[ 544 ] At the first public hearing on June 9, 2022, the committee said that Trump had engaged in a seven-part conspiracy to overturn a free and fair democratic election, [ 545 ] [ 546 ] and they discussed it in the hearings that followed. According to Bennie Thompson, chair of the committee: "Jan. 6 was the culmination of an attempted coup, a brazen attempt, as one rioter put it shortly after Jan. 6, to overthrow the government ... The violence was no accident. It represents Trump's last stand, most desperate chance to halt the transfer of power." Trump, according to the committee, "lied to the American people, ignored all evidence refuting his false fraud claims, pressured state and federal officials to throw out election results favoring his challenger, encouraged a violent mob to storm the Capitol and even signaled support for the execution of his own vice president".

[ 545 ] [ 546 ] On October 21, 2022, the committee subpoenaed Trump's testimony and relevant records.

[ 547 ] He sued the committee and never testified.

[ 548 ] [ 549 ] On December 19, 2022, the committee criminally referred him to the Justice Department, [ 53 ] though the Justice Department was already investigating .

2021 German federal election During the 2021 German federal election , the Center for Monitoring, Analysis and Strategy (CeMAS) found that false claims of voter fraud had become commonplace on Telegram in Germany, with accusations against Dominion Voting Systems being common despite the company's technology not being used in German elections.

[ h ] CeMAS researcher Miro Dittrich said, "We have seen far-right actors try to claim election fraud since at least 2016, but it didn't take off. When Trump started telling the ' big lie ,' it became a big issue in Germany, sometimes bigger than the pandemic, because far-right groups and the AfD are carefully monitoring the success Trump is having with this narrative." [ 551 ] Justice Department investigations Main article: United States Justice Department investigation into attempts to overturn the 2020 presidential election By March 2022, Justice Department investigations of participants in the Capitol attack had expanded to include activities of Trump's inner circle leading up to the attack. A federal grand jury was empaneled that issued at least one subpoena seeking records about people who organized, spoke at, or provided security at Trump rallies, as well as information about members of the executive and legislative branches who may have taken part in planning or executing the rallies, or attempted to "obstruct, influence, impede or delay" the certification of the election.

[ 552 ] [ 553 ] Civil lawsuits Main article: Trump fake electors plot § Wisconsin In May 2022, a civil lawsuit was filed in Dane County, Wisconsin, against the ten Trump supporters who had presented themselves as alternate electors for that state.

[ 554 ] Continuing subversion efforts and 2024 predictions To sow election doubt, Trump has escalated use of "rigged election" and "election interference" statements in advance of the 2024 election compared to the previous two elections—the statements described as part of a "heads I win; tails you cheated" rhetorical strategy.

[ 88 ] As of 2025, Trump has publicly continued to insist that the 2020 election was rigged and stolen, while still providing no evidence.

[ 555 ] [ obsolete source ] It has been reported that Trump had admitted his loss to a group of historians in mid-2021 , saying, "We had a deal all set, and then when the election was rigged and lost, what happened is that the deal went away".

[ 60 ] On September 27, 2021, American legal scholar Laurence Tribe and colleagues described the legal background of the attempt to overturn the 2020 election, and named possible ways of averting the use of such a strategy in the future.

[ 556 ] On December 23, 2021, Tribe and colleagues wrote that Attorney General Merrick Garland ought to be "holding the leaders of the Jan. 6 insurrection – all of them – to account" to "teach the next generation that no one is above the law".

[ 557 ] Joshua Keating warned that the playbook used up until this point to challenges the legitimacy of election results could result in a 'coup trap,' where countries suffering a coup attempt are more likely to see another.

[ 558 ] [ 559 ] On December 17, 2021, The Washington Post published an opinion piece by three retired generals on the need to be prepared for a possible insurrection in 2024.

[ 560 ] The New York Times reported later in April 2022 that Trump supporters were continuing to seek ways to overturn the election. John Eastman, state and federal legislators, and right-wing news outlets continued to press for state legislatures to rescind electoral votes for Biden, and to bring new lawsuits asserting large-scale voting fraud. The Times reported that Trump was privately insisting he could be returned to power as he also continued to consider another run for the presidency in 2024. Legal experts expressed concerns that efforts were being made to undermine public confidence in democracy to lay the groundwork for baselessly challenging future elections. Former federal appeals court judge J. Michael Luttig , a prominent conservative attorney for whom Eastman clerked, remarked: At the moment, there is no other way to say it: This is the clearest and most present danger to our democracy. Trump and his supporters in Congress and in the states are preparing now to lay the groundwork to overturn the election in 2024 were Trump, or his designee, to lose the vote for the presidency.

[ 62 ] [ 561 ] On May 1, 2022, investigations by the House Select Committee into fundraising efforts by the Republican National Committee, based on their promotion of Trump's " big lie ", have been supported by a federal judge.

[ 562 ] On May 22, 2022, The New York Times presented a detailed analysis of the continuing efforts by Trump and his allies to further promote "the big lie" and related lies in their attempts to overturn and influence future elections, including those in 2022 and 2024.

[ 563 ] [ 564 ] In June 2022, the Republican Party in Texas adopted a statement that the election was illegitimate into its official party platform.

[ 565 ] On July 9, 2022, after the Wisconsin Supreme Court ruling that ballot dropboxes must be placed inside election clerks' offices in the future, Trump called Wisconsin House Speaker Robin Vos and complained about dropboxes in the 2020 election. Vos said he told Trump that such an attempt to overturn the 2020 election was unconstitutional. Trump posted to Truth Social : "It's now up to Robin Vos to do what everybody knows must be done".

[ 566 ] On August 29, 2022, Trump stated on Truth Social that he should be declared the president, or at least a new election should be held.

[ 567 ] On December 3, 2022, following the release of information by Twitter CEO Elon Musk documenting Twitter executives' discussion of previously disclosed content moderation relating to the New York Post 's story regarding Hunter Biden , Trump made comments on Truth Social suggesting the "termination" of the United States Constitution in order to overturn the outcome of the 2020 election.

[ 568 ] At 2023 campaign events, Trump predicted (without evidence) there would be voter fraud benefiting Democrats in the 2024 election.

[ 569 ] Post-election allegations of statistical improbabilities In the aftermath of the election, numerous claims were made and began to circulate, stating that serious anomalies could be found, suggesting an election fraud. However, a paper entitled "No Evidence For Voter Fraud: A Guide To Statistical Claims About The 2020 Election" written by Justin Grimmer, Haritz Garro and Andrew C. Eggers, was published by the conservative Hoover Institution (February 3, 2021) concluded that the statistics used to "claim some election facts would be unlikely if there had been no fraud" were either not accurate in the first place or if they were accurate, weren't really surprising.

[ 570 ] The Washington Post reported in February 2023 that soon after the election the Trump campaign paid researchers from Berkeley Research Group to examine a wide range of indicators that might suggest the election had been stolen. Trump, Meadows and others were briefed on the findings in December 2020. The analysis found no significant irregularities beyond those commonly found in all elections, and nothing that might have changed the election outcome. The findings were never publicly disclosed, though the Justice Department obtained the analysis and the Smith special counsel investigation examined the matter.

[ 571 ] [ 572 ] [ 573 ] The Post reported in April 2023 that the Trump campaign had hired a second firm, Simpatico Software Systems , days after the election to examine fraud allegations. The company delivered a report late in 2020, finding no evidence of fraud. The company's founder was subpoenaed for testimony by the Smith special counsel investigation in early 2023.

[ 574 ] Reactions Republican critiques of the "big lie" Main article: Republican reactions to Donald Trump's claims of 2020 election fraud Dr. Eastman and President Trump launched a campaign to overturn a democratic election, an action unprecedented in American history. Their campaign was not confined to the ivory tower – it was a coup in search of a legal theory... If Dr. Eastman and President Trump's plan had worked, it would have permanently ended the peaceful transition of power, undermining American democracy and the Constitution. If the country does not commit to investigating and pursuing accountability for those responsible, the Court fears January 6 will repeat itself.

— Judge David O. Carter , United States district court [ 575 ] [ 464 ] Administration dissenters See also: Aftermath of the January 6 United States Capitol attack § Trump administration resignations Hope Hicks told Trump to "move on". Trump replied, "Well, Hope doesn't believe in me". Hicks said, "No, I don't. Nobody's convinced me otherwise." [ 433 ] Kellyanne Conway claimed in her book that she told Trump privately to accept the loss, and he told her in response to "go back to your crazy husband".

[ 433 ] Matthew Pottinger , a leading aide on Trump's China policy, quickly quit in what two sources said was an act of protest against the president's response to the rioting. He was followed by at least five other senior foreign policy aides. Transportation Secretary Elaine Chao , who is married to Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, and Education Secretary Betsy DeVos also resigned in protest.

[ 576 ] In June 2022, Ivanka Trump told the panel of the United States House Select Committee on the January 6 Attack that she does not believe the election was stolen and accepted William Barr's conclusion that voter fraud claims have "zero basis".

[ 577 ] Consistent critics In 2021, The Republican Accountability Project estimated that 6% of national Republicans politicians consistently stood-up for democracy.

[ 578 ] Other prominent Republicans who spoke out against attempts to subvert the election results included Governor Larry Hogan of Maryland, former House Speaker Paul Ryan , and Representative Liz Cheney of Wyoming, the third-highest-ranking Republican in the House.

[ 579 ] Former Republican governor of California, Arnold Schwarzenegger , wrote in The Economist that "President Donald Trump's actions to destroy faith in our elections and throw centuries of American principles out the window must be met with universal condemnation from all political leaders, regardless of party".

[ 580 ] Longtime Republican strategist Steve Schmidt stated: "The Republican Party is an organized conspiracy for the purposes of maintaining power for self-interest, and the self-interest of its donor class... It's no longer dedicated to American democracy".

[ 581 ] [ 582 ] [ 583 ] [ 584 ] All ten living former secretaries of defense – including Dick Cheney, Donald Rumsfeld and Robert Gates – published an essay on January 3, 2021, stating: "The time for questioning the results has passed; the time for the formal counting of the electoral college votes, as prescribed in the Constitution and statute, has arrived". They also warned of grave consequences of any contemplated military involvement in the situation.

[ 326 ] [ 585 ] A former communications director for Senator Ted Cruz told reporters that "the new Ted Cruz, post-Trump, is one I don't recognize...his actions directly played into the hands of the mob".

[ 586 ] [ relevant?

] Others At least eight sitting Republican senators, [ i ] members of the second Bush administration, [ j ] and former members of the Trump administration condemned Trump's claims of fraud [ when?

] .

[ k ] House Minority leader Kevin McCarthy initially spoke against Trump's schemes as "doomed to fail" before the attack. During the attack, he implored Trump to intervene. Six days after the attack, he said in a radio interview that he supported a bipartisan commission and grand jury to investigate and that Trump "told me personally that he does have some responsibility". The next day, he stated on the House floor that Trump "bears responsibility for Wednesday's attack on Congress by mob rioters". However, after meeting with Trump at Mar-a-Lago on January 28, 2021, the tone of McCarthy's public comments "changed markedly". McCarthy ultimately opposed the formation of a bipartisan January 6 commission and the House committee.

[ 599 ] [ 600 ] [ 601 ] The New York Post , which had promoted Trump's celebrity in New York since the 1980s [ 602 ] and had twice endorsed his presidential candidacy, published a front-page editorial in December asking the president to "stop the insanity" and "end this dark charade", asserting that he was "cheering for an undemocratic coup". The editorial continued: "If you insist on spending your final days in office threatening to burn it all down, that will be how you are remembered. Not as a revolutionary, but as the anarchist holding the match." The Post characterized his former national security advisor Michael Flynn's suggestion to declare martial law as "tantamount to treason".

The Wall Street Journal editorial board on December 20, 2020, wrote "As he leaves office he can't seem to help reminding Americans why they denied him a second term" and "his sore loser routine is beginning to grate even on millions who voted for him".

[ 603 ] [ 604 ] [ 605 ] In 2011, Fox News created a "Monday Mornings with Trump" segment during which Trump would call in to Fox & Friends to offer his views on current affairs, and the hosts of that program continued to be supportive of Trump during his presidency.

[ 606 ] On January 4, 2021, host Ainsley Earhardt stated that many conservatives "feel like it was rigged", although host Steve Doocy responded: "That's the case that Donald Trump and his lawyers have put out. They said there is all this evidence. But they haven't really produced the evidence." Host Brian Kilmeade stated that he had another "worry" about " the protest the president is calling for on Tuesday and Wednesday [as Congress convened to certify the election results]. I mean, this is the type of anarchy that doesn't work for anybody, Republicans or Democrats, in the big picture." [ 607 ] [ 608 ] Description as attempted coup Before the Capitol attack Multiple media outlets [ l ] characterized the efforts as an attempted coup. A number of scholars and pundits preferred to use the more precise term autocoup .

[ 622 ] [ 623 ] [ 624 ] [ 625 ] On November 14, Jonathan Powell argued that any illegal or unconstitutional attempts to overturn the results would make it a coup.

[ 625 ] On December 7, Daniel Drezner argued that violence would be necessary for the coup definition to be met.

[ 626 ] When news broke about Trump's December 27, 2020 call with Rosen telling the Justice Department to say the election was "corrupt and leave the rest to me", Ari Melber on MSNBC described Trump's activities up through that time as a soft coup .

[ 627 ] On a January 4, 2021 podcast, Steve Bannon , while discussing the planning for the upcoming events and speech by Trump on January 6 at The Ellipse , said: "Live from our nation's capital, you're in the field headquarters of one of the small divisions of the bloodless coup".

[ 628 ] [ 629 ] According to a July 2021 book by Washington Post reporters Philip Rucker and Carol Leonnig , during the weeks following the election, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Mark Milley became concerned that Trump was preparing to stage a coup, and held informal discussions with his deputies about possible ways to thwart it, telling associates: "They may try, but they're not going to fucking succeed. You can't do this without the military. You can't do this without the CIA and the FBI. We're the guys with the guns." The book also quoted Milley saying: "This is a Reichstag moment. The gospel of the Führer ." Milley reportedly told police and military officials preparing to secure Joe Biden's presidential inauguration: "Everyone in this room, whether you're a cop, whether you're a soldier, we're going to stop these guys to make sure we have a peaceful transfer of power. We're going to put a ring of steel around this city and the Nazis aren't getting in." The book also stated that a friend told Milley they were concerned that Trump's allies were attempting to "overturn the government".

[ 630 ] [ 631 ] During or after the Capitol attack See also: International reactions to the January 6 United States Capitol attack Representative Adam Kinzinger (R-IL), [ 632 ] as well as New York Attorney General Letitia James [ 633 ] described the event as a coup attempt. On March 28, 2022, United States district court Judge David O. Carter ordered Attorney John Eastman to hand over documents to the house select committee . In the court's opinion, Judge Carter wrote that Eastman and Trump's campaign was "a coup in search of a legal theory".

[ 575 ] Later that day, US Representative Bennie Thompson (D-MS), chairman of House January 6th committee , read the relevant paragraph of Judge Carter's opinion into the committee record.

[ 634 ] [ 635 ] [ relevant?

– discuss ] Sen. Mitt Romney (R-UT) described the events as an "insurrection", language also echoed by President-elect Biden.

[ 636 ] Professors Inderjeet Parmar , [ 637 ] Timothy D. Snyder , [ 638 ] and scholars at the Brookings Institution called the event a coup [ 639 ] and other academics describe the event as a self-coup .

[ 640 ] [ 641 ] "Trump won" and "big lie" Main article: Big lie § Donald Trump's false claims of a stolen election "Trump won" is a political slogan adopted by Trump supporters who, contrary to the election results, believe that Trump won the 2020 U.S. presidential election.

[ 642 ] [ 643 ] These claims were described by former US Attorney General William Barr as "bullshit" in sworn deposition testimony, [ 644 ] [ 645 ] and are called a "big lie" by many, including Senator Mitt Romney.

[ 646 ] In the two weeks after the election, a large majority of Trump supporters thought the election was illegitimate.

[ 647 ] [ 648 ] According to a September 2022 poll, 61% of Republicans still believed Biden won in 2020 due to "voter fraud".

[ 649 ] [ better source needed ] As of June 2021 [update] , some still believed that Trump would be restored to power by some extraordinary process, possibly later in 2021.

[ 643 ] [ 650 ] These beliefs have led to calls for violence on social media, sparking concerns from the Department of Homeland Security about violence by right-wing extremists in mid-2021.

[ 651 ] A CNN/SSRS poll conducted in August–September 2021 found that Republicans' enthusiasm for voting in future elections was higher among those believing that "Trump won" and with holding that belief as central to their identity as Republicans.

[ 652 ] Corporate reactions See also: List of companies that halted U.S. political contributions in January 2021 On January 5, the Chief Executive of the United States Chamber of Commerce commented that "efforts by some members of Congress to disregard certified election results ... undermines our democracy and the rule of law and will only result in further division", while almost 200 business leaders signed a statement from the Partnership for New York City declaring that such a move would "run counter to the essential tenets of our democracy".

[ 653 ] On January 6, the National Association of Manufacturers called for Vice President Pence to invoke the Twenty-fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution and remove Trump from office.

[ 654 ] During the riot, a Cumulus Media executive told its radio hosts that they must stop spreading the idea of election fraud. The memo said the election was over and that "there are no alternate acceptable 'paths'", and thus the radio hosts must immediately "help induce national calm".

[ 655 ] Many large corporations pledged to suspend donations to officials and candidates who opposed the certification of Biden's victory, hindered the peaceful transfer of power, or incited violence. While many companies did so, most had resumed such contributions within a year, either directly or through their lobbyists.

[ 656 ] [ 657 ] [ 658 ] [ 659 ] See also Electoral fraud in the United States Election denial movement in the United States Post-election lawsuits related to the 2020 U.S. presidential election 2022 Brazilian general election - election in which the defeated President Jair Bolsonaro denied the results 2016 Philippine Vice Presidential election - election in which the defeated candidate Bongbong Marcos protested the results Portals : Conservatism United States Politics Notes ^ Attributed to multiple references: [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] ^ Attributed to multiple references: [ 21 ] [ 17 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 29 ] ^ This would require a law passed by Congress to delay the vote and a constitutional amendment to change the term of office. Congress had no interest in taking either action at the time.

[ citation needed ] ^ For this, a New York court eventually suspended Giuliani's law license.

[ 101 ] ^ The audio was obtained by the Associated Press on February 2, 2023.

^ Trump's Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs nominee Scott O'Grady and Virginia State Senator Amanda Chase , a candidate in Virginia's 2021 gubernatorial election , promoted debunked conspiracy claims and called for Trump to institute martial law.

[ 315 ] [ 316 ] [ 317 ] North Carolina State Senator Bob Steinburg similarly promoted false claims of a "stolen" election and suggested that Trump should declare a national emergency, invoke the Insurrection Act of 1807 , and suspend civil liberties and habeas corpus .

[ 318 ] ^ The audio was released later in 2021.

^ Since March 2009, all elections in Germany have been conducted exclusively with paper ballots which are tabulated by hand.

[ 550 ] ^ The senators are Roy Blunt , [ 587 ] Susan Collins , [ 587 ] Joni Ernst , [ 588 ] Lisa Murkowski , [ 589 ] Rob Portman , [ 590 ] Mitt Romney, [ 589 ] Ben Sasse [ 587 ] and Pat Toomey .

[ 589 ] ^ Statements were made by George W. Bush , [ 591 ] Andrew Card , [ 592 ] Dan Coats , [ 593 ] Ari Fleischer , [ 594 ] Condoleezza Rice , [ 595 ] Tom Ridge [ 596 ] and Karl Rove .

[ 597 ] ^ The former members included National Security Advisor John Bolton , [ 4 ] Director of National Intelligence Michael Chertoff , [ 593 ] and H. R. McMaster , Assistant to the President for National Security Affairs (2017–2018).

[ 598 ] ^ The outlets are The Atlantic , [ 609 ] Bloomberg News , [ 610 ] [ 611 ] The Economist , [ 612 ] The Financial Times , [ 613 ] The Guardian , [ 614 ] The Intelligencer , [ 615 ] The Nation , [ 616 ] The New Yorker , [ 617 ] The New York Times , [ 618 ] Salon , [ 619 ] The San Francisco Chronicle , [ 620 ] The Washington Post , [ 28 ] and Vanity Fair [ 621 ] References ^ Chalfant, Morgan; Samuels, Brett (November 4, 2020).

"Trump prematurely declares victory, says he'll go to Supreme Court" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on June 7, 2021 . Retrieved June 18, 2021 .

^ Liptak, Kevin; Stracqualursi, Veronica; Malloy, Allie (January 7, 2021).

"Trump publicly acknowledges he won't serve a second term a day after inciting mob" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2021 . Retrieved May 8, 2022 .

^ Woodward, Calvin; Dale, Maryclaire (November 6, 2020).

"Fact Check: Trump Fabricates Election Corruption" .

New England Cable News .

Archived from the original on November 30, 2020 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ a b Crowley, Michael (November 6, 2020).

"Trump's False Election Fraud Claims Split Republicans" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 6, 2020 .

^ Funke, Daniel (November 20, 2020).

"Dozens of claims about election fraud, debunked" .

PolitiFact . Tampa Bay Times.

Archived from the original on February 17, 2023 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ a b Blood, Michael R.; Riccardi, Nicholas (December 5, 2020).

"Biden officially secures enough electors to become president" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 6, 2020 .

^ Kumar, Anita; Orr, Gabby (December 21, 2020).

"Inside Trump's pressure campaign to overturn the election" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on December 22, 2020 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

Trump's efforts to cling to power are unprecedented in American history. While political parties have fought over the results of presidential elections before, no incumbent president has ever made such expansive and individualized pleas to the officials who oversee certification of the election results.

^ Sanger, David E. (November 19, 2020).

"Trump's Attempts to Overturn the Election Are Unparalleled in U.S. History" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

President Trump's attempts to overturn the 2020 election are unprecedented in American history and an even more audacious use of brute political force to gain the White House than when Congress gave Rutherford B. Hayes the presidency during Reconstruction.

^ Miller, Zeke; Long, Colleen; Eggert, David (November 20, 2020).

"Trump tries to leverage power of office to subvert Biden win" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on November 28, 2020 . Retrieved December 8, 2020 .

^ Haberman, Maggie ; Rutenberg, Jim; Corasaniti, Nick; Epstein, Reid J. (November 20, 2020).

"Trump Targets Michigan in His Ploy to Subvert the Election" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2020 . Retrieved December 8, 2020 .

^ "Trump presses Georgia governor to help subvert election" .

MarketWatch .

Associated Press . December 5, 2020.

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 8, 2020 .

^ "The Growing Backlash Against Trump's Efforts To Subvert The Election" .

Consider This .

NPR . November 20, 2020.

Archived from the original on December 2, 2020 . Retrieved December 8, 2020 .

^ Raju, Manu; Herb, Jeremy (December 7, 2020).

"House conservatives urge Trump not to concede and press for floor fight over election loss" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 8, 2020 .

^ a b Snyder, Timothy (January 9, 2021).

"The American Abyss" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 9, 2021 . Retrieved February 9, 2021 .

^ a b Ben-Ghiat, Ruth (January 26, 2021).

"Opinion: Trump's big lie wouldn't have worked without his thousands of little lies" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on June 3, 2022 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Wolfe, Jan; Heavey, Susan (January 25, 2021).

"Trump lawyer Giuliani faces $1.3 billion lawsuit over 'big lie' election fraud claims" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on June 20, 2022 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ a b Block, Melissa (January 16, 2021).

"Can The Forces Unleashed By Trump's Big Election Lie Be Undone?" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on November 28, 2021 . Retrieved June 12, 2022 .

^ Pilkington, Ed (January 24, 2021).

"Donald Trump is gone but his big lie is a rallying call for rightwing extremists" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on June 11, 2022 . Retrieved February 9, 2021 .

^ a b c Gardner, Amy; Dawsey, Josh; Bade, Rachael (December 7, 2020).

"Trump asks Pennsylvania House speaker for help overturning election results, personally intervening in a third state" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 8, 2020 .

^ Multiple sources: Harvey, Michael (2022). "Introduction: History's Rhymes". In Harvey, Michael (ed.).

Donald Trump in Historical Perspective . Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781003110361-1 .

ISBN 978-1-003-11036-1 .

Archived from the original on June 15, 2022 . Retrieved June 15, 2022 .

As with the Beer Hall Putsch, a would-be leader tried to take advantage of an already scheduled event (in Hitler's case, Kahr's speech; in Trump's, Congress's tallying of the electoral votes) to create a dramatic moment with himself at the center of attention, calling for bold action to upend the political order. Unlike Hitler's coup attempt, Trump already held top of office, so he was attempting to hold onto power, not seize it (the precise term for Trump's intended action is a 'self-coup' or 'autogolpe'). Thus, Trump was able to plan for the event well in advance, and with much greater control, including developing the legal arguments that could be used to justify rejecting the election's results. (p3) Pion-Berlin, David; Bruneau, Thomas; Goetze, Richard B. Jr. (April 7, 2022).

"The Trump self-coup attempt: comparisons and civil–military relations" .

Government and Opposition . FirstView (4): 789– 806.

doi : 10.1017/gov.2022.13 .

S2CID 248033246 .

Castañeda, Ernesto; Jenks, Daniel (April 17, 2023). Costa, Bruno Ferreira; Parton, Nigel (eds.).

"January 6th and De-Democratization in the United States" .

Social Sciences .

12 (4).

MDPI : 238.

doi : 10.3390/socsci12040238 .

ISSN 2076-0760 .

What the United States went through on January 6th was an attempt at a self-coup, where Trump would use force to stay as head of state even if abandoning democratic practices in the U.S. Some advised Trump to declare martial law to create a state of emergency and use that as an excuse to stay in power.

Eisen, Norman; Ayer, Donald; Perry, Joshua; Bookbinder, Noah; Perry, E. Danya (June 6, 2022).

Trump on Trial: A Guide to the January 6 Hearings and the Question of Criminality (Report). Brookings Institution.

Archived from the original on June 9, 2022 . Retrieved December 16, 2023 .

[Trump] tried to delegitimize the election results by disseminating a series of far fetched and evidence-free claims of fraud. Meanwhile, with a ring of close confidants, Trump conceived and implemented unprecedented schemes to – in his own words – "overturn" the election outcome. Among the results of this "Big Lie" campaign were the terrible events of January 6, 2021 – an inflection point in what we now understand was nothing less than an attempted coup.

Eastman v Thompson, et al.

, 8:22-cv-00099-DOC-DFM Document 260 , 44 (S.D. Cal. May 28, 2022) ("Dr. Eastman and President Trump launched a campaign to overturn a democratic election, an action unprecedented in American history. Their campaign was not confined to the ivory tower – it was a coup in search of a legal theory. The plan spurred violent attacks on the seat of our nation's government, led to the deaths of several law enforcement officers, and deepened public distrust in our political process... If Dr. Eastman and President Trump's plan had worked, it would have permanently ended the peaceful transition of power, undermining American democracy and the Constitution. If the country does not commit to investigating and pursuing accountability for those responsible, the Court fears January 6 will repeat itself."), archived from the original.

Graham, David A. (January 6, 2021).

"This Is a Coup" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2023 .

Musgrave, Paul (January 6, 2021).

"This Is a Coup. Why Were Experts So Reluctant to See It Coming?" .

Foreign Policy .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2023 .

Solnit, Rebecca (January 6, 2021).

"Call it what it was: a coup attempt" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2023 .

Coleman, Justine (January 6, 2021).

"GOP lawmaker on violence at Capitol: 'This is a coup attempt' " .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2023 .

Jacobson, Louis (January 6, 2021).

"Is this a coup? Here's some history and context to help you decide" .

PolitiFact .

Archived from the original on June 20, 2022 . Retrieved January 7, 2021 .

A good case can be made that the storming of the Capitol qualifies as a coup. It's especially so because the rioters entered at precisely the moment when the incumbent's loss was to be formally sealed, and they succeeded in stopping the count.

Barry, Dan; Frenkel, Sheera (January 7, 2021).

" 'Be There. Will Be Wild!': Trump All but Circled the Date" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved December 16, 2023 .

Duignan, Brian (August 4, 2021).

"January 6 U.S. Capitol attack" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on January 17, 2023 . Retrieved September 22, 2021 .

Because its object was to prevent a legitimate president-elect from assuming office, the attack was widely regarded as an insurrection or attempted coup d'état.

^ Stelter, Brian (January 11, 2021).

"Experts warn that Trump's 'big lie' will outlast his presidency" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 14, 2022 . Retrieved April 7, 2021 .

^ Castronuovo, Celine (January 8, 2021).

"Biden says Cruz, other Republicans responsible for 'big lie' that fueled Capitol mob" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2022 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Carlson, J. (December 14, 2020).

"The Legitimacy and Effect of Private Funding in Federal and State Electoral Processes" (PDF) .

Got Freedom .

Thomas More Society . Archived from the original (PDF) on January 10, 2021 . Retrieved January 15, 2021 .

The confusion and negative effect from illegitimate infusion of private funding in Michigan, Wisconsin, Pennsylvania, and several other states during the 2020 election can be shown to have had a disparate and inequitable impact on the electorate.

^ a b Swenson, Ali (November 19, 2020).

"AP Fact Check: Trump legal team's batch of false vote claims" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2020 .

^ a b Subramaniam, Tara; Lybrand, Holmes (November 19, 2020).

"Fact checking Giuliani and the Trump legal team's wild, fact-free press conference" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 20, 2020 .

^ Farhi, Paul; Izadi, Elahe (November 20, 2020).

"Rudy Giuliani floated 'dangerous' and incendiary false claims of election conspiracy – and Fox News broadcast it live" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 21, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2020 .

^ a b c Kessler, Glenn (November 19, 2020).

"Analysis | Fact-checking the craziest news conference of the Trump presidency" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 21, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2020 .

^ a b c Rucker, Philip; Gardner, Amy; Dawsey, Josh (November 19, 2020).

"Trump uses power of presidency to try to overturn the election and stay in office" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved December 10, 2020 .

^ Multiple sources: [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] ^ a b Wild, Whitney; Herb, Jeremy; Fox, Lauren; Cohen, Zachary; Nobles, Ryan (June 15, 2021).

"New emails show how Trump and his allies pressured Justice Department to try to challenge 2020 election results" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on June 18, 2021 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ a b Herb, Jeremy (July 30, 2021).

"Trump to DOJ last December: 'Just say that the election was corrupt + leave the rest to me' " .

CNN .

Archived from the original on June 8, 2022 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ a b Reich, Robert (August 3, 2021).

"A Trump bombshell quietly dropped last week. And it should shock us all - A newly released memo shows that Trump told the acting attorney general: 'Just say the election was corrupt [and] leave the rest to me and the [Republican] congressmen' " .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on August 3, 2021 . Retrieved August 3, 2021 .

^ a b c d e f Tapper, Jake (December 31, 2020).

"At least 140 House Republicans to vote against counting electoral votes, two GOP lawmakers say" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on January 5, 2021 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ a b c d e f Balsamo, Michael (December 1, 2020).

"Disputing Trump, Barr says no widespread election fraud" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2020 . Retrieved December 6, 2020 .

^ Chen, Shawna (November 12, 2020).

"Department of Homeland Security calls election 'the most secure in American history' " .

Axios .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2020 . Retrieved December 8, 2020 .

^ a b Feuer, Alan (September 21, 2021).

"Trump Campaign Knew Lawyers' Voting Machine Claims Were Baseless, Memo Shows" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on September 21, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Benner, Katie; Edmondson, Catie; Broadwater, Luke; Feuer, Alan (December 16, 2021).

"Meadows and the Band of Loyalists: How They Fought to Keep Trump in Power" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on December 16, 2021 . Retrieved February 16, 2022 .

^ a b Date, S.V. (February 4, 2022).

"Mike Pence Rebuts Trump's Claim That VP Can Overturn Election: 'President Trump Is Wrong' " .

HuffPost . Retrieved February 5, 2022 .

^ Rummler, Orion (January 6, 2021).

"Pence says he lacks authority to throw out Electoral College votes" .

Axios .

Archived from the original on September 26, 2024 . Retrieved October 4, 2024 .

^ Kane, Paul; Clement, Scott (December 5, 2020).

"Just 27 congressional Republicans acknowledge Biden's win, Washington Post survey finds" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 .

^ Caldwell, Leigh Ann ; Kapur, Sahil; Tsirkin, Julie (December 16, 2020).

"McConnell congratulates Biden on his victory as more Republicans abandon Trump's fight" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on April 17, 2021 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Wise, Lindsay; Hughes, Siobhan (December 15, 2020).

"More Republicans Now Say Joe Biden Is President-Elect" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on October 10, 2021 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Grisales, Claudia (December 14, 2020).

"With Electoral College Vote, More Republicans Recognize Biden As President-Elect" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on May 28, 2024 . Retrieved September 12, 2024 .

^ Sherman, Amy; Valverde, Miriam (January 8, 2021).

"Joe Biden is right that more than 60 of Trump's election lawsuits lacked merit" .

PolitiFact .

Archived from the original on February 26, 2021 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Cummings, William; Garrison, Joey; Sergent, Jim (January 6, 2021).

"By the numbers: President Donald Trump's failed efforts to overturn the election" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved January 10, 2021 .

^ a b c Liptak, Adam (December 8, 2020).

"Supreme Court Rejects Republican Challenge to Pennsylvania Vote" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 22, 2020 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Shamsian, Jacob; Sheth, Sonam (January 5, 2021).

"Trump and Republican officials have won zero out of at least 42 lawsuits they've filed since Election Day" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved January 10, 2021 .

^ a b Fordham, Evie (December 9, 2020).

"Trump touts Texas Supreme Court case as 'the big one,' says 'we will be intervening' " .

Fox News .

Archived from the original on November 22, 2021 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Sonmez, Felicia; Dawsey, Josh; Lamothe, Dan; Zapotosky, Matt (December 21, 2020).

"A frustrated Trump redoubles efforts to overturn election result" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 3, 2021 . Retrieved January 4, 2023 .

^ Rahman, Rema (December 21, 2020).

"No. 2 GOP senator: Efforts to overturn election would 'go down like a shot dog' " .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on January 17, 2023 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ a b Woodruff Swan, Betsy (January 21, 2022).

"Read the never-issued Trump order that would have seized voting machines" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on January 21, 2022 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Yen, Hope (June 13, 2022).

"Jan. 6 Panelists: Enough Evidence Uncovered To Indict Trump" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on June 14, 2022 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ a b Sangal, Aditi; Chowdhury, Maureen; Hammond, Elise; Macaya, Melissa; Wagner, Meg (December 19, 2022).

"Live updates: Jan. 6 committee votes to issue criminal referrals against Trump" .

CNN . Retrieved December 19, 2022 .

^ Barrett, Devlin; Hsu, Spencer S.; Stein, Perry; Dawsey, Josh; Alemany, Jacqueline (August 1, 2023).

"Trump charged in probe of Jan. 6, efforts to overturn 2020 election" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on August 1, 2023 . Retrieved August 2, 2023 .

^ Sneed, Tierney (August 3, 2023).

"Donald Trump pleads not guilty to January 6-related charges" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on April 12, 2024 . Retrieved August 3, 2023 .

^ Singman, Brooke (August 14, 2023).

"Meadows, Giuliani, others indicted along with Trump in Georgia 2020 election interference probe" .

Fox News .

Archived from the original on August 19, 2023 . Retrieved August 19, 2023 .

^ Orden, Erica; Cheney, Kyle (August 15, 2023).

"19 defendants: Here are all the people charged in the new Trump indictment" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on August 15, 2023 . Retrieved August 19, 2023 .

^ Spencer S. Hsu; Rachel Weiner; Tom Jackman (May 4, 2023).

"Proud Boys Enrique Tarrio, 3 others guilty of Jan. 6 seditious conspiracy" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on May 14, 2023 . Retrieved May 4, 2023 .

^ Samuels, Brett (June 13, 2022).

"Trump releases 12-page response to Jan. 6 hearing" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on June 19, 2022 . Retrieved June 14, 2022 .

^ a b Parsley, Aaron (April 5, 2022).

"Trump Admits 'I Didn't Win' the 2020 Election During Video Call with Presidential Historians" .

People.com .

Archived from the original on April 7, 2022 . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ Feinberg, Andrew (August 29, 2022).

"Trump demands 'new election immediately' in bizarre post on Truth Social" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on November 18, 2022 . Retrieved October 15, 2022 .

^ a b Haberman, Maggie; Berzon, Alexandra; Schmidt, Michael S. (April 18, 2022).

"Trump Allies Continue Legal Drive to Erase His Loss, Stoking Election Doubts" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 18, 2022 . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ Smith, Terrance (November 11, 2020).

"Trump has longstanding history of calling elections 'rigged' if he doesn't like the results" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on November 30, 2020 . Retrieved November 30, 2020 .

^ Collinson, Stephen (October 20, 2016).

"Donald Trump refuses to say whether he'll accept election results" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on October 20, 2016 . Retrieved October 21, 2016 .

^ "Debate Stunner: Trump Won't Say He'll Accept Election Result" .

ABC News .

Associated Press . October 20, 2016.

Archived from the original on October 21, 2016 . Retrieved October 21, 2016 .

^ Gambino, Lauren (October 21, 2016).

"What would happen if Donald Trump refused to concede this election?" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on November 18, 2020 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ Diamond, Jeremy (October 20, 2016).

"Donald Trump: 'I will totally accept' election results 'if I win' " .

CNN .

Archived from the original on October 21, 2016 . Retrieved October 21, 2016 .

^ Bertrand, Natasha; Samuelsohn, Darren (June 21, 2019).

"What if Trump won't accept 2020 defeat?" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on July 26, 2020 . Retrieved July 29, 2020 .

^ Gessen, Masha (July 21, 2020).

"What could happen if Donald Trump rejects electoral defeat?" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on July 31, 2020 . Retrieved July 29, 2020 .

^ Ward, Jon (October 1, 2020).

"Trump's false claims of rigged voting are 'a perilous thing,' says top Republican expert" .

Yahoo! News .

Archived from the original on November 1, 2020 . Retrieved November 19, 2021 .

^ Beer, Tommy (September 24, 2020).

"Here's Everything Trump Has Said About Refusing To Give Up Power" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on November 6, 2020 . Retrieved November 8, 2020 .

^ Lange, Jason (June 12, 2020).

"Trump says he will 'do other things' if he loses 2020 election" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on July 29, 2020 . Retrieved July 29, 2020 .

^ Feuer, Will (July 19, 2020).

"President Trump won't agree to accept 2020 election results as Biden leads in polls – 'I have to see' " .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on July 28, 2020 . Retrieved July 29, 2020 .

^ "Donald Trump suggests delay to 2020 US presidential election" .

BBC News . July 30, 2020.

Archived from the original on July 30, 2020 . Retrieved November 19, 2021 .

^ "Trump won't commit to peaceful transfer of power" .

BBC News . September 24, 2020.

Archived from the original on September 27, 2020 . Retrieved September 24, 2020 .

^ Choi, Matthew (September 23, 2020).

"Trump declines to commit to a peaceful transition of power after election" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on September 29, 2020 . Retrieved September 24, 2020 .

^ Kiely, Eugene; Rieder, Rem (September 30, 2020).

"Trump's Repeated False Attacks on Mail-In Ballots" .

FactCheck.org .

Annenberg Public Policy Center .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2021 . Retrieved November 20, 2021 .

^ Riccardi, Nicholas (September 30, 2020).

"Here's the reality behind Trump's claims about mail voting" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Parks, Miles (August 28, 2020).

"Ignoring FBI And Fellow Republicans, Trump Continues Assault On Mail-In Voting" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on May 16, 2023 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Stimson, Brie (September 24, 2020).

"Trump blasts ballots when asked about election aftermath: 'The ballots are a disaster' " .

Fox News .

Archived from the original on October 24, 2020 . Retrieved October 24, 2020 .

^ Levine, Marianne; Desiderio, Andrew; Everett, Burgess (September 24, 2020).

"Republicans break with Trump over peaceful transition of power" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2020 . Retrieved September 24, 2020 .

^ Cillizza, Chris (September 25, 2020).

"The FBI director just totally shut down Donald Trump's vote-fraud conspiracy" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on September 25, 2020 . Retrieved September 26, 2020 .

^ Crowley, Michael (September 24, 2020).

"2020 Election Live Updates: Trump Once Again Questions the Election, as Top Republicans Commit to a Peaceful Transfer of Power" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on September 27, 2020 . Retrieved September 24, 2020 .

^ Kane, Paul; Bade, Rachael; Itkowitz, Colby (September 24, 2020).

"What Senate Republicans are saying after Trump refused to commit to an orderly transfer of power" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved October 24, 2020 .

^ Morgan, David (October 8, 2020).

" 'Democracy isn't the objective': Republican U.S. senator draws Democrats' ire" .

Reuters . Archived from the original on November 1, 2020 . Retrieved November 23, 2020 .

^ Baker, Peter (September 23, 2020).

"Trump says he wants a conservative majority on the Supreme Court in case of an Election Day dispute" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2020 . Retrieved September 24, 2020 .

Reklaitis, Victor (September 23, 2020).

"Trump says Supreme Court will need 9th justice to decide election outcome" .

MarketWatch .

Archived from the original on September 26, 2020 . Retrieved September 24, 2020 .

Garrison, David Jackson and Joey (September 23, 2020).

"Trump says he wants to fill Supreme Court seat quickly in case justices need to settle election dispute" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2020 . Retrieved September 24, 2020 .

Mason, Jeff (September 24, 2020).

"Trump hedges on transferring power, says election will end up at Supreme Court" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on September 27, 2020 . Retrieved September 24, 2020 .

Stieb, Matt (September 23, 2020).

"Trump Says Supreme Court Needs 9 Justices for Potential Election Dispute" .

Intelligencer .

Archived from the original on September 27, 2020 . Retrieved September 24, 2020 .

Wingrove, Josh (September 23, 2020).

"Trump Talks Up Need for Full Court as He Casts Doubt on Election" .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2020 . Retrieved September 24, 2020 .

^ Dale, Daniel (June 12, 2021).

"Trump is doing more lying about the election than talking about any other subject" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on June 16, 2021 . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

Similar graphic in source attributed to Janie Boschma, CNN.

^ a b Yourish, Karen; Smart, Charlie (May 24, 2024).

"Trump's Pattern of Sowing Election Doubt Intensifies in 2024" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 24, 2024.

^ Axelrod, Tal.

"A timeline of Donald Trump's election denial claims, which Republican politicians increasingly embrace" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2023 . Retrieved November 10, 2023 .

^ Darcy, Oliver (November 4, 2020).

"News anchors forcefully call out Trump for prematurely declaring victory | CNN Business" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on September 2, 2024 . Retrieved September 2, 2024 .

^ Wilkie, Christina (November 4, 2020).

"Trump tries to claim victory even as ballots are being counted in several states — NBC has not made a call" .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on November 4, 2020 . Retrieved September 2, 2024 .

^ a b c Rupar, Aaron (November 5, 2020).

"Trump's desperate "STOP THE COUNT!" tweet, briefly explained" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on November 7, 2020 . Retrieved July 31, 2024 .

^ "Trump's mixed message: Stop the count or keep counting?" .

Los Angeles Times . November 5, 2020.

Archived from the original on October 4, 2024 . Retrieved July 31, 2024 .

^ Izadi, Elahe (November 8, 2020).

"First CNN, then within minutes, most other news organizations called the race for Biden" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 11, 2020 . Retrieved November 11, 2020 .

^ a b King, Ledyard (November 7, 2020).

"Trump revives baseless claims of election fraud after Biden wins presidential race" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on November 8, 2020 . Retrieved November 7, 2020 .

^ Herb, Jeremy (September 12, 2022).

"Exclusive: 'I'm just not going to leave': New book reveals Trump vowed to stay in White House" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on September 26, 2022 . Retrieved September 12, 2022 .

Former President Donald Trump repeatedly told aides in the days following his 2020 election loss that he would remain in the White House...according to reporting provided to CNN from a forthcoming book by New York Times reporter Maggie Haberman.

'I'm just not going to leave,' Trump told one aide, according to Haberman.

'We're never leaving,' Trump told another. 'How can you leave when you won an election?' ^ a b Rutenberg, Jim; Becker, Jo; Lipton, Eric; Haberman, Maggie; Martin, Jonathan; Rosenberg, Matthew; Schmidt, Michael S. (January 31, 2021).

"77 Days: Trump's Campaign to Subvert the Election – Hours after the United States voted, the president declared the election a fraud – a lie that unleashed a movement that would shatter democratic norms and upend the peaceful transfer of power" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved February 1, 2021 .

^ a b Woodward, Calvin (November 17, 2020).

"AP Fact Check: Trump conclusively lost, denies the evidence" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on November 17, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ Shubber, Kadhim (November 16, 2020).

"Lawsuit tracker: Trump's battle faces tough test this week" .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ a b Tillman, Zoe (November 5, 2020).

"Judges Are Rejecting Trump's False Claims Of Shady Poll Practices After Looking At The Evidence" .

BuzzFeed News .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 11, 2020 .

^ Stempel, Jonathan (June 24, 2021).

"Rudolph Giuliani is suspended from law practice in New York state" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on July 3, 2021 . Retrieved June 24, 2021 .

^ Lamire, Jonathan (November 10, 2020).

"Refusing to concede, Trump blocks cooperation on transition" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on November 10, 2020 . Retrieved November 10, 2020 .

^ Balsamo, Michael (November 10, 2020).

"Barr tells DOJ to probe election fraud claims if they exist" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on November 18, 2020 . Retrieved November 18, 2020 .

^ a b c d e Garder, Amy (November 16, 2020).

"Ga. secretary of state says fellow Republicans are pressuring him to find ways to exclude ballots" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 17, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ a b Fessler, Pam (November 19, 2020).

"Despite More Than 2 Dozen Legal Losses, Trump's Lawyers Press On With Election Fights" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on November 21, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2020 .

^ Multiple sources: Feuer, Alan (November 22, 2020).

"Judge Dismisses Trump Lawsuit Seeking to Delay Certification in Pennsylvania" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 22, 2020 . Retrieved November 25, 2020 .

Fahrenthold, David A.; Reinhard, Beth; Viebeck, Elise; Brown, Emma (November 20, 2020).

"Trump's escalating attacks put pressure on vote certification process" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 24, 2020 . Retrieved November 25, 2020 .

^ a b Gardner, Amy (January 3, 2021).

" 'I just want to find 11,780 votes': In an hour-long call, Trump pressures Georgia secretary of state to recalculate the vote in his favor" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on January 4, 2021 . Retrieved January 3, 2021 .

^ a b c d Gardner, Amy; Itkowitz, Colby; Dawsey, Josh (December 5, 2020).

"Trump calls Georgia governor to pressure him for help overturning Biden's win in the state" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 .

^ a b c Scolforo, Mark (November 24, 2020).

"Biden certified as winner of Pennsylvania presidential vote" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on November 27, 2020 . Retrieved December 8, 2020 .

^ a b Brumback, Kate (November 20, 2020).

"Georgia officials certify election results showing Biden win" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on December 1, 2020 . Retrieved December 7, 2020 .

^ a b c d e f g Alemany, Jacqueline; Brown, Emma; Hamburger, Tom; Swaine, Jon (October 23, 2021).

"Ahead of Jan. 6, Willard hotel in downtown D.C. was a Trump team 'command center' for effort to deny Biden the presidency" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved October 23, 2021 .

^ Broadwater, Luke; Feuer, Alan (January 21, 2022).

"Jan. 6 Panel and State Officials Seek Answers on Fake Trump Electors – Pressure is mounting on the Justice Department to investigate bogus electors who claimed that Donald J. Trump defeated Joseph R. Biden Jr. in their states" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 22, 2022 . Retrieved January 22, 2022 .

^ Cohen, Marshall; Cohen, Zachary; Merica, Dan (January 20, 2022).

"Trump campaign officials, led by Rudy Giuliani, oversaw fake electors plot in 7 states" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on January 20, 2022 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Reinhard, Beth; Gardner, Amy; Dawsey, Josh; Brown, Emma; Helderman, Rosalind S. (January 20, 2022).

"As Giuliani coordinated plan for Trump electoral votes in states Biden won, some electors balked" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on January 21, 2022 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Edmondson, Catie; Crowley, Michael (December 30, 2020).

"Hawley Answers Trump's Call for Election Challenge" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Herb, Jeremy; Mattingly, Phil; Fox, Lauren (December 30, 2020).

"GOP senator to delay affirming Biden victory" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on January 8, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Wagner, John (December 31, 2020).

"Sen. Hawley announces he will contest certification of electoral college vote" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on January 15, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ a b c d Broadwater, Luke (January 2, 2021).

"Pence Welcomes Bid to Overturn Biden's Election as Republican Senators Join" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 2, 2021 .

^ a b Karni, Annie (January 4, 2021).

"Pence's Choice: Side With the Constitution or His Boss" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 5, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Jalonick, Mary Clare (January 3, 2021).

"EXPLAINER: How Congress will count Electoral College votes" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on January 4, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Seitz-Wald, Alex (April 5, 2021).

" 'The 45th': Why Trump is abandoning his iconic brand for a number" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on June 10, 2023 . Retrieved July 31, 2021 .

^ Colvin, Jill (June 26, 2021).

"Trump airs old election grievances in return to rally stage" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on July 28, 2021 . Retrieved July 31, 2021 .

^ Layne, Nathan (June 27, 2021).

"At Ohio rally, Trump knocks Biden on border, hints at 2024 plans" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on August 2, 2021 . Retrieved July 31, 2021 .

^ Smith, Allan; Allen, Jonathan (September 17, 2023).

"Here are 11 top moments from Trump's 'Meet the Press' interview" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on September 17, 2023 . Retrieved September 17, 2023 .

^ Multiple sources: Triomphe, Catherine (November 6, 2020).

"Explaining 'Stop the Steal', Trump supporters' viral offensive to discredit the election" .

America Votes . Archived from the original on November 10, 2020 . Retrieved October 3, 2021 .

Romm, Tony; Stanley-Becker, Isaac; Dwoskin, Elizabeth (November 6, 2020).

"Facebook bans 'STOP THE STEAL' group Trump allies were using to organize protests against vote counting" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 10, 2020 . Retrieved November 10, 2020 .

Ghaffary, Shirin (November 5, 2020).

"Facebook took down a massive 'Stop the Steal' group after its members called for violence" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on November 10, 2020 . Retrieved November 10, 2020 .

Perez, Sarah; Hatmaker, Taylor (November 5, 2020).

"Facebook blocks hashtags for #sharpiegate, #stopthesteal election conspiracies" .

TechCrunch .

Archived from the original on November 18, 2020 . Retrieved November 10, 2020 .

Parks, Miles (November 8, 2020).

"The Next 2020 Election Fight? Convincing Trump's Supporters That He Lost" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on November 11, 2020 . Retrieved November 10, 2020 .

Sullivan, Mark (November 5, 2020).

"The pro-Trump 'Stop the Steal' movement is still growing on Facebook" .

Fast Company .

Archived from the original on November 6, 2020 . Retrieved November 9, 2020 .

Beckett, Lois (November 6, 2020).

"Tea party-linked activists protest against election fraud in US cities" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on November 7, 2020 . Retrieved November 9, 2020 .

Doerer, Kristen (November 5, 2020).

"Right-Wing Operative Ali Alexander Leads 'Stop the Steal' Campaign" .

Right Wing Watch .

Archived from the original on November 5, 2020 . Retrieved November 9, 2020 .

^ Frenkel, Sheera (November 13, 2020).

"Beware of this misinformation from 'Stop the Steal' rallies this weekend" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 17, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ a b c Breland, Ali (November 7, 2020).

"Meet the right-wing trolls behind "Stop The Steal" " .

Mother Jones .

Archived from the original on November 9, 2020 . Retrieved November 10, 2020 .

^ Athas, Eric; Carlson, Seth; Keefe, John; Miller, Claire Cain; Parlapiano, Alicia; Sanger-Katz, Margot (November 7, 2020).

"Tracking Which News Outlets Have Called the Presidential Race in Each State" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 8, 2020 . Retrieved November 8, 2020 .

^ a b Polantz, Katelyn (December 3, 2020).

"With Trump and allies headed to the Supreme Court, elections cases still dead on arrival" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 6, 2020 .

^ Corasaniti, Nick; Epstein, Reid J.; Rutenberg, Jim (November 11, 2020).

"The Times Called Officials in Every State: No Evidence of Voter Fraud" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 14, 2020 .

^ Cheney, Kyle; Gerstein, Josh (December 4, 2020).

"Donald Trump's brutal day in court" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on December 6, 2020 . Retrieved December 6, 2020 .

^ Kuznia, Rob (November 14, 2020).

"Stop the Steal's massive disinformation campaign connected to Roger Stone" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on November 14, 2020 . Retrieved November 14, 2020 .

^ a b Wong, Julia Carrie (November 5, 2020).

"Facebook removes pro-Trump Stop the Steal group over 'calls for violence' " .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on November 6, 2020 . Retrieved November 7, 2020 .

^ Frenkel, Sheera (November 5, 2020).

"The Rise and Fall of the 'Stop the Steal' Facebook Group" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 9, 2020 . Retrieved November 9, 2020 .

^ Culliford, Elizabeth; Satter, Raphael (November 5, 2020).

"Pro-Trump Facebook group protesting vote count adding 1000 members every 10 seconds" .

The Sydney Morning Herald .

Archived from the original on November 6, 2020 . Retrieved November 8, 2020 .

^ Dickson, E. J. (November 5, 2020).

"A Pro-Trump 'Stop the Steal' Group Rapidly Grew on Facebook" .

Rolling Stone .

Archived from the original on November 10, 2020 . Retrieved November 10, 2020 .

^ Schulberg, Jessica; Cook, Jesselyn (November 5, 2020).

"Nationwide 'Stop The Steal' Protests Are Being Pushed By GOP Operatives And The Far-Right" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on December 14, 2020 . Retrieved December 14, 2020 .

^ Mac, Ryan; Silverman, Craig (November 5, 2020).

"Facebook Has A Metric For "Violence And Incitement Trends." It's Rising" .

BuzzFeed News .

Archived from the original on November 11, 2020 . Retrieved November 11, 2020 .

^ "Violence Brewed in Facebook Groups Ahead of 'Stop The Steal' Protests" .

Snopes . November 5, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 10, 2021 . Retrieved January 11, 2021 .

^ Silverman, Craig; Timberg, Craig; Kao, Jeff; Merrill, Jeremy B. (January 4, 2022).

"Facebook Hosted Surge of Misinformation and Insurrection Threats in Months Leading Up to Jan. 6 Attack, Records Show" .

Defense One .

Government Executive .

Archived from the original on January 9, 2022 . Retrieved January 8, 2021 .

^ Timberg, Craig; Dwoskin, Elizabeth; Albergotti, Reed (October 22, 2021).

"Inside Facebook, Jan. 6 violence fueled anger, regret over missed warning signs" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 22, 2021 . Retrieved January 8, 2022 .

^ Rosen, Guy (January 11, 2021).

"Our Preparations Ahead of Inauguration Day" .

About Facebook .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved January 11, 2021 .

^ Yancey-Bragg, N'dea (November 13, 2020).

"Trump supporters plan rallies in Washington DC, experts warn extremists may attend" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on November 17, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ Marcus, Josh (November 4, 2020).

" 'Stop the count': Crowd tries to storm Detroit convention centre" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on November 19, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ LeBlanc, Beth (November 14, 2020).

"Trump supporters dispute Michigan vote count at 'Stop the Steal' rally on Capitol lawn" .

The Detroit News .

Archived from the original on November 17, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ Komenda, Ed (November 4, 2020).

"Nevada election 2020: Vote challengers gather outside election department in Las Vegas" .

Reno Gazette Journal .

Archived from the original on November 18, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ Mendez, Astrid (November 8, 2020).

" 'Stop the steal' protest outside Clark County Election Center Office" . KTNV.

Archived from the original on November 18, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ Rickert, Chris; Wroge, Logan (November 7, 2020).

"Trump supporters, counter protesters clash at Madison rally" .

madison.com .

Archived from the original on November 17, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ "Demonstrators rally for Trump in front of Georgia Capitol" . WSBTV. November 14, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 17, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ Thomas, Matthew; Smith, Mary (November 7, 2020).

"Trump, Biden supporters rally at Ohio Statehouse after Biden projected to win election" . WSYX.

Archived from the original on November 8, 2020 . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ Jones, Julia; Snider, Sara (November 15, 2020).

"MAGA March brings together Trump voters, far-right leaders and counterprotesters, ending in some clashes" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 20, 2020 .

^ O'Kane, Caitlin (December 7, 2020).

"Dozens of armed 'stop the steal' protesters threaten Michigan Secretary of State outside her house" .

CBS News .

Archived from the original on December 11, 2020 . Retrieved December 14, 2020 .

^ Koenig, Lauren (December 12, 2020).

"Several people stabbed and 33 arrested as 'Stop the Steal' protesters and counterprotesters clash in Washington, DC" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 14, 2020 . Retrieved December 14, 2020 .

^ MacFarquhar, Neil (March 26, 2021).

"Far-Right Extremists Move From 'Stop the Steal' to Stop the Vaccine" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved March 26, 2021 .

^ Devine, Curt; Griffin, Drew (February 5, 2021).

"How two anti-government conspiracy theories converged" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on February 7, 2021 . Retrieved April 5, 2021 .

^ Brownell, Andy (April 7, 2021).

"FBI Says Minnesota Boogaloo Bois Member Scouted the State Capitol" .

KRFO .

Archived from the original on April 8, 2021 . Retrieved April 7, 2021 .

^ "Self-Described Member Of Boogaloo Bois Arrested, Charged With Illegal Possession Of A Machine Gun" .

justice.gov (Press release). April 7, 2021.

Archived from the original on April 7, 2021 . Retrieved April 7, 2021 .

^ Mannix, Andy (July 15, 2021).

"Boogaloo Bois member accused in plot to attack Minnesota Capitol pleads guilty to firearm charge" .

Star Tribune .

Archived from the original on July 15, 2021 . Retrieved July 15, 2021 .

^ Woodward, Bob ; Costa, Robert (March 24, 2022).

"Virginia Thomas urged White House chief to pursue unrelenting efforts to overturn the 2020 election, texts show" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on March 28, 2022 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Garcia, Catherine (March 14, 2022).

"Ginni Thomas acknowledges attending 'Stop the Steal' rally, but denies organizing it" .

The Week .

Archived from the original on March 26, 2022 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Cercone, Jeff (January 11, 2022).

"There's no evidence Ginni Thomas organized Jan. 6 events" .

PolitiFact .

Archived from the original on March 26, 2022 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ "Gingrich Pushes 'Soros Stole the Election' Conspiracy Theory on Fox News" .

Haaretz .

Associated Press . November 9, 2020.

Archived from the original on January 5, 2021 . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

^ a b c "Fact check: Evidence disproves claims of Italian conspiracy to meddle in U.S. election (known as #ItalyGate)" .

Reuters . January 15, 2021.

Archived from the original on June 8, 2021 . Retrieved November 20, 2021 .

^ Lanzavecchia, Otto (January 12, 2021).

"Vatican blackout hoax linked to ItalyGate conspiracy theory" .

Formiche.net .

Archived from the original on June 8, 2021 . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Caldera, Camille (January 8, 2021).

"Fact check: Claims of electoral fraud in Rome, dubbed 'ItalyGate,' are baseless" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on June 16, 2021 . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Cohen, Zachary; Nobles, Ryan; Grayer, Annie; Gangel, Jamie (April 27, 2022).

"CNN Exclusive: Meadows' texts reveal new details about the key role a little-known GOP congressman played in efforts to overturn election" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on April 27, 2022 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Multiple sources: Benner, Katie (June 5, 2021).

"Meadows Pressed Justice Dept. to Investigate Election Fraud Claims" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 29, 2022 . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

Pengelly, Martin (June 6, 2021).

"Trump aide asked DoJ to investigate bizarre 'Italygate' claim votes were changed by satellite" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on June 16, 2021 . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

Bolies, Corbin (June 5, 2021).

"Meadows Pushed DOJ to Probe Insane 'Italygate' Election Fraud Theory" .

The Daily Beast .

Archived from the original on June 8, 2021 . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

Porter, Tom (June 6, 2021).

"Trump's chief of staff pressed the Justice Department to investigate the bizarre conspiracy theory that people in Italy meddled in the 2020 election using military satellites" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on October 5, 2021 . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Keveny, Bill; Puente, Maria (January 11, 2021).

"How conservative media stoked baseless election-fraud claims that motivated DC rioters" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on November 7, 2021 . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

^ a b Darcy, Oliver (November 17, 2020).

"Company debunks conspiracy theory that its server showed a landslide for Trump" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on November 30, 2020 . Retrieved November 23, 2020 .

^ Moore, Martin; Colley, Thomas (June 13, 2022).

"Two International Propaganda Models: Comparing RT and CGTN's 2020 US Election Coverage" .

Journalism Practice .

18 (5): 1306– 1328.

doi : 10.1080/17512786.2022.2086157 .

ISSN 1751-2786 .

S2CID 249696725 .

^ Dwoskin, Elizabeth; Lerman, Rachel (November 10, 2020).

" 'Stop the Steal' supporters, restrained by Facebook, turn to Parler to peddle false election claims" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 11, 2020 . Retrieved November 11, 2020 .

^ Brandom, Russell (November 9, 2020).

"Parler, a conservative Twitter clone, has seen nearly 1 million downloads since Election Day" .

The Verge .

Archived from the original on November 9, 2020 . Retrieved November 9, 2020 .

^ Shead, Sam (January 11, 2021).

"Parler CEO says app will be offline 'longer than expected' because of Amazon, Apple and Google" .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved January 11, 2021 .

^ Karni, Annie; Haberman, Maggie (June 5, 2021).

"At Once Diminished and Dominating, Trump Prepares for His Next Act" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved June 5, 2021 .

^ Cooper, Jonathan J. (June 2, 2021).

"Arizona GOP election audit draws more Republican politicians" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on June 5, 2021 . Retrieved June 5, 2021 .

^ Multiple sources: Brewster, Jack (June 3, 2021).

"Lara Trump Dismisses Reports Trump Believes He Will Be Reinstated In August" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on October 28, 2021 . Retrieved November 20, 2021 .

Pengelly, Martin (June 6, 2021).

"Trump adviser Lewandowski: he 'lost the election' and will not be reinstated" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on October 27, 2021 . Retrieved November 20, 2021 .

Montgomery, Blake (July 7, 2021).

"Rep. Marjorie Taylor Greene Admits Trump Will Not Be Reinstated to Presidency" .

The Daily Beast .

Archived from the original on October 27, 2021 . Retrieved November 20, 2021 .

Fink, Jenna (August 13, 2021).

"Trump Allies Reject Theory Trump Can Be Reinstated as President" .

Newsweek .

Archived from the original on October 27, 2021 . Retrieved November 20, 2021 .

^ Swenson, Ali (August 4, 2021).

"Report claiming 'excess' Biden votes doesn't show fraud" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on December 16, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Funke, Daniel (August 10, 2021).

"Fact check: No evidence of 8 million 'excess' Biden votes from 2020 election" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on November 7, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ a b Roston, Ram; Heath, Brad; Shiffman, John; Eisler, Peter (December 15, 2021).

"The military-intelligence veterans who helped lead Trump's campaign of disinformation" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on December 18, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ "Ex-Trump aide says Trump admitted privately that he lost the election" .

CNN Video . June 19, 2022.

Archived from the original on June 21, 2022 . Retrieved June 20, 2022 .

^ a b Winter, Tom; Collier, Kevin; Rohde, David (April 9, 2025).

"Trump orders probes of two former officials who defied him" .

NBC News . Retrieved April 9, 2025 .

^ Krebs, Christopher Cox (November 29, 2020).

"Fired director of U.S. cyber agency Chris Krebs explains why President Trump's claims of election interference are false" . In Pelley, Scott Cameron (ed.).

60 Minutes . Season 53. Episode 13.  Event occurs at 11:30.

CBS .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2020 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ a b Pengelly, Martin (December 1, 2020).

"Trump lawyer: ex-election security chief Krebs should be 'taken out and shot' " .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2020 . Retrieved December 3, 2020 .

^ Sanger, David E.; Perlroth, Nicole (November 18, 2020).

"Trump Fires Christopher Krebs, Official Who Disputed Election Fraud Claims" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2021 . Retrieved January 13, 2021 .

^ Multiple sources: Payne, Adam (December 1, 2020).

"Trump lawyer Joe diGenova says election security chief fired by the president should be 'taken out at dawn and shot' " .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2020 . Retrieved December 3, 2020 .

Acosta, Jim; Tapper, Jake; Cohen, Zachary; Cole, Devan (December 2, 2020).

"Trump attorney issues call for violence against truth-telling former election cybersecurity official" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2020 . Retrieved December 3, 2020 .

Izadi, Elahe (December 3, 2020).

"Joseph diGenova resigns from Gridiron Club after saying fired cybersecurity official should be shot" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 3, 2020 .

^ Shear, Michael D.; Haberman, Maggie; Crowley, Michael (November 10, 2020).

"Trump Appointee Stands Between Biden's Team and a Smooth Transition" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 10, 2020 . Retrieved November 10, 2020 .

^ "Formal Joe Biden transition may begin, US agency concludes" .

12news.com .

Associated Press . November 23, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 23, 2020 . Retrieved November 23, 2020 .

^ U.S. House of Representatives (December 22, 2022).

"Final Report of the Select Committee to Investigate the January 6th Attack on the United States Capitol" (PDF) .

govinfo.gov . p. 11.

Archived (PDF) from the original on July 29, 2023 . Retrieved July 5, 2023 .

^ Feinberg, Andrew (December 17, 2021).

"Rick Perry sent Meadows text on 'aggressive' strategy to toss election, report says" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on December 18, 2021 . Retrieved December 18, 2021 .

^ Nobles, Ryan; Cohen, Zachary; Grayer, Annie (April 8, 2022).

"CNN Exclusive: 'We control them all': Donald Trump Jr. texted Meadows ideas for overturning 2020 election before it was called" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on April 8, 2022 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Herb, Jeremy; Grayer, Annie; Maher, Kit; Polantz, Katelyn (December 29, 2022).

"Key findings from the latest Jan. 6 panel transcripts, including from Donald Trump Jr. and others" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 29, 2022 . Retrieved December 29, 2022 .

^ Brown, Emma (June 10, 2022).

"Ginni Thomas pressed 29 Ariz. lawmakers to help overturn Trump's defeat, emails show" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on June 11, 2022 . Retrieved June 11, 2022 .

^ Haberman, Maggie; Savage, Charlie; Broadwater, Luke (August 8, 2023).

"Previously Secret Memo Laid Out Strategy for Trump to Overturn Biden's Win - The House Jan. 6 committee's investigation did not uncover the memo, whose existence first came to light in last week's indictment" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on August 9, 2023 . Retrieved August 10, 2023 .

^ Bauer, Scott, Wisconsin attorney general files felony charges against attorneys, aide who worked for Trump in 2020 Archived June 4, 2024, at the Wayback Machine , Associated Press, June 4, 2024 ^ a b Feuer, Alan; Haberman, Maggie ; Broadwater, Luke (February 2, 2022).

"Memos Show Roots of Trump's Focus on Jan. 6 and Alternate Electors" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on August 10, 2023 . Retrieved February 3, 2022 .

^ Blake, Aaron (April 25, 2022).

"The two significant new Jan. 6 disclosures from Mark Meadows's aide" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on April 26, 2022 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ a b c d e McEvoy, Jemima (November 18, 2020).

"Trump's 'Post-Election Purge': Head Of Election Cybersecurity, 11 Other Top Officials Out" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on May 26, 2022 . Retrieved November 24, 2020 .

^ Harper, Steven (March 7, 2021).

"Insurrection Timeline: First the Coup and Then the Cover-Up" .

BillMoyers.com .

Archived from the original on February 27, 2021 . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Mehta, Aaron (November 10, 2020).

"Esper fired as defense secretary" .

Defense News .

Archived from the original on November 10, 2020 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ Alexander, Harriet (November 11, 2020).

"White House 'requesting names of those who clapped out departing Pentagon official' " .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on November 17, 2020 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ Schmitt, Eric; Goldman, Adam (December 1, 2020).

"Another Official Is Ousted From the Pentagon" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 1, 2020 . Retrieved December 1, 2020 .

^ Sanger, David E. (November 18, 2020).

"Trump fires Christopher Krebs, whose agency disputed president's false claims of election fraud" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on November 18, 2020 . Retrieved November 18, 2020 .

^ "Trump fires election security official who contradicted him" .

BBC News . November 18, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 18, 2020 . Retrieved November 18, 2020 .

^ Dawsey, Josh; Eilperin, Juliet; Hudson, John; Rein, Lisa (November 13, 2020).

"In Trump's final days, a 30-year-old aide purges officials seen as insufficiently loyal" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 28, 2020 . Retrieved November 16, 2020 .

^ Hansler, Jennifer; Atwood, Kylie (November 7, 2020).

"Second highest-ranking official at USAID ousted" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on November 7, 2020 . Retrieved November 8, 2020 .

^ Multiple sources: Waldmann, Scott (November 10, 2020).

"Trump to put climate change denier in charge of key U.S. report" .

Science Magazine .

doi : 10.1126/science.abf6536 .

S2CID 228883906 .

Archived from the original on July 8, 2022 . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

Boyle, Louise (November 10, 2020).

"Trump removes scientist who led sweeping climate change report and other officials" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on January 9, 2021 . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

Flavelle, Christopher; Friedman, Lisa; Davenport, Coral (November 9, 2020).

"Trump Administration Removes Scientist in Charge of Assessing Climate Change" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 5, 2021 . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

Samenow, Jason; Freedman, Andrew; Eilperin, Juliet (November 9, 2020).

"Trump administration removes head of federal climate program that oversees key reports" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 24, 2020 . Retrieved November 16, 2020 .

^ Flavelle, Christopher (May 19, 2021).

"Biden reappoints a top climate scientist who was removed by Trump" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved May 21, 2021 .

^ Castronuovo, Celine (November 6, 2020).

"Lisa Gordon-Hagerty resigns as chief of nuclear weapons agency" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on November 27, 2020 . Retrieved November 7, 2020 .

^ Feinberg, Andrew (October 30, 2020).

"Trump just quietly passed an executive order that could destroy a future Biden administration" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on November 21, 2020 . Retrieved December 1, 2020 .

^ Wegmann, Philip (November 21, 2020).

"OMB Lists Positions Stripped of Job Protection Under Trump Order" .

Real Clear Politics .

Archived from the original on November 27, 2020 . Retrieved December 1, 2020 .

^ Ogrysko, Nicole (November 24, 2020).

"Congress, employee groups ramp up pressure to block Schedule F executive order" .

Federal News Network .

Archived from the original on November 30, 2020 . Retrieved December 1, 2020 .

^ Rampell, Catherine (November 30, 2020).

"Trump lays the groundwork for a massive government purge on his way out the door" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2020 . Retrieved December 1, 2020 .

^ Stein, Jeff; Werner, Erica; Dawsey, Josh (November 10, 2020).

"White House tells federal agencies to proceed with plans for Trump's February budget in latest sign of election defiance" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 21, 2020 . Retrieved December 22, 2020 .

^ Davis, Tina (November 7, 2020).

"Trump's Election Lawsuits: Where the Fights Are Playing Out" .

Bloomberg Law .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 10, 2020 .

^ "Courting failure: Donald Trump still hopes lawsuits will make up for his lack of votes" .

The Economist . November 7, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 12, 2020 .

^ Shubber, Kadhim (November 8, 2020).

"Trump clings to courtroom hopes despite lawsuit losses" .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 12, 2020 .

^ Parks, Miles (November 10, 2020).

"Trump Election Lawsuits Have Mostly Failed. Here's What They Tried" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 11, 2020 .

^ "US election: Trump camp's lawsuit struck down in Pennsylvania" .

BBC News . April 10, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 21, 2020 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ Brann, Matthew W.

(November 21, 2020).

"MEMORANDUM OPINION" (PDF) .

PACER .

Archived (PDF) from the original on November 22, 2020 . Retrieved November 23, 2020 .

^ Axelrod, Tal (November 17, 2020).

"Michigan county reverses course, votes unanimously to certify election results" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on November 19, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2020 .

^ Hendrickson, Clara (November 19, 2020).

"Donald Trump called Monica Palmer after Wayne County Board of Canvassers meeting" .

Detroit Free Press .

Archived from the original on November 22, 2020 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ Bowden, John (November 19, 2020).

"Republicans in key Michigan county ask to rescind votes to certify election" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2020 .

^ Meloni, Rod; Kelly, Dane (November 20, 2020).

"Wayne County GOP canvassers say call from Trump did not influence vote decisions" . WDIV.

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ Mauger, Craig (December 21, 2023).

"Trump recorded pressuring Wayne County canvassers not to certify 2020 vote" .

The Detroit News .

Archived from the original on December 22, 2023 . Retrieved December 22, 2023 .

^ Fahrenthold, David A.; Hamburger, Tom; Dawsey, Josh; Ruble, Kayla (November 19, 2020).

"Trump invites Michigan Republican leaders to meet him at White House as he attempts to overturn election results" .

The Seattle Times .

Archived from the original on November 21, 2020 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ Falcon, Russell (April 14, 2016).

" 'Dom Perignon' trends on Twitter after Michigan GOP leaders seen drinking $495 champagne at Trump hotel" . WGN-TV.

Archived from the original on November 22, 2020 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ Lawler, Emily (November 21, 2020).

"Michigan legislative leaders after meeting with Trump: 'we will follow the law' " .

MLive.com .

Archived from the original on May 16, 2023 . Retrieved January 6, 2023 .

^ Mauger, Craig (November 22, 2020).

"Michigan House speaker floats possibility of 'constitutional crisis' " .

Archived from the original on November 22, 2020 . Retrieved November 23, 2020 .

^ Gibbons, Lauren (December 14, 2020).

"Michigan's top GOP lawmakers acknowledge Trump's loss, won't interfere with electoral vote" .

MLive.com .

Archived from the original on April 8, 2023 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Bangura, Fatima (November 21, 2020).

"GOP leaders ask Michigan Board of State Canvassers to delay certification of election results for 2 weeks" .

WXYZ-TV .

Archived from the original on November 21, 2020 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ Ahmad, Zahra (November 23, 2020).

"Board of Canvassers certifies Michigan's election results" .

mlive .

Archived from the original on November 23, 2020 . Retrieved November 23, 2020 .

^ Swaine, Jon; Brown, Emma; Alemany, Jacqueline (February 9, 2022).

"Giuliani asked Michigan prosecutor to give voting machines to Trump team" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 10, 2022 . Retrieved February 9, 2022 .

^ Oosting, Jonathan (July 27, 2023).

" 'I have been indicted,' says suspect in Michigan vote machine tampering probe | Bridge Michigan" .

Bridge Michigan .

Archived from the original on July 27, 2023 . Retrieved July 27, 2023 .

^ Evelyn, Kenya (November 17, 2020).

"Lindsey Graham condemned for allegedly pressuring Georgia to toss out ballots" .

The Guardian . Guardian News & Media Limited.

Archived from the original on January 7, 2022 . Retrieved October 24, 2023 .

^ Gregorian, Dareh; Clark, Dartunorro (November 18, 2020).

"Georgia officials spar with Sen. Lindsey Graham over alleged ballot tossing comments" .

NBC News .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on November 18, 2020 . Retrieved November 19, 2020 .

^ Kane, Paul (November 17, 2020).

"Lindsey Graham's one-man voting probe prompts confusion" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 18, 2020 . Retrieved November 19, 2020 .

^ Bauer, Scott (February 3, 2023).

"Trump campaign staff on 2020 election lies: 'fan the flame' " .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on February 3, 2023 . Retrieved February 3, 2023 .

^ Tarm, Michael (September 24, 2019).

"Wisconsin officials: Trump observers obstructing recount" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on November 21, 2020 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ Marley, Patrick (November 29, 2020).

"Biden gains 87 votes in Trump's $3 million Wisconsin recount as Dane County wraps up review. President plans lawsuit" .

Milwaukee Journal Sentinel .

Archived from the original on November 30, 2020 . Retrieved November 30, 2020 .

^ "Trump phones in false claims at Pennsylvania Senate committee hearing on voting "irregularities" " .

CBS News . November 25, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 26, 2020 . Retrieved November 26, 2020 .

^ Small, Jim; Gómez, Laura (December 14, 2020).

"Arizona Senate will subpoena Maricopa County for election audit" .

Arizona Mirror .

Archived from the original on December 15, 2020 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Mauger, Craig (December 1, 2020).

"Michigan Senate hearing puts new spotlight on unproven claims of election fraud" .

The Detroit News .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ "Fact check: TV news clip does not show 'live computerized fraud' on Election Day 2020" .

Reuters . November 10, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ a b c Fichera, Angelo; Spencer, Saranac Hale (November 13, 2020).

"Bogus Theory Claims Supercomputer Switched Votes in Election" .

FactCheck.org .

Archived from the original on November 15, 2020 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ Leibovich, Mark (November 20, 2020).

"Trump's Legal Team Sets a Precedent for Lowering the Bar" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 25, 2020 . Retrieved November 30, 2020 .

^ Tucker, Eric; Bajak, Frank (November 13, 2020).

"Repudiating Trump, officials say election 'most secure' " .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on November 15, 2020 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ Collins, Kaitlan; LeBlanc, Paul (November 18, 2020).

"Trump fires director of Homeland Security agency who had rejected President's election conspiracy theories" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on November 18, 2020 . Retrieved November 18, 2020 .

^ Peters, Jeremy W.; Feuer, Alan (December 8, 2020).

"What We Know About Sidney Powell, the Lawyer Behind Wild Voting Conspiracy Theories" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on June 29, 2022 . Retrieved March 30, 2021 .

^ Sherman, Jake; Palmer, Anna; Ross, Garrett; Okun, Eli (November 19, 2020).

"POLITICO Playbook PM: Rudy" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 19, 2020 .

^ Qiu, Linda (November 20, 2020).

"Trump allies are among the frequent purveyors of election misinformation" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 30, 2020 . Retrieved November 30, 2020 .

^ Joffe-Block, Jude (November 14, 2020).

"False reports claim election servers were seized in Germany" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on November 15, 2020 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ "Scytl strongly denies the false information related to the U.S. elections" .

Scytl . November 13, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2020 .

^ Roose, Kevin (November 18, 2020).

"No, the Army didn't seize a German server showing a Trump landslide" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 21, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2020 .

^ Barnes, Julian E. (March 16, 2021).

"Russian Interference in 2020 Included Influencing Trump Associates, Report Says" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Papenfuss, Mary (February 18, 2023).

"Even Rupert Murdoch Ripped Rudy Giuliani's 'Crazy' Election Press Conference: Court Filing" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on February 18, 2023 . Retrieved February 18, 2023 .

^ Garrett, Alexandra (November 22, 2020).

"Trump lawyer Sidney Powell said that the Georgia election lawsuit "will be biblical," suggests GOP governor helped Biden" .

Newsweek .

Archived from the original on November 29, 2020 . Retrieved November 23, 2020 .

^ "Trump campaign cuts ties with attorney Sidney Powell after bizarre election fraud claims" .

The Guardian .

Associated Press . November 23, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 27, 2020 . Retrieved November 23, 2020 .

^ Haberman, Maggie; Feuer, Alan (November 22, 2020).

"Trump Team Disavows Lawyer Who Peddled Conspiracy Theories on Voting" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 23, 2020 . Retrieved November 26, 2020 .

^ Feldman, Josh (November 22, 2020).

"Sidney Powell Goes After Brian Kemp Over Election Conspiracy" . Mediaite.

Archived from the original on November 22, 2020 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ "Sidney Powell: Trump team cuts ties with lawyer who peddled bizarre fraud claims" .

BBC News . November 23, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 27, 2020 . Retrieved November 24, 2020 .

^ Vella, Lauren (November 19, 2020).

"Ernst: Trump lawyer claim that candidates pay to rig elections 'absolutely outrageous' " .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 20, 2020 .

^ Smith, David (November 21, 2020).

"Trump makes futile last stand to overturn results as Georgia certifies Biden win" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on November 21, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2020 .

^ Campbell, Jason [@JasonSCampbell] (November 19, 2020).

"Sidney Powell: "The entire election, frankly, in all the swing states should be overturned and the legislatures should make sure that the electors are selected for Trump" " ( Tweet ).

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 20, 2020 – via Twitter .

^ a b Feldman, Josh (December 18, 2020).

"Lou Dobbs Airs Stunning Fact-Check of His Own Election Claims" .

Mediaite .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2021 . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

^ Feldman, Josh (December 20, 2020).

"Maria Bartiromo Airs Fact-Check, Adds 'We Will Keep Investigating' " .

Mediaite .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Barr, Jeremy (December 19, 2020).

"Lou Dobbs debunks his own claims of election fraud – after a legal demand from Smartmatic" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Darcy, Oliver (February 4, 2021).

"Voting technology company Smartmatic files $2.7 billion lawsuit against Fox News, Rudy Giuliani and Sidney Powell over 'disinformation campaign' " .

CNN .

Archived from the original on February 4, 2021 . Retrieved February 4, 2021 .

^ Collins, Kaitlan (December 19, 2020).

"Trump campaign told to preserve all documents related to Sidney Powell and Dominion Voting Systems" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 21, 2020 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Naham, Matt (December 17, 2020).

"Days After Smartmatic's Legal Threat, Dominion Voting Systems Follows Suit with Demand Letter to Sidney Powell" .

lawandcrime.com .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2021 . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

^ "Dominion sues Trump lawyer Sidney Powell for defamation" .

Associated Press . January 8, 2021.

Archived from the original on January 14, 2021 . Retrieved March 30, 2021 .

^ Polantz, Katelyn (March 23, 2021).

"Sidney Powell argues in new court filing that no reasonable people would believe her election fraud claims" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on March 23, 2021 . Retrieved March 23, 2021 .

^ Jeremy W. Peters; Katie Robertson (February 16, 2023).

"Fox Stars Privately Expressed Disbelief About Election Fraud Claims. 'Crazy Stuff.' " .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 19, 2023 . Retrieved February 18, 2023 .

See also the brief itself.

Archived April 5, 2023, at the Wayback Machine ^ Darcy, Oliver (February 27, 2023).

"Rupert Murdoch acknowledged that Fox News hosts endorsed false stolen election claims" .

CNN Business .

Archived from the original on February 28, 2023 . Retrieved February 28, 2023 .

^ a b c d Wines, Michael (December 3, 2020).

"Here Are the Threats Terrorizing Election Workers" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ a b Pilkington, Ed; Levine, Sam (December 9, 2020).

" 'It's surreal': the US officials facing violent threats as Trump claims voter fraud" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on January 5, 2021 . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

^ Montellaro, Zach (December 1, 2020).

"Georgia election official condemns Trump after threat to worker" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2020 . Retrieved December 2, 2020 .

^ Knowles, Hannah; Gowen, Annie; Hamburger, Tom (December 13, 2020).

" 'A dark, empty place:' Public officials face personal threats as tensions flare" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on January 9, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Corasaniti, Nick; Rutenberg, Jim; Gray, Kathleen (December 9, 2020).

"As Trump Rails Against Loss, His Supporters Become More Threatening" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Vella, Lauren (January 2, 2021).

"Appeals court dismisses Gohmert's election suit against Pence" .

The Hill . Archived from the original on January 3, 2021 . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

^ Kilander, Gustaf (January 2, 2021).

"Trump election lawyer Lin Wood calls for Pence to be 'executed by firing squad' " .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on January 5, 2021 . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

^ Crump, James (December 15, 2020).

"Trump election lawyer calls on his supporters to stock up on '2nd Amendment supplies' " .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on January 4, 2021 . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

^ Timberg, Craig; Harwell, Drew (January 5, 2021).

"Pro-Trump forums erupt with violent threats ahead of Wednesday's rally against the 2020 election" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Zadrozny, Brandy; Collins, Ben (January 6, 2021).

"Violent threats ripple through far-right internet forums ahead of protest" .

NBC News .

Archived from the original on January 10, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Rosenberg, Matthew; Rutenberg, Jim (February 1, 2021).

"Key Takeaways From Trump's Effort to Overturn the Election – A Times examination of the 77 days between election and inauguration shows how a lie the former president had been grooming for years overwhelmed the Republican Party and stoked the assault on the Capitol" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved February 1, 2021 .

^ Multiple sources: Schouten, Fredreka (December 3, 2020).

"Trump raises more than $207 million since Election Day as he pushes baseless election fraud claims" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 4, 2020 .

Dawsey, Josh; Lee, Michelle Ye Hee (December 1, 2020).

"Trump raises more than $150 million appealing to false election claims" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 1, 2020 . Retrieved December 1, 2020 .

Goldmacher, Shane; Haberman, Maggie (December 1, 2020).

"Trump Raises $170 Million as He Denies His Loss and Eyes the Future" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 1, 2020 . Retrieved December 1, 2020 .

Renshaw, Jarrett; Tanfani, Joseph (November 11, 2020).

"Donations under $8K to Trump 'election defense' instead go to president, RNC" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on April 9, 2023 . Retrieved June 15, 2022 .

^ Herridge, Catherine; Quinn, Melissa (December 3, 2020).

"Ratcliffe says Biden getting "all of the same intelligence" as Trump, warns of China threat" .

CBS News .

Archived from the original on October 13, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Polantz, Katelyn; Cohen, Zachary; Perez, Evan (August 6, 2021).

"How a Trump environmental lawyer tried to weaponize the Justice Department to help the President" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on November 26, 2021 . Retrieved June 15, 2022 .

^ Multiple sources: Vallejo, Justin (December 3, 2020).

"Michael Flynn calls for Trump to suspend the constitution and declare martial law to re-run election" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 4, 2020 .

Krawczyk, Kathryn (December 2, 2020).

"Freshly pardoned Michael Flynn shares message telling Trump to 'suspend the Constitution' to hold a new presidential election" .

The Week .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 3, 2020 .

Meyer, Ken (December 2, 2020).

"Michael Flynn Calls for Trump to 'Suspend the Constitution,' Impose Martial Law" .

Mediaite .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 3, 2020 .

^ Hamburger, Tom; Ruble, Kayla; Fahrenthold, David A.; Dawsey, Josh (November 19, 2020).

"Trump invites Michigan Republican leaders to meet him at White House as he escalates attempts to overturn election results" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2020 . Retrieved December 8, 2020 .

^ Grayer, Annie; Herb, Jeremy; Duster, Chandelis (November 23, 2020).

"Michigan's state board certifies Biden's win" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 1, 2020 . Retrieved December 8, 2020 .

^ Fausset, Richard; Saul, Stephanie (November 12, 2020).

"Georgia's Close Elections Sent Republicans After a Republican" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 16, 2023 . Retrieved March 30, 2021 .

^ Meyer, Ken (December 6, 2020).

"Brad Raffensperger Responds to Death Threats, 'Irrational' Behavior Over GA Election Results" .

Mediaite .

Archived from the original on December 14, 2020 . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

^ "Correction: Trump-Georgia story" .

The Washington Post . March 15, 2021. Archived from the original on March 16, 2021 . Retrieved March 16, 2021 .

^ Gardner, Amy (January 9, 2021).

" 'Find the fraud': Trump pressured a Georgia elections investigator in a separate call legal experts say could amount to obstruction 'Find the fraud': Trump pressured a Georgia elections investigator in a separate call legal experts say could amount to obstruction" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on January 14, 2021 . Retrieved January 9, 2021 .

^ Fausset, Richard; Corasaniti, Nick (December 7, 2020).

"Georgia Recertifies Election Results, Affirming Biden's Victory" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2021 . Retrieved December 10, 2020 .

^ Long, Colleen; White, Ed (December 8, 2020).

"Trump thought courts were key to winning. Judges disagreed" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on January 10, 2021 . Retrieved June 15, 2022 .

^ Gillman, Todd J. (December 9, 2020).

"17 states, and Trump, join Texas request for Supreme Court to overturn Biden wins in four states" .

Dallas News .

Archived from the original on December 9, 2020 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Liptak, Adam (December 8, 2020).

"Texas files an audacious suit with the Supreme Court challenging the election results" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 9, 2020 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Bluestein, Greg (December 9, 2020).

"Trump warns Georgia AG not to rally other Republicans against Texas lawsuit" .

The Atlanta Journal-Constitution .

Archived from the original on December 17, 2020 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Gabriel, Trip (December 9, 2020).

"Even in Defeat, Trump Tightens Grip on State G.O.P. Lawmakers" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2021 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Levy, Marc (December 4, 2020).

"64 Pennsylvania Republican Lawmakers Ask Congress to Throw Out State's Electoral Votes" .

NBC10 Philadelphia .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2022 . Retrieved June 7, 2022 .

^ Idliby, Leia (December 10, 2020).

" 'This is Going to Escalate Dramatically': Trump Threatens a 'Dangerous Moment' Forthcoming in Twitter Spree Assailing Election" .

Mediaite .

Archived from the original on December 10, 2020 . Retrieved December 20, 2021 .

^ Multiple sources: Mascaro, Lisa (September 30, 2020).

"Trump thrusts Supreme Court pick into election turmoil" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on November 2, 2020 . Retrieved December 4, 2020 .

Mason, Jeff (September 24, 2020).

"Trump hedges on transferring power, says election will end up at Supreme Court" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on September 27, 2020 . Retrieved December 4, 2020 .

McCoy, Kevin; Wolf, Richard (December 1, 2020).

"Lawsuit by Trump allies challenging Pennsylvania election results reaches Supreme Court" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 4, 2020 .

Gresko, Jessica; Sherman, Mark (November 7, 2020).

"Trump faces tough road in getting Supreme Court to intervene" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on November 26, 2020 . Retrieved December 4, 2020 .

^ a b Liptak, Adam (December 11, 2020).

"Supreme Court Rejects Texas Suit Seeking to Subvert Election" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 11, 2020 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Solender, Andrew (December 11, 2020).

"126 House Republicans Now Support Lawsuit To Overturn Election In Updated Brief" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on December 12, 2020 . Retrieved December 12, 2020 .

^ "Order in Pending Case" (PDF) .

Supreme Court of the United States . December 11, 2020.

Archived (PDF) from the original on December 11, 2020 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ "READ: Supreme Court order on Texas election case" .

CNN News . December 11, 2020.

Archived from the original on December 12, 2020 . Retrieved December 11, 2020 .

^ a b Kranish, Michael (March 28, 2022).

"Inside Ted Cruz's last-ditch battle to keep Trump in power" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Farley, Robert (March 3, 2016).

"Cruz's Record Before the Supreme Court" . FactCheck.org . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Sneed, Tierney; Polantz, Katelyn; Murray, Sara (November 2, 2022).

"Clarence Thomas was 'key' to a plan to delay certification of 2020 election, Trump lawyers said in emails | CNN Politics" .

CNN . Retrieved November 2, 2022 .

^ a b Cheney, Kyle; Gerstein, Josh (December 19, 2020).

"Trump sought to tap Sidney Powell as special counsel for election fraud" .

Politico . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

Haberman, Maggie; Kanno-Youngs, Zolan (December 19, 2020).

"Trump Weighed Naming Election Conspiracy Theorist as Special Counsel" .

The New York Times .

Liptak, Kevin; Brown, Pamela (December 21, 2020).

"Heated Oval Office meeting included talk of special counsel, martial law as Trump advisers clash" .

CNN .

Rubin, Olivia; Mosk, Matthew; Santucci, John; Faulders, Katherine (December 20, 2020).

"Fired attorney Sidney Powell is back, advising Trump to chart a scorched-earth course" .

ABC News .

Williams, Jordan (December 18, 2020).

"Michael Flynn: Trump could deploy military to 'rerun' election" .

The Hill .

^ Lambe, Jerry (December 2, 2020).

"Lawyers Condemn Michael Flynn and Lin Wood's 'Breathtakingly Morally Treasonous' Call for Trump to Declare Martial Law and Hold New Election" . Law and Crime.

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 3, 2020 .

^ Blake, Andrew (December 1, 2020).

"Sidney Powell shares post recommending military tribunals review election" .

The Washington Times . Retrieved December 30, 2020 .

^ Ackerman, Spencer; Weill, Kelly (December 2, 2020).

" 'When the Bombs Go Off, the Blood Is on Mike Flynn's Hands': Retired Officers Blast His Calls for Martial Law" .

The Daily Beast .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 3, 2020 .

^ McDermott, Nathan; Kaczynski, Andrew; Steck, Em (December 4, 2020).

"Trump Pentagon nominee spreads debunked conspiracies and tweets suggesting Trump declare martial law" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 4, 2020 .

^ "US hero of Bosnia war named to the Pentagon" .

Yahoo! News . AFP. November 18, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 18, 2020 . Retrieved December 4, 2020 .

^ Ruiz, Michael (December 17, 2020).

"Virginia gubernatorial candidate says 'Trump should declare martial law' " .

Fox News . Retrieved December 30, 2020 .

^ WRAL (December 15, 2020).

"NC senator OK with suspending civil liberties in wake of Trump's defeat" .

WRAL.com . Retrieved December 16, 2020 .

^ Cohen, Zachary; Reid, Paula (January 31, 2022).

"Exclusive: Trump advisers drafted more than one executive order to seize voting machines, sources tell CNN" .

CNN . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Swan, Jonathan (December 19, 2020).

"Giuliani asks DHS about seizing voting machines" .

Axios . Retrieved January 6, 2023 .

^ a b Feuer, Alan; Haberman, Maggie; Schmidt, Michael S.; Broadwater, Luke (February 1, 2022).

"Trump Had Role in Weighing Proposals to Seize Voting Machines" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ a b Goodwin, Jazmin (December 20, 2020).

"Trump's talk of martial law sends White House staffers rushing to the press" .

CNN . Retrieved January 3, 2021 .

^ a b Finkelstein, Claire O.; Painter, Richard (December 22, 2020).

"Invoking Martial Law to Reverse the 2020 Election Could be Criminal Sedition" .

Just Security . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

^ Kim, Noah Y. (December 18, 2020).

"No, a 2018 executive order doesn't allow Trump to unilaterally impose martial law" .

PolitiFact . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

PolitiFact spoke to six scholars of constitutional law and presidential power and asked them whether the executive order allows Trump to declare martial law. They were unanimous: It doesn't. ... Under the Constitution, the president does not have the power to unilaterally impose martial law.

^ Frum, David (December 20, 2020).

"How Long Can This Continue?" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved December 20, 2020 .

^ a b Carter, Ashton ; Cheney, Dick ; Cohen, William ; Esper, Mark ; Gates, Robert ; Hagel, Chuck ; Mattis, James ; Panetta, Leon ; Perry, William ; Rumsfeld, Donald (January 3, 2021).

"All 10 living former defense secretaries: Involving the military in election disputes would cross into dangerous territory" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

^ Gattis, Paul (January 6, 2021).

"Mo Brooks: Today patriots start 'kicking ass' in fighting vote results" .

AL.com . Retrieved January 7, 2021 .

^ Grisales, Claudia (January 6, 2021).

"Here Are The Republicans Challenging Congress' Tally Of Election Results" .

NPR . Retrieved January 7, 2021 .

^ Zanona, Melanie (December 21, 2021).

"House Republicans meet with Trump to discuss overturning election results" .

Politico . Retrieved July 29, 2021 .

^ Walker, Hunter (December 12, 2022).

"A Plot To Overturn An American Election" .

Talking Points Memo . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Congressional Research Service (December 8, 2020).

Counting Electoral Votes: An Overview of Procedures at the Joint Session, Including Objections by Members of Congress (PDF) . Retrieved February 12, 2020 .

^ The Editorial Board (October 2, 2021).

"Jan 6 Was Worse Than We Knew" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved October 3, 2021 .

^ Parton, Heather Digby (October 8, 2021).

"Trump's coup plot was worse than anyone knew - Republicans are trying their best to make attempted coups now normal politics in America" .

Salon . Retrieved October 8, 2021 .

^ @visionsurreal (September 26, 2021).

"Before it became the "Eastman memo," the plan to overthrow our democracy was known as Ivan Raiklin's "Pence Card." " ( Tweet ) . Retrieved January 14, 2022 – via Twitter .

^ Gabriel, Trip; Saul, Stephanie (March 24, 2025).

"Could State Legislatures Pick Electors to Vote for Trump? Not Likely" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved March 24, 2025 .

^ Evon, Dan (December 23, 2020).

"Can Veep Play the 'Pence Card' and Reject US Election Results?" .

Snopes . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Gangel, Jamie; Herb, Jeremy; Stuart, Elizabeth (September 14, 2021).

"Woodward/Costa book: Worried Trump could 'go rogue,' Milley took secret action to protect nuclear weapons" .

CNN . Retrieved June 20, 2022 .

^ Collins, Kaitlan; Acosta, Jim (January 5, 2021).

"Pence informed Trump that he can't block Biden's win" .

CNN . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ a b c d Haberman, M.; Karni, A. (September 14, 2021).

"Pence Said to Have Told Trump He Lacks Power to Change Election Result" .

The New York Times . Retrieved February 14, 2022 .

^ Baker, Peter; Haberman, Maggie; Karni, Annie (January 13, 2021).

"Pence Reached His Limit With Trump. It Wasn't Pretty" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved January 14, 2021 .

^ a b Gangel, Jamie; Herb, Jeremy (September 20, 2021).

"Memo shows Trump lawyer's six-step plan for Pence to overturn the election" .

CNN . Retrieved September 20, 2021 .

^ Pengelly, Martin (January 10, 2021).

" 'Hang Mike Pence': Twitter stops phrase trending after Capitol riot" .

The Guardian . Retrieved January 12, 2021 .

^ Stracqualursi, Veronica; Orr, Gabby (November 12, 2021).

"Trump defends threats to Pence on January 6 in new audio" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2021 . Retrieved November 12, 2021 .

^ Litvan, Laura (January 21, 2022).

"McConnell Backs Effort to Overhaul Electoral Vote Count Law" .

Bloomberg . Retrieved January 31, 2022 .

^ Trump, Donald (January 30, 2022).

"Statement by Donald J. Trump, 45th President of the United States of America" .

donaldjtrump.com . Archived from the original on March 10, 2025 . Retrieved March 10, 2025 .

^ "Vice president doesn't have power to 'change the outcome' of elections" .

Associated Press . February 1, 2022.

Archived from the original on March 10, 2025 . Retrieved March 10, 2025 .

^ a b c d Schmidt, M.S.; Haberman, M. (October 2, 2021).

"The Lawyer Behind the Memo on How Trump Could Stay in Office" .

The New York Times . Retrieved February 14, 2022 .

^ Pagliery, Jose (December 28, 2021).

"Trump Adviser Peter Navarro Lays Out How He and Bannon Planned to Overturn Biden's Electoral Win" .

Daily Beast . Retrieved February 14, 2022 .

^ Fandos, N.; Schmidt, M.S. (January 15, 2021).

"Trump Allies Eye Long-Shot Election Reversal in Congress, Testing Pence" .

The New York Times . Retrieved February 14, 2022 .

^ Polantz, Katelyn (June 2, 2022).

"House January 6 committee obtains email outlining early plan to try to overturn Trump's 2020 loss" .

CNN . Retrieved June 2, 2022 .

^ McFall, Caitlin (January 2, 2021).

"Trump, House Republicans held call to discuss Electoral College rejection: Brooks" .

Fox News . Retrieved February 14, 2022 .

^ Kruzel, John [@johnkruzel] (December 24, 2020).

"Trump just RT'd a bizarre "memo" calling on VP Pence to reject certain Biden slates of electors on Dec. 6. Setting aside the kooky details here...big takeaway is that Trump is now publicly pressuring Pence to conspire in his bid to overturn the election" ( Tweet ) . Retrieved February 14, 2022 – via Twitter .

^ a b c d Cathey, L. (November 14, 2021).

"Memo from Trump attorney outlined how Pence could overturn election, says new book" .

ABC News . Retrieved February 14, 2022 .

^ a b Swan, Betsy Woodruff; Cheney, Kyle (December 10, 2021).

"Trump campaign lawyer authored two memos claiming Pence could halt Biden's victory" .

Politico . Retrieved June 15, 2022 .

^ Balsamo, Michael (December 14, 2020).

"Trump says Barr resigning, will leave before Christmas" .

Associated Press . Retrieved June 15, 2022 .

^ Benner, Katie (June 15, 2021).

"Trump Pressed Official to Wield Justice Dept. to Back Election Claims" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Swan, Betsy Woodruff; Wu, Nicholas (August 10, 2021).

"Trump asked his AG about legal strategy to overturn election, Rosen tells senators" .

Politico . Retrieved January 6, 2023 .

^ a b Dawsey, Josh; Barrett, Devlin (July 28, 2021).

"As Trump pushed for probes of 2020 election, he called acting AG Rosen almost daily" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved July 30, 2021 .

^ Brown, Matthew (August 8, 2021).

"Trump DOJ official Jeffrey Clark pushed acting AG to interfere in Georgia election: report" .

USA Today . Retrieved August 10, 2021 .

^ Balsamo, Michael (December 3, 2020).

"Trump aide banned from Justice after trying to get case info" .

Associated Press . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ a b Steakin, Will (November 16, 2021).

"Trump allies pressed Defense Department to help overturn election, new book says" .

ABC News . Retrieved November 16, 2021 .

^ a b Bort, Ryan (November 16, 2021).

"Michael Flynn Pushed Defense Department to Seize Ballots, Overturn Trump's Loss: Report" .

Rolling Stone . Retrieved November 16, 2021 .

^ a b Dawsey, Josh; Helderman, Rosalind S.; Brown, Emma; Swaine, Jon; Alemany, Jacqueline (February 3, 2022).

"Memo circulated among Trump allies advocated using NSA data in attempt to prove stolen election" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved February 3, 2022 .

^ Date, S.V. (December 23, 2022).

"Trump's Eagerness To Use Military On June 2020 Protests Made Pentagon Coup-Wary" .

HuffPost . Retrieved December 24, 2022 .

^ Lowell, Hugo (February 4, 2022).

"Revealed: Trump reviewed draft order that authorized voting machines to be seized" .

The Guardian . Retrieved February 8, 2022 .

^ Wire, Sarah D. (June 4, 2022).

"Trump allies explored sending armed private contractors to seize voting machines in 2020 election" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Rucker, Philip; Abutaleb, Yasmeen; Dawsey, Josh; Costa, Robert (August 8, 2020).

"The lost days of summer: How Trump fell short in containing the virus" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

The president recently hosted Andrew Whitney, a biopharmaceuticals executive on the board of a company called Phoenix, who met in the Oval Office with Trump. Whitney, who has a limited health background, pitched Trump on a botanical extract called oleandrin as a treatment for the coronavirus, according to two senior administration officials with knowledge of the discussion. One official said Mike Lindell, a Trump booster and the chief executive of MyPillow – who stars as pitchman for his product in advertising on some of the Fox News shows Trump watches – helped arrange the meeting. Since then, Whitney has personally made overtures to senior leaders at the Food and Drug Administration, including its commissioner, Stephen Hahn, in an effort to get the agency to approve oleandrin as a treatment for the coronavirus.

^ Karl, Jonathan D. (November 9, 2021).

"The Man Who Made January 6 Possible" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Jacobs, Jennifer (January 14, 2021).

"Trump Reconciles With Ex-Strategist Steve Bannon in Talks on Election" .

Bloomberg L.P.

Retrieved January 15, 2021 .

^ a b Dawsey, Josh; Alemany, Jacqueline; Swaine, Jon; Brown, Emma (October 29, 2021).

"During Jan 6 riot, Trump attorney told Pence team the vice president's inaction caused attack on Capitol" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved October 30, 2021 .

^ Kaczynski, Andrew; Steck, Em (October 30, 2021).

"Trump lawyer John Eastman said 'courage and the spine' would help Pence send election to the House in comments before January 6" .

CNN . Retrieved October 30, 2021 .

^ Stracqualursi, Veronica (October 30, 2021).

"Washington Post: Trump lawyer John Eastman blamed Pence for January 6 violence by refusing to block 2020 election certification" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved October 30, 2021 .

^ Broadwater, Luke (October 30, 2021).

"Trump Lawyer Blamed Pence for Violence as Rioters Stormed Capitol – John Eastman, the author of a memo that some in both parties liken to a blueprint for a coup, sent a hostile email to the vice president's chief counsel as the mob attacked" .

The New York Times . Retrieved October 31, 2021 .

^ Benner, Katie (August 11, 2021).

"Former U.S. attorney in Atlanta says Trump wanted to fire him for not backing election fraud claims" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Viswanatha, Aruna; Gurman, Sadie; McWhirter, Cameron (January 9, 2021).

"White House Forced Georgia U.S. Attorney to Resign" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2021 . Retrieved March 30, 2021 .

^ a b c d Potter, Trevor (December 17, 2020).

"No, Jan. 6 isn't another chance for Trump to reverse the election" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved March 30, 2021 .

^ Berman, Dan (January 1, 2021).

"Pence asks judge to reject Gohmert lawsuit asking the VP to interfere in the Electoral College count" .

CNN . Retrieved March 30, 2021 .

^ O'Connell, Oliver (January 31, 2021).

"Trump impeachment lawyers quit 10 days before Senate trial" .

The Independent . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ a b Linton, Caroline (January 2, 2021).

"Judge dismisses Gohmert's attempt to force Pence to decide election results" .

CBS News . Retrieved March 30, 2021 .

^ a b "Order of Dismissal" (PDF) .

Gohmert v. Pence . January 1, 2021 . Retrieved March 30, 2021 – via courtlistener.com.

6:20-cv-00660-JDK ^ Cheney, Kyle (December 28, 2020).

"Gohmert suit may force Pence's hand in effort to overturn Trump's defeat" .

Politico . Retrieved March 30, 2021 .

^ Breuninger, Kevin (December 28, 2020).

"Congressman, other Republicans sue Vice President Pence in last-ditch effort to overturn Biden win" .

CNBC . Retrieved March 30, 2021 .

^ Helderman, Rosalind S.; Wagner, John (December 31, 2020).

"Pence seeks rejection of lawsuit that aimed to expand his power to overturn the election" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved January 1, 2021 .

^ a b c Barrett, Devlin (January 1, 2021).

"Judge dismisses Gohmert lawsuit seeking to stymie Biden electoral college count" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved January 2, 2021 .

^ Edmondson, Catie; Haberman, Maggie (January 1, 2021).

"Federal Judge Dismisses Election Lawsuit Against Pence" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved January 2, 2021 .

^ Gerstein, Josh; Cheney, Kyle (January 1, 2021).

"Federal appeals court tosses Gohmert suit aimed at overturning 2020 election results" .

Politico . Retrieved January 3, 2021 .

^ Smith, Allan; Jester, Julia; Thompson, Priscilla (January 3, 2021).

"Trump begs Georgia secretary of state to overturn election results in remarkable, hourlong phone call" .

NBC News . Retrieved January 3, 2021 .

^ Duster, Chandelis; Cole, Devan (January 3, 2021).

"In call, Trump demands Georgia officials 'find' votes to tilt election" .

CNN News . Retrieved January 3, 2021 .

^ a b Gardner, Amy; Firozi, Paula (January 3, 2021).

"Here's the full transcript and audio of the call between Trump and Raffensperger" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved March 30, 2021 .

^ Caputo, Marc (January 4, 2021).

"POLITICO Playbook: The backstory of Trump's Georgia call" .

Politico . Retrieved February 8, 2022 .

^ a b c d e f g Amy, Jeff; Superville, Darlene; Brumback, Kate (January 3, 2021).

"Trump, on tape, presses Ga. official to 'find' him votes" .

Associated Press . Retrieved March 30, 2021 .

^ Bluestein, Greg (January 3, 2021).

"Trump demands Georgia elections official overturn his defeat in hourlong call" .

Atlanta Journal-Constitution .

Archived from the original on January 5, 2021 . Retrieved January 3, 2021 .

^ Breland, Ali (January 3, 2021).

"Trump called the Georgia secretary of state and pressured him to find more nonexistent votes" .

Mother Jones . Retrieved January 3, 2021 .

^ a b Bice, Allie; Cheney, Kyle ; Kumar, Anita (January 3, 2021).

"Trump's pressure on Georgia election officials raises legal questions" .

Politico . Retrieved January 3, 2021 .

^ Shear, Michael D.; Saul, Stephanie (January 3, 2021).

"Trump, in Taped Call, Pressured Georgia Official to 'Find' Votes to Overturn Election" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved January 3, 2021 .

^ Sweeney, Don; Aldridge, Bailey (January 3, 2021).

" 'The truth's on tape.' Reactions to leaked Trump call seeking to overturn Georgia vote" .

The Charlotte Observer . Retrieved January 3, 2021 .

^ Morris, Jason; Murray, Sara (March 11, 2021).

"Wall Street Journal: Trump pressured Georgia investigator to find 'the right answer' in baseless fraud push" .

CNN . Retrieved March 11, 2021 .

^ Morris, Jason (March 15, 2021).

"Officials located December recording of Trump call in a trash folder on Georgia investigator's device" .

CNN . Retrieved March 15, 2021 .

^ Lipton, Eric (January 3, 2021).

"Trump Call to Georgia Official Might Violate State and Federal Law" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Nichols, John (January 4, 2021).

"Trump's Solicitation of Election Fraud Is His Highest Crime" .

The Nation . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

^ Lozada, Carlos (October 8, 2021).

"Adam Schiff points to a second insurrection – by members of Congress themselves – In his memoir [ "Midnight In Washington: How We Almost Lost Our Democracy and Still Could" ], the House Intelligence Committee chair argues America barely passed Trump's "stress test" of American democracy" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved October 9, 2021 .

^ Pengelly, Martin; Luscombe, Richard (January 3, 2021).

" 'I just want 11,780 votes': Trump pressed Georgia to overturn Biden victory" .

The Guardian . Retrieved March 30, 2021 .

^ Smith, Allan; Moe, Alex (January 4, 2021).

"Democrats ask FBI Director Wray to open criminal probe into Trump after leaked phone call" .

NBC News . Retrieved January 4, 2021 .

^ Falconer, Rebecca; Rummler, Orion (January 3, 2021).

" "Impeachable offense": Democrats react to Trump's Georgia call" .

Axios . Retrieved February 9, 2021 .

^ Hayes, Christal (January 4, 2021).

"90 House Dems support Trump censure after leaked GA election call" .

USA Today . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ a b Raju, Manu; Herb, Jeremy (January 4, 2021).

"House Republicans rush to Trump's defense over Georgia call as Democrats prep censure resolution" .

CNN News . Retrieved January 4, 2021 .

^ Fowler, Stephen (February 10, 2021).

"Georgia District Attorney Is Investigating Trump's Call To Overturn Election" .

NPR . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Hallerman, Tamar (January 24, 2022).

"Fulton judges greenlight special grand jury for Trump probe" .

The Atlanta Journal-Constitution .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2023 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ a b c Levine, Marianne; Zanona, Melanie (January 4, 2021).

" 'A new low': Republicans chastise Trump over his Raffensperger call" .

Politico . Retrieved March 30, 2021 .

^ Hains, Tim (January 3, 2021).

"David Perdue Says It is "Disgusting" Trump Call With Georgia Secretary Of State Was Leaked" (Video) .

Real Clear Politics . Retrieved January 3, 2021 .

^ a b c Benner, Katie (January 23, 2021).

"Trump and Justice Dept. Lawyer Said to Have Plotted to Oust Acting Attorney General" .

The New York Times . Retrieved November 19, 2021 .

^ Bravin, Jess; Gurman, Sadie (January 24, 2021).

"Trump Pressed Justice Department to Go Directly to Supreme Court to Overturn Election Results" .

Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 0099-9660 . Retrieved January 24, 2021 .

^ Mena, Kelly (January 24, 2021).

"The Wall Street Journal: Trump pressured DOJ to file case with Supreme Court to overturn election results" .

CNN . Retrieved January 24, 2021 .

^ Faulders, Katherine (August 3, 2021).

"DOJ officials rejected colleague's request to intervene in Georgia's election certification: Emails" .

ABC News . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Zapotosky, Matt; Barrett, Devlin; Leonnig, Carol D. (January 23, 2021).

"Trump entertained plan to install an attorney general who would help him pursue baseless election fraud claims" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved January 23, 2021 .

^ Brenner, Katie (August 7, 2021).

"Former Acting Attorney General Testifies About Trump's Efforts to Subvert Election" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved August 7, 2021 .

^ Perez, Evan (August 7, 2021).

"Interviews with former Justice Department officials provide new details on Trump efforts to undermine election results" .

CNN . Retrieved November 19, 2021 .

^ Barr, Luke; Mallin, Alexander (October 7, 2021).

"Senate report describes Trump, allies' efforts to use DOJ to subvert 2020 election" .

ABC News . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Benner, Katie (June 5, 2021).

"Meadows Pressed Justice Dept. to Investigate Election Fraud Claims" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved June 11, 2021 .

^ Cohen, Zachary; LeBlanc, Paul; McCullough, Colin (December 12, 2021).

"Meadows said National Guard would be ready to 'protect pro Trump people' before Capitol insurrection, House investigators say" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 13, 2021 . Retrieved December 13, 2021 .

^ Benen, Steve (December 17, 2021).

"Contributor to conspiratorial PowerPoint slides gets Jan. 6 subpoena" .

MSNBC.com .

Archived from the original on December 17, 2021 . Retrieved December 17, 2021 .

^ Broadwater, Luke; Feuer, Alan (December 10, 2021).

"Jan. 6 Committee Examines PowerPoint Document Sent to Meadows" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved December 13, 2021 .

^ Brown, Emma; Swaine, Jon; Alemany, Jacqueline; Dawsey, Josh; Hamburger, Tom (December 11, 2021).

"Phil Waldron, backer of Jan. 6 PowerPoint, says he met with Mark Meadows, briefed lawmakers" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved December 13, 2021 .

^ Hayes, Chris (December 15, 2021).

Jan. 6 probe witnesses speak out .

All In with Chris Hayes .

MSNBC .  Event occurs at 49:55.

Archived from the original on January 16, 2022.

Transcript: All In with Chris Hayes, 12/15/21 . Retrieved December 17, 2021 .

^ Olander, Olivia (November 9, 2022).

" 'People are gonna think you're stupid': Trump warned Pence not to 'wimp out' before Jan. 6, Pence writes" .

Politico . Retrieved November 12, 2022 .

^ Politi, Daniel (January 3, 2021).

"Peter Navarro Falsely Claims in TV Interview Biden Inauguration Could Be Delayed" .

Slate . Retrieved February 14, 2022 .

^ Lucey, C.; Leary, A. (January 5, 2021).

"Pence Faces Dilemma Over Biden Election Confirmation, as Trump Digs In" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved February 14, 2022 .

^ a b Niedzwiadek, Nick; Cheney, Kyle (January 5, 2021).

"Trump pressures Pence to throw out election results – even though he can't" .

Politico . Retrieved February 14, 2022 .

^ a b c Graham, David (December 15, 2021).

"The Paperwork Coup" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved February 14, 2022 .

^ Swan, Betsy Woodruff; Cheney, Kyle (June 11, 2022).

"Pence-world's final takedown of Trump's Jan. 6 bid to remain in power revealed in his lawyer's memo" .

Politico . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Jacoby, J. (January 7, 2021).

"This is what Trump told supporters before many stormed Capitol Hill" .

ABC News . Retrieved February 14, 2022 .

^ Giuliani, R.; Eastman, J. (January 6, 2021).

"Rudy Giuliani Speech Transcript at Trump's Washington, D.C. Rally: Wants 'Trial by Combat' " .

Rev.com . Retrieved February 14, 2022 .

^ a b c Baker, Peter (June 8, 2022).

"How Jared Kushner Washed His Hands of Donald Trump Before Jan. 6" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved June 9, 2022 .

^ a b Fandos, Nicholas (December 15, 2020).

"Defying Trump, McConnell Seeks to Squelch Bid to Overturn the Election" .

The New York Times . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Brockell, Gillian (January 5, 2021).

"The senators who were expelled after refusing to accept Lincoln's election" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

^ a b c Everett, Burgess (January 1, 2021).

" 'Exercise in futility': Republicans lambaste Hawley's push to challenge election" .

Politico . Retrieved March 30, 2021 .

^ Axelrod, Tal (December 31, 2020).

"Outgoing GOP congressman criticizes Hawley for fundraising off Electoral College challenge" .

The Hill . Retrieved March 30, 2021 .

^ Isenstadt, Alex (December 21, 2020).

"Hawley faces heat from Senate Republicans over Electoral College plans" .

Politico . Retrieved March 30, 2021 .

^ Sneve, Joe (January 1, 2021).

"Trump again attacks Thune via Twitter, Noem repeats she won't challenge for Senate seat" .

Sioux Falls Argus Leader . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

^ Schmidt, Michael S. (January 5, 2021).

"Trump Says Pence Can Overturn His Loss in Congress. That's Not How It Works" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved January 6, 2021 .

^ Wise, Alana (January 6, 2021).

"Pence Says He Doesn't Have Power To Reject Electoral Votes" .

NPR . Retrieved January 7, 2021 .

^ Hayes, Steve (January 6, 2021).

"Giuliani to Senator: 'Try to Just Slow it Down' " .

The Dispatch . Retrieved January 7, 2021 .

^ Serfaty, Sunlen; Cole, Devan; Rogers, Alex (January 9, 2021).

"As riot raged at Capitol, Trump tried to call senators to overturn election" .

CNN . Retrieved January 9, 2021 .

^ Stevens, Harry; Santamariña, Daniela; Rabinowitz, Kate; Uhrmacher, Kevin; Muyskens, John (January 7, 2021).

"How members of Congress voted on counting the electoral college vote" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved January 13, 2021 .

^ Chang, Alvin (January 7, 2021).

"The long list of Republicans who voted to reject election results" .

The Guardian . Retrieved January 13, 2021 .

^ Fox, Lauren (February 5, 2021).

"Democratic Rep. Zoe Lofgren quietly releases massive social media report on GOP colleagues who voted to overturn the election" .

CNN . Retrieved March 8, 2021 .

^ a b c Lang, Marissa J. (December 30, 2020).

"Jan. 6 protests multiply as Trump continues to call supporters to Washington" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Shaw, Adam (December 19, 2020).

"Trump promises 'wild' protest in Washington DC on Jan 6, claims it's 'impossible' he lost" .

Fox News . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

^ Editorial Board (December 30, 2020).

"Trump is inciting chaos on Jan. 6, both in and outside the Capitol" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

^ a b Jackson, David; Brown, Matthew (January 2, 2021).

" 'Wild' protests: Police brace for pro-Trump rallies when Congress meets Jan 6 to certify Biden's win" .

USA Today . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Hermann, Peter; Weil, Martin (January 4, 2021).

"Proud Boys leader arrested in the burning of Black Lives Matter banner, D.C. police say" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved January 4, 2021 .

^ Feldman, Josh (January 6, 2021).

"Trump Supporters Breach Capitol Building as Violent Clashes Continue" .

Mediaite . Retrieved January 7, 2021 .

^ Dupree, Jamie [@jamiedupree] (January 6, 2021).

"A protester sitting in the chair of the Senate chamber pic.twitter.com/4FZ5Rziqd9" ( Tweet ) . Retrieved November 21, 2021 – via Twitter .

^ Smith, Allan; Gibson, Ginger; Arkin, Daniel; Williams, Pete (January 6, 2021).

"Senate evacuated, National Guard activated after pro-Trump protesters storm Capitol" .

NBC News . Retrieved January 6, 2021 .

^ Wild, Whitney; Duster, Chandelis (August 23, 2021).

"US Capitol Police says shooting of January 6 rioter Ashli Babbitt was 'lawful' " .

CNN .

Archived from the original on August 23, 2021 . Retrieved August 23, 2021 .

^ Evelyn, Kenya (January 9, 2021).

"Capitol attack: the five people who died" .

The Guardian . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Hermann, Peter; Hsu, Spencer S. (April 19, 2021).

"Capitol Police officer Brian Sicknick, who engaged rioters, suffered two strokes and died of natural causes, officials say" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved April 19, 2021 .

^ Polantz, Katelyn (October 21, 2021).

"DOJ plans for Secret Service testimony about Pence at first scheduled Capitol riot trial" .

CNN . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Castronuovo, Celine (July 16, 2021).

"Pence refused to leave Capitol during riot: book" .

The Hill . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Mangan, Dan; Pramuk, Jacob; Breuninger, Kevin (January 7, 2021).

"Congress confirms Biden election as president, morning after Trump-fueled mob invades Capitol" .

CNBC . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Arkin, William M. (January 3, 2022).

"Exclusive: Secret Commandos with Shoot-to-Kill Authority Were at the Capitol" .

Newsweek . Retrieved January 3, 2022 .

^ Gangel, Jamie (January 3, 2022).

"January 6 committee has 'firsthand' knowledge of Trump's behavior during the riot from multiple sources" .

CNN News . Retrieved January 3, 2022 .

^ Ward, Myah (April 10, 2022).

"Cheney says Jan. 6 committee has enough evidence for a criminal referral for Trump – Her statement followed a New York Times report that said the panel is divided on whether to move forward" .

Politico . Retrieved April 11, 2022 .

^ a b Schmidt, Michael S.; Broadwater, Luke (April 10, 2022).

"Jan. 6 Panel Has Evidence for Criminal Referral of Trump, but Splits on Sending" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Cohen, Zachary (April 21, 2023).

"Exclusive: Text messages reveal Trump operatives considered using breached voting data to decertify Georgia's Senate runoff in 2021" .

CNN .

^ Cohen, Zachary; Morris, Jason (September 6, 2022).

"Newly obtained surveillance video shows fake Trump elector escorted operatives into Georgia county's elections office before voting machine breach" .

CNN . Retrieved September 6, 2022 .

^ Cohen, Zachary (August 15, 2023).

"Indictment zeroes in on Trump supporters who breached voting system in Coffee County, Georgia" .

CNN . Retrieved August 15, 2023 .

^ a b c Jacobs, Ben (January 16, 2021).

"Even the Guy the MyPillow CEO Wanted to Enlist for a Coup Is Confused" .

New York Intelligencer . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Bort, Ryan (January 16, 2021).

"Trump Calls in Pillow Salesman to Discuss Possibility of Instituting Martial Law" .

Rolling Stone . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Bump, Philip (January 16, 2021).

"A pillow salesman apparently has some ideas about declaring martial law" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved February 10, 2021 .

^ Riga, Kate (January 15, 2021).

"MyPillow CEO Spotted Bringing Notes To WH That Appear To Reference 'Martial Law,' Installing New CIA Director" .

Talking Points Memo . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Olorunnipa, Toluse; Ye Hee Lee, Michelle (February 6, 2021).

"Trump's lie that the election was stolen has cost $519 million (and counting) as taxpayers fund enhanced security, legal fees, property repairs and more" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Collins, Ben; Zadrozny, Brandy (March 2, 2021).

"D.C. police, FBI on alert ahead of QAnon's 'true Inauguration Day' " .

NBC News . Retrieved March 2, 2021 .

^ Balsamo, Michael (March 3, 2021).

"Police uncover 'possible plot' by militia to breach Capitol" .

AP News .

Archived from the original on March 4, 2021 . Retrieved March 3, 2021 .

^ Smith, Allan (June 4, 2021).

"Not just Arizona: Republicans push more partisan election inquiries" .

NBC News . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Robinson, Samuel J. (October 6, 2021).

"3 Michigan Republicans join national call for 'forensic audit' of 2020 election" .

MLive.com . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Gardner, Amy; Brown, Emma; Dawsey, Josh (December 22, 2021).

"Inside the nonstop pressure campaign by Trump allies to get election officials to revisit the 2020 vote" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved June 14, 2022 .

^ Cassidy, Christina A. (December 14, 2021).

"Far too little vote fraud to tip election to Trump, AP finds" .

Associated Press . Retrieved June 14, 2022 .

^ Cooper, Jonathan J.; Christie, Bob (May 10, 2021).

"Inside Arizona's election audit, GOP fraud fantasies live on" .

Associated Press . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Stone, Kevin (July 15, 2021).

"Arizona Sen. Karen Fann at audit hearing: 'This is not about Trump' " .

KTAR-FM . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Multiple sources: Colarossi, Natalie (May 1, 2021).

"Trump Suggests Arizona Recount Will Be First Domino to Fall: 'Let's See What They Find' " .

Newsweek . Retrieved May 18, 2021 .

T, Anthony (April 22, 2021).

"Maricopa County Are Moving Machines To Be Audited" .

welovetrump.com . Retrieved May 18, 2021 .

Quill, Vince (May 3, 2021).

"AZ GOP Chair Kelli Ward: Arizona Is The First Domino That Will Fall" .

welovetrump.com .

Archived from the original on May 8, 2021 . Retrieved May 18, 2021 .

Warner, Bruce (May 11, 2021).

"Bruce Warner: How 2020 election could be overturned" .

havasunews.com . Retrieved May 18, 2021 .

^ Bradner, Eric; Rappard, Anna-Maja (September 24, 2021).

"Final report from partisan Arizona review confirms Biden defeated Trump in Maricopa County last November" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on September 24, 2021 . Retrieved September 25, 2021 .

^ Healy, Jack; Wines, Michael; Corasaniti, Nick (September 24, 2021).

"Republican Review of Arizona Vote Fails to Show Stolen Election" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on September 24, 2021 . Retrieved September 24, 2021 .

^ Leary, Alex (September 24, 2021).

"Arizona GOP's Election Audit Confirms Biden Win in Draft Report" .

The Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 0099-9660 .

Archived from the original on September 24, 2021 . Retrieved September 24, 2021 .

^ Flynn, Sheila (September 25, 2021).

"Arizona governor says state won't decertify 2020 election results, 'outcome stands' " .

The Independent . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ "Correcting the Record: Maricopa County's In-Depth Analysis of the Senate Inquiry" (PDF) .

Maricopa County Elections Department & Office of the Recorder .

Maricopa County, Arizona . January 2022.

Archived (PDF) from the original on June 15, 2022 . Retrieved August 30, 2023 .

^ Clark, Dartunorro (January 6, 2022).

"Cyber Ninjas, company that led Arizona GOP election 'audit,' is shutting down" .

NBC News . Retrieved June 14, 2022 .

^ Jonathan J. Cooper; Bob Christie (April 7, 2022).

"Arizona AG letter offers no proof of 2020 election fraud" .

AP News .

^ Yvonne Wingett Sanchez; Isaac Stanley-Becker (February 22, 2023).

"Arizona's top prosecutor concealed records debunking election fraud claims" .

The Washington Post .

^ Niesse, Mark (October 12, 2021).

"No counterfeit ballots found by Georgia election investigators" .

The Atlanta Journal-Constitution .

Archived from the original on June 4, 2022 . Retrieved June 14, 2022 .

^ Murray, Sara; Morris, Jason; Gallagher, Dianne; Schouten, Fredreka (May 24, 2021).

"Another ballot audit set to move ahead in Fulton County, Georgia, as judge rules absentee ballots can be unsealed" .

CNN . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Morris, Jason (June 25, 2021).

"Georgia judge dismisses most of lawsuit seeking inspection of Fulton County ballots" .

CNN . Retrieved June 14, 2022 .

^ Murray, Sara; Janfaza, Rachel (October 13, 2021).

"Judge dismisses Fulton County ballot review case in Georgia" .

CNN . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Amy, Jeff (December 10, 2021).

"Georgia's Perdue sues over 2020 election, pushes fraud claim" .

Associated Press . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Niesse, Mark (December 27, 2021).

"Alleged 'dead' Georgia voters found alive and well after 2020 election" .

The Atlanta Journal-Constitution .

Archived from the original on June 10, 2022 . Retrieved June 14, 2022 .

^ Keith, Annisa (September 30, 2021).

"Allegations made by MyPillow founder spur Bonner County vote recount" .

krem.com . Retrieved October 8, 2021 .

^ Lonas, Lexi (October 8, 2021).

"Idaho GOP official says he is sending Mike Lindell bill for election audit" .

The Hill . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Norimine, Hayat (October 7, 2021).

"Idaho wants MyPillow CEO to pay for costs to refute his false election fraud claim" .

Idaho Statesman .

^ a b Helderman, Rosalind S. (June 6, 2021).

" 'It was like This Rogue Thing': How the Push by Trump Allies to Undermine the 2020 Results Through Ballot Reviews Started Quietly in Pennsylvania" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved September 14, 2023 .

^ Parish, Marley (October 31, 2021).

" 'An unprecedented situation': Loose ends remain in Fulton County election review" .

Pennsylvania Capital-Star . Retrieved October 6, 2023 .

^ Duda, Jeremy (May 24, 2021).

"Group led by 'kraken' lawyer Sidney Powell hired the firm recounting AZ's election to probe a PA election" .

Arizona Mirror . Retrieved October 6, 2023 .

^ Duda, Jeremy (May 21, 2021).

"Wake Technology Services Audited a Pennsylvania Election as Part of the #StopTheSteal Movement" .

Arizona Mirror . Retrieved September 14, 2023 .

^ Mimms, Sarah (September 9, 2021).

"Pennsylvania Republicans' Attempts At A 2020 Election "Audit" Are Off To An Awkward Start" .

BuzzFeed News . Retrieved October 6, 2023 .

^ Delano, Jon (August 25, 2021).

"State Senate President Jake Corman Renews Investigation Of 2020 Election, But Claims Trump Is Not Directing The Show" .

CBS Pittsburgh . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Viebeck, Elise (August 24, 2021).

"In latest bow to Trump, GOP lawmakers in Pennsylvania plan to launch hearings on 2020 vote" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved June 14, 2022 .

^ Viebeck, Elise; Helderman, Rosalind S.

(September 15, 2021).

"Pennsylvania GOP lawmakers approve wide-ranging subpoenas for personal information of 2020 voters" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved June 14, 2022 .

^ Seidman, Andrew; Lai, Jonathan (September 29, 2021).

"What to know about Pennsylvania Republicans' investigation of the 2020 election" .

The Philadelphia Inquirer . Retrieved June 14, 2022 .

^ Levy, Marc (September 23, 2021).

"Pennsylvania prosecutor sues to block GOP election subpoena" .

Associated Press . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Gavin, Kevin; Williams, Marylee; Tsutsui, Laura; Reese, Rebecca (October 7, 2021).

"Senator Jake Corman says he accepts November election results, but wants audit for oversight of Department of State" .

WESA . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Goldenstein, Taylor (December 21, 2020).

"Ken Paxton's beefed-up 2020 voter fraud unit closed 16 minor cases, all in Harris County" .

Houston Chronicle . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Goldstein, Taylor (December 17, 2021).

"Texas AG Paxton's $2.2M voter fraud unit closed three cases in 2021. GOP lawmakers still boosted its budget" .

Houston Chronicle . Retrieved June 14, 2022 .

^ Murray, Sara (September 25, 2021).

"County officials in Texas say they are in the dark following 'audit' announcement" .

CNN . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Heinz, Frank (December 31, 2021).

"Preliminary Findings of 2020 Election Audit Finds Little Trouble in Big Texas Counties" .

KXAS-TV . Retrieved June 14, 2022 .

^ Weber, Paul J. (October 21, 2021).

"Gov. Abbott Appoints New Secretary of State; Elections Chief Joined Trump's Challenge in 2020" .

KXAS-TV . Retrieved June 14, 2022 .

^ Bauer, Scott (May 21, 2021).

"27 possible voter fraud cases in 3 million Wisconsin ballots" .

Associated Press . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Marley, Patrick (February 11, 2021).

"Republican lawmakers order an audit of Wisconsin's elections" .

Milwaukee Journal Sentinel . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Marley, Patrick (May 26, 2021).

"Top Wisconsin Republican Robin Vos hires former cops to investigate November election" .

Milwaukee Journal Sentinel . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ a b White, Laurel (September 22, 2021).

"What's The Status Of GOP-Backed Election Investigations In Wisconsin?" .

Wisconsin Public Radio . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Beck, Molly (June 26, 2021).

"A former Wisconsin Supreme Court justice will oversee the latest election review sought by the state's GOP leaders" .

Milwaukee Journal Sentinel .

^ Marley, Patrick (September 13, 2017).

"Wisconsin Supreme Court Justice Michael Gableman being vetted for Trump job" .

Milwaukee Journal Sentinel .

^ Elise, Viebeck (October 14, 2021).

"Calls intensify to end Wisconsin's election review amid blunders by ex-judge in charge" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Bradner, Eric (October 18, 2021).

"Calls to end Wisconsin Republicans' review of 2020 election grow amid investigator's blunders" .

CNN .

^ Bauer, Scott (October 23, 2021).

"Wisconsin audit finds elections are 'safe and secure' " .

ABC News .

Associated Press . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Blake, Aaron (December 9, 2021).

"A conservative group debunks Trump's voter-fraud claims (yet again)" .

The Washington Post .

^ Redman, Henry (March 3, 2023).

"Third ethics complaint filed against Gableman" . Wisconsin Examiner.

^ Graziosi, Craig (August 13, 2021).

"Critics mock believers in Trump's 'reinstatement day' " .

The Independent . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Harvey, Josephine (November 24, 2021).

"Mike Lindell Finally Reveals His Supreme Court Complaint, And Critics Have Notes" .

news.yahoo.com .

Archived from the original on November 24, 2021 . Retrieved November 27, 2021 .

^ Johnson, Kevin (October 7, 2021).

" 'Subverting Justice': Senate panel details the 9 times Trump pressured DOJ to overturn election results" .

USA Today . Retrieved October 9, 2021 .

^ Levine, Marianne (March 6, 2019).

"McConnell won't allow vote on election reform bill" .

Politico . Retrieved March 8, 2019 .

^ Parks, Miles (December 23, 2022).

"Congress passes election reform designed to ward off another Jan. 6" .

NPR .

^ "Senators announce deal on electoral college reforms in wake of January 6" .

The Guardian . July 20, 2022 . Retrieved January 4, 2023 .

^ "S.4574 - 117th Congress (2021-2022): Enhanced Election Security and Protection Act &#124" .

Congress.gov . Library of Congress. July 20, 2022 . Retrieved October 14, 2024 .

^ Izaguirre, Anthony; Coronado, Acacia (January 31, 2021).

"GOP lawmakers seek tougher voting rules after record turnout" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on January 31, 2021 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ McCaskill, Nolan D. (March 15, 2021).

"After Trump's loss and false fraud claims, GOP eyes voter restrictions across nation" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on March 15, 2021 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ "Voting Laws Roundup: October 2021" .

Brennan Center for Justice . October 4, 2021.

Archived from the original on December 3, 2021 . Retrieved December 4, 2021 .

^ "State Voting Bills Tracker 2021" .

Brennan Center for Justice . February 24, 2021.

Archived from the original on June 11, 2022 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Corisaniti, Nick; Epstein, Reid J. (March 23, 2021).

"G.O.P. and Allies Draft 'Best Practices' for Restricting Voting" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on June 11, 2022 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Corasaniti, Nick (March 24, 2021).

"Republicans Aim to Seize More Power Over How Elections Are Run" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on June 11, 2022 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Gardner, Amy (March 26, 2021).

"After Trump tried to intervene in the 2020 vote, state Republicans are moving to take more control of elections" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on June 14, 2022 . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Kalmbacher, Colin (May 26, 2021).

"Arizona GOP Bill Would Allow GOP-Controlled State Legislature to Strip Key Election Powers from Democratic Secretary of State" .

Law & Crime . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Gardner, Amy (May 29, 2021).

"Texas Republicans finalize bill that would enact stiff new voting restrictions and make it easier to overturn election results" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Corasaniti, Nick; Berzon, Alexandra (May 8, 2023).

"Under the Radar, Right-Wing Push to Tighten Voting Laws Persists" .

The New York Times .

^ Dovere, Isaac; Herb, Jeremy (October 26, 2021).

" 'It's absolutely getting worse': Secretaries of state targeted by Trump election lies live in fear for their safety and are desperate for protection" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on October 26, 2021 . Retrieved October 26, 2021 .

^ Freking, Kevin (July 2, 2021).

"A look at 8 lawmakers appointed to probe Jan. 6 attack" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on July 2, 2021 . Retrieved December 20, 2021 .

^ a b Broadwater, Luke (June 9, 2022).

" 'Trump Was at the Center': Jan. 6 Hearing Lays Out Case in Vivid Detail" .

The New York Times . Retrieved June 10, 2022 .

^ a b Baker, Peter (June 9, 2022).

"Trump Is Depicted as a Would-Be Autocrat Seeking to Hang Onto Power at All Costs – As the Jan. 6 committee outlined during its prime-time hearing, Donald J. Trump executed a seven-part conspiracy to overturn a free and fair democratic election" .

The New York Times . Retrieved June 10, 2022 .

^ "Bennie G. Thompson and Liz Cheney to President Donald J. Trump" (PDF) .

january6th.house.gov . October 21, 2022 . Retrieved October 21, 2022 .

^ Thompson, Bennie; Cheney, Liz (November 14, 2022).

"Thompson & Cheney Statement on Donald Trump's Defiance of Select Committee Subpoena" .

Select Committee to Investigate the January 6th Attack on the United States Capitol (january6th.house.gov) . Archived from the original on November 15, 2022 . Retrieved November 15, 2022 .

^ Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief , Trump v. Select Committee et al. (S.D. Fla., November 11, 2022) (No. 9:22-cv-81758).

^ "How Bundestag elections work" .

Federal Ministry of the Interior and Community . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Stanley-Becker, Isaac (September 25, 2021).

"Election fraud, QAnon, Jan. 6: Far-right extremists in Germany read from a pro-Trump script" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved November 23, 2022 .

^ Feuer, Alan; Benner, Katie; Haberman, Maggie (March 30, 2022).

"Justice Dept. Widens Jan. 6 Inquiry to Range of Pro-Trump Figures" .

The New York Times .

^ Feuer, Alan; Broadwater, Luke; Haberman, Maggie (April 5, 2022).

"Justice Dept. Investigation of Jan. 6 Confronts Sprawling Cast of Characters" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Date, S.V. (May 17, 2022).

"Fake Wisconsin Trump Electors, Already Under DOJ Investigation, Now Face Civil Suit, Too" .

HuffPost . Retrieved May 17, 2022 .

^ Welch, David (April 2, 2022).

"Trump Rallies in Michigan to Put His Stamp on Republican Primary" .

Bloomberg . Retrieved April 2, 2022 .

^ Tribe, Laurence H.; Buchanan, Neil H.; Dorf, Michael C. (September 27, 2021).

"How to prevent the legal strategy that nearly undid the last election from ending democracy - Congress needs to act and the executive branch needs to step up" .

The Boston Globe . Retrieved October 1, 2021 .

^ Tribe, Laurence H.; Ayer, Donald; Aftergut, Dennis (December 23, 2021).

"Will Donald Trump Get Away With Inciting an Insurrection" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2021 . Retrieved December 23, 2021 .

^ Keating, Joshua (November 13, 2020).

"Whatever Trump Is Doing, It Isn't a "Coup": But the long-term effect could be similarly damaging" .

Slate .

Archived from the original on December 17, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Harkness, Kristen A. (June 1, 2016).

"The Ethnic Army and the State: Explaining Coup Traps and the Difficulties of Democratization in Africa" .

Journal of Conflict Resolution .

60 (4): 587– 616.

doi : 10.1177/0022002714545332 .

hdl : 10023/9391 .

ISSN 0022-0027 .

S2CID 54538341 .

^ Eaton, Paul D.; Taguba, Antonio M.; Anderson, Steven M. (December 17, 2021).

"Opinion: 3 retired generals: The military must prepare now for a 2024 insurrection" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved December 18, 2021 .

^ Carolan, Kelsey; Beitsch, Rebecca (April 12, 2022).

"John Eastman reportedly pressures Wisconsin legislature to decertify 2020 election" .

The Hill . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ Hsu, Spencer S. (May 2, 2022).

"Judge rejects RNC bid to block email, fundraising data from Jan. 6 panel – House probes whether Trump, RNC profited from and stoked violence through false, inflammatory claims of election fraud" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved May 2, 2022 .

^ Corasaniti, Nick; Yourish, Karen; Collins, Keith (May 22, 2022).

"How Trump's 2020 Election Lies – Have Gripped State Legislatures" .

The New York Times . Retrieved May 22, 2022 .

^ Edelman, Adam (May 22, 2022).

"Election deniers who say Trump won in 2020 are running to be top cop in 4 battleground states – At least 15 people who push false claims about the 2020 results are running for attorney general in 14 states, including four swing states, according to a group tracking the races" .

NBC News . Retrieved May 22, 2022 .

^ Paybarah, Azi; Montgomery, David (June 19, 2022).

"Texas Republicans Approve Far-Right Platform Declaring Biden's Election Illegitimate" .

The New York Times . Retrieved June 20, 2022 .

^ Gregorian, Dareh; Hillyard, Vaughn (July 20, 2022).

"Wisconsin House speaker says Trump called him to overturn 2020 results – 20 months after election" .

NBC News . Retrieved July 21, 2022 .

^ Gage, Brandon (August 29, 2022).

"Trump demands "new election immediately" in bizarre Truth Social rant" .

Salon.com . Retrieved August 30, 2022 .

^ Astor, Maggie (December 4, 2022).

"Trump's Call for 'Termination' of Constitution Draws Rebukes" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved December 4, 2022 .

^ "Trump Is Lying About Another Election Being 'Stolen' From Him – The One Still A Year Away" .

HuffPost . October 7, 2023 . Retrieved October 7, 2023 .

^ Grimmer, Justin; Garro, Haritz; Eggers, Andrew C. (February 3, 2021).

"No Evidence For Voter Fraud: A Guide To Statistical Claims About The 2020 Election" .

Hoover Institution .

^ Dawsey, Josh (February 11, 2023).

"Trump campaign paid researchers to prove 2020 fraud but kept findings secret" .

The Washington Post .

^ Maggie Haberman; Glenn Thrush; Alan Feuer (February 12, 2023).

"Jack Smith, Special Counsel for Trump Inquiries, Steps Up the Pace" .

The New York Times .

^ Dawsey, Josh (March 17, 2023).

"Trump-commissioned report undercut his claims of dead and double voters" .

The Washington Post .

^ Dawsey, Josh (April 27, 2023).

"A second firm hired by Trump campaign found no evidence of election fraud" .

The Washington Post .

^ a b Eastman v Thompson, et al.

, 8:22-cv-00099-DOC-DFM Document 260 , 44 (S.D. Cal. May 28, 2022) ("Dr. Eastman and President Trump launched a campaign to overturn a democratic election, an action unprecedented in American history. Their campaign was not confined to the ivory tower – it was a coup in search of a legal theory. The plan spurred violent attacks on the seat of our nation's government, led to the deaths of several law enforcement officers, and deepened public distrust in our political process... If Dr. Eastman and President Trump's plan had worked, it would have permanently ended the peaceful transition of power, undermining American democracy and the Constitution. If the country does not commit to investigating and pursuing accountability for those responsible, the Court fears January 6 will
repeat itself.").

^ Holland, Steve; Mason, Jeff; Spetalnick, Matt; Shalal, Andrea (January 14, 2021).

"Inside Trump's final days: Aides struggle to contain an angry, isolated president" .

Reuters . Retrieved June 9, 2022 .

^ Singh, Maanvi (June 10, 2022).

"Ivanka Trump says she does not believe father's claim 2020 election was stolen" .

The Guardian . Retrieved June 10, 2022 .

^ Levitsky, Steven; Ziblatt, Daniel (2023).

Tyranny of the minority: why American democracy reached the breaking point (First ed.). New York: Crown. pp.

130– 132.

ISBN 978-0-593-44307-1 .

^ Mascaro, Lisa; Jalonick, Mary Clare (January 3, 2021).

"Republicans condemn GOP 'scheme' to undo election for Trump" .

Associated Press . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Schwarzenegger, Arnold (January 5, 2021).

"Judgment Day: Arnold Schwarzenegger on why Republicans must stop Trump" .

The Economist . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

^ The Editorial board (December 11, 2020).

"The Republicans Who Embraced Nihilism – The Supreme Court thwarts the latest Trumpist attack on American democracy" .

The New York Times . Retrieved December 11, 2020 .

^ Chapman, Matthew (December 9, 2020).

"The GOP Is an 'Organized Conspiracy' That Exists for 'No Purpose Other Than Power' Says Steve Schmidt" .

TheNewCivilRightsMovement.com . Retrieved December 11, 2020 .

^ Schmidt, Steve; et al. (December 9, 2020).

"Steve Schmidt says the GOP is an 'organized conspiracy' to gain power – video (2:43)" .

MSNBC News . Retrieved December 11, 2020 .

^ Hains, Tim (December 10, 2020).

" "Lincoln Project" Founder Steve Schmidt Warns: "The Republican Party Is An Organized Conspiracy" And They Just Crossed The Rubicon" .

RealClearPolitics . Retrieved December 10, 2020 .

^ Lamothe, Dan (January 3, 2021).

"The time to question election results has passed, all living former defense secretaries say" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved January 1, 2021 .

^ Wagner, Meg; Macaya, Melissa (January 8, 2021).

"Cruz's former spokeswoman says she does not recognize him anymore" .

CNN . Retrieved January 9, 2021 .

^ a b c Everett, Burgess; Zanona, Melanie (November 6, 2020).

"GOP begins pushing back against Trump's false election claims" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on November 6, 2020 . Retrieved November 6, 2020 .

^ Fandos, Nicholas; Edmonson, Catie (November 19, 2020).

" 'Absolutely outrageous.' Joni Ernst bristles at Trump team's groundless claims about election results" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 22, 2020 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ a b c Daly, Matthew (November 6, 2020).

"GOP divided over Trump's baseless claims of election fraud" .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on November 6, 2020 . Retrieved November 6, 2020 .

^ Daly, Matthew (November 5, 2020).

"Some in GOP break with Trump over baseless vote-fraud claims" .

Star Tribune .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 7, 2020 .

^ Bradner, Eric (November 8, 2020).

"Bush congratulates Biden, says election was 'fundamentally fair' and 'its outcome is clear' " .

CNN .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 8, 2020 .

^ DeCiccio, Emily (November 11, 2020).

"Former Bush chief of staff cites 9/11 Commission, warns about slow transition" .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 14, 2020 .

^ a b Solender, Andrew (November 13, 2020).

"Ex-Trump Intelligence Chief Dan Coats Among 20 New Republicans Calling Biden President-Elect" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on November 13, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2020 .

^ Goldmacher, Shane; Cochrane, Emily (November 12, 2020).

"Small Cracks Emerge in G.O.P. Support for Trump's Baseless Fraud Claims" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 13, 2020 .

^ Langlois, Shawn (November 9, 2020).

"Condoleezza Rice calls for 'respect' and 'empathy' from both sides – and gets the exact opposite" .

MarketWatch .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 13, 2020 .

^ Shepherd, Katie (November 6, 2020).

"GOP splits over Trump's false election claims, unfounded fraud allegations" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 7, 2020 .

^ Perkins, Tom (November 6, 2020).

"Donald Trump's baseless vote fraud claim opens cracks in Republican ranks" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on November 6, 2020 . Retrieved November 6, 2020 .

^ Fuchs, Hailey; Delkic, Melina; Cameron, Chris (November 15, 2020).

"Presidential Transition: As More Republicans Break With Trump, He Refuses to Budge" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved November 15, 2020 .

^ Sayers, Devon M.; Gangel, Jamie; Nobles, Ryan (January 28, 2021).

"McCarthy and Trump discuss Republicans' plans to win House majority at Florida meeting Thursday" .

CNN . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Neidzwadek, Nick (January 13, 2021).

"McCarthy says Trump 'bears responsibility' for Capitol riot" .

Politico . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Herb, Jeremy (May 18, 2021).

"McCarthy won't support January 6 commission and sides with Republicans downplaying the insurrection" .

CNN . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

^ Mulcahy, Susan (May 2016).

"Confessions of a Trump Tabloid Scribe" .

Politico . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

^ "Trump's Bad Exit" .

The Wall Street Journal . December 20, 2020 . Retrieved October 29, 2021 .

^ Tracy, Marc (December 28, 2020).

"Murdoch's New York Post Blasts President's Fraud Claims" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 1, 2021 .

^ Goldman, David (December 28, 2020).

"New York Post to Donald Trump: Stop the insanity" .

CNN . Retrieved January 1, 2021 .

^ Stelter, Brian (September 15, 2020).

"Trump says weekly calls on 'Fox & Friends' are returning; Fox says maybe not" .

CNN . Retrieved January 1, 2021 .

^ Meyer, Ken (January 4, 2021).

"Ainsley Earhardt Says Conservatives 'Feel' Election Was Rigged" .

Mediaite . Retrieved January 1, 2021 .

^ Hall, Colby (January 4, 2021).

"Steve Doocy and Brian Kilmeade Agree It's Long Past Time for Trump to Show Evidence of Voter Fraud" .

Mediaite . Retrieved January 1, 2021 .

^ Tufekci, Zeynep (December 7, 2020).

"This Must Be Your First" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on December 8, 2020 . Retrieved December 8, 2020 .

the word coup may not technically capture what we're seeing ^ Gongloff, Mark (November 19, 2020).

"Trump's Coup Attempt Will Be a Very Costly Failure" .

Bloomberg.com .

Bloomberg News .

Archived from the original on November 20, 2020 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ Niquette, Mark (December 13, 2020).

"Biden Nod From Electors Could Seal His Win With Some in GOP" .

Bloomberg News . Retrieved December 14, 2020 .

It's mind-boggling to me that we have people that are actually trying conduct a coup and take the votes away from the voters.

^ "Donald Trump's refusal to concede is harming America" .

The Economist . November 21, 2020 . Retrieved January 1, 2021 .

^ Luce, Edward (November 12, 2020).

"Donald Trump is not done with America yet" .

Financial Times . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ McCarthy, Tom (November 11, 2020).

" 'It must be made to fail': Trump's desperate bid to cling to power" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on November 22, 2020 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ Kilgore, Ed (December 10, 2020).

"Every Republican in Congress May Have to Vote on Trump's Coup" .

The Intelligencer . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Mystal, Elie (December 12, 2020).

"People Are Taking the Wrong Lesson From Trump's Failed Coup" .

The Nation . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Gessen, Masha (November 20, 2020).

"The Coup Stage of Donald Trump's Presidency" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on November 22, 2020 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ Friedman, Thomas L. (January 6, 2021).

"Opinion | Never Forget the Names of These Republicans Attempting a Coup" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 10, 2021 . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Devega, Chauncey (December 11, 2020).

"Don't look past Trump's coup attempt: This is a dark moment in American history" .

Salon.com . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ "Editorial: The enduring cost of Trump's attempted coup" .

San Francisco Chronicle . Editorial Board. December 10, 2020 . Retrieved December 10, 2020 .

^ Levin, Bess (December 10, 2020).

"106 House Republicans Back Trump's Bid to Overthrow the Government" .

Vanity Fair . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

^ Scarborough, Charles Joseph (December 1, 2020).

"Morning Joe" .

MSNBC (Interview). Interviewed by Scarborough, Mika Emilie Leonia Brzezinski . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

Just so people who think this, to call this a coup is hyperbolic, or an attempted coup, you just look at the definition in Wikipedia : it says, "Typically, it's an illegal, unconstitutional attempt to seize power by a political faction". Definition of a coup. Of course, if he's already in power, it'd be an " autocoup ". But at the same time, you look at the definition, and if... I guess I would just say to Trump defenders, if it's not an attempted coup, if it's not an "illegal unconstitutional attempt to seize power by a political faction" when he's trying to call people to the White House to get them to change their votes, trying to call the Governor of Arizona to try to stop him from doing legally what he has to do which is to certify the election results, trying to get those in Michigan and Wayne County to illegally not certify the votes there... if Republicans don't think it's a coup or doesn't fit this definition of a coup in all four corners then I'd love to hear what they would call it.

^ Nakamura, David (January 5, 2021).

"With brazen assault on election, Trump prompts critics to warn of a coup" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved January 6, 2021 .

^ De Bruin, Erica (November 11, 2020).

"No, Trump is not attempting a 'coup.' Here's why the distinction matters.: It's important that we describe the crisis accurately. That will shape our response" . PostEverything · Perspective.

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 23, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

Because Trump is attempting to remain in power, rather than remove someone else from it his efforts come closer to what scholars call an attempt at a "self-coup" – or, using the Spanish term, an autogolpe – in which a head of state attempts to remain in power past his or her term in office.

^ a b Narea, Nicole (November 14, 2020).

"3 scholars say Trump isn't staging a coup – but he still poses a threat to democracy" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on December 18, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Drezner, Daniel W. (December 7, 2020).

"It's not a coup. It's not even a bad coup: Coup-coup-kachoo!" . PostEverything · Perspective.

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on December 17, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

To be clear, the takeaway from this is not to relax completely. However ineptly, Trump and his legal team are trying to overturn the results. The effect on GOP public attitudes is disheartening.

Tufekci is correct to observe that the watchword is vigilance. That said, what is happening is not a coup, or even an attempt at a coup. It is a ham-handed effort to besmirch the election outcome by any easily available means necessary. That is not good, but it is very different from Turkey's myriad coups.

^ Melber, Ari (July 30, 2021).

"Trump 'Soft Coup' Busted By 2021 Leak Of Secret DOJ Notes" .

MSNBC The Beat . Retrieved June 15, 2022 .

^ "CNN Transcripts" .

CNN . July 15, 2022 . Retrieved July 20, 2022 .

^ Peltz, Madeline (October 29, 2021).

"Leading up to January 6, Steve Bannon publicly bragged about his behind-the-scene role fomenting the insurrection" .

Media Matters for America . Retrieved July 20, 2022 .

^ Thebault, Reis (July 14, 2021).

"Top U.S. military official draws parallels between Trump, Hitler" .

The Seattle Times . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Gangel, Jamie; Herb, Jeremy; Cohen, Marshall; Stuart, Elizabeth (July 15, 2021).

" 'They're not going to f**king succeed': Top generals feared Trump would attempt a coup after election, according to new book" .

CNN . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

^ Wagner, Meg; Macaya, Melissa; Hayes, Mike; Mahtani, Melissa; Rocha, Veronica; Alfonso, Fernando III (January 6, 2021).

"Republican congressman tweets: "This is a coup attempt" " .

CNN . Retrieved April 7, 2021 .

^ Reisman, Nick (January 6, 2021).

"Cuomo, AG James Call U.S. Capitol Riot a Failed Coup" .

spectrumlocalnews.com . Retrieved January 11, 2021 .

^ "Thompson & Cheney Opening Statements at Select Committee Business Meeting" .

Select Committee to Investigate the January 6th Attack on the United States Capitol . March 28, 2022 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ (Video) Business Meeting Recommending the House Cite Peter Navarro & Daniel Scavino Jr for Criminal Contempt . U.S. House Select Committee to Investigate the January 6th Attack on the United States Capitol. March 28, 2022 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 – via youtube.

^ Swanson, Ian (January 6, 2021).

"Romney: Trump caused 'this insurrection' " .

The Hill . Retrieved April 7, 2021 .

^ Parmar, Inderjeet (2021).

"Trump's Coup and Insurrection: Biden's Challenge and Opportunity" .

Insight Turkey .

23 (1): 35– 50.

doi : 10.25253/99.2021231.4 .

ISSN 1302-177X .

JSTOR 26989815 .

S2CID 233825478 .

^ Davis, Charles R. (January 14, 2022).

"Yale history professor Timothy Snyder told Insider he fears American democracy may not survive another Trump campaign" .

Business Insider . Retrieved June 18, 2022 .

Well, I mean, obviously things could be worse. The January 6th insurrection a year ago could have succeeded. We could be living in a country that is wracked by civil and indeed violent conflict after Donald Trump succeeds in, at least temporarily, staying in power, thanks to some kind of conspiracy of his supporters, the Department of Justice, supporters in Congress and so on, right? So things could be worse. And I wouldn't wanna deny that. Unfortunately, that scenario is not one that is just in the rearview mirror. It's also one that is right in front of us. The problem with a failed coup, which is what January 6th, 2021, is, is that it is practice for a successful coup. So what we're looking at now is a kind of slow-motion practice for a repetition of all of that, but this time with the legal parts of it more fully prepared. What I'm afraid of is that now, in the shadow of a big lie – namely, that Trump actually won – the states are preparing the legal steps that will enable Trump to be installed as president the next time around. And that in turn will lead to a terrible sort of conflict, the kind that we haven't seen before.

^ Eisen, Norman ; Ayer, Donald ; Perry, Joshua; Bookbinder, Noah; Perry, E. Danya (June 6, 2022).

Trump on Trial: A Guide to the January 6 Hearings and the Question of Criminality (Report). Brookings Institution . Retrieved January 17, 2023 .

[Trump] tried to delegitimize the election results by disseminating a series of far fetched and evidence-free claims of fraud. Meanwhile, with a ring of close confidants, Trump conceived and implemented unprecedented schemes to – in his own words – "overturn" the election outcome. Among the results of this "Big Lie" campaign were the terrible events of January 6, 2021 – an inflection point in what we now understand was nothing less than an attempted coup.

^ Pion-Berlin, David ; Bruneau, Thomas; Goetze, Richard B. (April 7, 2022).

"The Trump Self-Coup Attempt: Comparisons and Civil–Military Relations" .

Government and Opposition .

58 (4). Cambridge University Press: 789– 806.

doi : 10.1017/gov.2022.13 .

ISSN 0017-257X .

S2CID 248033246 .

^ Harvey, Michael (2022). "Introduction: History's Rhymes". In Harvey, Michael (ed.).

Donald Trump in Historical Perspective . Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781003110361-1 .

ISBN 978-1-003-11036-1 .

As with the Beer Hall Putsch, a would-be leader tried to take advantage of an already scheduled event (in Hitler's case, Kahr's speech; in Trump's, Congress's tallying of the electoral votes) to create a dramatic moment with himself at the center of attention, calling for bold action to upend the political order. Unlike Hitler's coup attempt, Trump already held top of office, so he was attempting to hold onto power, not seize it (the precise term for Trump's intended action is a 'self-coup' or 'autogolpe'). Thus, Trump was able to plan for the event well in advance, and with much greater control, including developing the legal arguments that could be used to justify rejecting the election's results. (p3) ^ "US election 2020: The people who still believe Trump won" .

BBC News . January 5, 2021 . Retrieved June 29, 2021 .

^ a b Goba, Kadia (June 27, 2021).

"The People Still Going To Trump Rallies Are Committed To Trump's Fantasy: "He's Our True President" " .

BuzzFeed News . Retrieved June 29, 2021 .

^ Parton, Heather Digby (June 28, 2021).

"Bill Barr calls "bullshit" on Trump's Big Lie – but it is much too late now" .

Salon.com . Retrieved June 12, 2022 .

^ Barr, William (June 10, 2022).

"January 6th Committee Public Hearing, sworn deposition testimony of former US AG William Barr" .

C-SPAN . Retrieved June 12, 2022 .

^ Romney, Mitt (February 18, 2021).

"Romney Releases Statement for Congressional Record on Impeachment Trial" .

romney.senate.gov . Retrieved June 12, 2022 .

^ Frankovic, Kathy (November 19, 2020).

"Trump voters still see Biden's victory as illegitimate" .

YouGov .

Archived from the original on November 30, 2020 . Retrieved December 1, 2020 .

^ Pramuk, Jacob (November 24, 2020).

"Almost no Trump voters consider Biden the legitimate 2020 election winner" .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on December 1, 2020 . Retrieved December 1, 2020 .

^ Murray, Mark (September 27, 2022).

"Poll: 61% of Republicans still believe Biden didn't win fair and square in 2020" .

NBC News . Retrieved January 4, 2023 .

^ Thomas, Phil (June 26, 2021).

"Conspiracy theory that Trump will be reinstated in August has officials worried, report claims" .

The Independent . Retrieved June 29, 2021 .

^ Multiple sources: Cohen, Zachary; Sands, Geneva (June 30, 2021).

"DHS raises alarms over potential for summer violence pegged to August conspiracy theory" .

CNN . Retrieved June 30, 2021 .

Dilanian, Ken (August 11, 2021).

"Feds warn of potential violence fueled by false election claims" .

NBC News . Retrieved August 13, 2021 .

Sands, Geneva (August 13, 2021).

"Calls for violence online similar to before January 6 Capitol attack, DHS Intel chief says" .

CNN . Retrieved August 13, 2021 .

^ Enten, Harry (December 10, 2021).

"Voters who think Trump won are the most enthusiastic to vote in 2022" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on December 10, 2021 . Retrieved January 7, 2022 .

^ Politi, James; Weaver, Courtney (January 5, 2021).

"Donald Trump vows to 'fight like hell' to remain in White House" .

Financial Times . Retrieved January 5, 2021 .

^ "Manufacturers group calls on Pence to invoke 25th Amendment" .

PBS NewsHourr .

Associated Press . January 6, 2021 . Retrieved January 7, 2021 .

^ Farhi, Paul (January 11, 2021).

"Talk-radio owner orders conservative hosts to temper election fraud rhetoric" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved January 11, 2021 .

^ Mehta, Seema; Moore, Maloy; Stiles, Matt (April 20, 2021).

"Most corporations stood by pledges to not fund politicians who voted against Biden's victory" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved February 17, 2023 .

^ Rappeport, Alan; Ngo, Madeleine; Kelly, Kate (January 6, 2022).

"Corporations Donated Millions to Lawmakers Who Voted to Overturn Election Results" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved February 17, 2023 .

^ Birnbaum, Emily; Wilson, Megan; Fuchs, Hailey (February 15, 2022).

"These companies stopped campaign donations to election objectors. Their lobbyists did not" .

Politico . Retrieved February 17, 2023 .

^ Birnbaum, Emily; Bass, Dina (December 14, 2022).

"Tech Firms Are Giving Money to Election Deniers Again" .

Bloomberg.com . Retrieved February 17, 2023 .

External links Quotations related to Attempts to overturn the 2020 United States presidential election at Wikiquote Violence breaks out in Washington, DC at pro-Trump protest at Wikinews Conservative groups hold rally in Washington D.C. claiming U.S. elections were stolen from President Trump at Wikinews PBS FRONTLINE Episodes.

"American Insurrection" .

FRONTLINE . Season 39. Episode 15.

PBS .

WGBH . Retrieved July 6, 2023 .

"Plot to Overturn the Election" .

FRONTLINE . Season 40. Episode 9.

PBS . WGBH . Retrieved July 6, 2023 .

"Lies, Politics and Democracy" .

FRONTLINE . Season 40. Episode 17.

PBS . WGBH . Retrieved July 6, 2023 .

"Democracy on Trial" .

FRONTLINE . Season 42. Episode 11.

PBS . WGBH . Retrieved February 3, 2024 .

"THE ATTACK: The Jan 6 siege of the U.S. Capitol was neither a spontaneous act nor an isolated event" .

The Washington Post . October 31, 2021 . Retrieved November 21, 2021 .

A detailed account of the events before, during and after the attack on the Capitol and attempt to overturn the election.

Sullivan, Margaret (May 2, 2021).

"The politicians who tried to overturn an election – and the local news team that won't let anyone forget it" .

The Washington Post .

Lost Not Stolen: The Conservative Case that Trump Lost and Biden Won the 2020 Presidential Election Video (04:48): John Eastman Defends His Eastman Memorandum In Trying To Overturn 2020 Election ( MSNBC ; October 27, 2021) Video (18:49): "Inside Trump's Election Plot" on YouTube ( MSNBC News ; July 29, 2022) v t e ( ← 2016 ) 2020 United States presidential election ( 2024 → ) Joe Biden , Kamala Harris (D), 306 electoral votes ; Donald Trump , Mike Pence (R), 232 electoral votes 2020 United States elections Polls national state Predictions Timeline Debates Postal voting Social media Fundraising Electors Electoral College vote count Transition inauguration Democratic Party ▌ IPO · ▌ WFP Primaries Candidates Debates Forums Results Convention ( automatic delegates ) Polls ( national · state ) Positions Endorsements VP candidate selection Unity Task Forces Candidates Nominee: Joe Biden campaign endorsements celebrity organizations Congress state & territorial officials municipal officials positions VP nominee: Kamala Harris positions Withdrew during primaries Michael Bennet Michael Bloomberg campaign endorsements positions Pete Buttigieg campaign endorsements positions Tulsi Gabbard campaign positions Amy Klobuchar campaign endorsements positions Deval Patrick Bernie Sanders campaign endorsements positions media coverage Tom Steyer Elizabeth Warren campaign endorsements positions Andrew Yang campaign endorsements Withdrew before primaries Cory Booker campaign endorsements positions Steve Bullock Julian Castro Bill de Blasio John Delaney campaign positions Kirsten Gillibrand positions Ben Gleib Mike Gravel campaign Kamala Harris campaign endorsements positions John Hickenlooper Jay Inslee campaign Wayne Messam Seth Moulton Richard Ojeda Beto O'Rourke campaign Tim Ryan Joe Sestak Eric Swalwell Marianne Williamson campaign Republican Party ▌ CPNYS · ▌ RTLP Primaries Results Debates Convention Polls Candidates Incumbent nominee Donald Trump campaign endorsements political non-political positions GOP opposition GOP reactions to fraud claims Incumbent VP nominee: Mike Pence Withdrew during primaries Rocky De La Fuente Bob Ely Jack Fellure Zoltan Istvan Joe Walsh campaign Bill Weld campaign Withdrew before primaries Mark Sanford campaign Libertarian Party Primaries Results Convention Candidates Nominee Jo Jorgensen campaign endorsements VP nominee: Spike Cohen Eliminated in balloting Jim Gray Adam Kokesh John McAfee John Monds Vermin Supreme campaign Withdrew before or during primaries Max Abramson Lincoln Chafee Zoltan Istvan Formed exploratory committee but did not run Justin Amash Green Party ▌ LMN · ▌ SA · ▌ SPUSA Primaries Results Debates Convention Candidates Nominee: Howie Hawkins campaign endorsements VP nominee: Angela Walker Withdrew during primaries Dario Hunter Other candidates Jesse Ventura Constitution Party Primaries Nominee: Don Blankenship Other third-party candidates Alliance Party ▌ AIP · ▌ Reform Nominee: Rocky De La Fuente VP nominee: Darcy Richardson AIP VP nominee: Kanye West Other candidates Max Abramson Phil Collins American Solidarity Party Nominee: Brian T. Carroll Other candidates Joe Schriner Birthday Party Nominee: Kanye West campaign positions Bread and Roses Nominee: Jerome Segal Party for Socialism & Liberation ▌ LUP · ▌ PFP Nominee: Gloria La Riva VP nominee: Leonard Peltier (withdrew) Other candidates: Howie Hawkins Progressive Party Nominee: Dario Hunter Prohibition Party Nominee: Phil Collins Socialist Action Nominee: Jeff Mackler Socialist Equality Party Nominee: Joseph Kishore Socialist Workers Party Nominee: Alyson Kennedy Independent candidates Declared Pete Accetturo Mark Charles Brock Pierce ( ▌ IPNY nominee) Jade Simmons Joe Schriner Withdrew Perry Caravello Jeremy Gable Disputes Attempts to overturn Protests during inauguration week U.S. Capitol attack timeline aftermath second impeachment of Donald Trump trial January 6 commission reactions domestic international Trump fake electors plot Arizona Georgia Michigan Trump–Raffensperger phone call Eastman memos Lawsuits Filed before Election Day Filed during or after Election Day Arizona Georgia Michigan Nevada Pennsylvania Wisconsin Texas v. Pennsylvania Four Seasons Total Landscaping press conference Controversies Russian interference Voting restrictions v t e January 6 United States Capitol attack Background U.S. Capitol United States Capitol Police Harry Dunn Aquilino Gonell Eugene Goodman Yogananda Pittman Steven Sund Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia Robert Contee Michael Fanone Daniel Hodges Timeline of prior security incidents Election Previous claims of election fraud by President Trump in 2012 in 2016 Republican reactions 2020–21 presidential election protests 2021 Electoral College vote count Predictions of violence 1776 Returns Attempts to overturn the 2020 presidential election Fake electors plot Chesebro memos Eastman memos Lawsuits Texas v. Pennsylvania Jeffrey Clark letter Other Democratic backsliding in the United States Michigan State Capitol storming Trumpism False or misleading statements by Donald Trump Conspiracy theories Social media use by Donald Trump Twitter QAnon Donald Trump and fascism Trump derangement syndrome Involved Christina Bobb Kenneth Chesebro Jeffrey Clark Joseph diGenova John Eastman Jenna Ellis Rudy Giuliani John McEntee Mark Meadows Cleta Mitchell Peter Navarro Sidney Powell Victoria Toensing Jim Troupis Donald Trump Donald Trump Jr.

Events Planning Timeline of attack Law enforcement response killing of Ashli Babbitt Death of Brian Sicknick Participants Proud Boys Enrique Tarrio Joe Biggs Ethan Nordean Dominic Pezzola Oath Keepers Stewart Rhodes Kelly Meggs Jeremy Bertino Ray Epps Roberto Minuta Jessica Marie Watkins Others Richard Barnett Jacob Chansley Cameron Clapp Isabella DeLuca Derrick Evans Nick Fuentes Tim "Baked Alaska" Gionet Simone Gold Couy Griffin Pamela Hemphill Alan Hostetter Adam Christian Johnson Jay Johnston Klete Keller Edward Kelley Carol Kicinski Kevin James Lyons Doug Mastriano Evan Neumann Nicholas Ochs Matthew Perna Rachel Powell Chaya "Libs of TikTok" Raichik Guy Reffitt Jason Riddle Dana Rohrabacher Rick Saccone Ryan Samsel Ronald Sandlin Jon Schaffer Tighe Scott Kevin Seefried Owen Shroyer Peter Francis Stager Brandon Straka John Earle Sullivan‎‎ Antwione Williams Christopher John Worrell Aftermath 2021 U.S. inauguration week protests Companies that halted political contributions Reactions domestic international Second impeachment of Donald Trump trial Suicides Howard Liebengood Jeffrey L. Smith Proceedings Justice Department investigation January 6 commission House Select Committee criminal proceedings list Fischer v. United States public hearings Thompson v. Trump Smith special counsel investigation Federal prosecution of Donald Trump Trump v. United States Justice for J6 rally 2021 Facebook company files leak Presidential eligibility of Donald Trump Trump v. Anderson Pardons Related 8 January Brasília attacks Alex Jones Ali Alexander Kathy Barnette Boogaloo movement Jericho March Groypers Sedition Caucus Social media use by Donald Trump Three Percenters Trumpism Day of Rage: How Trump Supporters Took the U.S. Capitol (2021) Four Hours at the Capitol (2021) This Place Rules (2022) "Justice for All" (2023) A Storm Foretold (2023) The Sixth (2024) Democratic backsliding in the United States Cincinnati FBI field office attack v t e Legal affairs of Donald Trump Personal and business Legal affairs of Donald Trump as president first term second term Impeachments Overview Efforts to impeach Resolutions Proposed expungements First impeachment 2019 Trump–Zelenskyy phone call 2019 Trump–Ukraine scandal House inquiry Trial Defense counsel Second impeachment January 6 Capitol attack Trial Defense counsel Indictments New York Reactions Stormy Daniels scandal Trump Organization investigation Prosecutor Alvin Bragg Judge Juan Merchan Federal Classified documents Disclosures of classified information FBI investigation Mar-a-Lago search Smith special counsel investigation Trump v. United States (2022) Co-defendants Walt Nauta Carlos De Oliveira Prosecutor Jack Smith Judge Aileen Cannon Election obstruction Attempts to overturn the election fake electors plot January 6 Capitol attack Department of Justice investigation Smith special counsel investigation Trump v. United States 2024 Co-conspirators Rudy Giuliani John Eastman Sidney Powell Jeffrey Clark Kenneth Chesebro Prosecutor Jack Smith Judge Tanya Chutkan Georgia Trump–Raffensperger phone call Investigation Donald Trump mug shot Alleged racketeers Bob Cheeley Jeffrey Clark John Eastman Rudy Giuliani Harrison Floyd Cathy Latham Steve Lee Mark Meadows Mike Roman David Shafer Shawn Still Trevian Kutti Pleaded guilty Kenneth Chesebro Jenna Ellis Sidney Powell Prosecutors Fani Willis Judge Scott F. McAfee Category v t e Second impeachment and impeachment trial of Donald Trump Background Efforts to impeach Resolutions January 6 United States Capitol attack Attempts to overturn the 2020 United States presidential election Trump–Raffensperger phone call Trump fake electors plot Republican reactions to Donald Trump's claims of 2020 election fraud 2020–21 United States election protests 2021 United States Electoral College vote count Impeachment trial Presiding officer: Patrick Leahy House managers: Jamie Raskin lead manager Diana DeGette David Cicilline Joaquin Castro Eric Swalwell Ted Lieu Stacey Plaskett Joe Neguse Madeleine Dean President's counsel: William J. Brennan Bruce Castor Michael van der Veen David Schoen Other Proposed expungement v t e Donald Trump 45th (2017–2021) and 47th (2025–present) President of the United States Life and politics Business career The Trump Organization legal affairs business projects in Russia links between business partners and Russian government officials wealth tax returns Trump Media & Technology Group Media career The Apprentice American football Golf Honors and awards Political positions Trumpism Relationship to fascism Relationship to antisemitism Views on the American Civil War Rhetoric 2021 CPAC speech Political endorsements False or misleading statements Promotion of conspiracy theories Protests timeline Racial views Security incidents Attempted assassinations Las Vegas rally incident in Pennsylvania raised-fist photographs perpetrator in Florida suspect Age and health concerns Religion Family Ivana Trump (first wife) Marla Maples (second wife) Melania Trump (third wife) Donald Trump Jr.

(son) Ivanka Trump (daughter) Eric Trump (son) Tiffany Trump (daughter) Barron Trump (son) Fred Trump (father) Mary Anne MacLeod Trump (mother) Maryanne Trump Barry (sister) Fred Trump Jr.

(brother) Robert Trump (brother) Frederick Trump (grandfather) Elizabeth Christ Trump (grandmother) Jared Kushner (son-in-law) Lara Trump (daughter-in-law) Michael Boulos (son-in-law) Vanessa Trump (former daughter-in-law) Blaine Trump (former sister-in-law) Amalija Knavs (mother-in-law) John G. Trump (uncle) Mary L. Trump (niece) Fred Trump III (nephew) John W. Walter (cousin) Books The Art of the Deal (1987) Trump: Surviving at the Top (1990) Trump: The Art of the Comeback (1997) The America We Deserve (2000) Trump: How to Get Rich (2004) The Way to the Top (2004) Trump 101 (2006) Why We Want You to Be Rich (2006) Think Big and Kick Ass (2007) Time to Get Tough (2011) Midas Touch (2011) Crippled America (2015) Our Journey Together (2021) Letters to Trump (2023) Save America (2024) Campaigns 2000 presidential campaign 2016 presidential campaign announcement " Make America Great Again " hat rallies links between campaign officials and Russian government officials Crossfire Hurricane 2016 Republican primaries debates running mate selection convention 2016 general election endorsements debates reactions transition Republican opposition Never Trump movement 2016 Mitt Romney speech 2020 2024 Sexual misconduct allegations Access Hollywood recording 2020 presidential campaign rallies 2020 Tulsa rally 2020 Republican primaries convention 2020 general election political endorsements non-political endorsements debates attempts to overturn fake electors plot Chesebro memos Eastman memos lawsuits Texas v. Pennsylvania Jeffrey Clark letter Republican reactions to Trump's election fraud claims Biden transition 2024 presidential campaign announcement rallies 2024 Republican primaries debates running mate selection convention 2024 general election eligibility endorsements debates transition Kamala is for they/them (attack ad) Trump Bible " God Bless the U.S.A.

" (campaign song) " Y.M.C.A.

" (campaign song) Legal affairs FBI investigation into handling of government documents FBI search of Mar-a-Lago Gulf of Mexico naming controversy New York investigations of the Trump Organization Stormy Daniels scandal civil criminal Carroll v. Trump Trump v. United States (2022) Relationship of Donald Trump and Jeffrey Epstein State prosecutions Georgia New York Smith special counsel investigation Federal prosecution classified documents case election obstruction case Trump mug shot Trump v. United States Related Family Foundation Presidential library In popular culture Best Sex I've Ever Had Trump dance filmography in music SNL parodies Residences 85-15 Wareham Place Trump Tower penthouse apartment Bedminster Mar-a-Lago The Visionary Colorado State Capitol portrait Social media media use conflict Feud with Elon Musk Twitter wiretapping allegations Real News Update covfefe Donald J. Trump State Park Nicknames used Trump Force One Trump derangement syndrome Fort Trump Official portraits Support groups Bikers for Trump Blacks for Trump Black Voices for Trump Gays for Trump Women for Trump Pseudonyms Wikipedia coverage ← Barack Obama ← Joe Biden → Category v t e First presidency of Donald Trump (2017–2021) Previous: Obama administration Next: Biden administration See also: Second Trump administration General Appointments ambassadors attorneys judges Supreme Court candidates Gorsuch Kavanaugh Barrett Cabinet Pence vice presidency Economic advisors Withdrawn appointees Short-tenure appointees Dismissals and resignations attorneys Comey inspectors general Executive orders Legal affairs Impeachments efforts resolutions impeachment inquiry first impeachment first trial second impeachment second trial proposed expungements Opinion polling 2017 2018 2019 Pardons Joe Arpaio commutation of Jaime Davidson Proclamations 2017 2018 2019 2020–21 Trips 2017 2018 2019 2020–21 international Rex TIllerson Mike Pompeo North Korea summit Singapore Hanoi DMZ Riyadh summit Helsinki summit Namaste Trump Events Timeline First 100 days 2017 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 2018 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 2019 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 2020 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 January 2021 Speeches Joint address to Congress Warsaw speech National Scout Jamboree State of the Union Address 2018 2019 2020 Oval Office Address 2019 2020 Farewell address Other Transition Inauguration Biden transition Policies Domestic Government shutdowns January 2018 2018–2019 Salute to America 2019 2020 COVID-19 pandemic Taskforce Communication Government response stimulus bills CARES Act Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2021 Operation Warp Speed White House outbreak Interference with science agencies Reactions to the George Floyd protests Photo op at St. John's Church Deployment of federal forces in the United States 2020 Mount Rushmore Fireworks Celebration National Garden of American Heroes Infrastructure Racial views Social First Step Act Cannabis Space Economic Tax cuts Tariffs China trade war USMCA Farmer bailouts Environmental Paris Agreement withdrawal America's Water Infrastructure Act of 2018 Foreign America First Saudi Arabia arms deal Relations with Iran Nuclear deal withdrawal Relations with Israel Jerusalem recognition Golan Heights recognition Palestine peace plan Abraham Accords UAE Bahrain Sudan Morocco Kosovo–Serbia agreements Syria strikes 2017 2018 Killings al-Baghdadi Soleimani Afghanistan withdrawal Taliban deal Proposed invasion of Venezuela Immigration Travel bans reactions legal challenges protests replacement Executive Order 13767 Border wall Family separation policy protests Migrant detentions Troop deployments National emergency Protests 2017 Women's March list Lincoln Portland Seattle global LGBTQ Travel ban list Day Without Immigrants Not My Presidents Day Day Without a Woman Tax March March for Science list Portland Seattle 2018 People's Climate March May Day March for Truth Impeachment March Boston Free Speech Rally (counter-protest) U.S. national anthem kneeling protests 2018 Women's March list Gun violence March for Our Lives list Portland Seattle Family separation Abolish ICE Families Belong Together Occupy ICE Women Disobey Donald Trump baby balloon Kremlin Annex Nobody Is Above the Law 2019 Women's March list 2019 Presidents Day protest Dump Trump (statue) December 2019 impeachment protests 2020 Women's March January list October list Racial unrest George Floyd protests list-USA list-abroad Trump Statue Initiative God Emperor Trump Related 2016 election Trump campaign Trumpism Donald Trump and fascism Social media Twitter Crossfire Hurricane Classified information disclosures Special counsel investigations Mueller Durham Links between Trump administration and Russian government officials Russian bounty program Anonymous senior official op-ed Stormy Daniels scandal Zelenskyy phone call Ukraine scandal Federal government data breach Attempts to overturn the 2020 presidential election Fake electors plot Chesebro memos Eastman memos Lawsuits Texas v. Pennsylvania Jeffrey Clark letter January 6 United States Capitol attack timeline aftermath continued protests domestic reactions international reactions Presidential Library Category v t e Joe Biden 46th President of the United States (2021–2025) 47th Vice President of the United States (2009–2017) U.S. Senator from Delaware (1973–2009) Senator Early life and career Classified Information Procedures Act Counterterrorism Act Violence Against Women Act Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act Vice presidency Obama transition Task forces Gun Violence Prevention Protect Students from Sexual Assault First Trump transition Presidency Appointments Cabinet Harris vice presidency Agriculture Commerce Defense Education Energy Executive Office appointments HHS Homeland Security HUD Interior Justice U.S. attorneys Labor State ambassadors Transportation Treasury Veterans Affairs Judicial appointments Jackson Supreme Court candidates Legislation 2021 American Rescue Plan Act Capitol Police Emergency Assistance Act Consolidated Appropriations Act Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act National Defense Authorization Act RENACER Act Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act 2022 Bipartisan Safer Communities Act CHIPS and Science Act Consolidated Appropriations Act Electoral Count Reform and Presidential Transition Improvement Act Merger Filing Fee Modernization Act No TikTok on Government Devices Act Pregnant Workers Fairness Act State Antitrust Enforcement Venue Act Emmett Till Antilynching Act Inflation Reduction Act Medical Marijuana and Cannabidiol Research Expansion Act PACT Act National Defense Authorization Act Postal Service Reform Act Respect for Marriage Act Speak Out Act Ukraine Democracy Defense Lend-Lease Act 2023 COVID-19 Origin Act Fiscal Responsibility Act National Defense Authorization Act DCA agreement between Finland and the US 2024 ADVANCE Act Consolidated Appropriations Act National Defense Authorization Act National Security Act Protecting Americans from Foreign Adversary Controlled Applications Act 2025 Social Security Fairness Act Policies Cannabis COVID-19 COVID-19 Advisory Board White House COVID-19 Response Team Economic Biden v. Nebraska Build Back Better Act Build Back Better Plan Elementary and Secondary School Emergency Relief Fund Electoral and ethical Presidential Commission on the Supreme Court Summit for Democracy Environmental 2021 Leaders Summit on Climate Executive Order 13990 Foreign Geneva summit 2023 Chinese balloon incident AUKUS Camp David Principles Afghanistan withdrawal killing of Ayman al-Zawahiri War in Ukraine 2022 visit by Volodymyr Zelenskyy 2023 visit to Ukraine Gaza war Ankara prisoner exchange Relations with Iran Immigration A Proclamation on Securing the Border Social 2021 National Day of Unity Space Timeline Transition Inauguration security Celebrating America protests First 100 days 2021 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 2022 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 2023 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 2024 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 January 2025 Second Trump transition Classified documents incident White House cocaine incident Efforts to impeach House Oversight Committee investigation inquiry Executive actions proclamations Opinion polling 2021 2022 2023 2024–2025 Presidential trips international 2021 2022 2023 2024–2025 Death and state funeral of Jimmy Carter Elections U.S. Senate 1972 1978 1984 1990 1996 2002 2008 Vice presidential 2008 campaign selection convention debate election transition 2012 campaign convention debate election Presidential 1988 campaign primaries 2008 campaign primaries debates 2020 campaign endorsements celebrity organizations Congress state and territorial officials municipal officials primaries endorsements debates Unity Task Forces running mate selection convention debates election protests 2024 campaign withdrawal Democratic opposition primaries endorsements protest vote movements debate Family Edward Francis Blewitt (great-grandfather) Neilia Hunter Biden (first wife) Jill Biden (second wife) James Biden (brother) Valerie Biden Owens (sister) Beau Biden (son) Hunter Biden (son) Ashley Biden (daughter) Howard Krein (son-in-law) Hallie Olivere Biden (daughter-in-law) Kathleen Buhle (former daughter-in-law) Melissa Cohen Biden (daughter-in-law) Dogs Champ Major Commander Cat Willow Writings Promises to Keep Promise Me, Dad Tomorrow Will Be Different (foreword) Speeches Inaugural address (2021) Joint session of Congress (2021) State of the Union Address 2022 2023 2024 Warsaw speech (2022) Battle for the Soul of the Nation speech (2022) Farewell address (2025) Media depictions Confirmation The Choice 2020 " Intro to Political Science " My Son Hunter " One Last Ride " The Onion ' s "Diamond Joe" Our Cartoon President Saturday Night Live parodies Spitting Image Related Age and health concerns Awards Beau Biden Cancer Moonshot Biden Foundation Biden Presidential Library Biden–Ukraine conspiracy theory Buy a shotgun Eponyms Hunter Biden laptop controversy I Did That!

Let's Go Brandon Public image Sexual assault allegation Situation Room Sleepy Joe 2019 Trump–Zelenskyy phone call 2019 Trump–Ukraine scandal ← Donald Trump → ← Dick Cheney Mike Pence → Category v t e Coups , self-coups , and attempted coups since 1991 List of coups and coup attempts by country since 2010 1990s Mali (1991) c Lesotho (1991) c Thailand (1991) c Soviet Union (1991) Haiti (1991) c Georgia (1991–1992) c Venezuela (1992) February November Peru (1992) April ‡ c November Sierra Leone (1992) c Algeria (1992) c Sudan (1992) Guatemala (1993) ‡ Azerbaijan (1993) c Russia (1993) ‡ c Libya (1993) Burundi (1993) Nigeria (1993) c Bophuthatswana (1994) c Gambia (1994) c Lesotho (1994) ‡ c Liberia (1994) Cambodia (1994) Azerbaijan (1995) Qatar (1995) c São Tomé and Príncipe (1995) c Guinea (1996) Paraguay (1996) Iraq (1996) Burundi (1996) c Niger (1996) c Qatar (1996) Bangladesh (1996) Cambodia (1997) c Turkey (1997) c Zambia (1997) Guinea-Bissau (1998) Niger (1999) c Pakistan (1999) c Côte d'Ivoire (1999) c 2000s Cambodia (2000) Ecuador (2000) c Paraguay (2000) Fiji (2000) c Solomon Islands (2000) c Côte d'Ivoire (2001) Burundi (2001) Haiti (2001) Central African Republic (2001) Venezuela (2002) Côte d'Ivoire (2002) Burkina Faso (2003) Central African Republic (2003) c Mauritania (2003) Philippines (2003) Guinea-Bissau (2003) c São Tomé and Príncipe (2003) Chad (2004) Sudan (2004) Haiti (2004) c Equatorial Guinea (2004) DR Congo (2004) Peru (2005) Nepal (2005) ‡ c Togo (2005) c Mauritania (2005) c Chad (2006) Thailand (2006) c Madagascar (2006) Fiji (2006) c Philippines (2007) Sudan (2008) Mauritania (2008) c Guinea (2008) c Madagascar (2009) c Honduras (2009) c 2010s Niger (2010) c Madagascar (2010) Niger (2011) Guinea-Bissau (2011) Bangladesh (2011) Mali (2012) March c April Guinea-Bissau (2012) c Sudan (2012) Eritrea (2013) Central African Republic (2013) c Chad (2013) Egypt (2013) c Libya (2013) Libya (2014) Thailand (2014) c Gambia (2014) Yemen (2014–15) c Burundi (2015) Burkina Faso (2015) Turkey (2016) Burkina Faso (2016) Libya (2016) Zimbabwe (2017) c Yemen (2018) c Gabon (2019) Sudan (2019) c Ethiopia (2019) 2020s Mali (2020) c Central African Republic (2021) Myanmar (2021) c Niger (2021) Mali (2021) c Guinea (2021) c Tunisia (2021) ‡ c Sudan (2021) September October c Burkina Faso (2022) January c September c Guinea-Bissau (2022) São Tomé and Príncipe (2022) Peru (2022) ‡ Gambia (2022) Sudan (2023) Niger (2023) c Gabon (2023) c Burkina Faso (2023) Sierra Leone (2023) Guinea-Bissau (2023) Oyo State, Nigeria (2024) DR Congo (2024) Bolivia (2024) South Korea (2024) ‡ ‡ Self-coup or its attempt [no symbol] Coup attempt c Successful coup or self-coup See also: Plots and conspiracies v t e Disinformation and misinformation Core content Disinformation Misinformation Malinformation Propaganda Disinformation attack Disinformation research Publications about disinformation Mechanisms Psychological Cognitive bias List Denialism Manipulation Misinformation effect Political polarization Psychology of climate change denial Computational Algorithmic radicalization Content moderation Community notes Internet manipulation Social bot Social networking service List User-generated content Economic Fake news websites Surveillance capitalism Programmatic advertising Media and Politics Audience fragmentation Echo chamber (media) Fake news Media bias Media culture Media manipulation Tactics Astroturfing Big Lie Circular reporting Clickbait Conspiracy theory List Culture war Deception Deepfake Disinformation playbook Dog whistle (politics) Doublespeak Doxxing Fake news Fake news website List of fake news websites List of satirical fake news websites False accusation False attribution False balance Fear, uncertainty, and doubt Firehose of falsehood Forgery as covert operation Gaslighting Greenwashing Historical negationism Information warfare Logic and reasoning Cherry picking False dilemma Gish gallop Half-truth Fallacy Formal fallacy Informal fallacy List of fallacies Quote mining Red herring Whataboutism Memetic warfare Pink-slime journalism Psychological warfare Propaganda Black propaganda Counterpropaganda State-sponsored Internet propaganda Perception management Rumors Spin (propaganda) Smear campaign Scientific fabrication Strategy of tension Yellow journalism Related terms Alternative facts Factoid Hoax Infodemic Malinformation Post-truth politics Potemkin village Pseudoscience Tabloid journalism Truthiness Targets and campaigns International Politics Disinformation in the Russian invasion of Ukraine Misinformation in the Gaza war New World Order conspiracy theory Russian disinformation Genocide denial Politics by country List of disinformation attacks by country List of political disinformation website campaigns Antisemitism Holocaust denial International Jewish conspiracy Environmental science Climate change denial Fossil fuel industry ExxonMobil climate change denial Fossil fuels lobby Leaded gasoline Ethyl Corporation Robert A. Kehoe Clair Cameron Patterson Pesticide industry Rachel Carson Silent Spring Red mercury Medicine and Public health 5G misinformation Anti-vaccine activism Lancet MMR autism fraud Vaccines and autism Vaccine misinformation COVID-19 misinformation COVID-19 misinformation by governments COVID-19 vaccine misinformation and hesitancy Birth control misinformation Ebola misinformation GMO conspiracy theories HIV/AIDS denialism Mental illness denial Misinformation related to abortion Tobacco industry playbook Transgender health care misinformation Opposition to water fluoridation Journalism and journalists Safety of journalists Maria Ressa Daily Maverick Rappler The Quint Countering disinformation Academic research Critical thinking Digital literacy Health literacy Information literacy Media literacy Science communication Scientific consensus Scientific literacy List of climate change video games Scientific skepticism Skepticism Truth sandwich Verificado 2018 Watchdog journalism Fact-checking and research Fact-checking Websites List of fact-checking websites Non-profits and charities Africa Check FactCheck.org Full Fact PolitiFact USAFacts Private companies Logically (company) NewsGuard StopFake Other Bellingcat International Fact-Checking Network Media Bias/Fact Check Snopes Quackwatch Projeto Comprova Research Canada Citizen Lab EU East StratCom Task Force Finland Faktabaari New Zealand The Disinformation Project UK Counter disinformation unit Ukraine Center for Countering Disinformation USA Active Measures Working Group Counter Misinformation Team Disinformation Governance Board Countering Foreign Propaganda and Disinformation Act United States Information Agency WikiProjects WikiCred Climate change COVID-19 Medicine Skepticism Vaccine safety NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐mktvg
Cached time: 20250818054907
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 7.139 seconds
Real time usage: 7.606 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 44187/1000000
Revision size: 506894/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 2052364/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 29425/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 54/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 2882710/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 4.852/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 32622811/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 6481.543      1 -total
 75.79% 4912.105      1 Template:Reflist
 37.33% 2419.706    361 Template:Cite_news
 29.09% 1885.238    318 Template:Cite_web
  3.37%  218.272      1 Template:2020_United_States_presidential_election
  1.83%  118.661      1 Template:Infobox_civil_conflict
  1.70%  110.336      1 Template:Lang
  1.54%   99.766      1 Template:US_2020_presidential_elections_series
  1.40%   91.027      1 Template:Short_description
  1.40%   90.690     14 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:65905202:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818054907 and revision id 1305572510. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Attempts_to_overturn_the_2020_United_States_presidential_election&oldid=1305572510 " Categories : Attempts to overturn the 2020 United States presidential election 2020 United States presidential election Constitutional crises Controversies of the 2020 United States presidential election Conspiracy theories promoted by Donald Trump Conspiracy theories regarding Joe Biden Coups d'état and coup attempts in the United States Democratic backsliding in the United States First presidency of Donald Trump First Trump administration controversies Josh Hawley Mike Lindell Presidency of Joe Biden Protests against results of United States elections Donald Trump Donald Trump 2020 presidential campaign Donald Trump and social media Donald Trump controversies Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2022 CS1: long volume value Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing Spanish-language text Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from December 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from January 2021 Articles that may be too long from July 2025 All articles that may be too long Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2025 Use mdy dates from January 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from February 2024 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from February 2024 Articles with excerpts All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from February 2025 All articles that may have off-topic sections Wikipedia articles that may have off-topic sections from February 2024 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from February 2024 Articles lacking reliable references from February 2024 Articles containing potentially dated statements from June 2021 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 21:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Attempts to overturn the 2020 United States presidential election 10 languages Add topic

