Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Identity Toggle Identity subsection 1.1 Origins 1.1.1 Silsila connecting to Hoja Ahmad Yasawi 1.1.2 From the Vilayetname 1.1.3 Spread of the Bektashi order 1.1.4 Nineteenth century and later 1.1.5 The Four Poles of Anatolia 1.1.6 In popular culture 2 See also 3 References 4 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Haji Bektash Veli 27 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål پنجابی Русский Shqip Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°56′N 34°33′E ﻿ / ﻿ 38.933°N 34.550°E ﻿ / 38.933; 34.550 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Islamic scholar and mystic (1209–1271) "Bektash" redirects here. For other uses, see Bektash (disambiguation) .

Sayyid Haji Bektash Wali بکتاش 15th century painting depicting Haji Bektash, located in Hajibektash complex Personal life Born c.

1209 Fushenjan , Nishapur , Khwarazmian Empire Died c.

1271 Sulucakarahöyük , Sultanate of Rum Resting place Haji Bektash Veli Complex , Nevşehir Province , Turkey 38°56′N 34°33′E ﻿ / ﻿ 38.933°N 34.550°E ﻿ / 38.933; 34.550 Parent Sayyid Ibrahim (father) Era Medieval Known for Sufi mysticism Religious life Religion Islam Muslim leader Period in office 13th century Influenced by Ahmad Yasawi Influenced Imadaddin Nasimi , Yunus Emre , Pir Sultan Abdal , Sarı Saltık Part of a series on Bektashism Historical figures Haji Bektash Veli Nesimi Balım Sultan Gül Baba Bektashi Dedebabate Salih Nijazi Ali Riza Dede Kamber Ali Xhafer Sadik Abaz Hilmi Ahmet Myftar Reshat Bardhi Edmond Brahimaj Bektashi sites Kryegjyshata Haji Bektash Veli Complex Arabati Baba Teḱe Durbalı Sultan Tekke Hasan Baba Tekke Tekke of Melan Tekke of Frashër Zall Tekke Abbas Ali Türbe Tomb of Gül Baba Events Ashura Nevruz World Bektashi Congress Countries Bektashism in Albania Sovereign State of the Bektashi Order v t e Sculpture of Haji Bektash Veli in Turkey Haji Bektash Veli ( Persian : حاجی بکتاش ولی , romanized : Ḥājī Baktāš Valī ; Turkish : Hacı Bektaş Veli ; Albanian : Haxhi Veli Bektashi ; c.

1209–1271 ) was an Islamic scholar , mystic , saint , sayyid , and philosopher from Khorasan who lived and taught in Anatolia .

[ 1 ] His original name was Sayyid Muhammad ibn Sayyid Ibrāhim Ātā. He is also referred to as the "Sultan of Hearts" [ 2 ] and the "Dervish of the Dervishes".

[ 3 ] He is revered among Alevis for an Islamic understanding that is esoteric , rational and humanistic . Alevi and Bektashi Muslims believe the path of Bektash is the path of Haqq-Muhammad-Ali since they were the source of Bektash's teachings. He was one of the many figures who flourished in the Sultanate of Rum and had an important influence on the culture of Turkic nomads of Asia Minor.

[ 4 ] Identity [ edit ] Bektash is generally believed to be of Persian or Turkic origin, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] and his name is considered to be of Turkic origin.

[ 9 ] Bektash belonged to a group of Khorasani migrants in Anatolia who had left their homeland during the Mongol conquests .

[ 5 ] According to the Vilâyet-Nâme , Bektash was the son of Sayyed Muhammad ibn Musa, a great-grandson of Musa al-Kazim ; this is impossible, given the fact that Bektash lived in the 7th/13th century. Genealogies encountered in later sources and designed to fill the obvious gap in time are all questionable and may well have been inspired by a wish—analogous to that of the fabricators of the Safavid genealogy—to give Bektash, as the eponym of a nominally Shia order, Imami descent.

[ 10 ] According to "The history of Aşıkpaşazade" ( Aşıkpaşazade Tarihi ), written by one of the grandsons of "Aşık Pasha" who was the son of "Muhlis Paşa" (Muhlees Pāshā) who was the son of renowned Baba Ilyas al-Khorasani , "Sayyeed Muhammad ibn Sayyeed Ebrāheem Ātā" had come to Sivas , Anatolia from Khorasan with his brother "Menteş" (Mantash) to become affiliated with the tariqat of Bābā Eliyās al-Khorāsānī . On the other hand, the famous reference book of Bektaşi order , Valāyat-Nāma-i Hādjī Baktāsh-ī Wālī, claims that "Bektash" was the murshid of Bābā (Bābā Eliyās al-Khorāsānī) .

[ 11 ] The name attributed to him by his followers can be translated as "The Pilgrim Saint Bektash." The Haji title implies that he had made the pilgrimage to Mecca and Medina to perform Hajj . He is the eponym of the Bektashi Sufi order and is considered one of the principal teachers of Alevism . According to the Encyclopaedia of Islam , the "center and source of his teachings" was ʿAlī ibn Abī Ṭālib , whom Alevis believe to be the righteous successor of Muhammad while also "acknowledging the twelve Shia Imams " and "holding Jafar as-Sadiq in high esteem".

[ 12 ] Despite his Shia belief and his unorthodox teachings, he is considered a renowned figure in the history and culture of both the Ottoman Empire and the modern nation-state of Turkey . On the other hand, Ibn Khallikan reports that Shī'ite tendencies belonged not to him but rather to his murids , who took refuge in his tekke at Suluca Kara Oyuk in Kırşehir after the Babai Revolt .

[ 13 ] Origins [ edit ] Main articles: Ahmad Yasawi , Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar , Baba Ishak , Babai Revolt , and Bektashism Born in Nishapur . Legends state that Bektash was a khalifa of Ahmad Yasawi , the eponymous founder of the Yasawi order that had a wide following among Turkic nomads in Central Asia . Though chronogically impossible, supposedly Yasawi sent him to Anatolia to propagate his order there.

[ 14 ] Not much is known about him, his origins are shrouded in mystery and much of his biography is based on legends.

[ 15 ] Silsila connecting to Hoja Ahmad Yasawi [ edit ] Haji Baktash Veli, a murid of the Malāmatī - Qalāndārī Sheikh Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar , introduced Ahmad Yasawi 's doctrine of " Four Doors and Forty Standing " into his order.

The sisilah of Hadji Baktāsh Wālī reaches to the Yasawi Order through another but a similar tariqah , which is well known as the Wafā'īyyah Order of Abu’l Wafā al-Khwarazmī, who was a murid of Ahmad Yasawi and the murshid of Dede Ğarkhen, who was in turn the murshid of Bābā Eliyās al-Khorāsānī († 1240), an influential mystic from Eastern Persia. Modern research connects him to another important religious movement of that time: to the Qalandariyya and to Bābā Eliyās al-Khorāsānī, who was the murshid of Aybak Bābā, who was in turn the murshid of one of the leading actors of the Babai revolt , Baba Ishak , as well. Eventually, Bābā Eliyās Khorāsānī was held responsible for the Babai revolt organized by Baba Ishak, and consequently executed by Mubāriz’ud-Dīn-i Armāğān-Shāh, [ 16 ] the supreme commander-in-chief of the armies of the Sultanate of Rum .

The original Bektashi teachings in many ways resemble the teachings of the Khorasanian Qalandariyya and that of Bābā Eliyās.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Haji Baktash Veli was the murid of Lokhmānn Bābā (Lokhmānn Sarakhs ī), who was one of the four most famous murids of Bābā Eliyās al-Khorāsānī as well. Lokhmānn Bābā, on the other hand, was also a murid of the renowned Qalandari Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar , who was the murid of Ahmad Yasawi. For these reasons, his silsila gets connected to Ahmad Yasawi through two different channels, one by means of the Wafā’i and the other through Qutb ad-Dīn Haydar. He was highly respected by the Sultanate of Rum due to his amicable attitude during the Babai revolt, and his khanqah in Suluca Kara Oyuk was permitted to remain open during and after it, thereby saving most of the lives of the Alevi survivors.

From the Vilayetname [ edit ] From the Vilayetname (or: The Saintly Exploits of Hacı Bektaş Veli ): [ 19 ] After Lokman Perende had returned from the hajj, the erenler (saints) of Khorasan came to offer him their respects. When they saw a spring flowing from the middle of the mekteb, they said, "We have been here before many times and had never seen such spring." Lokman Perende replied, "This is by the blessings of Hunkar Haji Bektash." The erenler asked, "Who is this Hunkar Haji Bektash?" Lokman Perende said, "Haji Bektash Hunkar is this beloved one," and he then pointed to the young Bektash. The erenler said, "That one is still a child. How on earth could he become a haji?" Lokman Perende then described to the gathering all of the miracles of Haji Bektash one by one and then said, "While I was performing my prayer at the Kaabah, Bektash was always there praying next to me. When we completed our prayer, he would vanished." The erenler said, "Where could this boy have found this extraordinary capability?" Then Hunkar Haji Bektash opened his blessed mouth and said, "I am the secret of the exalted Imam Ali, who is the dispenser of the River Kawthar and who is the Lion of Allah, the Emperor of Sainthood and the Commander of the Faithful. My origin and family line is from him. These many miracles are my inheritance which is granted by Allah. It should not be surprising to anyone that miracles like these appear from me, for this is the Power of God." The erenler of Khorasan said, "If, in reality, you are the secret of the Shah, he has marks. Show these marks to us and we shall believe." Now the sign of Hazreti Ali was this; in the middle of his blessed hand he had a beautiful mole of emerald tone. So Hazreti Hunkar Haji Bektash Veli opened his sanctified hand and showed his palm. They all saw that there, in the middle his palm, was a beautiful emerald mole. The erenler said, "The Commander of the Faithful also had a beautiful emerald mole on his blessed forehead." Hunkar Haji Bektash Veli removed the skull cap from his blessed head and all saw a divinely illuminated mole of emerald tint between his brow. All of the erenler begged for forgiveness, saying, "O Dervish of the Dervishes, we have been sorely mistaken." They surrendered to him asserting, "These are indeed miracles." Spread of the Bektashi order [ edit ] Part of a series on the Alevis Alevism Beliefs God in Islam Haqq–Muhammad–Ali Muhammad Muhammad-Ali Zahir Batin Sharia Tariqa Ma'rifa Haqiqa Wahdat al-wujud Wahdat al-mawjud Baqaa Fana Hal Kashf Keramat Al-Insān al-Kāmil Lataif Four Doors Manzil Nûr Salik Practices Zakat Ziyarat Taqiyya Ashura Hıdırellez Nowruz Saya Mawlid Music Fasting Müsahiplik Buyruks Twelve Imams Ali Hasan Husayn al-Abidin al-Baqir al-Sadiq al-Kazim ar-Rida al-Taqi al-Naqi al-Askari al-Mahdi Leadership Nabi Dede Murshid Rehber Baba Cem Cemevi Important figures Ahi Evran Haji Bektash Veli Sarı Saltık Demir Baba Teke Arabati Baba Teḱe Pir Sultan Abdal Kul Nesîmî Sheikh Bedreddin Börklüce Mustafa Torlak Kemal Baba Ishak Seyid Riza History Babak Khorramdin Maziar Babai revolt Celali rebellions Ottoman persecution of Alevis Baba Zünnun Rebellion Kalender Çelebi rebellion Nur Ali Halife rebellion Şahkulu rebellion Battle of Chaldiran Abaza rebellion Koçgiri rebellion Dersim massacre Maraş massacre Çorum massacre Sivas massacre Gazi Quarter riots 2025 massacres of Syrian Alawites Islam portal v t e Bektashism spread from Anatolia through the Ottoman Turks primarily into the Balkans , where its leaders (known as dedes or babas ) helped convert many to Islam . The Bektashi Sufi order became the official order of the elite Janissary corps after their establishment. The Bektashi Order remained very popular among Albanians, and Bektashi tekkes can be found throughout Albania , Kosovo and the Republic of Macedonia to this day. During the Ottoman period Bektashi tekkes were set up in Egypt and Iraq , but the order did not take root in these countries. There is also a Bektashi tekke in Michigan, founded by Baba Rexheb , who was a Bektashi baba and a writer in Islamic mysticism and Bektashism.

Nineteenth century and later [ edit ] When the Janissary corps were abolished in 1826 by Sultan Mahmud II the Bektashis suffered the same fate.  The babas of the tekkes and their dervishes were banished to staunchly Sunni villages and towns, and their tekkes were closed or handed over to Sunni Sufi orders (mostly Naqshbandi ; for example, the Goztepe Tekke in Istanbul was given to the Naqshbandis during this period).

Although the Bektashi order regained many of its lost tekkes during the Tanzimat period, they, along with all other Sufi orders, were banned in Turkey in 1925 as a result of the country's secularization policies and all Bektashi tekkes were closed once more along with all others.

The main Bektashi tekke is in the town of Hacıbektaş in Central Anatolia, known as Hajibektash complex. It is currently open as a museum and his resting place is still visited by both Sunni and Alevi Muslims.  Large festivals are held there every August.  Also the Göztepe and Shahkulu tekkes in Istanbul are now used as meeting places for Alevis. The biggest Bektashi tekke is said to be in Albania.  There is also a Bektashi tekke in Taylor , Michigan, US, founded by Baba Rexheb , who was a famous Bektashi writer on Islamic mysticism and Bektashism.

[ 20 ] The Four Poles of Anatolia [ edit ] Haji Bektash Veli is considered one of the four poles ( aqtab ) of Anatolia by all tariqa circles, the others being Mawlana Rumi , Shaban-i Veli , and Haji Bayram-i Veli .

[ 21 ] In popular culture [ edit ] In the Turkish TV series Yunus Emre: Aşkın Yolculuğu (2015), he was portrayed by Ahmet Mekin .

[ 22 ] See also [ edit ] Al-Hallaj Rumi References [ edit ] ^ C. Olsen: Celibacy and Religious Traditions. Oxford University Press. 1st Ed. 2007.

Pg. 143–144 ^ "Haci Bektaş Veli's Commentary of Fatiha | the First Bektashi Teqe in America" . Archived from the original on 8 April 2014 . Retrieved 8 April 2014 .

^ "The Bektashi Order of Dervishes" .

bektashiorder.com . Archived from the original on 12 August 2011.

^ Alexēs G. K. Savvidēs, Byzantium in the Near East: Its Relations with the Seljuk Sultanate of Rum in Asia Minor, The Armenians of Cilicia and The Mongols, A.D. c. 1192-1237 , Kentron Vyzantinōn Ereunōn, 1981, p. 116.

^ a b Algar 1989 .

^ Bashir 2008 , p. 143.

^ M. Kia: Daily Life in the Ottoman Empire. Greenwood Pub Group Inc. 2011. Pg. 169: "The Bektashis traced the origins of their order to the Persian Sufi master Hadji Baktāsh Wālī [...]" ^ Jestice, Phyllis (2004).

Holy people of the world: a cross-cultural encyclopedia, Volume 1 . ABC-CLIO. p. 113.

ISBN 978-1-57607-355-1 .

^ Kılıç, Filiz; Bülbül, Tuncay, eds. (2007).

2nd International Symposium on Alevism and Bektashism in the Turkish Cultural Universe: Proceedings Book (in Turkish). Vol. 2. Ankara: Gazi University, Turkish Culture and Hacı Bektaş Veli Research Center.

^ Algar 1989 , p. 116–118.

^ Balcıoğlu, Tahir Harimi, Mezhep cereyanları - Madh'hab movements, p. 184, Ahmed Said tab’ı, Hilmi Ziya neşriyâtı, 1940.

^ Gibb, H. A. R.

; Kramers, J. H.

; Lévi-Provençal, E.

; Schacht, J.

; Lewis, B.

& Pellat, Ch.

, eds. (1960).

"Bektāshiyya" .

The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition .

Volume I: A–B . Leiden: E. J. Brill. p. 1162.

OCLC 495469456 .

^ Ibn Khallikan , Shakāyik.

^ H. Algar, "Khorāsanian Sufī Hāji Bektāŝ" , Encyclopædia Iranica , v, p. 117, Online Edition 2006, ( LINK ) ^ Gibb, H. A. R.

; Kramers, J. H.

; Lévi-Provençal, E.

; Schacht, J.

; Lewis, B.

& Pellat, Ch.

, eds. (1960).

"Bektāshiyya" .

The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition .

Volume I: A–B . Leiden: E. J. Brill. p. 1162.

OCLC 495469456 .

^ Ibn Bibi , Al-Avāmer’ûl-‘ālā’īyyah, pages 498-499.

^ Algar, Hamid .

"BEKTĀŠ, ḤĀJĪ" . Encyclopedia Iranica . Retrieved 24 October 2011 .

^ Mehmet Fuat Köprülü , citing ibn Bibi in his book "Anadolu'da İslamiyet" ( Islam in Anatolia ) (1922), identifies Bābā with Baba Ishak who led The Bābā Ishāq Rebellion ; this is contradicted by other scholars, such as David Cook in his book Martyrdom in Islam (2007; p. 84), citing historical references, such as the Manākib ul-Qudsiyya (14th century) ^ "The Bektashi Order of Dervishes" .

bektashiorder.com . Archived from the original on 12 August 2011.

^ "The Bektashi Order of Dervishes" .

bektashiorder.com . Archived from the original on 18 August 2011.

^ "ŞÂBÂN-ı VELÎ - TDV İslâm Ansiklopedisi" .

TDV İslam Ansiklopedisi (in Turkish) . Retrieved 28 April 2022 .

^ "Yunus Emre Aşkın Sesi filminin kadrosu ve yönetmeni" .

Sources [ edit ] Algar, Hamid (1989).

"BEKTĀŠ, ḤĀJĪ" .

Encyclopædia Iranica. Vol. IV, Fasc. 2 . pp.

116– 118.

Bashir, Shahzad (2008). Olson, Carl (ed.).

Celibacy and Religious Traditions . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-530632-3 .

J. Birge, The Bektashi Order of Dervishes, London, 1937, chapter VI. (p. 22) Sayyed Hossein Nasr, Sufi Essays, SUNY Press, (1972). p. 117.

Brian Glyn Williams: Mystics, Nomads and Heretics: A History of the Diffusion of Muslim Syncretism from Central Asia to the Thirteenth-Century Turco-Byzantine Dobruca - International journal of Turkish studies, 2001 - University of Wisconsin (p. 7) R. Khanam, Encyclopaedic ethnography of Middle-East and Central Asia, Global Vision Publishing Ho, 2005 (p. 142) The Harvard Theological Review, Cambridge University Press, Vol. 2, No. 3, July 1909, (p. 343) Richard Robert Madden, The Turkish Empire: In its relations with Christianity and civilization.

, Vol.1, 335.

Indries Shah, The Way of the Sufi , 294.

Mark Soileau, Humanist Mystics:Nationalism and the commemoration of saints in Turkey , 375.

Olsson, Tord; Ozdalga, Elisabeth; Raudvere, Catharina (1998).

Alevi Identity: Cultural, Religious and Social Perspectives . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 9780203985878 .

External links [ edit ] Photos of Hacı Bektaş Town The Bektashi Order of Dervishes The lost Quran commentary of Haji Bektash The technology of the Heart in Bektashism v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah v t e People of Khorasan Scientists Abu Hatam Isfizari Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Wafa Abu Ubayd Juzjani Abu Zayd Balkhi Alfraganus Ali Qushji Avicenna Birjandi Biruni Hasib Marwazi Ibn Hayyan Abu Ja'far al-Khazin Khazini Khojandi Khwarizmi Nasawi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi Sijzi Philosophers Algazel Amiri Avicenna Farabi Haji Bektash Veli Nasir Khusraw Sijistani Shahrastani Islamic scholars Abu Dawud al-Sijistani Abu Barakat Nasafi Abu Hanifa Abu Hafs Nasafi Abu Layth Samarqandi Abu Mu'in Nasafi Abu Qasim Samarqandi Ansari Baghavi Bayhaqi Bazdawi Bukhari Dabusi Fatima Samarqandi Ghazali Ghaznawi Hakim Tirmidhi Hakim Nishapuri Ibn Hibban Ibn Mubarak Ishaq ibn Rahwayh Ibn Tayfour Sajawandi Juwayni Kasani Kashifi Lamishi Marghinani Maturidi Mulla al-Qari Muqatil Muslim Nasa'i Qushayri Razi Sabuni Sajawandi Sarakhsi Shaykh Tusi Taftazani Tha'labi Nishapuri Tirmidhi Yahya ibn Adam Zamakhshari Poets and artists Abu Sa'id Abu'l-Khayr Anvari Aruzi Samarqandi Asadi Tusi Attar Nishapuri Behzad Daqiqi Farrukhi Sistani Ferdowsi Jami Kashifi Nasir Khusraw Rabia Balkhi Rudaki Rumi Sanā'ī Historians and political figures Abu'l-Fadl Bayhaqi Abu'l-Hasan Isfarayini Abu'l-Ma'ali Nasrallah Abu Muslim Khorasani Gardizi Ali-Shir Nava'i Ata-Malik Juvayni Aufi Abu Ali Bal'ami Gawhar Shad Ibn Khordadbeh Khalid ibn Barmak Minhaj al-Siraj Juzjani Nizam al-Mulk Tahir ibn Husayn Yahya Barmaki Ahmad ibn Nizam al-Mulk Shihab al-Nasawi Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Norway Israel People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐554b8dbc64‐rsqbm
Cached time: 20250818130730
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.679 seconds
Real time usage: 0.824 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5001/1000000
Revision size: 19462/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 144659/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5779/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 93736/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.416/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17383459/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  681.320      1 -total
 21.34%  145.392      1 Template:Infobox_religious_biography
 20.80%  141.715      1 Template:Reflist
 17.68%  120.470      1 Template:Infobox
 13.09%   89.194      7 Template:Cite_web
 12.67%   86.355      3 Template:Langx
 11.83%   80.622      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.65%   72.553      1 Template:Bektashi
  7.99%   54.409      1 Template:Short_description
  6.92%   47.127      1 Template:Islamic_philosophy Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1602822:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818130730 and revision id 1306565968. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Haji_Bektash_Veli&oldid=1306565968 " Categories : 1209 births 1271 deaths Sufis from Nishapur Alevism Scholars from the Sultanate of Rum Hashemite people 13th-century Muslim scholars of Islam Sufi religious leaders Sufi saints Miracle workers Bektashi Order Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles having same image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing Persian-language text Articles containing Turkish-language text Articles containing Albanian-language text Use dmy dates from June 2019 This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 13:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Haji Bektash Veli 27 languages Add topic

