Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin and accretion 2 Example 3 Manuscripts 4 Title 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Mappae clavicula 4 languages Deutsch Français Italiano Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Medieval recipes for crafts materials The mappae clavicula is a medieval Latin text containing manufacturing recipes for crafts materials, including for metals , glass , mosaics , and dyes and tints for materials. The information and style in the recipes is very terse. Each recipe consists of the names of the ingredients and typically about two sentences on combining the ingredients together. A small minority of the recipes go to about six sentences. The text comes with a short preamble, and other than that it is just recipes. The number of recipes was expanded over the course of the medieval centuries, and some medieval copies have deletions as well as additions, so it is better thought of as a family of texts with a largely common core, not a single text. Most of the Mappae Clavicula recipes are also in medieval Latin in a text known as the Compositiones ad Tingenda (English: "Recipes for Coloring (or Tingeing)").

[ 1 ] Origin and accretion [ edit ] The core was probably originally compiled around AD 600, perhaps in Alexandria in Egypt , in Greek . The core contains items traceable to earlier Alexandrian Greek texts, particularly the Stockholm papyrus and Leiden Papyrus X , which are Greek texts dated to the 2nd or 3rd century AD that contain some of the same and similar recipes. The first few recipes in the Phillipps-Corning manuscript [ 2 ] of the Mappae clavicula were long considered integral, but they form a distinct separate entity,  the De coloribus et mixtionibus , which survives (in whole or in part) in at least 62 manuscripts.

[ 3 ] The core of the Latin Mappae clavicula is very likely a translation of a Greek text, although the original Greek text (if it existed) does not exist today.

The best manuscripts of the Mappae clavicula date from the eighth to the twelfth century.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] One of the fullest collections of recipes is in a certain manuscript dated late 12th century in which about 300 recipes are presented. In this manuscript, called the Phillipps-Corning manuscript, some of the names for some materials are Arabic names (e.g.

alquibriz from the Arabic for sulphur, atincar from the Arabic for borax, alcazir from the Arabic for tin).

[ 2 ] The recipes containing the Arabic names are historically later, and are in all likelihood no earlier than the 12th century. Certain earlier manuscripts have about 200 recipes.

Example [ edit ] Here is a translation of one recipe for joining tin: 1 part of soap, 1 part of pine resin, 1 part of soda and some borax. Coat the tin with this and heat lightly, as you know how, until it joins together, and quench it while still hot in water.

[ 4 ] Manuscripts [ edit ] The  principal manuscripts are: The Lucca MS , Lucca, Biblioteca Capitolare Feliniana, Codex 490, the oldest witness, c. 800.

The Sélestat MS, Sélestat, Bibliothèque Humaniste, MS 17. A very full yet old witness, early ninth century.

The Codex Matritensis ('Madrid codex'), Madrid, Biblioteca Nacional, MS A.16 (Was: MS A.19), c. 1130.

The Phillipps-Corning Manuscript, Corning Museum of Glass, MS 5, late twelfth century.

[ 2 ] These  are simply among the fullest witnesses - there are dozens more that preserve extracts.

[ 3 ] Title [ edit ] The title, Mappae clavicula , is absurd, translating approximately as 'the little key to the small cloth'. The best explanation is that it is a mis-translation from a Greek original, in which χειρόκμητον kheirókmēton ('knack' or 'trick of the trade') was mis-read as χειρόμακτρον kheirómaktron ('hand-towel').

[ 5 ] This is consistent with the observation that certain recipes derive from the Greek technical papyri, the Leyden papyrus X and the Stockholm papyrus .

References [ edit ] ^ "Notes on Some Manuscripts of the Mappae Clavicula " , by Rozelle P. Johnson, year 1935.

A Review of Compositiones variae from Codex 490, Biblioteca Capitolare , by Lynn White, year 1940.

Books of Secrets in Medieval and Early Modern Culture , by William Eamon, year 1996, pages 32-36.

^ a b c Mappae clavicula from a 12th-century manuscript , text published in Latin by Thomas Phillipps in year 1847. The original manuscript that Thomas Phillipps possessed, dated late 12th century, is now in the hands of the Corning Museum of Glass. Hence it is referred to as "the Phillipps-Corning manuscript". A digital image of it is downloadable at the Corning Museum of Glass, MS 5 .

^ a b c Clarke, M. (2001) The Art of All Colours: Mediaeval Recipe Books for Painters and Illuminators . London: Archetype Publications.

^ a b Smith, C. S. and J. G. Hawthorne (1974) ‘Mappae Clavicula: A Little Key to the World of Medieval Techniques’, Transactions of the American Philosophical Society: Held at Philadelphia for promoting useful knowledge (new series) 64 (4) [occupies whole issue].

^ Robert Halleux, 'Recettes d'artisan, recettes d'alchimiste', in: R. Jansen-Sieben (ed.) Artes mechanicae , Archives et bibliothèques de Belgique, no. spécial 34 (Brussels, 1989), p. 28 Sir Thomas Phillipps, "A transcript of a manuscript treatise on the preparation of pigments, and on various processes of the decorative arts practised during the Middle Ages, written in the twelfth century, and entitled Mappae Clavicula ." Published in journal Archaeologia , volume XXXII, pages 183–244, year 1847.

Downloadable at Archive.org .

C. S. Smith and J. G. Hawthorne (1974) ‘Mappae Clavicula: A Little Key to the World of Medieval Techniques’, Transactions of the American Philosophical Society: Held at Philadelphia for promoting useful knowledge (new series) 64 (4) [occupies whole issue].

External links [ edit ] Mappae Clavicula (in Latin), a late 12th century version . (Retrieved 17 July 2014) Mappae Clavicula (in Latin) , possibly written in Flanders, c. 1150. Held at the Rakow Research Library of the Corning Museum of Glass. (Retrieved 17 July 2014) Dye Recipes in English from the Mappae Clavicula , translated by Cyril Stanley Smith and John G. Hawthorne . Only dye recipes. (Retrieved 17 July 2014) v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mappae_clavicula&oldid=1180741894 " Categories : Art technological sources Medieval manuscripts Medieval art Books about the visual arts Metallurgy History of glass Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 October 2023, at 15:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mappae clavicula 4 languages Add topic

