Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology Toggle Terminology subsection 1.1 Sewage and wastewater 1.2 Blackwater 1.3 Greywater 2 Overall appearance 3 Pollutants Toggle Pollutants subsection 3.1 Organic matter 3.2 Nutrients 3.3 Pathogens 3.4 Solid waste 3.5 Micro-pollutants 4 Typical sewage composition Toggle Typical sewage composition subsection 4.1 Factors that determine composition 4.2 Concentrations and loads 5 Flowrates 6 Analytical methods Toggle Analytical methods subsection 6.1 General quality indicators 6.2 Specific organisms and substances 7 Collection Toggle Collection subsection 7.1 Sanitary sewer 7.2 Combined sewer 8 Dilution in the sewer Toggle Dilution in the sewer subsection 8.1 Infiltration of groundwater into the sewerage system 8.2 Stormwater 8.3 Industrial wastewater 9 Disposal and dilution Toggle Disposal and dilution subsection 9.1 Assimilative capacity of receiving water bodies or land 9.2 Other disposal methods 9.2.1 Marine outfall 9.3 Global situation 10 Treatment 11 Reuse and reclamation Toggle Reuse and reclamation subsection 11.1 Sewage farm 12 Regulations 13 See also 14 References 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Sewage 66 languages العربية Беларуская Български Boarisch Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Davvisámegiella Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Igbo Bahasa Indonesia IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar Македонски मराठी مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Sardu Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Wastewater that is produced by a community of people This article is about a type of wastewater. For the infrastructure to transport sewage, see sewerage .

Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Sewage (or domestic sewage , domestic wastewater , municipal wastewater ) is a type of wastewater that is produced by a community of people. It is typically transported through a sewer system .

[ 1 ] : 175 Sewage consists of wastewater discharged from residences and from commercial, institutional and public facilities that exist in the locality.

[ 2 ] : 10 Sub-types of sewage are greywater (from sinks, bathtubs, showers, dishwashers, and clothes washers) and blackwater (the water used to flush toilets , combined with the human waste that it flushes away). Sewage also contains soaps and detergents. Food waste may be present from dishwashing , and food quantities may be increased where garbage disposal units are used. In regions where toilet paper is used rather than bidets , that paper is also added to the sewage. Sewage contains macro-pollutants and micro-pollutants, and may also incorporate some municipal solid waste and pollutants from industrial wastewater .

Sewage usually travels from a building's plumbing either into a sewer , which will carry it elsewhere, or into an onsite sewage facility . Collection of sewage from several households together usually takes places in either sanitary sewers or combined sewers . The former is designed to exclude stormwater flows whereas the latter is designed to also take stormwater. The production of sewage generally corresponds to the water consumption. A range of factors influence water consumption and hence the sewage flowrates per person. These include: Water availability (the opposite of water scarcity ), water supply options, climate (warmer climates may lead to greater water consumption), community size, economic level of the community, level of industrialization , metering of household consumption, water cost and water pressure.

[ 2 ] : 20 The main parameters in sewage that are measured to assess the sewage strength or quality as well as treatment options include: solids, indicators of organic matter, nitrogen, phosphorus, and indicators of fecal contamination.

[ 2 ] : 33 These can be considered to be the main macro-pollutants in sewage. Sewage contains pathogens which stem from fecal matter . The following four types of pathogens are found in sewage: pathogenic bacteria , viruses , protozoa (in the form of cysts or oocysts) and helminths (in the form of eggs).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In order to quantify the organic matter, indirect methods are commonly used: mainly the Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) and the Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD).

[ 2 ] : 36 Management of sewage includes collection and transport for release into the environment, after a treatment level that is compatible with the local requirements for discharge into water bodies, onto soil or for reuse applications.

[ 2 ] : 156 Disposal options include dilution (self-purification of water bodies, making use of their assimilative capacity if possible), marine outfalls , land disposal and sewage farms . All disposal options may run risks of causing water pollution .

Terminology [ edit ] Sewage and wastewater [ edit ] Sewage (or domestic wastewater) consists of wastewater discharged from residences and from commercial, institutional and public facilities that exist in the locality.

[ 2 ] : 10 Sewage is a mixture of water (from the community's water supply ), human excreta ( feces and urine ), used water from bathrooms , food preparation wastes, laundry wastewater, and other waste products of normal living.

Sewage from municipalities contains wastewater from commercial activities and institutions, e.g. wastewater discharged from restaurants , laundries , hospitals , schools , prisons , offices , stores and establishments serving the local area of larger communities.

[ 2 ] : 21 Sewage can be distinguished into "untreated sewage" (also called "raw sewage") and "treated sewage" (also called "effluent" from a sewage treatment plant ).

The term "sewage" is nowadays often used interchangeably with "wastewater" – implying "municipal wastewater" – in many textbooks, policy documents and the literature.

[ 2 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] To be precise, wastewater is a broader term, because it refers to any water after it has been used in a variety of applications.

[ 5 ] : 1 Thus it may also refer to " industrial wastewater ", agricultural wastewater and other flows that are not related to household activities.

Blackwater [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Blackwater (waste) .

[ edit ] Blackwater in a sanitation context denotes wastewater from toilets which likely contains pathogens that may spread by the fecal–oral route . Blackwater can contain feces , urine , water and toilet paper from flush toilets . Blackwater is distinguished from greywater , which comes from sinks, baths, washing machines , and other household appliances apart from toilets.  Greywater results from washing food, clothing, dishes, as well as from showering or bathing.

[ 7 ] Blackwater and greywater are kept separate in "ecological buildings", such as autonomous buildings .

Recreational vehicles often have separate holding tanks for greywater from showers and sinks, and blackwater from the toilet.

Greywater [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Greywater .

[ edit ] Greywater (or grey water, sullage, also spelled gray water in the United States) refers to domestic wastewater generated in households or office buildings from streams without fecal contamination, i.e., all streams except for the wastewater from toilets. Sources of greywater include sinks , showers , baths , washing machines or dishwashers . As greywater contains fewer pathogens than blackwater , it is generally safer to handle and easier to treat and reuse onsite for toilet flushing , landscape or crop irrigation , and other non- potable uses. Greywater may still have some pathogen content from laundering soiled clothing or cleaning the anal area in the shower or bath.

The application of greywater reuse in urban water systems provides substantial benefits for both the water supply subsystem, by reducing the demand for fresh clean water , and the wastewater subsystems by reducing the amount of conveyed and treated wastewater.

[ 8 ] Treated greywater has many uses, such as toilet flushing or irrigation.

[ 9 ] Pumping station lifting sewage to the treatment plant in Bujumbura , Burundi Greywater (a component of sewage) in a settling tank Overall appearance [ edit ] The overall appearance of sewage is as follows: [ 2 ] : 30 The temperature tends to be slightly higher than in drinking water but is more stable than the ambient temperature. The color of fresh sewage is slightly grey, whereas older sewage (also called "septic sewage") is dark grey or black. The odor of fresh sewage is "oily" and relatively unpleasant, whereas older sewage has an unpleasant foul odor due to hydrogen sulfide gas and other decomposition by-products.

[ 10 ] : 9–38 Sewage can have high turbidity from suspended solids.

The pH value of sewage is usually near neutral, and can be in the range of 6.7–8.0.

[ 2 ] : 57 Pollutants [ edit ] Sewage consists primarily of water and usually contains less than one part of solid matter per thousand parts of water. In other words, one can say that sewage is composed of around 99.9% pure water, and the remaining 0.1% are solids, which can be in the form of either dissolved solids or suspended solids .

[ 2 ] : 28 The thousand-to-one ratio is an order of magnitude estimate rather than an exact percentage because, aside from variation caused by dilution, solids may be defined differently depending upon the mechanism used to separate those solids from the liquid fraction.

Sludges of settleable solids removed by settling or suspended solids removed by filtration may contain significant amounts of entrained water, while dried solid material remaining after evaporation eliminates most of that water but includes dissolved minerals not captured by filtration or gravitational separation.

[ 11 ] The suspended and dissolved solids include organic and inorganic matter plus microorganisms.

[ 2 ] : 28 About one-third of this solid matter is suspended by turbulence , while the remainder is dissolved or colloidal . For the situation in the United States in the 1950s it was estimated that the waste contained in domestic sewage is about half organic and half inorganic .

[ 10 ] : 9–38 Organic matter [ edit ] The organic matter in sewage can be classified in terms of form and size: Suspended (particulate) or dissolved (soluble). Secondly, it can be classified in terms of biodegradability : either inert or biodegradable.

[ 2 ] : 35 The organic matter in sewage consists of protein compounds (about 40%), carbohydrates (about 25–50%), oils and grease (about 10%) and urea , surfactants , phenols , pesticides and others (lower quantity).

[ 2 ] : 35 In order to quantify the organic matter content, it is common to use "indirect methods" which are based on the consumption of oxygen to oxidize the organic matter: mainly the Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) and the Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD).

[ 2 ] : 36 These indirect methods are associated with the major impact of the discharge of organic matter into water bodies: the organic matter will be food for microorganisms, whose population will grow, and lead to the consumption of oxygen, which may then affect aquatic living organisms.

The mass load of organic content is calculated as the sewage flowrate multiplied with the concentration of the organic matter in the sewage.

[ 2 ] : 55 Typical values for physical–chemical characteristics of raw sewage is provided further down below.

Nutrients [ edit ] Apart from organic matter, sewage also contains nutrients. The major nutrients of interest are nitrogen and phosphorus . If sewage is discharged untreated, its nitrogen and phosphorus content can lead to pollution of lakes and reservoirs via a process called eutrophication .

[ 2 ] : 77 In raw sewage, nitrogen exists in the two forms of organic nitrogen or ammonia . The ammonia stems from the urea in urine . Urea is rapidly hydrolyzed and therefore not usually found in raw sewage.

[ 2 ] : 43 Total phosphorus is mostly present in sewage in the form of phosphates .They are either inorganic (polyphosphates and orthophosphates) and their main source is from detergents and other household chemical products. The other form is organic phosphorus, where the source is organic compounds to which the organic phosphorus is bound.

[ 2 ] : 45 Pathogens [ edit ] Human feces in sewage may contain pathogens capable of transmitting diseases.

[ 10 ] : 9–38 The following four types of pathogens are found in sewage: [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Bacteria like Salmonella , Shigella , Campylobacter , or Vibrio cholerae ; Viruses like hepatitis A , rotavirus , coronavirus , [ 12 ] enteroviruses ; Protozoa like Entamoeba histolytica , Giardia lamblia , Cryptosporidium parvum ; and Helminths and their eggs including Ascaris (roundworm), Ancylostoma (hookworm), and Trichuris (whipworm) In most practical cases, pathogenic organisms are not directly investigated in laboratory analyses. An easier way to assess the presence of fecal contamination is by assessing the most probable numbers of fecal coliforms (called thermotolerant coliforms), especially Escherichia coli .

Escherichia coli are intestinal bacteria excreted by all warm blooded animals, including human beings, and thus tracking their presence in sewage is easy, because of their substantially high concentrations (around 10 to 100 million per 100 mL).

[ 2 ] : 52 Solid waste [ edit ] Screening of the sewage with bar screens at a sewage treatment plant to remove larger objects in Norton, Zimbabwe Screening of sewage at a sewage treatment plant in Bujumbura , Burundi The ability of a flush toilet to make things "disappear" is soon recognized by young children who may experiment with virtually anything they can carry to the toilet.

[ 13 ] Adults may be tempted to dispose of toilet paper , wet wipes , diapers , sanitary napkins , tampons , tampon applicators, condoms , and expired medications , even at the risk of causing blockages. The privacy of a toilet offers a clandestine means of removing embarrassing evidence by flushing such things as drug paraphernalia , pregnancy test kits, combined oral contraceptive pill dispensers, and the packaging for those devices. There may be reluctance to retrieve items like children's toys or toothbrushes which accidentally fall into toilets, and items of clothing may be found in sewage from prisons or other locations where occupants may be careless.

[ 14 ] Trash and garbage in streets may be carried to combined sewers by stormwater runoff.

Micro-pollutants [ edit ] Sewage contains environmental persistent pharmaceutical pollutants .

Trihalomethanes can also be present as a result of past disinfection . Sewage may contain microplastics such as polyethylene and polypropylene beads, or polyester and polyamide fragments [ 15 ] from synthetic clothing and bedding fabrics abraded by wear and laundering, or from plastic packaging and plastic-coated paper products disintegrated by lift station pumps.

Pharmaceuticals , endocrine disrupting compounds, and hormones [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] may be excreted in urine or feces if not catabolized within the human body.

Some residential users tend to pour unwanted liquids like used cooking oil , [ 19 ] : 228 lubricants , [ 19 ] : 228 adhesives , paint , solvents , detergents , [ 19 ] : 228 and disinfectants into their sewer connections. This behavior can result in problems for the treatment plant operation and is thus discouraged.

Typical sewage composition [ edit ] Factors that determine composition [ edit ] The composition of sewage varies with climate, social and economic situation and population habits.

[ 2 ] : 28 In regions where water use is low, the strength of the sewage (or pollutant concentrations) is much higher than that in the United States where water use per person is high.

[ 5 ] : 183 Household income and diet also plays a role: For example, for the case of Brazil, it has been found that the higher the household income, the higher is the BOD load per person and the lower is the BOD concentration.

[ 2 ] : 57 Concentrations and loads [ edit ] Typical values for physical–chemical characteristics of raw sewage in developing countries have been published as follows: 180 g/person/d for total solids (or 1100 mg/L when expressed as a concentration), 50 g/person/d for BOD (300 mg/L), 100 g/person/d for COD (600 mg/L), 8 g/person/d for total nitrogen (45 mg/L), 4.5 g/person/d for ammonia-N (25 mg/L) and 1.0 g/person/d for total phosphorus (7 mg/L).

[ 2 ] : 57 The typical ranges for these values are: 120–220 g/person/d for total solids (or 700–1350 mg/L when expressed as a concentration), 40–60 g/person/d for BOD (250–400 mg/L), 80–120 g/person/d for COD (450–800 mg/L), 6–10 g/person/d for total nitrogen (35–60 mg/L), 3.5–6 g/person/d for ammonia-N (20–35 mg/L) and 0.7–2.5 g/person/d for total phosphorus (4–15 mg/L).

[ 2 ] : 57 For high income countries, the "per person organic matter load" has been found to be approximately 60 gram of BOD per person per day.

[ 6 ] This is called the population equivalent (PE) and is also used as a comparison parameter to express the strength of industrial wastewater compared to sewage.

Values for households in the United States have been published as follows, whereby the estimates are based on the assumption that 25% of the homes have kitchen waste-food grinders (sewage from such households contain more waste): 95 g/person/d  for total suspended solids (503 mg/L concentration), 85 g/person/d for BOD (450 mg/L), 198 g/person/d for COD (1050 mg/L), 13.3 g/person/d for the sum of organic nitrogen and ammonia nitrogen (70.4 mg/L), 7.8 g/person/d for ammonia-N (41.2 mg/L) and 3.28 g/person/d for total phosphorus (17.3 mg/L). The concentration values given here are based on a flowrate of 190 L per person per day.

[ 5 ] : 183 A United States source published in 1972 estimated that the daily dry weight of solid wastes per capita in sewage is estimated as 20.5 g (0.72 oz) in feces, 43.3 g (1.53 oz) of dissolved solids in urine, 20 g (0.71 oz) of toilet paper, 86.5 g (3.05 oz) of greywater solids, 30 g (1.1 oz) of food solids (if garbage disposal units are used), and varying amounts of dissolved minerals depending upon salinity of local water supplies, volume of water use per capita, and extent of water softener use.

[ 19 ] : 234 Sewage contains urine and feces. The mass of feces varies with dietary fiber intake. An average person produces 128 grams of wet feces per day, or a median dry mass of 29 g/person/day.

[ 20 ] The median urine generation rate is about 1.42 L/person/day, as was determined by a global literature review.

[ 20 ] Flowrates [ edit ] The volume of domestic sewage produced per person (or " per capita ", abbreviated as "cap") varies with the water consumption in the respective locality.

[ 2 ] : 11 A range of factors influence water consumption and hence the sewage flowrates per person. These include: Water availability (the opposite of water scarcity ), water supply options, climate (warmer climates may lead to greater water consumption), community size, economic level of the community, level of industrialization , metering of household consumption, water cost and water pressure.

[ 2 ] : 20 The production of sewage generally corresponds to the water consumption. However water used for landscape irrigation will not enter the sewer system, while groundwater and stormwater may enter the sewer system in addition to sewage.

[ 2 ] : 22 There are usually two peak flowrates of sewage arriving at a treatment plant per day: One peak is at the beginning of the morning and another peak is at the beginning of the evening.

[ 2 ] : 24 With regards to water consumption, a design figure that can be regarded as "world average" is 35–90 L per person per day (data from 1992).

[ 5 ] : 163 The same publication listed the water consumption in China as 80 L per person per day, Africa as 15–35 L per person per day, Eastern Mediterranean in Europe as 40–85 L per person per day and Latin America and Caribbean as 70–190 L per person per day.

[ 5 ] : 163 Even inside a country, there may be large variations from one region to another due to the various factors that determine the water consumption as listed above.

A flowrate value of 200 liters of sewage per person per day is often used as an estimate in high income countries , and is used for example in the design of sewage treatment plants.

[ 6 ] For comparison, typical sewage flowrates from urban residential sources in the United States are estimated as follows: 365 L/person/day (for one person households), 288 L/person/day (two person households), 200 L/person/day (four person households), 189 L/person/day (six person households).

[ 5 ] : 156 This means the overall range for this example would be 189–365 L (42–80 imp gal; 50–96 US gal).

Analytical methods [ edit ] General quality indicators [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Wastewater quality indicators .

[ edit ] Wastewater quality indicators are laboratory test methodologies to assess suitability of wastewater for disposal, treatment or reuse. The main parameters in sewage that are measured to assess the sewage strength or quality as well as treatment options include: solids, indicators of organic matter, nitrogen, phosphorus, indicators of fecal contamination.

[ 21 ] : 33 Tests selected vary with the intended use or discharge location. Tests can measure physical, chemical, and biological characteristics of the wastewater. Physical characteristics include temperature and solids. Chemical characteristics include pH value, dissolved oxygen concentrations, biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and chemical oxygen demand (COD), nitrogen, phosphorus, chlorine. Biological characteristics are determined with bioassays and aquatic toxicology tests.

Specific organisms and substances [ edit ] Sewage can be monitored for both disease-causing and benign organisms with a variety of techniques. Traditional techniques involve filtering, staining, and examining samples under a microscope. Much more sensitive and specific testing can be accomplished with DNA sequencing , such as when looking for rare organisms, attempting eradication , testing specifically for drug-resistant strains, or discovering new species.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] Sequencing DNA from an environmental sample is known as metagenomics .

Sewage has also been analyzed to determine relative rates of use of prescription and illegal drugs among municipal populations.

[ 25 ] General socioeconomic demographics may be inferred as well.

[ 26 ] Collection [ edit ] Lack of maintenance causing sewage to overflow from a manhole into the street of an informal settlement near Cape Town , South Africa Sewage is commonly collected and transported in gravity sewers , either in a sanitary sewer or in a combined sewer . The latter also conveys urban runoff ( stormwater ) which means the sewage gets diluted during rain events.

[ 2 ] : 9 Sanitary sewer [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Sanitary sewer .

[ edit ] A sanitary sewer is an underground pipe or tunnel system for transporting sewage from houses and commercial buildings (but not stormwater ) to a sewage treatment plant or disposal.

Combined sewer [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Combined sewer .

[ edit ] A combined sewer is a type of gravity sewer with a system of pipes, tunnels, pump stations etc. to transport sewage and urban runoff together to a sewage treatment plant or disposal site. This means that during rain events, the sewage gets diluted, resulting in higher flowrates at the treatment site. Uncontaminated stormwater simply dilutes sewage, but runoff may dissolve or suspend virtually anything it contacts on roofs, streets, and storage yards.

[ 27 ] : 296 As rainfall travels over roofs and the ground, it may pick up various contaminants including soil particles and other sediment , heavy metals, organic compounds , animal waste, and oil and grease . Combined sewers may also receive dry weather drainage from landscape irrigation , construction dewatering , and washing buildings and sidewalks .

Dilution in the sewer [ edit ] Infiltration of groundwater into the sewerage system [ edit ] Infiltration is groundwater entering sewer pipes through defective pipes, connections, joints or manholes .

[ 2 ] : 26 [ 5 ] : 164 Contaminated or saline groundwater may introduce additional pollutants to the sewage. The amount of such infiltrated water depends on several parameters, such as the length of the collection network, pipeline diameters, drainage area, soil type, water table depth, topography and number of connections per unit area.

[ 2 ] : 26 Infiltration is increased by poor construction procedures, and tends to increase with the age of the sewer. The amount of infiltration varies with the depth of the sewer in comparison to the local groundwater table .

[ 10 ] : 9–1, 9–9 Older sewer systems that are in need of rehabilitation may also exfiltrate sewage into groundwater from the leaking sewer joints and service connections.

[ 5 ] : 167 This can lead to groundwater pollution .

[ 28 ] Stormwater [ edit ] Combined sewers are designed to transport sewage and stormwater together. This means that sewage becomes diluted during rain events. There are other types of inflow that also dilute sewage, e.g. "water discharged from cellar and foundation drains, cooling-water discharges, and any direct stormwater runoff connections to the sanitary collection system".

[ 5 ] : 163 The "direct inflows" can result in peak sewage flowrates similar to combined sewers during wet weather events.

[ 5 ] : 165 Industrial wastewater [ edit ] Main article: Industrial wastewater treatment Sewage from communities with industrial facilities may include some industrial wastewater , generated by industrial processes such as the production or manufacture of goods. Volumes of industrial wastewater vary widely with the type of industry.

[ 2 ] : 27 Industrial wastewater may contain very different pollutants at much higher concentrations than what is typically found in sewage.

[ 5 ] : 188 Pollutants may be toxic or non- biodegradable waste including pharmaceuticals , [ 29 ] biocides , heavy metals , radionuclides , or thermal pollution .

An industry may treat its wastewater and discharge it into the environment (or even use the treated wastewater for specific applications), or, in case it is located in the urban area, it may discharge the wastewater into the public sewerage system. In the latter case, industrial wastewater may receive pre-treatment at the factories to reduce the pollutant load .

[ 2 ] : 27 Mixing industrial wastewater with sewage does nothing to reduce the mass of pollutants to be treated, but the volume of sewage lowers the concentration of pollutants unique to industrial wastewater, and the volume of industrial wastewater lowers the concentration of pollutants unique to sewage.

Disposal and dilution [ edit ] Ocean outfall pipes in Cape May, New Jersey , United States – pipes exposed after the sand was removed by severe storm Further information: Sewage treatment § Disposal or treatment options Assimilative capacity of receiving water bodies or land [ edit ] When wastewater is discharged into a water body (river, lakes, sea) or land, its relative impact will depend on the assimilative capacity of the water body or ecosystem .

[ 2 ] : 78 Water bodies have a self-purification capacity, so that the concentration of a pollutant may decrease along the distance from the discharge point. Furthermore, water bodies provide a dilution to the pollutants concentrations discharged, although it does not decrease their mass. In principle, the higher the dilution capacity (ratio of volume or flow of the receiving water and volume or flow of sewage discharged), the lower will be the concentration of pollutants in the receiving water, and probably the lower will be the negative impacts. But if the water body already arrives very polluted at the point of discharge, the dilution will be of limited value.

[ 30 ] In several cases, a community may partially treat its sewage, and still count on the assimilative capacity of the water body. However, this needs to be analyzed very carefully, taking into account the quality of the water in the receiving body before it receives the discharge of sewage, the resulting water quality after the discharge and the impact on the intended water uses after discharge. There are also specific legal requirements in each country. Different countries have different regulations regarding the specifications of the quality of the sewage being discharged and the quality to be maintained in the receiving water body.

[ 2 ] : 152 The combination of treatment and disposal must comply with existing local regulations.

The assimilative capacity depends – among several factors – on the ability of the receiving water to sustain dissolved oxygen concentrations necessary to support organisms catabolizing organic waste.

[ 19 ] : 9, 673 For example, fish may die if dissolved oxygen levels are depressed below 5 mg/L.

[ 31 ] : 573 Application of sewage to land can be considered as a form of final disposal or of treatment, or both.

[ 2 ] : 189 Land disposal alternatives require consideration of land availability, groundwater quality, and possible soil deterioration.

[ 32 ] Other disposal methods [ edit ] Sewage may be discharged to an evaporation or infiltration basin .

[ 10 ] : 9–41 Groundwater recharge is used to reduce saltwater intrusion , or replenish aquifers used for agricultural irrigation . Treatment is usually required to sustain percolation capacity of infiltration basins, and more extensive treatment may be required for aquifers used as drinking water supplies.

[ 19 ] : 700–703 Marine outfall [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Marine outfall .

[ edit ] A marine outfall (or ocean outfall) is a pipeline or tunnel that discharges municipal or industrial wastewater , stormwater , combined sewer overflows (CSOs), cooling water , or brine effluents from water desalination plants to the sea. Usually they discharge under the sea's surface (submarine outfall). In the case of municipal wastewater, effluent is often being discharged after having undergone no or only primary treatment , with the intention of using the assimilative capacity of the sea for further treatment. Submarine outfalls are common throughout the world and probably number in the thousands. The light intensity and salinity in natural sea water disinfects the wastewater to ocean outfall system significantly.

[ 33 ] More than 200 outfalls alone have been listed in a single international database maintained by the Institute for Hydromechanics at Karlsruhe University for the International Association of Hydraulic Engineering and Research (IAHR) / International Water Association (IWA) Committee on Marine Outfall Systems.

[ 34 ] Global situation [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Sewage treatment § Global situation .

[ edit ] Before the 20th century in Europe, sewers usually discharged into a body of water such as a river, lake, or ocean. There was no treatment, so the breakdown of the human waste was left to the ecosystem . This could lead to satisfactory results if the assimilative capacity of the ecosystem is sufficient which is nowadays not often the case due to increasing population density.

[ 35 ] : 78 Today, the situation in urban areas of industrialized countries is usually that sewers route their contents to a sewage treatment plant rather than directly to a body of water. In many developing countries , however, the bulk of municipal and industrial wastewater is discharged to rivers and the ocean without any treatment or after preliminary treatment or primary treatment only. Doing so can lead to water pollution . Few reliable figures exist on the share of the wastewater collected in sewers that is being treated worldwide. A global estimate by UNDP and UN-Habitat in 2010 was that 90% of all wastewater generated is released into the environment untreated.

[ 36 ] A more recent study in 2021 estimated that globally, about 52% of sewage is treated.

[ 37 ] However, sewage treatment rates are highly unequal for different countries around the world. For example, while high-income countries treat approximately 74% of their sewage, developing countries treat an average of just 4.2%.

[ 37 ] As of 2022, without sufficient treatment, more than 80% of all wastewater generated globally is released into the environment. High-income nations treat, on average, 70% of the wastewater they produce, according to UN Water.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] Only 8% of wastewater produced in low-income nations receives any sort of treatment.

[ 38 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] Treatment [ edit ] Main article: Sewage treatment Sewage treatment is beneficial in reducing environmental pollution.

Bar screens can remove large solid debris from sewage, [ 19 ] : 274–275 and primary treatment can remove floating and settleable matter .

[ 19 ] : 446 Primary treated sewage usually contains less than half of the original solids content and approximately two-thirds of the BOD in the form of colloids and dissolved organic compounds.

[ 43 ] Secondary treatment can reduce the BOD of organic waste in undiluted sewage, [ 31 ] : 575 but is less effective for dilute sewage.

[ 44 ] Water disinfection may be attempted to kill pathogens prior to disposal, and is increasingly effective after more elements of the foregoing treatment sequence have been completed.

[ 19 ] : 359 Reuse and reclamation [ edit ] Main article: Reclaimed water An alternative to discharge into the environment is to reuse the sewage in a productive way (for agricultural, urban or industrial uses), in compliance with local regulations and requirements for each specific reuse application. Public health risks of sewage reuse in agriculture can be minimized by following a "multiple barrier approach" according to guidelines by the World Health Organization .

[ 45 ] There is also the possibility of resource recovery which could make agriculture more sustainable by using carbon , nitrogen , phosphorus , water and energy recovered from sewage.

[ 46 ] [ 4 ] Sewage farm [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Sewage farm .

[ edit ] Sewage farms use sewage for irrigation and fertilizing agricultural land. The practice is common in warm, arid climates where irrigation is valuable while sources of fresh water are scarce . Suspended solids may be converted to humus by microbes and bacteria in order to supply nitrogen , phosphorus and other plant nutrients for crop growth. Many industrialized nations use conventional sewage treatment plants nowadays instead of sewage farms. These reduce vector and odor problems; but sewage farming remains a low-cost option for some developing countries . Sewage farming should not be confused with sewage disposal through infiltration basins or subsurface drains .

Regulations [ edit ] Further information: Sewage regulation and administration Sewage management includes collection and transport for release into the environment after a treatment level that is compatible with the local requirements for discharge into water bodies, onto soil, or for reuse applications.

[ 2 ] : 156 In most countries, uncontrolled discharges of wastewater to the environment are not permitted under law, and strict water quality requirements are to be met. For requirements in the United States, see Clean Water Act .

Sewage management regulations are often part of a country's broader sanitation policies. These may also include the management of human excreta (from non-sewered collection systems ), solid waste and stormwater.

See also [ edit ] Water portal Fecal sludge management History of water supply and sanitation Reuse of human excreta Urban Waste Water Treatment Directive Wastewater-based epidemiology References [ edit ] ^ Tilley, E.; Ulrich, L.; Lüthi, C.; Reymond, Ph.; Zurbrügg, C. (2014).

Compendium of Sanitation Systems and Technologies (2nd Revised ed.). Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology (Eawag), Duebendorf, Switzerland.

ISBN 978-3-906484-57-0 .

Archived from the original on 8 April 2016.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai aj ak Von Sperling, M. (2007).

"Wastewater Characteristics, Treatment and Disposal" .

Water Intelligence Online .

6 .

doi : 10.2166/9781780402086 .

ISBN 978-1-78040-208-6 .

ISSN 1476-1777 .

Text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ^ a b Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wasterwater, Excreta and Greywater . World Health Organization. 2006. p. 31.

ISBN 92-4-154685-9 .

OCLC 71253096 .

^ a b c Andersson, K.; Rosemarin, A.; Lamizana, B.; Kvarnström, E.; McConville, J.; Seidu, R.; Dickin, S.; Trimmer, C. (2016).

Sanitation, Wastewater Management and Sustainability: from Waste Disposal to Resource Recovery . Nairobi and Stockholm: United Nations Environment Programme and Stockholm Environment Institute. p. 56.

ISBN 978-92-807-3488-1 .

Archived from the original on 1 June 2017 . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Wastewater engineering: treatment and reuse . George Tchobanoglous, Franklin L. Burton, H. David Stensel, Metcalf & Eddy (4th ed.). Boston: McGraw-Hill. 2003.

ISBN 0-07-041878-0 .

OCLC 48053912 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ a b c Henze, M.; van Loosdrecht, M. C. M.; Ekama, G.A.; Brdjanovic, D. (2008).

Biological Wastewater Treatment: Principles, Modelling and Design . IWA Publishing.

doi : 10.2166/9781780401867 .

ISBN 978-1-78040-186-7 .

S2CID 108595515 .

Spanish and Arabic versions available free online ^ Tilley, E.; Ulrich, L.; Lüthi, C.; Reymond, Ph.; Zurbrügg, C. (2014).

Compendium of Sanitation Systems and Technologies (2nd Revised ed.). Duebendorf, Switzerland: Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology (Eawag). p. 10.

ISBN 978-3-906484-57-0 .

^ Behzadian, k; Kapelan, Z (2015).

"Advantages of integrated and sustainability based assessment for metabolism based strategic planning of urban water systems" (PDF) .

Science of the Total Environment .

527– 528: 220– 231.

Bibcode : 2015ScTEn.527..220B .

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.04.097 .

hdl : 10871/17351 .

PMID 25965035 .

^ Duttle, Marsha (January 1990).

"NM State greywater advice" .

New Mexico State University .

Archived from the original on 13 February 2010 . Retrieved 23 January 2010 .

^ a b c d e Urquhart, Leonard Church (1959).

Civil Engineering Handbook (Fourth ed.).

New York City : McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc.

^ Norton, John F.; Maxcy, Kenneth F.; Pirnie, Malcolm (1947).

Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage (Ninth ed.). New York: American Public Health Association . pp.

145– 146.

^ Naddeo, Vincenzo; Liu, Haizhou (2020).

"Editorial Perspectives: 2019 novel coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2): what is its fate in urban water cycle and how can the water research community respond?" .

Environmental Science: Water Research & Technology .

6 (5): 1213– 1216.

doi : 10.1039/D0EW90015J .

^ Collins, Meg.

"The Infamous Toilet Lock" .

Lucie's List . Retrieved 24 August 2021 .

^ Jamrock, Thomas E.

"Grinders and Comminutors: An Evolving Technology" .

Environmental Protection . Retrieved 5 August 2021 .

^ Gatidou, Georgia; Arvaniti, Olga S.; Stasinakis, Athanasios S. (2019).

"Review on the occurrence and fate of microplastics in Sewage Treatment Plants" .

Journal of Hazardous Materials .

367 : 504– 512.

Bibcode : 2019JHzM..367..504G .

doi : 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2018.12.081 .

PMID 30620926 .

S2CID 58567561 .

^ Arvaniti, Olga S.; Stasinakis, Athanasios S. (2015).

"Review on the occurrence, fate and removal of perfluorinated compounds during wastewater treatment" .

Science of the Total Environment .

524– 525: 81– 92.

Bibcode : 2015ScTEn.524...81A .

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2015.04.023 .

PMID 25889547 .

^ Bletsou, Anna A.; Asimakopoulos, Alexandros G.; Stasinakis, Athanasios S.; Thomaidis, Nikolaos S.; Kannan, Kurunthachalam (19 February 2013).

"Mass Loading and Fate of Linear and Cyclic Siloxanes in a Wastewater Treatment Plant in Greece" .

Environmental Science & Technology .

47 (4): 1824– 1832.

Bibcode : 2013EnST...47.1824B .

doi : 10.1021/es304369b .

ISSN 0013-936X .

PMID 23320453 .

S2CID 39997737 .

^ Gatidou, Georgia; Kinyua, Juliet; van Nuijs, Alexander L.N.; Gracia-Lor, Emma; Castiglioni, Sara; Covaci, Adrian; Stasinakis, Athanasios S. (2016).

"Drugs of abuse and alcohol consumption among different groups of population on the Greek Island of Lesvos through sewage-based epidemiology" .

Science of the Total Environment .

563– 564: 633– 640.

Bibcode : 2016ScTEn.563..633G .

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.04.130 .

hdl : 10067/1345920151162165141 .

PMID 27236142 .

S2CID 4073701 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Metcalf & Eddy, Inc. (1972).

Wastewater Engineering . New York: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 978-0-07-041675-8 .

^ a b Rose, C.; Parker, A.; Jefferson, B.; Cartmell, E. (2015).

"The Characterization of Feces and Urine: A Review of the Literature to Inform Advanced Treatment Technology" .

Critical Reviews in Environmental Science and Technology .

45 (17): 1827– 1879.

Bibcode : 2015CREST..45.1827R .

doi : 10.1080/10643389.2014.1000761 .

ISSN 1064-3389 .

PMC 4500995 .

PMID 26246784 .

^ Von Sperling, M. (2007).

"Wastewater Characteristics, Treatment and Disposal" .

Water Intelligence Online .

6 : 9781780402086.

doi : 10.2166/9781780402086 .

ISSN 1476-1777 . Archived from the original on 20 September 2023 . Retrieved 10 March 2023 .

Text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ^ Poliovirus detected from environmental samples in Israel Archived 2013-11-04 at the Wayback Machine ^ Drug resistant bug review: NDM-1 in New Delhi's sewage, WHO calls to action, recent outbreaks of antibiotic resistant bacteria Archived 2013-11-05 at the Wayback Machine ^ Raw Sewage Harbors Diverse Viral Populations Archived 2013-06-07 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Leading experts to review global developments in detecting illicit drugs in wastewater" . The European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction. 2 May 2013.

Archived from the original on 9 February 2014 . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ Choi, Phil M. (7 October 2019).

"Social, demographic, and economic correlates of food and chemical consumption measured by wastewater-based epidemiology" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

116 (43): 21864– 21873.

Bibcode : 2019PNAS..11621864C .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1910242116 .

PMC 6815118 .

PMID 31591193 .

^ Hammer, Mark J. (1975).

Water and Waste-Water Technology . New York: John Wiley & Son.

ISBN 0-471-34726-4 .

^ UN-Water (2015).

"Wastewater Management – A UN-Water Analytical Brief" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 November 2016 . Retrieved 22 March 2017 .

^ Naddeo, V.; Meriç, S.; Kassinos, D.; Belgiorno, V.; Guida, M. (September 2009). "Fate of pharmaceuticals in contaminated urban wastewater effluent under ultrasonic irradiation".

Water Research .

43 (16): 4019– 4027.

Bibcode : 2009WatRe..43.4019N .

doi : 10.1016/j.watres.2009.05.027 .

PMID 19589554 .

S2CID 23561392 .

^ Schmidt, Michael (2008).

Standards and thresholds for impact assessment . Berlin: Springer Verlag.

ISBN 978-3-540-31141-6 .

OCLC 261324614 .

^ a b Linzley, Ray K.; Franzini, Joseph B. (1972).

Water-Resources Engineering (Second ed.).

New York City : McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc.

^ Rich, Linville Gene (1980).

Low-Maintenance, Mechanically Simple Wastewater Treatment Systems .

New York City : McGraw-Hill Book Company, Inc.

p. 187.

ISBN 0-07-052252-9 .

^ Yang, Lei; Chang, Wen-Shi; Lo Huang, Mong-Na (15 February 2000).

"Natural disinfection of wastewater in marine outfall fields" .

Water Research .

34 (3): 743– 750.

Bibcode : 2000WatRe..34..743Y .

doi : 10.1016/S0043-1354(99)00209-2 .

ISSN 0043-1354 .

^ Outfalls Database Archived 2008-06-28 at the Wayback Machine Click on "Activities", then "Outfalls repository", then "database", then "Output" ^ Von Sperling, M. (2007).

"Wastewater Characteristics, Treatment and Disposal" .

Water Intelligence Online .

6 .

doi : 10.2166/9781780402086 .

ISSN 1476-1777 .

Text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ^ Corcoran E, Nellemann C, Baker E, Bos R, Osborn D, Savelli M, eds. (2010).

Sick water? : the central role of wastewater management in sustainable development: a rapid response assessment (PDF) . Arendal, Norway: UNEP/GRID-Arendal.

ISBN 978-82-7701-075-5 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 December 2015 . Retrieved 26 December 2014 .

^ a b Jones, Edward R.; van Vliet, Michelle T. H.; Qadir, Manzoor; Bierkens, Marc F. P. (2021).

"Country-level and gridded estimates of wastewater production, collection, treatment and reuse" .

Earth System Science Data .

13 (2): 237– 254.

Bibcode : 2021ESSD...13..237J .

doi : 10.5194/essd-13-237-2021 .

ISSN 1866-3508 .

^ a b "Wastewater resource recovery can fix water insecurity and cut carbon emissions" .

European Investment Bank . Retrieved 29 August 2022 .

^ UN-Water.

"Quality and Wastewater" .

UN-Water . Retrieved 29 August 2022 .

^ "Water and Sanitation" .

United Nations Sustainable Development . Retrieved 29 August 2022 .

^ "Only 8 per cent of wastewater in low-income countries undergoes treatment: UN" . Retrieved 29 August 2022 .

^ "50% global wastewater treatment still not enough" .

www.aquatechtrade.com . Retrieved 29 August 2022 .

^ Abbett, Robert W. (1956).

American Civil Engineering Practice . Vol. II. New York: John Wiley & Sons. pp.

19– 28.

^ "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit Writers' Manual" (PDF) .

United States Environmental Protection Agency . pp.

5– 11 . Retrieved 14 September 2021 .

^ World Health Organization (14 February 2024).

WHO Guidelines for the Safe Use of Wastewater, Excreta and Greywater (Volume IV: Excreta and greywater use in agriculture) . Geneva: World Health Organization.

ISBN 978-92-4-154685-0 .

Archived from the original on 17 October 2014 . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ Banwart, S.; Carter, L.; Daniell, T.; Yong-Guan, Z.; Guo, H.; Guest, J.; Kirk, S.; Chen, X.; Evans, B. (14 September 2021).

"Expanding the agricultural – sanitation circular economy: opportunities and benefits" .

www.leeds.ac.uk .

doi : 10.5518/100/71 . Retrieved 16 September 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Sanitation and Wastewater Atlas of Africa Look up sewage in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Wastewater .

Scholia has a topic profile for Sewage .

v t e Wastewater Sources and types Acid mine drainage Ballast water Bathroom Blackwater (coal) Blackwater (waste) Boiler blowdown Brine Combined sewer Cooling tower Cooling water Fecal sludge Greywater Infiltration/Inflow Industrial wastewater Ion exchange Leachate Manure Papermaking Produced water Return flow Reverse osmosis Sanitary sewer Septage Sewage Sewage sludge Toilet Urban runoff Quality indicators Adsorbable organic halides Biochemical oxygen demand Chemical oxygen demand Coliform index Oxygen saturation Heavy metals pH Salinity Temperature Total dissolved solids Total suspended solids Turbidity Wastewater surveillance Treatment options Activated sludge Aerated lagoon Agricultural wastewater treatment API oil–water separator Carbon filtering Chlorination Clarifier Constructed wetland Decentralized wastewater system Extended aeration Facultative lagoon Fecal sludge management Filtration Imhoff tank Industrial wastewater treatment Ion exchange Membrane bioreactor Reverse osmosis Rotating biological contactor Secondary treatment Sedimentation Septic tank Settling basin Sewage sludge treatment Sewage treatment Sewer mining Stabilization pond Trickling filter Ultraviolet germicidal irradiation UASB Vermifilter Wastewater treatment plant Disposal options Combined sewer Evaporation pond Groundwater recharge Infiltration basin Injection well Irrigation Marine dumping Marine outfall Reclaimed water Sanitary sewer Septic drain field Sewage farm Storm drain Surface runoff Vacuum sewer Category: Sewerage v t e Plumbing Fundamental concepts Air gap (plumbing) Backflow Compatibility (chemical) Corrosion Drain (plumbing) Drinking water Fuel gas Friction loss Grade (slope) Greywater Heat trap Hydrostatic loop Leak Neutral axis Onsite sewage facility Pressure Sanitary sewer Sewer gas Sewage Sewerage Siphon Storm sewer Stormwater Surface tension Tap water Thermal expansion Thermal insulation Thermosiphon Trap (plumbing) Venturi effect Wastewater Water hammer Water supply network Water table Well Technology Brazing British Standard Pipe (BSP) Cast iron pipe Chemical drain cleaners Compression fitting Copper tubing Crimp (joining) Drain-waste-vent system Ductile iron pipe Flare fitting Garden Hose Thread (GHT) Gasket Hydronics Leak detection National pipe thread (NPT) Nominal Pipe Size (NPS) O-ring Oakum Pipe (fluid conveyance) Pipe dope Pipe support Plastic pipework Push-to-pull compression fittings Putty Sealant Sewage pumping Soldering Solvent welding Swaging Thread seal tape Threaded pipe Tube bending Water heat recycling Components Atmospheric vacuum breaker Automatic bleeding valve Automatic faucet Backflow prevention device Ball valve Bleed screw Booster pump Butterfly valve Check valve Chemigation valve Chopper pump Circulator pump Cistern Closet flange Concentric reducer Condensate pump Coupling (piping) Diaphragm valve Dielectric union Double check valve Eccentric reducer Expansion tank Faucet aerator Float switch Float valve Floor drain Flow limiter Flushing trough Flushometer Gate valve Globe valve Grease trap Grinder pump Hose coupling Manifold Needle valve Nipple (plumbing) Pinch valve Piping and plumbing fitting Plug (sanitation) Pressure regulator Pressure vacuum breaker Pressure-balanced valve Pump Radiator (heating) Reduced pressure zone device Reducer Relief valve Riser clamp Rooftop water tower Safety valve sewage pumping Street elbow Submersible pump Tap (valve) Thermostatic mixing valve Trench drain Vacuum breaker Vacuum ejector Valve Water tank Zone valve Plumbing fixtures Accessible bathtub Bathtub Bidet Dehumidifier Dishwasher Drinking fountain Electric water boiler Evaporative cooler Flush toilet Garbage disposal unit Hot water storage tank Humidifier Icemaker Instant hot water dispenser Laundry tub Shower water recycling shower Sink Storage water heater Sump pump Tankless water heating Urinal Washing machine Washlet Water dispenser Water filter Water heating Water softening Specialized tools Basin wrench Blowtorch Borescope Core drill Drain cleaner Driving cap Flare-nut wrench Pipecutter Pipe wrench Plumber's snake Plumber wrench Plunger Strap wrench Tap and die Measurement and control Control valve Flow sensor Pressure sensor Water detector Water metering Professions, trades, and services Hydronic balancing Hydrostatic testing Leak detection Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing Pipe marking Pipefitter Pipelayer Plumber Industry organizations and standards International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO) NSF International Plumbing & Drainage Institute (PDI) Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) World Plumbing Council (WPC) Health and safety Plumbing code Scalding Waterborne disease See also Fire sprinkler system Piping Template:HVAC Template:Public health Template:Sewerage Template:Human waste elimination Template:Wastewater v t e Biosolids , waste , and waste management Major types Agricultural wastewater Biodegradable waste Biomedical waste Brown waste Chemical waste Construction waste Demolition waste Electronic waste by country Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Heat waste Industrial waste Industrial wastewater Litter Marine debris Mining waste Municipal solid waste Open defecation Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Radioactive waste Scrap metal Sewage Sharps waste Surface runoff Toxic waste Processes Anaerobic digestion Balefill Biodegradation Composting Durable good Ecological design Garden waste dumping Illegal dumping Incineration Landfill Landfill mining Mechanical biological treatment Mechanical sorting Photodegradation Reclaimed lumber Recycling appliance recycling battery recycling bottle recycling fluorescent lamp recycling land recycling plastic recycling textile recycling timber recycling tire recycling water heat recycling water recycling shower Repurposing Resource recovery Reusable packaging Right to repair Sewage treatment Urban mining Waste collection Waste sorting Waste trade Waste treatment Waste-to-energy Countries Afghanistan Albania Armenia Australia Belgium Bangladesh Brazil Bosnia and Herzegovina Egypt Georgia Hong Kong India Israel Japan Kazakhstan New Zealand Russia South Korea Sri Lanka Switzerland Syria Tanzania Taiwan Thailand Turkey United Kingdom United States Agreements Bamako Convention Basel Convention EU directives batteries Recycling framework incineration landfills RoHS vehicles waste water WEEE London Convention Oslo Convention OSPAR Convention Occupations Sanitation worker Street sweeper Waste collector Waste picker Other topics Blue Ribbon Commission on America's Nuclear Future China's waste import ban Cleaner production Downcycling Eco-industrial park Extended producer responsibility High-level radioactive waste management History of waste management Landfill fire Sewage regulation and administration Supervised injection site Toxic colonialism Upcycling Waste hierarchy Waste legislation Waste minimisation Zero waste Environment portal Category: Waste Index Journals Lists Organizations v t e Pollution History Air Acid rain Air quality index Air pollution measurement Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Biofuel Biomass Coal Joss paper Open burning of waste Construction Renovation Demolition Exhaust gas Diesel exhaust Haze Smoke Indoor air quality Internal combustion engine Global dimming Global distillation Mining Ozone depletion Particulates Asbestos Oil refining Polluting cooking fuels Persistent organic pollutant Smelting Smog Soot Black carbon Volatile organic compound Waste Biological Biological hazard Genetic pollution Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information pollution Electromagnetic Light Ecological light pollution Overillumination Radio spectrum pollution Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Land Water Air Rail Sustainable transport Urban Sonar Marine mammals and sonar Industrial Military Abstract Noise control Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Electromagnetic radiation and health Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural pollution Herbicides Manure waste Pesticides Land degradation Bioremediation Open defecation Electrical resistance heating Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Battery recycling Foam food container Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Biomedical waste Chemical waste Construction waste Lead poisoning Mercury poisoning Toxic waste Industrial waste Lead smelting Litter Mining Coal mining Gold mining Surface mining Deep sea mining Mining waste Uranium mining Municipal solid waste Garbage Nanomaterials Plastic pollution Microplastics Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Landfill Thermal treatment Space Satellite Visual Air travel Clutter (advertising) Traffic signs Overhead power lines Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare ( Agent Orange ) Nuclear holocaust ( Nuclear fallout - nuclear famine - nuclear winter ) Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biological pollution Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine debris Monitoring Nonpoint source pollution Nutrient pollution Ocean acidification Oil exploitation Oil exploration Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Sewage Septic tanks Pit latrine Shipping Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Thermal Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Topics Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Brain health and pollution Misc Area source Debris Dust Garbology Legacy pollution Midden Point source Waste Responses Cleaner production Industrial ecology Pollution haven hypothesis Pollutant release and transfer register Polluter pays principle Pollution control Waste minimisation Zero waste Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM 2.5 Most polluted countries Most polluted rivers Treaties Categories ( by country ) Commons WikiProject Environment WikiProject Ecology Environment portal Ecology portal Authority control databases National Japan Czech Republic Other NARA NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5749f589c8‐h97l5
Cached time: 20250813003155
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.777 seconds
Real time usage: 2.001 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 21547/1000000
Revision size: 43410/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 320083/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6222/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 249116/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.127/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10478340/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 2/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1676.051      1 -total
 24.76%  415.014      1 Template:Reflist
 24.38%  408.643      8 Template:Excerpt
 20.36%  341.213     67 Template:Rp
 19.44%  325.758     67 Template:R/superscript
 10.29%  172.464     16 Template:Cite_book
  9.84%  164.866    201 Template:R/where
  7.22%  120.994     15 Template:Cite_journal
  6.46%  108.321      1 Template:Pollution_sidebar
  6.32%  105.927      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:20646704:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250813003155 and revision id 1302319537. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sewage&oldid=1302319537 " Categories : Anaerobic digestion Sanitation Sewerage Waste management Water pollution Hidden categories: CS1 maint: others CS1: long volume value Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2021 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with excerpts Commons category link is locally defined Module:Interwiki extra: additional interwiki links This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 17:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sewage 66 languages Add topic

