Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Mechanics Toggle Mechanics subsection 2.1 Wet bell 2.1.1 Type 1 wet bell 2.1.2 Type 2 wet bell 2.1.3 Operation of a wet bell 2.2 Closed bell 2.2.1 British mini-bell system 2.3 Breathing gas distribution 2.3.1 Bell gas panel 2.4 Deployment of a modern diving bell 2.4.1 Clump weight 2.4.2 Bell stage 2.4.3 Bell handling system 2.4.4 Bell cursor 2.4.5 Heave compensation 2.4.6 Cross-hauling 3 Use with hyperbaric chambers 4 Air-lock diving bells 5 Rescue bell 6 Observation bell 7 Bell diving skills and procedures 8 Hazards 9 Diver training 10 Underwater habitats 11 In nature 12 See also 13 References 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Diving bell 25 languages Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chamber for transporting divers vertically through the water For the 2014 film, see Diving Bell (film) .

Not to be confused with Bathysphere .

Diving bell Exterior view of an open (wet) diving bell Other names Closed bell Personnel transfer capsule Wet bell Open bell Uses Transport of surface supplied and saturation divers from the surface to the underwater workplace and back.

A diving bell is a rigid chamber used to transport divers from the surface to depth and back in open water, usually for the purpose of performing underwater work. The most common types are the open-bottomed wet bell and the closed bell , which can maintain an internal pressure greater than the external ambient.

[ 1 ] Diving bells are usually suspended by a cable, and lifted and lowered by a winch from a surface support platform. Unlike a submersible , the diving bell is not designed to move under the control of its occupants, or to operate independently of its launch and recovery system.

The wet bell is a structure with an airtight chamber which is open to the water at the bottom, that is lowered underwater to operate as a base or a means of transport for a small number of divers. Air is trapped inside the bell by pressure of the water at the interface. These were the first type of diving chamber , and are still in use in modified form.

The closed bell is a pressure vessel for human occupancy , which may be used for bounce diving or saturation diving , with access to the water through a hatch at the bottom. The hatch is sealed before ascent to retain internal pressure.  At the surface, this type of bell can lock on to a hyperbaric chamber where the divers live under saturation or are decompressed. The bell is mated with the chamber system via the bottom hatchway or a side hatchway, and the trunking in between is pressurized to enable the divers to transfer through to the chamber under pressure. In saturation diving the bell is merely the ride to and from the job, and the chamber system is the living quarters. If the dive is relatively short (a bounce dive), decompression can be done in the bell in exactly the same way it would be done in the chamber.

A third type is the rescue bell, used for the rescue of personnel from sunk submarines which have maintained structural integrity. These bells may operate at atmospheric internal pressure and must withstand the ambient water pressure.

History [ edit ] 16th century Islamic painting of Alexander the Great lowered in a glass diving bell The diving bell is one of the earliest types of equipment for underwater work and exploration.

[ 2 ] Its use was first described by Aristotle in the 4th century BC: "they enable the divers to respire equally well by letting down a cauldron, for this does not fill with water, but retains the air, for it is forced straight down into the water." [ 3 ] Recurring legends about Alexander the Great (including some versions of the Alexander Romance [ 4 ] ) tell he explored the sea in some closed vessel, lowered from his ships. Their origin is hard to determine, but some of the earliest dated works are from the early Middle Ages.

[ 5 ] In 1535, Guglielmo de Lorena created and tested his own diving bell to explore a sunken vessel in a lake near Rome. De Lorena's diving bell only had space for enough oxygen for a few minutes however, the air in his diving bell was reported to last for one to two hours with the limiting factor being a diver's ability to withstand cold and fatigue, not lack of oxygen. The mechanism he used needed to keep the pressure inside the bell continuous, supply fresh air, and remove air exhaled by the diver. To accomplish this, it is believed that de Lorena used a method similar to what would later be Edmond Halley's 1691 design.

[ 6 ] In 1616, Franz Kessler designed an improved diving bell, making the bell reach the diver's ankles, and adding windows and a ballast to the bottom. This design no longer needed to be tethered to the surface, but it is unclear whether or not it was actually built.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] In 1642, John Winthrop reported one Edward Bendall building two large wooden barrels, weighted with lead and open at their bottoms, to salvage a ship Mary Rose which had exploded and sunk, blocking the harbor of Charlestown, Boston . Bendall undertook the work on condition that he be awarded all the value of the salvage should he succeed in unblocking the harbor, or half the value he could salvage if he could not.

[ 9 ] In 1658, Albrecht von Treileben was permitted to salvage the warship Vasa , which sank in Stockholm harbor on its maiden voyage in 1628. Between 1663 and 1665 von Treileben's divers were successful in raising most of the cannon, working from a diving bell.

[ 10 ] A diving bell is mentioned in the 1663 Ballad of Gresham College (stanza 16): A wondrous Engine is contriveing In forme, t'is said, much like a Bell, Most usefull for the Art of Diveing.

If 't hitt, 't will prove a Miracle; For, gentlemen, 't is no small matter To make a man breath under water.

In late 1686, Sir William Phipps convinced investors to fund an expedition to what is now Haiti and the Dominican Republic to find sunken treasure, despite the location of the shipwreck being based entirely on rumor and speculation. In January 1687, Phipps found the wreck of the Spanish galleon Nuestra Señora de la Concepción off the coast of Santo Domingo .  Some sources say they used an inverted container for the salvage operation while others say the crew was assisted by Indian divers in the shallow waters.  The operation lasted from February to April 1687 during which time they salvaged jewels, some gold and 30 tons of silver which, at the time, was worth over £200,000.

[ 11 ] In 1689, Denis Papin suggested that the pressure and fresh air inside a diving bell could be maintained by a force pump or bellows. Engineer John Smeaton utilized this concept in 1789.

[ 7 ] [ 12 ] In 1691, Dr.

Edmond Halley completed plans for a diving bell capable of remaining submerged for extended periods of time, and fitted with a window for the purpose of undersea exploration. In Halley's design, atmosphere is replenished by sending weighted barrels of air down from the surface.

[ 13 ] Spalding's Diving Bell, The Saturday Magazine , Vol. 14, 1839 In 1775, Charles Spalding , an Edinburgh confectioner, improved on Halley's design by adding a system of balance-weights to ease the raising and lowering of the bell, along with a series of ropes for signaling the surface crew.

[ 14 ] Spalding and his nephew, Ebenezer Watson, later suffocated off the coast of Dublin in 1783 doing salvage work in a diving bell of Spalding's design.

[ 14 ] c1963: Dan Wilson of Deep Submergene Systems developed the Purisma diving bell, the first commercial diving lock-out bell. In September 1963 it was presented to Edwin Link in Washington DC. The bell had two spherical chambers, arranged vertically, with a pressure door between them. The upper chamber could be used as an atmospheric pressure observation chamber or for a second shift of divers. A third, unoccupied sphere was attached above the bell to stabilise it by raiding the centre of buoyancy. The bell was used for a short time in a subsea drilling operation off Oregon, but was not commercially successful. Later closed bells used information derived from this experiment.

[ 15 ] Mechanics [ edit ] Occupied diving bell illustrated. From Otto Lueger , Lexikon der gesamten Technik ( Dictionary of Technology ), 1904 The bell is lowered into the water by cables from a crane , gantry or A-frame attached to a floating platform or shore structure. The bell is ballasted so as to remain upright in the water and to be negatively buoyant , so that it will sink even when full of air.

Hoses, supplied by gas compressors or banks of high pressure storage cylinders at the surface, provide breathing gas to the bell, serving two functions: Fresh gas is available for breathing by the occupants.

Volume reduction of the air in an open bell due to increasing hydrostatic pressure as the bell is lowered is compensated. Adding pressurized gas ensures that the gas space within the bell remains at constant volume as the bell descends in the water. Otherwise the bell would partially fill with water as the gas was compressed.

The physics of the diving bell applies also to an underwater habitat equipped with a moon pool , which is like a diving bell enlarged to the size of a room or two, and with the water–air interface at the bottom confined to a section rather than forming the entire bottom of the structure.

Wet bell [ edit ] See also: Surface-supplied diving skills Open diving bell on a stern mounted launch and recovery system A wet bell, or open bell, is a platform for lowering and lifting divers to and from the underwater workplace, which has an air filled space, open at the bottom, where the divers can stand or sit with their heads out of the water. The air space is at ambient pressure at all times, so there are no great pressure differences, and the greatest structural loads are usually self weight and the buoyancy of the air space. A fairly heavy ballast is often required to counteract the buoyancy of the airspace, and this is usually set low at the bottom of the bell, which helps with stability.

[ 1 ] The base of the bell is usually a grating or deck which the divers can stand on, and folding seats may be fitted for the divers' comfort during ascent, as in-water decompression may be long. Other equipment that is carried on the bell includes cylinders with the emergency gas supply, and racks or boxes for tools and equipment to be used on the job. There may be a tackle for hoisting and supporting a disabled diver so that their head projects into the air space.

Type 1 wet bell [ edit ] The type 1 wet bell does not have an umbilical supplying the bell, because diver's umbilicals supply the divers directly from the surface, similar to a diving stage . Divers deploying from a type 1 bell will exit on the opposite side to where the umbilicals enter the bell so that the umbilicals pass through the bell and the divers can find their way back to the bell at all times by following the umbilical. Bailout from a type 1 bell is done by exiting the bell on the side that the umbilicals enter the bell so they no longer pass through the bell, leaving the divers free to surface.

Type 2 wet bell [ edit ] A gas panel inside the bell is supplied by the bell umbilical and the emergency gas cylinders, and supplies the divers' umbilicals and sometimes built-in breathing system (BIBS) sets. There will be racks to hang the divers' excursion umbilicals, which for this application must not be buoyant. Abandonment of a type 2 wet bell requires the divers to manage their own umbilicals as they ascend along a remaining connection to the surface.

Operation of a wet bell [ edit ] See also: Surface-supplied diving skills § Routine wet bell procedures , and Surface-supplied diving skills § Emergency wet bell procedures The bell with divers on board is deployed from the working platform (usually a vessel) by a crane , davit , or other mechanism with a man-rated winch. The bell is lowered into the water and to the working depth at a rate recommended by the decompression schedule, and which allows the divers to equalize comfortably. Wet bells with an air space will have the air space topped up as the bell descends and the air is compressed by increasing hydrostatic pressure . The air will also be refreshed as required to keep the carbon dioxide level acceptable to the occupants. The oxygen content is also replenished, but this is not the limiting factor, as the oxygen partial pressure will be higher than in surface air due to the depth.

When the bell is raised, the pressure will drop and excess air due to expansion will automatically spill under the edges. If the divers are breathing from the bell airspace at the time, it may need to be vented with additional air to maintain a low carbon dioxide level. The decrease in pressure is proportional to the depth as the airspace is at ambient pressure, and the ascent must be conducted according to the planned decompression schedule appropriate to the depth and duration of the diving operation.

Wet bell exterior view Wet bell interior showing bell gas panel Wet bell hoisting winch Wet bell supply gas panel (left) Wet bell supply gas panel (right) Wet bell umbilical deck storage Wet bell bailout gas cylinders Closed bell [ edit ] See also: Surface-supplied diving skills § Closed bell procedures , Human factors in diving equipment design § Diving chambers , and Saturation diving § Personnel transfer capsule Schematic of a dry bell with attached bell stage and separate clump weight Bell umbilical section A closed, or dry, bell, also known as a personnel transfer capsule or submersible decompression chamber, is a pressure vessel for human occupancy which is lowered into the sea to the workplace, equalised in pressure to the environment, and opened to allow the divers in and out.  These functional requirements dictate the structure and arrangement.  The internal pressure requires a strong structure, and a sphere or spherically ended cylinder is most efficient for this purpose. When the bell is underwater, it must be possible for the occupants to get in or out without flooding the interior. This requires a pressure hatch at the bottom. The requirement that the bell reliably retain its internal pressure when the external pressure is lowered dictates that the hatch open inward, so that internal pressure will hold it closed. The bell is lowered through the water to working depth, so must be negatively buoyant. This may require additional ballast, which may be attached by a system that can be released from inside the bell in an emergency, without losing pressure, to allow the bell to float back to the surface.

[ 16 ] Locking onto a deck decompression chamber or saturation system at the surface is possible either from the bottom or the side. Using the bell bottom hatch for this purpose has the advantage of only needing one hatch, and the disadvantage of having to lift the bell up and place it over a vertical entry to the chamber. A bell used in this way may be called a personnel transfer capsule. If decompression is done inside the bell, it may be referred to as a submersible decompression chamber.

[ 17 ] The bell bottom hatch must be wide enough for a large diver fully kitted with appropriate bailout cylinders , to get in and out without undue difficulty, and it can not be closed while the diver is outside as the umbilical is tended through the hatch by the bellman . It must also be possible for the bellman to lift the working diver in through the hatch if he is unconscious, and close the hatch after him, so that the bell can be sealed and pressurised for the ascent. A lifting tackle is usually fitted inside the bell for this purpose, and the bell may be partially flooded to assist the procedure.

[ 17 ] The internal space must be large enough for a fully kitted diver and bellman (the stand-by diver responsible for manning the bell while the working diver is locked out) to sit, and for their umbilicals to be stowed neatly on racks, and the hatch to be opened inwards while they are inside. Anything bigger will make the bell heavier than it really needs to be, so all equipment that does not need to be inside is mounted outside. This includes a framework to support the ancillary equipment and protect the bell from impact and snagging on obstacles, and the emergency gas and power supplies, which are usually racked around the framework. The emergency gas supply (EGS) is connected to the internal gas panel. The part of the framework that keeps the lower hatch off the bottom is called the bell stage . It may be removable, which can facilitate connection to a vertical access chamber lock. The bell umbilical is connected to the bell via through hull fittings (hull penetrations), which must withstand all operating pressures without leaking. The internal gas panel connects to the hull penetrations and the diver's umbilicals. The umbilicals will carry main breathing gas supply, a communications cable, a pneumofathometer hose, hot water supply for suit heating, power for helmet mounted lights, and possibly gas reclaim hose and video cable. The bell umbilical will usually also carry a power cable for internal and external bell lighting. Hydraulic power lines for tools do not have to pass into the interior of the bell as they will never be used there, and tools can also be stored outside. There may be an emergency through-water communications system with a battery power supply, and a location transponder working on the international standard 37.5 kHz.

[ 18 ] The bell may also have viewports and a medical lock.

A closed bell may be fitted with an umbilical cutter, a mechanism which allows the occupants to sever the bell umbilical from inside the sealed and pressurised bell in the event of an umbilical snag that prevents bell recovery. The device is typically hydraulically operated using a hand pump inside the bell, and can shear the umbilical at or just above the point where it is fastened to the top of the bell. Once cut, the bell can be raised and if the umbilical can then be recovered, it can be reconnected with only a short length lost.

[ 19 ] An external connection known as a hot stab unit which allows an emergency umbilical to be connected by a ROV or diver to maintain life support in the bell during a rescue operation may be fitted. Hot water, breathing gas, electrical power and communications connections are likely to be provided.

[ 20 ] The divers in the bell can be monitored from the diving control point by closed circuit video , [ 18 ] and the bell atmosphere can be monitored for volatile hydrocarbon contamination by a hyperbaric hydrocarbon analyser which can be linked to a topside repeater and set to give an alarm if the hydrocarbon levels exceed 10% of the anaesthetic level.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] The bell may be fitted with an external emergency battery power pack, carbon dioxide scrubber for the internal atmosphere, and air conditioner for temperature control. Power supply is typically 12 or 24V DC.

[ 20 ] The bell may be provided with ballast to give it negative buoyancy so that it will sink when lowered by the winch. It may be possible to release the ballast from inside the sealed bell for an emergency buoyant ascent in the event of a lifting winch failure. One such system allows the ballast to be lowered enough to allow the bell to rise two metres, giving more clearance to access the bottom hatch. After entering and sealing the bell, the occupants can complete the release, making the bell buoyant so it can float to the surface.

[ 16 ] A bell will be provided with equipment to rescue and treat an injured diver. This will normally include a small tackle to lift the disabled diver into the bell through the bottom hatch and secure them in an upright position if needed. A bell flooding valve, also known as a flood-up valve may be available to partially flood the interior to aid in lifting a disabled diver into the bell. Once inside and secure, the bell is cleared of water using the blow-down valve to fill the interior with breathing gas at ambient pressure and displace the water out through the hatch. A first aid kit will be carried.

[ 17 ] British mini-bell system [ edit ] A variant of this system used in the North Sea oilfields between early 1986 and the early 90s was the Oceantech Minibell system, which was used for bell-bounce dives , and was operated as an open bell for the descent, and as a closed bell for the ascent. The divers would climb into the bell after stowing their umbilicals on outside racks, remove their helmets for outside storage, seal the bell, and return to the surface, venting to the depth of the first decompression stop. The bell would then be locked onto a deck decompression chamber, the divers transferred under pressure to complete decompression in the chamber, and the bell would be available for use for another dive.

[ 23 ] Breathing gas distribution [ edit ] Breathing gas supplies for the bell comprise a primary gas supply, a reserve gas supply and an emergency gas supply carried on the bell. The divers will also carry bailout gas in scuba cylinders,  or as a semi-closed circuit rebreather , sufficient to get them back to the bellin the event of an umbilical supply failure.

Primary gas, or main gas supply may be compressed air, which is usually supplied by a low pressure breathing air compressor, or mixed gas, which is usually provided in manifolded clusters of high-pressure storage cylinders, commonly referred to as " quads ". Primary gas is connected to the main gas panel throughout the diving operation except when it fails or a problem is being corrected, during which time the divers are switched over to reserve gas.

Reserve gas, or secondary gas, which is connected to the main gas panel and available for immediate use by opening the supply valve, may also be supplied by low pressure compressor, or from high pressure storage. It has the same composition as the main gas supply.

Decompression gas , when used, is also supplied via the main gas panel. It may be the same gas as the primary gas, or an oxygen enriched mixture, or pure oxygen. Gas switching for in-water decompression in a wet bell is not the preferred procedure for commercial diving, as the entire breathing gas delivery system must be oxygen clean, and as a decompression chamber is required on site when a specified limit of obligatory decompression is planned, it is more convenient to do surface decompression on oxygen (SurDO 2 ) in the chamber. The relative safety of surface decompression and in-water decompression is uncertain. Both procedures are accepted by health and safety regulatory bodies.

Emergency gas is carried on the bell, usually in a small number of 50 litre high-pressure cylinders connected to the bell gas panel. This should be the same gas as the primary gas. On closed bells there is an additional supply of pure oxygen if the bell has a carbon dioxide scrubber for the bell atmosphere. On a type 2 wet bell or a closed bell this emergency gas can be distributed to the divers from the bell gas panel operated by the bellman, through the excursion umbilicals, .

Each diver carries an emergency gas supply (bailout gas) sufficient to get back to the bell under any reasonably foreseeable circumstances of umbilical supply failure of primary, reserve, and bell emergency gas supplies.

The main gas distribution panel is located at the control point for the diving operation, and operated by the gas man , who may also be a diver, or if the gas is air, it may be directly operated by the diving supervisor .

Bell gas panel [ edit ] The bell gas panel is a manifold of valves, pressure regulators, pipes, hoses and gauges mounted inside a closed bell, and under the canopy of a type 2 wet bell, and is operated by the bellman . When a helium reclaim system is in use, the return hose for the reclaimed gas passes through the bell gas panel and a back-pressure regulator on its way to the surface. The bell gas panel is supplied with primary and secondary gas supplies from the main gas panel through the bell umbilical, and with on-board emergency gas from the cylinders carried on the bell. Pressure of each gas supply is shown by a gauge on the panel before and after regulation.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] This section needs expansion with: Describe function of panel regarding distribution of gas in normal and emergency conditions [ 25 ] . You can help by adding to it .

( July 2025 ) Deployment of a modern diving bell [ edit ] Personnel Transfer Capsule – closed diving bell Diving bells are deployed over the side of the vessel or platform, or through a moonpool, using a gantry or A-frame from which the clump weight and the bell are suspended. On dive support vessels with in-built saturation systems the bell may be deployed through a moon pool . The bell handling system is also known as the launch and recovery system (LARS).

[ 26 ] The bell umbilical supplies gas to the bell gas panel, and is separate from the divers' excursion umbilicals, which are connected to the gas panel on the inside of the bell. The bell umbilical is deployed from a large drum or umbilical basket and care is taken to keep the tension in the umbilical low but sufficient to remain near vertical in use and to roll up neatly during recovery, as this reduces the risk of the umbilical snagging on underwater obstructions.

[ 26 ] Wet bell handling differs from closed bell handling in that there is no requirement to transfer the bell to and from the chamber system to make a pressure-tight connection, and that a wet bell will be required to maintain a finely controlled speed of descent and ascent and remain at a fixed depth within fairly close tolerances for the occupants to decompress at a specific ambient pressure, whereas a closed bell can be removed from the water without delay and the speed of ascent and descent is not critical.

A bell diving team will usually include two divers in the bell, designated as the working diver and bellman, though they may alternate these roles during the dive. The bellman is a stand-by diver and umbilical tender from the bell to the working diver, the operator of the on-board gas distribution panel, and has an umbilical about 2 m longer than the working diver to ensure that the working diver can be reached in an emergency. This can be adjusted by tying off the umbilicals inside the bell to limit deployment length, which must often be done in any case, to prevent the divers from approaching known hazards in the water. Depending on circumstances, there may also be a surface stand-by diver, with attendant, in case there is an emergency where a surface oriented diver could assist. The team will be under the direct control of the diving supervisor , will include a winch operator, and may include a dedicated surface gas panel operator.

[ 18 ] Clump weight [ edit ] Deployment of a diving bell usually starts by lowering the clump weight, which is a large ballast weight suspended in the bight of a cable which runs from a winch, over a sheave on one side of the gantry, down to the weight, round a pair of sheaves on the sides of the weight, and back up to the other side of the gantry, where it is fastened. The weight hangs freely between the two parts of the cable, and due to its weight, hangs horizontally and keeps the cable under tension. The bell hangs between the parts of the clump weight cable, and has a fairlead on each side which slides along the cable as it is lowered or lifted. Deployment of the bell is by a separate cable attached to the top, which runs over a sheave in the middle of the gantry. As the bell is lowered, the fairleads prevent it from rotating on the deployment cable, which would put twist into the umbilical and risk loops or snagging. The clump weight cables therefore act as guidelines or rails along which the bell is lowered to the workplace, and raised back to the platform. If the lifting winch or cable fails, and the bell ballast is released, a positively buoyant bell can float up and the cables will guide it to the surface to a position where it can be recovered relatively easily. The clump weight cable can also be used as an emergency recovery system, in which case both bell and weight are lifted together.

[ 26 ] An alternative system for preventing rotation on the lifting cable is the use of a cross-haul system , which may also be used as a means of adjusting the lateral position of the bell at working depth, and as an emergency recovery system.

[ 18 ] Bell stage [ edit ] A bell stage is an open framework below the bell which prevents the bell lower lock from getting too close to the clump weight or seabed, ensuring that there is space for the divers to safely exit and enter the bell. This can be deployed either as part of the bell, or as part of the clump weight. The bell stage may be fitted with baskets for carrying tools and equipment.

[ 27 ] Bell handling system [ edit ] A closed bell handling system is used to move the bell from the position where it is locked on to the chamber system into the water, lower it to the working depth and hold it in position without excessive movement, and recover it to the chamber system. The system used to transfer the bell on deck may be a deck trolley system, an overhead gantry or a swinging A-frame. The system must constrain movement of the supported bell sufficiently to allow accurate location on the chamber trunking even in bad weather. A bell cursor may be used to control movement through and above the splash zone, and heave compensation gear may be used to limit vertical movement when in the water and clear of the cursor, particularly at working depth when the diver may be locked out and the bell is open to ambient pressure.

[ 18 ] Bell cursor [ edit ] A bell cursor is a device used to guide and control the motion of the bell through the air and the splash zone near the surface, where waves can move the bell significantly. It can either be a passive system which relies on additional ballast weight or an active system which uses a controlled drive system to provide vertical motion. The cursor has a cradle which locks onto the bell and which moves vertically on rails to constrain lateral movement. The bell is released and locked onto the cursor in the relatively still water below the splash zone.

[ 26 ] [ 18 ] Heave compensation [ edit ] Heave compensation equipment is used to stabilise the depth of the bell by counteracting vertical movement of the handling system caused by movements of the platform, and usually also maintains correct tension on the guide wires. It is not usually essential, depending on the stability of the platform.

[ 18 ] Cross-hauling [ edit ] Cross-hauling is the use of a cable connected to the bell to move the bell laterally when this is useful, such as when the workplace is not close to directly below the LARS. Cross-hauling systems are cables from an independent lifting device, and may also be used to limit rotation and as an emergency bell recovery system.

[ 18 ] Use with hyperbaric chambers [ edit ] Commercial diving contractors generally use a closed bell in conjunction with a surface hyperbaric chamber , These have safety and ergonomic advantages and allow decompression to be carried out after the bell has been raised to the surface and back on board the diving support vessel . Closed bells are often used in saturation diving and undersea rescue operations. The diving bell would be connected via the mating flange of an airlock to the deck decompression chamber or saturation system for transfer under pressure of the occupants. A hyperbaric bell run is defined as the period between locking the bell off the system with one or more divers under pressure inside and locking back on again.

Air-lock diving bells [ edit ] An air-lock bell is a type of caisson with an access trunk that extends above the water surface, with an air-lock for access.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Barge with air-lock diving bell for working on moorings Service vessel with diving bell which can be lowered to 10 m and accessed via airlock and a 2 m diameter access tube The air lock diving-bell plant was a purpose-built barge for the laying, examination and repair of moorings for battleships [ 31 ] at Gibraltar harbour.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] It was designed by Siebe Gorman of Lambeth and Forrestt & Co. Ltd of Wivenhoe in Essex, who built and supplied it in 1902 to the British Admiralty .

[ 31 ] The vessel came about from the specific conditions at Gibraltar. The heavy harbour moorings have three chains extending out radially along the seabed from a central ring, each terminating in a large anchor. Most harbours have a soft seabed, and it is usual to lay down moorings by settling anchors in the mud, clay or sand but this could not be done in Gibraltar harbour, where the seabed is hard rock.

[ 34 ] In operation the barge would be towed over the work site, moored in place with anchors, and the bell would be lowered vertically to the bottom.

[ 32 ] and the water displaced by pumping. The work teams entered the bell through an airlock in the central access shaft. Working in ordinary clothes they could dig out anchorings for the moorings.

[ 34 ] The German service barge Carl Straat is similar in concept, but the bell is lowered by swinging the access tube.

Carl Straat was built in 1963 for the Waterways and Shipping Directorate West in Münster. The 6 m × 4 m × 2.5 m bell is accessible through a 2 m diameter tube and an airlock. A pantograph system keeps the bell and internal stairs level at all depths. Maximum working depth is 10 m. The vessel is used on those inland waterways which have locks large enough to accommodate its 52 m length overall, 11.8 m beam and 1.6 m draft.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Rescue bell [ edit ] A Swedish Navy submarine rescue diving bell from the early 1940s Diving bells have been used for submarine rescue . The closed, dry bell is designed to seal against the deck of the submarine above an escape hatch. Water in the space between the bell and the submarine is pumped out, and the pressure difference holds the bell against the submarine, so the hatches can be opened to allow occupants to leave the submarine and enter the bell. The hatches are then closed, the bell skirt flooded to release it from the submarine, and the bell with its load of survivors is hoisted back to the surface, where the survivors exit and the bell may return for the next group. The internal pressure in the bell is usually kept at atmospheric pressure to minimise run time by eliminating the need for decompression , so the seal between the bell skirt and the submarine deck is critical to the safety of the operation. This seal is provided by using a flexible sealing material, usually a type of rubber, which is pressed firmly against the smooth hatch surround by the pressure differential when the skirt is pumped out.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Observation bell [ edit ] The torretta butoscopica closed observation bell use on the salvage of the SS Egypt An observation bell is a closed bell, generally operated with internal pressure at atmospheric pressure, which provides an observation platform that can be lowered to depth with one or more occupants who can observe the environment through viewports, but are generally not provided with a means of interacting physically with the outside environment. The first observation bell was one of the first modern bells constructed in the late 19th century.

[ citation needed ] The bathysphere and observation bell are similar structures. A steel bathysphere created in 1930 by William Beebe and Otis Barton had three crystal glass windows made for observation. Observation bells for shallower depths generally use different designs to bathyspheres.

[ 39 ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( December 2022 ) Bell diving skills and procedures [ edit ] See also: Surface-supplied diving skills § Routine wet bell procedures , Surface-supplied diving skills § Emergency wet bell procedures , Surface-supplied diving skills § Routine closed bell procedures , and Surface-supplied diving skills § Emergency closed bell procedures Routine procedures for bell diving include preparation of the bell for the dive, descent and ascent, and monitoring of the working diver by the bellman. The bellman is responsible for ensuring that the bell and its occupants are ready for descent or ascent, and for communications with the surface for tenting the working diver's umbilical and for operation of the bell gas panel.

[ 40 ] A wet bell ascent usually includes decompression stops in the water, and sometimes surface decompression .

[ 40 ] Closed bell procedures also include locking in and locking out at depth, and transfer under pressure between bell and the saturation system or a deck decompression chamber.

[ 18 ] Emergency bell procedures include dynamic positioning alarm and runout response, emergency bell gas panel operations, such as surface gas supply failure or contaminated surface gas supply, both of which require bailout to onboard gas, hot water supply failure, and rescue of the working diver by the bellman. Voice communications failure requires appropriate use of emergency light and gas signals. Bell abandonment may be necessary if a wet bell cannot be raised, but saturation divers in a closed bell must be rescued in the bell or to another bell as they cannot be surfaced in-water.

[ 18 ] Hazards [ edit ] A closed bell that has been depressurised for maintenance access will probably retain residual diving breathing gas mixture, which will usually be hypoxic at normal atmospheric pressure, and could cause anyone who enters to lose consciousness quite rapidly. Helium based mixtures are buoyant and require active flushing with a strong flow of air, followed by testing for oxygen partial pressure before entry.

[ 41 ] The bell atmosphere can be contaminated by materials brought in by a diver who was exposed to the contaminants during the lock-out. These will depend on the working environment, and may include petrochemicals. This is a greater problem with closed bells.

[ 42 ] Like other pressure vessels for human occupancy, a fire inside a diving bell can be extremely dangerous to occupants. This is primarily a problem in closed bells, as occupants of open bells can generally immerse themselves in water and flood the bell to quickly extinguish a fire, and the interior is generally wet and not easy to ignite. Partial pressure of oxygen in the bell is generally limited to prevent oxygen toxicity and this is also a defence against ignition. In  saturation diving the bell atmosphere and breathing gas supply is generally the same as the accommodations atmosphere, which is carefully monitored and kept at a safe oxygen partial pressure for oxygen toxicity, which has an inherently low fire risk.

Diver training [ edit ] See also: Diver training Diver training using a wet bell Divers qualified to work from bells are trained in the skills and procedures relevant to the type of bell they will be expected to work from. Open bells are generally used for surface oriented surface-supplied deep air diving, and closed bells are used for saturation diving and surface oriented mixed gas diving. These skills include the standard procedures for the deployment of the working diver from the bell, the tending of the working diver from the bell by the bellman, and the emergency and rescue procedures for both working diver and bellman. There is considerable similarity and significant differences in these procedures between open and closed bell diving.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] Underwater habitats [ edit ] Main article: Underwater habitat As noted above, further extension of the wet bell concept is the moon-pool-equipped underwater habitat, where divers may spend long periods in dry comfort while acclimated to the increased pressure experienced underwater. By not needing to return to the surface between excursions into the water, they can reduce the necessity for decompression (gradual reduction of pressure), after each excursion, required to avoid problems with nitrogen bubbles releasing from the bloodstream (the bends , also known as caisson disease). Such problems can occur at pressures greater than 1.6 standard atmospheres (160 kPa), corresponding to a depth of 6 metres (20 ft) of water. Divers in an ambient pressure habitat will require decompression when they return to the surface. This is a form of saturation diving .

In nature [ edit ] The diving bell spider , Argyroneta aquatica , is a spider which lives entirely under water, even though it could survive on land.

Since the spider must breathe air, it constructs from silk a habitat like an open diving bell which it attaches to an underwater plant . The spider collects air in a thin layer around its body, trapped by dense hairs on its abdomen and legs. It transports this air to its diving bell to replenish the air supply in the bell. This allows the spider to remain in the bell for long periods, where it waits for its prey .

See also [ edit ] Bathysphere – Unpowered spherical deep-sea observation submersible lowered on a cable Benthoscope – Unpowered spherical deep-sea observation submersible lowered on a cable Caisson (engineering) – Rigid structure to provide workers with a dry working environment below water level Cofferdam – Barrier allowing liquid to be pumped out of an enclosed area Diving chamber – Hyperbaric pressure vessel for human occupancy used in diving operations Moon pool – Opening in the base of a hull, platform, or chamber giving access to the water below Timeline of diving technology – Chronological list of notable events in the history of underwater diving equipment Wet submarine – Ambient pressure diver propulsion vehicle References [ edit ] ^ a b "Modern diving bells and chambers" .

divingheritage.com . Diving Heritage.

Archived from the original on 3 May 2017 . Retrieved 22 February 2017 .

^ Bevan, J. (1999). "Diving bells through the centuries".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

29 (1).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 .

^ Bachrach, Arthur J. (Spring 1998).

"History of the Diving Bell" .

Historical Diving Times (21). Archived from the original on March 5, 2009.

^ Stoneman, Richard (1991).

The Greek Alexander romance . Penguin Books. Book 2, chapter 38.

ISBN 978-0-14-190711-6 .

OCLC 1004978007 .

^ Dönitz, Saskia (2011). "Chapter Two. Alexander The Great In Medieval Hebrew Traditions".

A companion to Alexander literature in the Middle Ages . Leiden: Brill. p. 24.

doi : 10.1163/ej.9789004183452.i-410.22 .

ISBN 978-90-04-21193-3 .

Alexander tries to explore the depths of the ocean with a diving bell, a story that Midrashic sources tell about Hadrian.

15 It is also found in Arab history books as well as in the Latin Cosmographia by Aethicus Ister (8th century), and in the Latin translation of Leo the Archpriest , the German Annolied (11th–12th century), and the Old French Prose Alexander (12th century).

^ Eliav, Joseph (2015).

"Guglielmo's Secret: The Enigmas of the First Diving Bell Used in Underwater Archaeology" .

The International Journal for the History of Engineering & Technology .

85 . Newcomen Society: 60– 69.

doi : 10.1179/1758120614Z.00000000060 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 .

^ a b Davis, R.H.

(1955).

Deep Diving and Submarine Operations (6th ed.). Tolworth, Surbiton, Surrey: Siebe Gorman & Company Ltd . p. 693.

^ Davis, Robert H. (1934).

"Deep Diving and Under-Water Rescue: Ii" .

Journal of the Royal Society of Arts .

82 (4267): 1049– 1065.

ISSN 0035-9114 .

JSTOR 41360195 .

Archived from the original on 2023-02-02 . Retrieved 2023-02-02 .

^ Winthrop, John .

"Winthrop's Journal, vol. 2" (PDF) .

North of Boston Library Exchange . pp.

67– 68. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 June 2020 . Retrieved 24 June 2020 .

^ "Timeline: 1663-1665 Fishing for cannons" .

www.vasamuseet.se . Vasa Museet.

Archived from the original on 23 September 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2017 .

^ "The Life of Sir William Phips Chapter 1: Spanish Treasure" .

Spanish Treasure and the Canada Townships . New Boston Historical Society.

Archived from the original on 9 April 2017 . Retrieved 3 October 2016 .

^ Acott, C. (1999). "A brief history of diving and decompression illness".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

29 (2).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 .

^ Edmonds, Carl; Lowry, C; Pennefather, John (1975). "History of diving".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

5 (2).

^ a b Kilfeather, Siobhan Marie (2005).

Dublin: A Cultural History . Oxford University Press. p. 63.

ISBN 9780195182019 .

^ "The Purisima Dive Bell" . Kirby Morgan. 25 November 2024.

Archived from the original on 18 December 2024 . Retrieved 18 June 2025 – via www.youtube.com.

^ a b "Bell Ballast Release System Bushings" .

www.comanex.fr .

Archived from the original on 28 June 2025 . Retrieved 28 June 2025 .

^ a b c Hamilton, R.W. (1984). "The diving environment". In Shilling, C.W.; Carlston, C.B.; Mathias, R.A. (eds.).

The Physician's Guide to Diving Medicine . New York: Plenum Press. p. 19.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4613-2671-7 .

ISBN 978-1-4612-9663-8 .

S2CID 21420467 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j "13 - Closed bell diving".

Guidance for diving supervisors IMCA D 022 (Revision 1 ed.). London, UK: International Marine Contractors Association. August 2016. pp.

13– 5.

^ "Umbilical cutter" .

Unique Group . Retrieved 22 June 2019 .

^ a b "Bell equipment brochure D-BE Issue 02/2015" (PDF) .

www.uniquegroup.com . February 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 April 2021 . Retrieved 24 June 2019 .

^ "Diving & Life Support: Analox HC Monitors - HYPER-GAS MKII" .

Unique Group . Archived from the original on 6 December 2017 . Retrieved 5 December 2017 .

^ "Hypergas Mk II Hyperbaric HC Monitor" (PDF) .

www.analoxsensortechnology.com . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 December 2017 . Retrieved 5 December 2017 .

^ Johns, Vic.

"British Mini bell system" .

divingheritage.com . Diving Heritage.

Archived from the original on 9 June 2016 . Retrieved 22 February 2017 .

^ Crawford, J. (2016). "8.5.1 Helium recovery systems".

Offshore Installation Practice (revised ed.). Butterworth-Heinemann. pp.

150– 155.

ISBN 9781483163192 .

^ a b Operation and Maintenance Manual for the Bell Gas Management Panel Part Number: A46983AA (PDF) .

Document Number: P1836-OM-296 (Report) (Revision: 3 ed.). JFD Divex.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 December 2023 . Retrieved 10 July 2025 .

^ a b c d Bevan, John, ed. (2005). "Section 5.1".

The Professional Divers's Handbook (second ed.). Gosport, UK: Submex Ltd. p. 200.

ISBN 978-0950824260 .

^ "100 Series Saturation Diving System Clump Weight Technical Overview FD36-0006 Rev. 0" (PDF) .

www.drass.tech . 21 September 2012.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 March 2023 . Retrieved 22 March 2023 .

^ Lowth, Cormac F. (July 2010).

"The Dublin Port Diving Bell" . National Maritime Museum of Ireland.

Archived from the original on 13 January 2025 . Retrieved 28 June 2025 .

^ "Diving bells and Observation chambers" .

www.divingheritage.com .

Archived from the original on 16 March 2025 . Retrieved 28 June 2025 .

^ Cassidy, Lisa.

"Diving bell, Sir John Rogerson's Quay, Dublin 2" .

builtdublin.com . Retrieved 28 June 2025 .

^ a b "Entrance to a Diving-Bell".

Illustrated London News : 1 (Cover). 25 March 1906.

An air-compression vessel, used for laying moorings for battleships, fitted with a diving-bell, the entrance to which is down the big funnel amidships. The headline painting here, appeared on the front cover of the Illustrated London News 25 March 1906 ^ a b Davis, R.H. (1909).

Diving Scientifically and Practically Considered. Being a Diving Manual and Handbook of Submarine Appliances (6th ed.). Tolworth, Surbiton, Surrey: Siebe Gorman & Company Ltd . p. 693.

^ "Modern Diving Bells" .

Popular Mechanics : 409. 1907 . Retrieved 30 April 2019 .

^ a b Barlow, Doug (1969).

"Getting down to the job" . Gibraltar Chronicle.

Archived from the original on 26 July 2004 . Retrieved 1 May 2019 .

^ "Taucherglockenschiff (TGS) "Carl Straat" " .

www.wsa-duisburg-rhein.wsv.de (in German). 2 January 2019. Archived from the original on 5 July 2010 . Retrieved 22 June 2010 .

^ "Taucherglockenschiff (TGS)"Carl Straat" " (PDF) .

www.wsa-duisburg-rhein.wsv.de . Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 June 2019 . Retrieved 22 June 2019 .

^ Hu, Y. (2019).

"Rescue Bell" . In Cui, W.; Fu, S.; Hu, Z. (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Ocean Engineering . Singapore: Springer. pp.

1– 4.

doi : 10.1007/978-981-10-6963-5_53-1 .

ISBN 978-981-10-6963-5 .

Archived from the original on 2020-11-08 . Retrieved 2024-10-30 .

^ "Submarine Rescue Capsule (SRC)" .

www.drass.tech .

Archived from the original on 7 October 2024 . Retrieved 30 October 2024 .

^ de Syon, Guillaume (2005).

"Submersibles" .

Credo Reference . Routledge.

Archived from the original on 14 December 2023 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 .

^ a b Guidance for diving supervisors IMCA D 022 , chpt. 11 Surface supplied air diving, sect. 8 Emergency and contingency plans ^ "Incident during entry to diving bell MCA SF 03/10" .

www.imca-int.com . 28 May 2010.

Archived from the original on 28 January 2023 . Retrieved 14 April 2024 .

^ "Bell contamination IMCA SF 10/07" .

www.imca-int.com . 20 December 2007.

Archived from the original on 22 May 2024 . Retrieved 14 April 2024 .

^ Class I Training Standard . South African Department of Labour. October 2007.

^ Class II Training Standard (Revision 5 ed.). South African Department of Labour. October 2007.

^ Technical Committee on Diving and Caisson Systems: Subcommittee on Diver Training (July 2005). Shanahan, Dave (ed.).

Occupational diver training Z275.5-05 . Mississauga, Ontario: Canadian Standards Association. pp. 42, 117, 221, 125, 135.

ISBN 1-55397-858-7 .

^ "Section 2".

Australian Standard AS2815.3-1992, Training and certification of occupational divers, Part 3: Air diving to 50m (2nd ed.). Homebush, New South Wales: Standards Australia. 1992. p. 9.

ISBN 0-7262-7631-6 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Diving bells .

Historical Diving Society: The History of the Diving Bell Historic diving bells Modern diving bells close call rapid depressurisation v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases National Germany Other NARA NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wgvvx
Cached time: 20250817044350
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.373 seconds
Real time usage: 1.628 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6592/1000000
Revision size: 64089/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 593587/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4951/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 197223/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.770/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19227210/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1187.379      1 -total
 38.12%  452.666      1 Template:Reflist
 16.62%  197.360      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 16.21%  192.444      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 15.68%  186.238     21 Template:Cite_web
  9.01%  107.024      1 Template:Poemquote
  8.76%  103.987      1 Template:Blockquote
  8.25%   97.902     35 Template:Navbox
  8.09%   96.091     14 Template:Cite_book
  8.02%   95.180      2 Template:Lang Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:654092:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044350 and revision id 1302409370. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Diving_bell&oldid=1302409370 " Categories : Diving support equipment Protective gear Hidden categories: Articles containing Middle English (1100-1500)-language text CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text Articles to be expanded from July 2025 All articles to be expanded All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Articles to be expanded from December 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 06:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Diving bell 25 languages Add topic

