Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Group mind (science fiction) 10 languages العربية Español Esperanto Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Plot device used in science-fiction stories A hive mind , group mind , group ego , mind coalescence , or gestalt intelligence in science fiction is a plot device in which multiple minds, or consciousnesses, are linked into a single collective consciousness or intelligence .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Overview [ edit ] "Hive mind" tends to describe a group mind in which the linked individuals have no identity or free will and are possessed or mind-controlled as extensions of the hive mind.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] It is frequently associated with the concept of an entity that spreads among individuals and suppresses or subsumes their consciousness in the process of integrating them into its own collective consciousness. The concept of the group or hive mind is an intelligent version of real-life superorganisms such as a beehive or an ant colony .

[ citation needed ] The first alien hive society was depicted in H. G. Wells 's The First Men in the Moon (1901) while the use of human hive minds in literature goes back at least as far as David H. Keller 's The Human Termites (published in Wonder Stories in 1929) and Olaf Stapledon 's science-fiction novel Last and First Men (1930), [ 5 ] [ 6 ] which is the first known use of the term "group mind" in science fiction.

[ 7 ] [ 2 ] The phrase "hive mind" in science fiction has been traced to Edmond Hamilton 's novel The Face of the Deep (published in Captain Future in 1942) referring to the hive mind of bees as a simile, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] then James H. Schmitz 's Second Night of Summer (1950).

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] A group mind might be formed by any fictional plot device that facilitates brain to brain communication, such as telepathy .

Some hive minds feature members that are controlled by a centralised "hive brain" or "hive queen," but others feature a decentralised approach in which members interact equally or roughly equally to come to decisions.

[ 12 ] The packs of Tines in Vernor Vinge 's A Fire Upon the Deep and The Children of the Sky are an example of such decentralized group minds.

[ 13 ] Hive minds are typically viewed in a negative light, especially in earlier works, but some newer works portray them as neutral or positive.

[ 5 ] [ 14 ] As conceived in speculative fiction , hive minds often imply (almost) complete loss (or lack) of individuality , identity , and personhood . However, while the individual members of a group mind may not have such things, the group mind as whole will have them, possibly even to greater degree than individual people (just like a human has more personhood than a single neuron cell). The individuals forming the hive may specialize in different functions, similarly to social insects .

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Psychology portal Science fiction portal All Tomorrows#Summary Borg Brain–brain communication Brain–computer interface Collective intelligence Crowd psychology Deindividuation Global brain Groupthink Herd mentality Insectoids in science fiction and fantasy Zerg , insectoid alien race in the StarCraft franchise " Legion ", group of demons in Christian mythology and the New Testament Parasites in fiction " Pod people ", parasitoid alien race in the 1956 film Invasion of the Body Snatchers Xenomorph , parasitoid alien race in the Alien and Alien vs. Predator franchises Sociobiology Swarm intelligence Telepathy Wisdom of the crowd References [ edit ] ^ "Coalescing minds: brain uploading-related group mind scenarios" by Kaj Sotala, Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki . January 2012.

^ a b Prucher, Jeff (2009).

"Group Mind n." .

Brave New Words: The Oxford Dictionary of Science Fiction . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 86.

ISBN 978-0-19-538706-3 .

OCLC 319869032 .

^ Prucher, Jeff (2009).

"Hive Mind n." .

Brave New Words: The Oxford Dictionary of Science Fiction . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

88– 89.

ISBN 978-0-19-538706-3 .

OCLC 319869032 .

^ "What is another word for "group mind"?" .

Word Hippo . Retrieved 2020-12-22 .

^ a b Stableford, Brian M; Langford, David (June 13, 2017).

"Hive Minds" . In Clute, John; Langford, David; Nicholls, Peter; Sleight, Graham (eds.).

The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction (3rd ed.). London: Gollancz.

^ Christensen, Bill.

"Group Ego by Robert Heinlein from Methuselah's Children" .

Technovelgy . Retrieved 2020-12-20 .

^ Sheidlower, Jesse (ed.).

"group mind n." .

Historical Dictionary of Science Fiction . Retrieved 2025-02-08 .

^ Sheidlower, Jesse (ed.).

"hive mind n." .

Historical Dictionary of Science Fiction . Retrieved 2025-02-08 .

^ Christensen, Bill.

"Hive Mind by Edmond Hamilton from The Face of the Deep" .

Technovelgy . Retrieved 2025-02-08 .

^ Zimmer, Ben (2015-12-29).

" 'Hive Mind,' From Beekeeping to Economics" .

Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 0099-9660 . Retrieved 2020-12-20 .

^ Prucher, Jeff (2009).

"Hive Mind n." .

Brave New Words: The Oxford Dictionary of Science Fiction . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

88– 89.

ISBN 978-0-19-538706-3 .

OCLC 319869032 .

^ Sokol, Joshua (2019-05-14).

"Striking Down the Queen Won't Save You From the Swarm (Published 2019)" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2020-12-03 .

^ Vernor Vinge, The Children of the Sky , Tor, 2011, p. 167 ^ Stableford, Brian M. (Jan 1, 1987).

The Sociology of Science Fiction (PDF) (PhD). University of York.

Further reading [ edit ] Science Fiction and the Prediction of the Future: Essays on Foresight and Fallacy by Wong King Yuen, McFarland (2011) The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy: Themes, Works, and Wonders · Volume 3 by Gary Westfahl, Greenwood Press (2005) Philosophers Look at Science Fiction by Nicholas D. Smith, Nelson-Hall (1982) Science Fiction in Classic Rock: Musical Explorations of Space, Technology and the Imagination, 1967-1982 by Robert McParland, McFarland (2017) Brave New Words : The Oxford Dictionary of Science Fiction by Jeff Brucher, Oxford University Press (2007) External links [ edit ] Look up hivemind in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Entries on group mind and hive mind at Historical Dictionary of Science Fiction Miguel Nicolelis' Brain-net v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Group_mind_(science_fiction)&oldid=1303906189 " Categories : Fictional collective consciousnesses Fictional superorganisms Science fiction themes Collective intelligence Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2009 This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 19:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Group mind (science fiction) 10 languages Add topic

