Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Selected works 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Li Minqi 9 languages تۆرکجه Deutsch فارسی Français مصرى Português Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese political economist, world-systems analyst and historical social scientist In this Chinese name , the family name is Li .

Li Minqi Li Minqi speaking on Subversive Festival (2009) Born 1969 (age 55–56) Alma mater Beijing University University of Massachusetts Amherst Known for Chinese New Left World-systems approach Scientific career Fields Political economy Marxism World systems theory Chinese economy Institutions University of Massachusetts Amherst York University University of Utah Part of a series about Imperialism studies Theories Cultural imperialism Dependency theory Economic imperialism Expansionism Intercommunalism Irredentism Linguistic imperialism Neo-Gramscianism Neocolonialism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Ultra-imperialism World-systems theory Concepts Conquest Great power Hegemony North–South model Unequal exchange Balance of trade Global labor arbitrage Ecological Sphere of influence Superprofit Uneven and combined development War of aggression People Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Paul A. Baran Charles Bettelheim Nikolai Bukharin Arghiri Emmanuel John Bellamy Foster Andre Gunder Frank Michael Hardt Rudolf Hilferding Peter Gowan J. A. Hobson Vladimir Lenin Mirsaid Sultan-Galiev Li Minqi Rosa Luxemburg Antonio Negri Kwame Nkrumah Huey P. Newton Walter Rodney Paul Sweezy Leon Trotsky Immanuel Wallerstein Works The Accumulation of Capital Empire How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Imperialism Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism Monopoly Capital Multitude Naked Imperialism Related Banana republic Economic development Illicit financial flows List of irredentist claims or disputes Global North and Global South Neofunctionalism Prebisch–Singer hypothesis Third-worldism Category:Imperialism studies v t e Part of a series on New Left in China Ideologies Communism Left communism Chinese nationalism Left-wing Marxism Marxism–Leninism Maoism Postmodernism Social democracy Socialism Feminism Principles Anti-capitalism Anti-corruption Anti-imperialism Environmentalism Income redistribution Equality Market intervention New Left Social justice Sustainability Workers' self-management Maoist factions Anti-revisionism Continuous Revolution Theory Mass line History Chongqing model History of the Chinese Communist Party Jasic incident Lang–Gu dispute New Enlightenment New Rural Reconstruction Movement Red culture movement Reform and opening up People Bo Cui Dai Gao Hu Kong Lang Li Qiu Sima Wang (Hui) Wang (Lijun) Wang (Shaoguang) Wang (Weizhong) Yue Parties Chinese Communist Party (factions) Maoist Communist Party of China Zhi Xian Party Literature Contemporary Chinese Thought and the Question of Modernity One China, Many Paths Organisations Chinese Left-wing Youth Jasic Workers Solidarity Group Peking University Marxist Society Media Dushu Related topics Capitalist roader Cultural Revolution Feminism in China Chinese communism Income inequality in China Labor relations in China 996 working hour system Delivery Knights Alliance Foxconn suicides Li Hongyuan incident Tonghua Iron and Steel Group riot LGBTQ rights in China New Left in Japan Politics of China Chinese socialism Liberalism Neoauthoritarianism Red Song Society Utopia (internet forum) Socialism portal Communism portal China portal v t e Li Minqi (born 1969) is a Chinese political economist , world-systems analyst, and historical social scientist , currently professor of economics at the University of Utah .

[ 1 ] Li is known as an advocate of the Chinese New Left and as a Marxian economist .

[ 2 ] Biography [ edit ] Li was a student at the Economic Management Department of Beijing University during the period 1987–90. There he studied and became convinced of neoliberal 'Chicago School' economics. He engaged in many protests of the existing economic system, and engaged in much activism after the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 .

Li was arrested after advocating free market principles in 1990, and made a vast switch to become a Marxist after extensive reading of the works of Karl Marx , Mao Zedong , and others while a political prisoner until his release in 1992.

[ 3 ] Li spent the next two years traveling in China, debating with remaining liberal dissident activists and conducting his own research into political, economic, and social development in modern China, using fake identification to visit provincial and city libraries. His view became one opposed to the mainstream, being that Mao Zedong 's influence was a "revolutionary legacy rather than a historical burden for future socialist revolutionaries." [ 4 ] In 1994, he authored the book Capitalist Development and Class Struggle in China , [ 5 ] which consisted of an analysis of the economic development of China in the Maoist era and the 1980s , as well as a Marxist analysis of the 1989 "democratic movement" , arguing that it was not a popular democratic movement and was abandoned by the liberal intellectuals, led to the physical and ideological slaughter of the urban working class, and led to a victory of the bureaucratic capitalists. He attempted to show that this paved the way for China's transition to Capitalism . He criticized neoliberal economics and its relation to economic rationality, inherent contradictions between democracy and capitalism, and the social and material conditions that had led to China's rise with a conclusion focusing on a criticism of state-capitalism and advocating democratic socialism .

[ 6 ] After firmly completing a political and intellectual break with the mainstream Chinese liberal tradition and their political counterparts, he established himself as a revolutionary Marxist. Li arrived in the United States on December 25, 1994, and became a graduate student at the University of Massachusetts Amherst [B.A. (summa cum laude) Economics University of Delaware (1996)]. Since then, he has been among the foremost promoters of the Chinese "New Left." [ 7 ] Li went on to author many Marxist articles for Monthly Review in this period, notably "After Neoliberalism: Empire, Social Democracy, or Socialism?".

[ 8 ] In 2001 Li's focus shifted to World Capitalist Systems , and the work of Immanuel Wallerstein in particular. Inspired by Wallerstein's arguments, he wrote a Chinese article, "Reading Wallerstein's Capitalist World-Economy—And the China Question in the First Half of the 21st Century," being the first economist to link the "rise of China" to the demise of capitalism. The article gained popularity among the New Left in China without his knowledge, and was published in Currents of Thought: China's New Left and Its Influences which he found by surprise while browsing in a Chinese bookstore in Philadelphia .

[ 9 ] In late 2001 he expanded his study of China in relation to World-Systems in a critique of Jiang Zemin 's theory of Chinese social strata (a refutation of Marxist social relations from a Chinese perspective, arguing that China is moving towards a "middle-class society"), in his "China's Class Structure from the World-System's Perspective." Li argued that China's economic rise would in fact greatly destabilize the capitalist world-economy in various ways and contribute to its final demise. Building upon his previous two papers, he wrote "The Rise of China and the Demise of the Capitalist World-Economy: Historical Possibilities of the 21st Century." [ 10 ] He then incorporated these and several other papers into his book "The Rise of China and the Demise of the Capitalist World-Economy" [ 5 ] in 2009, in which he argued, based upon an analysis of environmental data in relation to the Capitalist world economy, that the only way to avoid the inevitable collapse of civilization is to adopt a socialist world government by the middle of the 21st century.

From 2003 to 2006, he taught graduate and undergraduate courses on political economy at York University in Toronto, Ontario , Canada, and then went on to teach at the University of Utah , where he currently teaches.

He later worked on translation of Ernest Mandel 's "Power and Money" into Chinese with Meng Jie, [ citation needed ] and was an analyst of Chinese issues in 2008 for The Real News .

[ 11 ] Selected works [ edit ] China and the Twenty-First Century Crisis. London: Pluto Press (October 2015) The Rise of China and the Demise of the Capitalist World-Economy. London: Pluto Press ; New York: Monthly Review Press (November 2008 / January 2009).

The Rise of China and the Demise of the Capitalist World Economy . NYU Press. March 2009.

ISBN 978-1-58367-182-5 .

Three Essays on China's State Owned Enterprises: Towards An Alternative to Privatization. Hamburg: VDM Verlag (October 2008).

'Socialism, Capitalism, and Class Struggle: the Political Economy of Modern China,' Economic and Political Weekly, XLIII(52): 77–96, December 27, 2008 – January 2, 2009.

'Climate Change, Limits to Growth, and the Imperative for Socialism,' Monthly Review, 60:3 (July–August 2008), pp. 51–67.

'An Age of Transition: The United States, China, Peak Oil, and the Demise of Neoliberalism,' Monthly Review, 59:11 (April 2008), pp. 20–34.

Minqi, Li; Chaohua, Wang; Dan, Wang (May–June 1999).

"A Dialogue on the Future of China" .

New Left Review .

I (235). New Left Review.

'Response to Lau's "China: Labour Reform and the Challenge Facing the Working Class",' Capital and Class , 65 (1998).

See also [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Li Minqi .

Tiananmen Square protests of 1989 Immanuel Wallerstein World-systems approach Chinese New Left References [ edit ] ^ "MINQI LI - Home - Faculty Profile - the University of Utah" .

^ Grassroots political reform in contemporary China .

Elizabeth J. Perry , Merle Goldman ^ Preface: My 1989 to: Li, Minqi.

The Rise of China and the Demise of the Capitalist World Economy.

Monthly Review Press, 2009. Print.

^ Page xvi, Li, Minqi.

The Rise of China and the Demise of the Capitalist World Economy.

Monthly Review Press , 2009. Print.

^ a b "Minqi Li, Dr" .

www.econ.utah.edu . Archived from the original on 2008-09-07.

^ Li, Minqi. "CAPITALIST DEVELOPMENT AND CLASS STRUGGLES IN CHINA." 1993-1996. 6 Aug 2009 < http://www.econ.utah.edu/~mli/Capitalism%20in%20China/Index.htm Archived 2012-07-01 at the Wayback Machine >.

^ Page xvii, Li, Minqi.

The Rise of China and the Demise of the Capitalist World Economy.

Monthly Review Press, 2009. Print.

^ "Monthly Review | After Neoliberalism. Empire, Social Democracy, or Socialism" . January 2004.

^ Page xviii, Li, Minqi.

The Rise of China and the Demise of the Capitalist World Economy.

Monthly Review Press, 2009. Print.

^ 'The Rise of China and the Demise of the Capitalist World-Economy: Exploring the Historical Possibilities in the 21st Century,' Science & Society, 69:3 (2005), pp. 420-448.

^ "T. Boone's Windy Misadventure" . 22 July 2016.

v t e Chinese New Left Ideologies Anti-capitalism Communism Left communism Proletarian internationalism (only some people) Chinese nationalism Left-wing nationalism Marxism Marxism-Leninism Maoism Anti-revisionism Continuous revolution theory Mass line New Left Post-modernism Socialism Socialist feminism Conservatism (only some people) Figures Bo Xilai Cui Zhiyuan Dai Jinhua Gan Yang Gao Mobo Hu Angang Li Minqi Kong Qingdong Larry Hsien Ping Lang Qiu Zhanxuan Sima Nan Wang Hui Wang Shaoguang Yue Xin Websites Mao Zedong Flag Red Song Society Utopia Organizations Jasic Workers Solidarity Group Maoist Communist Party of China Peking University Marxist Society Zhi Xian Party Publications Contemporary Chinese Thought and the Question of Modernity Dushu One China, Many Paths Events Chongqing model Jasic incident Lang–Gu dispute New Rural Reconstruction Movement Red culture movement Related topics Cultural Revolution Feminism in China Chinese communism Income inequality in China Labor relations in China 996 working hour system Delivery Knights Alliance Foxconn suicides Li Hongyuan incident Tonghua Iron and Steel Group riot LGBTQ rights in China Reform and opening up Category v t e Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous Revolution Theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Salmin Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965–1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Peruvian Revolution Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Peru – Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Proletarian Party of East Bengal Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People – Communist League Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National communism National Democracy Movement Naxalism Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Korea Israel Academics Scopus Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Li_Minqi&oldid=1294459701 " Categories : Living people Chinese anti-capitalists Chinese economists Chinese communists Maoist theorists Anti-revisionists University of Massachusetts Amherst alumni Marxian economists University of Utah faculty 1969 births Chinese New Left Chinese Marxists Chinese Maoists Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2020 This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 21:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Li Minqi 9 languages Add topic

