Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 BOM and CSIRO resources 3 Some Aboriginal seasons Toggle Some Aboriginal seasons subsection 3.1 North coast – Yolngu seasons 3.2 Central – Anangu Pitjantjajara seasons 3.3 South-west – Noongar seasons 4 Torres Strait Islands seasons 5 Sources 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Indigenous Australian seasons Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Systems of weather seasons used by Indigenous Australians Indigenous Australian seasons are classified differently from the traditional four-season calendar used by most western European peoples.

Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islander people have distinct ways of dividing the year up. Naming and understanding of seasons differs among groups of Aboriginal peoples , and depends on where in Australia the group lives.

The Australian Bureau of Meteorology and the CSIRO have both worked with various groups to produce information about a number of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander seasonal calendars.

Background [ edit ] Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples observe the position of the stars in the sky and follow water, plant and animal cycles as ways of identifying seasonal phenomena. The seasonal calendars of different Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultural groups demonstrate an understanding of the interdependence and interrelationships amongst living things. They use their calendars to predict seasonal changes and weather patterns to determine the availability of particular resources or the timing of journeys.

[ 1 ] The seasonal calendars vary according to geographic location, ecological context and cultural interpretation. Specific biotic events , often referred to as bio-indicators , can occur locally or over great distances, enabling accurate predictions of seasonal changes. For instance, the appearance of particular insect species may be an indication that the wet season is approaching, indicating that it is time to harvest yams . Observations of cyclical animal behavioural patterns are also important, for example when the D'harawal people of the Sydney basin area hear the mating cries of tiger quolls , the lillipilli fruit has started to ripen. Once the fruit starts falling, it is a sign for the people of this country to begin their annual journey to the coast, to seek out other seasonal resources.

[ 1 ] Seasonal calendars continue to be used by many groups today. The publication of First Nations' calendars has revealed the immense scientific knowledge held by the respective communities and has informed Western scientific understandings across a wide range of disciplines, for example, botany , zoology , ecology , meteorology and many more.

[ 1 ] BOM and CSIRO resources [ edit ] The Bureau of Meteorology (BOM) and the CSIRO have both worked with various groups to produce Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander seasonal calendars.

[ 2 ] BOM has produced an interactive map, [ 3 ] and both BOM and the CSIRO have also documented the seasonal calendars of many Aboriginal groups in detail.

[ 4 ] Both sites provide downloadable and printable posters showing each group's calendar.

[ 2 ] Some Aboriginal seasons [ edit ] North coast – Yolngu seasons [ edit ] See also: Gove Peninsula § Yolngu seasons The Yolngu , the Aboriginal Australians of north-east Arnhem Land , identify six seasons. Non-Indigenous people living in the Top End usually identify two: the wet and the dry . (Arguably, the build-up period between dry and wet is coming to be identified as a distinct third season.) The six Yolngu seasons, and their characteristics, are: [ citation needed ] Season name Period Weather Flora and fauna Seasonal activities Mirdawarr Late March, April End of wet season with scattered showers. Wind in south-east quarter but air still hot and humid.

Vegetable foods becoming plentiful. Fish numerous.

People generally sedentary & living in big camps. Nomadic movement restricted by floodwaters. Long rank grass and mosquitoes.

Macassar traders used to depart at this time with south-east winds. Goose-hunting expeditions into swamps. Fishing, especially large-scale communal fishing operations and drives where floodwaters receding; including basket traps in weirs, nets and the gurl in use only in the valley of the Glyde River .

Dhaarratharramirri Late April, May, June, July, August South-east or dry season. Wind in east and south-east People nomadic; big wet-season camps breaking up.

Systematic burning of all extensive grassed areas, communal drives for kangaroo , bandicoots , goanna . Fishing still important, with nets, grass barriers, in shallow waters on plains & salt pans. August to November (inclusive) is the most important period for ceremonial activities.

Rarranhdharr September, October Hot dry season. Hot periods towards close of dry (south-east) season. Wind chiefly north-east, lightning frequent and first thunder heard.

Stringybark in flower.

Nomadic activities lessen after burning of grass. Poisoning of fish in waters now concentrated by evaporation. Fish spearing continues in estuarine & coastal waters. Important ceremonial time.

Worlmamirri Late October, November, December The 'nose of the wet season', with or bringing thunder - late October. Period of maximum heat and humidity immediately before the rain season, characterised by violent thunder storms of increasing frequency.

Nomadic activities much restricted. People generally in camps near permanent water.

Baarramirri Late December, January Short season with wind in north-west; breaking of the wet. Also called munydjutjmirri from the fruit of munydjutj . Two kinds of north-west wind recognised: (i) Baarra yindi , the big, or male, baarra ; (ii) Baarra nyukukurniny , the small, or female, baarra . The first refers to the more boisterous north-west gales, the second to the gentler breezes from the north-west.

Macassar fleets used to arrive with north-west winds and disperse to regular sites for trepang fishing. People concentrated in wet season camps leading almost sedentary life. Inland travel restricted by floods and dense growth of rank grass.

Gurnmul or Waltjarnmirri January, February, March Wet season proper. Two phases, the first, girritjarra is again subdivided into three.

People concentrated in camps. Inland travel restricted by floods.

Central – A n angu Pitjantjajara seasons [ edit ] The A n angu Pitjantjatjara of northern South Australia and the southern part of the Northern Territory live in central Australia. Examples of some of their seasons include: Season name Period Weather Flora and fauna Seasonal activities Wanitjunkupai April, May The beginning of the cold weather.  Clouds start around April but usually don't bring rain. They come from the south, brought mainly by westerly winds, and sit low over the hills till late in the day.

Reptiles hibernate. ( Wanitjunkupai literally means "hibernate").

Wari Late May, June, July The cold time when there is frost and mist or dew every morning, but little rain.

Piriyakutu / Piriya-Piriya ~August, September This is when the priya comes – a warm steady wind from the north and west.

Animals breed. Food plants flower, fruit and seed. Hibernating reptiles come out and the honey grevillea is in bloom.

A good time for hunting kangaroo.

Mai Wiyaringkupai / Kuli ~December Hottest season.  Storm clouds and lightning, but little rain. Lightning strikes can start fires.

Not much food around at this time.

Itjanu / Inuntjji January, February, March Overcast clouds usually bring rain.

Food plants flower. If rains are good there is plenty of fruit and seed.

South-west – Noongar seasons [ edit ] See also: Noongar § Seasons , and Whadjuk § Seasonal divisions Noongar seasons do not follow a rigid cycle; timing is dependent on subtle changes in the weather with wind, rain and temperature. The cycles are part of katitjin-bidi or "knowledge trails" that lead groups to reliable sources of food and water.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The seasons are named as follows by the Whadjuk Noongar people of Perth : [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Season name Period Weather Flora and fauna Seasonal activities Bunuru (second summer) February, March Hot, dry, easterly and north winds.

Fish – tailor and mullet – in shallow water.

Macrozamia riedlei fruiting.  Wattle ( Acacia ) and banksia in blossom.

Trapping fish (coasts and estuaries).  Collecting frogs , marron , gilgies , tortoises from wetlands .  Climbing trees for possums .  Collecting Macrozamia fruit and removing toxin.  Pounding the horizontal rhizomes of the bulrush ( Typha domingensis ) into a cake and roasting it.  Collecting the bulb of Haemodorum spicatum and roasting for a spice .  Collecting wattle and banksia blossoms and various roots.

Djeran (autumn) April, May Cooling, south-west winds.

Group fishing at lakes and weirs (inland). Continued fishing at estuaries.  Collecting edible bulbs and seeds.

Makuru (winter) June, July Cold, rain, westerly gales.

Black swans begin moulting, making them unable to fly.

Moving inland to hunt, when the watersheds fill.  Hunting black swans.  Collecting Tribonanthus tubers .  Keeping warm by holding smouldering bull Banksia branches ( Banksia grandis ) beneath bookas (skin cloaks).

Djilba (first spring) August, September Warming.

Collecting roots.  Digging out Platysace cirrosa tubers from under wandoo .  Hunting of emus , quenda , kangaroos, possums.

Kambarang (second spring) October, November Rain lessening.

Astroloma and desert quandong ( Santalum acuminatum ) fruiting.

Movement to the coast.  Sweet gum gathered by removing the bark from the WA Christmas tree ( Nuytsia floribunda ).  Collection of yams ( Dioscorea hastifolia and Platysace cirrosa ).  Collection of eggs from waterfowl and other birds.  Catching of tortoises, frogs, gilgie.  Trapping of possums and kangaroos.

Birak (first summer) December, January Hot, dry, daytime easterly breezes, late afternoon south-west sea breezes .

Banksia in flower.

Gathering banksia flowers for honey.  Catching bronzewing pigeons .  Controlled burning for hunting, and to assist regrowth.

Torres Strait Islands seasons [ edit ] In the Torres Strait Islands , the seasons are associated with the way the wind blows and changes in the environment. The four seasons based on the wind are known as  Kuki, Zey (Zei in Masig ) and Nay Gay (Nai Gai in Masig) and Sager (Zoerr): [ 9 ] [ 10 ] During Kuki, from January until April, the strong north-west winds (strong winds) and bring the wet season (monsoon).

From May to December it is Sager/Zoerr, when the south-east trade winds blow, and the weather is dry.

Southerly winds blow at different and unpredictable times during the year, and these times are known as Zey/Zei.

During Nay Gay/Naigai, from October through to December, northerly winds predominate, bringing high heat and humidity.

The people of Masig (otherwise known as Yorke Island), known as the Masigalgal, are part of the Kulkulgal nation of the central Torres Strait. The timing and duration of these four seasons varies from year to year, and Masig islanders observe signs in the winds, weather, sea life, plants and animals that tell them when one season is expected to change to another. Community celebrations, hunting, gardening and cultural activities are based around this annual cycle of resource availability and renewal.

[ 10 ] Sources [ edit ] ^ a b c "Teacher background information: Year 7 Science content description" .

The Australian Curriculum . 13 June 2014.

Archived from the original on 11 March 2022 . Retrieved 16 July 2020 .

Text was copied from this source, which is available under an Attribution 4.0 International  (CC BY 4.0) licence, as per this note .

^ a b "Australia's national weather agencies now provide Indigenous weather information" .

Welcome To Country . 25 May 2018 . Retrieved 16 July 2020 .

^ "Indigenous Weather Knowledge: Select a community to view their seasonal calendar" .

Bureau of Meteorology . Retrieved 16 July 2020 .

^ "Indigenous seasons calendars" .

CSIRO . Retrieved 16 July 2020 .

^ Collard, F.; Wally, J.; Bennell, B.

"Six Seasons - Nyungar Life on the Coastal Plain" .

Derbal Nara . Retrieved 12 October 2022 .

^ Barrow, Jason (2016).

"Indigenous Weather Knowledge – Nyoongar calendar" .

Bureau of Meteorology . Commonwealth of Australia . Retrieved 12 October 2022 .

The Nyoongar seasonal calendar includes six different seasons in a yearly cycle. These are Birak, Bunuru, Djeran, Makuru, Djilba and Kambarang.

^ Swan River System, Landscape Description (Report No 27/28 1997), 6. Resource Inventory, 6.2 Cultural Context pp41–42 Lisa Chalmers (Waterways Management Planning, Water and Rivers Commission ), for the Swan River Trust .  The section references Hunters And Gatherers , Landscope Volume 8 , 1, 31–35, (P. Bindon & T. Walley, 1993) and Broken Spears: Aboriginals and Europeans in the South West of Australia , Perth: Focus (N. Green, 1984).

Portal page for the entire report .  Retrieved 9 June 2007.

^ Logan, Tyne (31 March 2023).

"How Indigenous Australians rely on subtle changes in the environment to track the seasons" .

ABC News .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 30 March 2023 .

^ "Torres Strait" .

Gab Titui . 29 May 2015 . Retrieved 16 July 2020 .

^ a b "Masig calendar - Indigenous Weather Knowledge" .

Bureau of Meteorology . Retrieved 16 July 2020 .

Text was copied from this source, which is available under a Attribution 3.0 Australia (CC BY 3.0 AU) licence, as in this note .

Entwisle, Timothy 2014, Sprinter and Sprummer , Melbourne ISBN 9781486302031 .

Thomson, D., & Peterson, N., 1983, Donald Thomson in Arnhem Land , Miegunyah Press , Melbourne. Revised ed. publ. 2003, ISBN 0-522-85063-4 , pp172–3.

Ulu r u—Kata Tju t a National Park Visitor guide, Welcome to Aboriginal land , Colemans Printing, Darwin, January 2006, pp24–25.

Further reading [ edit ] "Indigenous Weather Knowledge: Language, culture and environmental knowledge" .

Bureau of Meteorology .

v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐5cf8f5fb49‐zg5hq
Cached time: 20250812012823
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.325 seconds
Real time usage: 0.418 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1303/1000000
Revision size: 17272/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 53998/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1775/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 51009/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.191/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5992223/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  346.417      1 -total
 34.04%  117.917      1 Template:Reflist
 29.46%  102.038     10 Template:Cite_web
 22.09%   76.532      1 Template:Short_description
 20.39%   70.620      1 Template:Indigenous_Australians
 20.23%   70.064      2 Template:Navbox
 13.56%   46.988      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.28%   28.685      1 Template:Cn
  7.28%   25.206      1 Template:Fix
  5.45%   18.880      2 Template:Also Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:8413554:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812012823 and revision id 1279730326. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indigenous_Australian_seasons&oldid=1279730326 " Categories : Australian Aboriginal bushcraft Australian Aboriginal words and phrases Climate of Australia Seasons Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2020 Use Australian English from July 2011 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 This page was last edited on 10 March 2025, at 06:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Indigenous Australian seasons Add languages Add topic

