Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Independence period 1.2 Petroleum boom 1.3 Chavismo and crisis 2 By country Toggle By country subsection 2.1 Bolivia 2.2 Brazil 2.3 Chile 2.4 Colombia 2.5 Curaçao 2.6 Ecuador 2.7 Hungary 2.8 Iran 2.9 Panama 2.10 Peru 2.11 Trinidad and Tobago 3 Internet 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents List of incidents of xenophobia during the Venezuelan refugee crisis 1 language Español Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( March 2022 ) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's notability guideline for stand-alone lists .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "List of incidents of xenophobia during the Venezuelan refugee crisis" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Acts and displays of prejudice , xenophobia , discrimination , violence , and racism against Venezuelan migrants have intensified in the 2010s due to the Venezuelan refugee crisis .

[ 1 ] Background [ edit ] Independence period [ edit ] Flag of Ecuador between 1845 and 1861 ( Época Marcista ), used in place of the Bolivarian tricolor that was then associated with the dictatorship of Venezuelan general Juan José Flores .

After the Spanish American wars of independence , Venezuelans came to hold key positions in the administration of the nascent republics. This unleashed the resentment of the local populations, who held revolts to expel the foreigners. In September 1828 in Bogotá , the Septembrina Conspiracy was carried out; this was an attempt to assassinate the leader Simón Bolívar , who was supported by the Venezuelan military and in opposition to the generals and Nueva-Granadian lawyers led by Francisco de Paula Santander . These events would lead to the dissolution of the Bolivarian projects of Gran Colombia and New Granada (today Colombia and Panama ) three years later, with Ecuador and Venezuela achieving total independence.

[ 2 ] For his part, Bolívar also imposed an authoritarian regime in Peru , where Venezuelan troops committed various abuses. The unpopular Bolivarian Constitution was repealed in 1827 and Peru went to war with Gran Colombia the following year, shortly after intervening in Bolivia in support of the rebels who wished to overthrow the regime of the Venezuelan Antonio José de Sucre .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] In Ecuador, the Venezuelan Juan José Flores continued to rule as a dictator until 1845, the year in which the Marcista Revolution or Nationalist Revolution occurred, an uprising that had among its objectives the expulsion foreign troops that still remained in the country.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Petroleum boom [ edit ] The emergence of the oil boom in the 1970s led to unparalleled economic growth in Venezuela. This caused Venezuelans to be stereotyped as opulent, arrogant or " agringados ", partly due to the xenophobia they committed against the population of border regions and against the increased numbers of migrants who moved to the country.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Chavismo and crisis [ edit ] Part of a series on the Crisis in Venezuela Causes Bolivarian Revolution Chavismo Economic policy under Hugo Chávez Economic policy under Nicolás Maduro Effects Refugee crisis Energy crisis 2019 blackouts 2024 blackouts Zulia energy collapse Defections International sanctions U.S. sanctions Interventions of political parties Piracy Shortages Venezuela–Colombia migrant crisis Hyperinflation Catatumbo campaign Xenophobic incidents Pemon conflict Siege of the Argentine Embassy in Venezuela Events Dakazo La Salida Arrest of Antonio Ledezma 2016 recall movement 2017 Venezuelan constitutional crisis Lima Group 2018 re-election campaign of Nicolás Maduro Venezuelan presidential crisis 2019 shipping of humanitarian aid to Venezuela Venezuela Aid Live COVID-19 pandemic 2022 recall movement 2023 Unitary Platform presidential primaries 2024 Venezuelan political crisis Elections 2013 presidential election 2015 parliamentary election 2017 referendum 2017 Constituent Assembly election 2018 presidential election 2020 parliamentary election 2023 referendum 2024 presidential election Protests 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2024 Timeline 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 Armed violence Caracas helicopter incident 2017 National Assembly attack Attack on Fort Paramacay El Junquito raid Caracas drone attack 2019 uprising attempt 2020 Barquisimeto shooting Operation Gideon (2020) 2021 Apure clashes 2022 Arauca clashes Venezuela portal v t e When Hugo Chávez came to power relations with several countries deteriorated, to the point that the Colombian government denounced the existence of a project of Venezuelan imperialism over the region.

[ 11 ] According to various sources, the Venezuelan government was interfering in the governments of Argentina , Bolivia, and several Caribbean islands, as well as outwardly supporting the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] The ideological rejection of Chavismo and Madurismo gained a growing xenophobia following the daily departure of thousands of Venezuelans due to the economic crisis that the country has been going through since 2013 . According to the UN , by the beginning of 2019 the number of refugees from Venezuela in other countries reached about 3.5 million.

[ 16 ] Despite the fact that regional governments have welcomed migrants in solidarity, Venezuelans have been accused of influencing higher unemployment and crime rates, and have become victims of harassment, insults and even violence by citizens of different countries.

[ 9 ] By country [ edit ] Bolivia [ edit ] In March 2019, a group of 14 Venezuelans were arrested by immigration authorities for protesting in front of Cuba 's embassy in La Paz . Six of them were expelled from the country, since according to the government: [ 17 ] Once the immigration interviews were completed, it was identified that these citizens do not have legal trade or legal reason for their stay in the country. They confessed to being involved in conspiratorial activities, and participating in political activities that affect public order, in exchange for money.

However, the action was condemned by organizations such as Amnesty International , which felt that the expulsion was arbitrary and done as part of systematic persecution against Venezuelan migrants due to the close relationship of the government of Evo Morales with the regime of Nicolás Maduro .

[ 18 ] Brazil [ edit ] An attack on a Venezuelan migrant population in Pacaraima , Brazil , in August 2018.

In August 2018, the government of the border state of Roraima requested a temporary closure of the border, claiming that its administration was unable to control the large number of Venezuelans who entered the country daily. Initially, Judge Helder Girão Barreto ordered the suspension of land entry of Venezuelans, but later the measure was revoked by the Supreme Court , which considered that the prohibition was contrary to the Constitution and international pacts signed by Brazil.

[ 19 ] Days later, a Venezuelan refugee camp was attacked in the municipality of Pacaraima. A mob armed with provincial weapons set fire to tents and other belongings of the immigrants, forcing more than 1,200 back over the border. The events occurred in retaliation for the alleged attack on a Brazilian merchant by four Venezuelans.

[ 20 ] Then-presidential candidate Jair Bolsonaro said the government should not turn its back on popular sentiment in Roraima, and proposed the creation of refugee camps with the help of the UN.

[ 21 ] Once he became president, Bolsonaro said he would adopt more rigorous criteria for the entry of foreigners to Brazil, but ruled that he would not return Venezuelan immigrants to their country.

[ 22 ] Chile [ edit ] See also: Tarapacá migrant crisis In May 2017, Venezuelan protesters were confronted by a group of Chileans who showed their support for the government of Nicolás Maduro in the vicinity of the Venezuelan embassy in Santiago .

[ 23 ] Some months later, Venezuelans protesting in the same place were beaten and robbed by Chilean communists.

[ 24 ] In January 2018, a disabled woman attacked an immigrant woman in Santiago with a cane, while calling her a communist and saying she voted for Sebastián Piñera .

[ 25 ] The same month, a driver from Valparaíso shouted "Venezuelan piece of shit" at an immigrant who was working in a gas station, before attacking him with a broom.

[ 26 ] In January 2019, during a match between the U-20 teams of Chile and Venezuela, Chilean soccer player Nicolás Díaz Huincales called the Venezuelan player Pablo Bonilla "starving to death". Subsequently, the Chilean player offered public apologies through a letter.

[ 27 ] A Chilean woman also referred to an immigrant she worked with "starving to death" in Cartagena later in the month.

[ 28 ] In February of the same year, following the publication of a video where a group of Chileans and Venezuelans offended the victims of Augusto Pinochet , left-wing citizens launched a virtual campaign calling on people not to help immigrants and asking for expulsion of the venecos [ es ] and venezorranas , both offensive slurs against Venezuelans specifically.

[ 29 ] According to statements by the Dominican consul in Arica , the Chilean border police deny entry to any immigrant who is black or Venezuelan and does not carry prepaid documents and tickets detailing where they will stay and when they will return.

[ 30 ] On September 25, 2021, residents of Iquique organised a protest against recent immigrants, most of whom are Venezuelans.

[ 31 ] During the protests an incident occurred in which a group of protesters set the belongings of migrants afire.

[ 32 ] Chilean Public Ministry ordered an investigation to identify and prosecute those responsible for the arson.

[ 31 ] Colombia [ edit ] See also: Venezuela–Colombia migrant crisis In January 2017, while delivering houses built by the Ministry of Housing to displaced people in the border town of Tibú , then-Vice President Germán Vargas Lleras said: [ 33 ] They are for displaced population, but those in Tibú, they are not going to let the " venecos [ es ] " get there, for all in the world, they are not for the "venecos".

Although Vargas Lleras later said that his use of "veneco" was only as a demonym, the Venezuelan president Nicolás Maduro said it was a xenophobic aggression and demanded an apology.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] In May 2017, Rodolfo Hernández, mayor of Bucaramanga , said that from Venezuela it was the beggars, prostitutes and unemployed who had arrived, and that it was not possible to throw them out, but the city was unable to respond to the crisis.

[ 36 ] In September 2017, there was a confrontation between Colombian and Venezuelan street vendors for the control of the spaces within the TransMilenio system, which left one person dead.

[ 37 ] Since the end of 2017, threatening pamphlets against Venezuelans began circulating in the border cities of Cúcuta and Arauca . Among the groups involved in delivering these threats were the ELN, the Clan del Golfo, and the Arauca Social Cleansing Group.

[ 38 ] In January 2018, a group of young people launched incendiary bombs at 900 Venezuelans who were in a refuge in a sports center in Cúcuta.

[ 39 ] In May 2018, an audio clip began circulating in which military threats were made against immigrants who did not leave the municipality of Subachoque within two weeks.

[ 40 ] In October 2018, a Venezuelan was lynched in Ciudad Bolívar , after being connected to the kidnapping of children through fake WhatsApp chains. At least 200 citizens participated in the lynching using stones, sticks and machetes. After this, two Venezuelans were about to be lynched in the same place and two other migrants were beaten in Transmilenio.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] In January 2019, threatening pamphlets appeared against Venezuelans residing in Ipiales , near the border with Ecuador. The authorities consider that the phenomenon occurred due to the return of a Venezuelan population from Ecuador, where there were attacks against immigrants in the previous weeks.

[ 43 ] In February 2019, mayor Rodolfo Hernández said Venezuelans were "factories for making poor chinitos ".

[ 44 ] Five months later, journalist Claudia Palacios wrote a column in the newspaper El Tiempo urging Venezuelans to stop giving birth.

[ 45 ] In July 2019, five quartered bodies were found in Bogotá, three of them belonging to Venezuelan citizens.

[ 46 ] In August of the same year, threatening pamphlets appeared in Bucaramanga, demanding that the city's merchants replace their Venezuelan workers within 48 hours.

[ 47 ] With the increase in the number of Venezuelan immigrants seeking housing in Bogotá, there are reports that in several places it is common to find advertisements saying "For rent: no Venezuelans." [ 48 ] During the campaign for the 2018 presidential elections, a common accusation among the candidates was that their competition wanted to make Colombia a second Venezuela.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] In addition, the conservative candidate Alejandro Ordóñez said that in the face of massive migration of Venezuelans, businessmen should prioritize the right to work of Colombians.

[ 51 ] Ordóñez was subsequently appointed Colombian ambassador to the Organization of American States , a position from which he said that Venezuelan migration was part of an agenda to radiate socialism throughout Latin America.

[ 52 ] According to a survey published by Semana magazine in March 2019, 41% of migrants had suffered some type of rejection or discrimination. However, 81% of respondents said they had not been the victim of any crime because of their nationality, and most of them described Colombians as kind and friendly people.

[ 53 ] Prior to the 2022 Colombian election , a study by the pollster Ivamer found that 63.2% of Colombians had a negative opinion on Venezuelans, and 60.2% disagreed with President Iván Duque 's policy towards Venezuelans.

[ 54 ] Curaçao [ edit ] In 2017, 1,203 Venezuelans were deported from Curaçao . Many of them were even forced to pay their return ticket.

Through a fierce removal strategy, Venezuelans without stability are deported before they can apply for refugee status. Despite the claims of organizations such as Amnesty International . In November 2018, the Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations of the Netherlands (the country to which the island belongs) stated that the government would not investigate the matter.

[ 55 ] Ecuador [ edit ] In August 2018, the Ecuadorian government issued a decree requiring Venezuelans who would like to enter the country to present valid passports.

[ 56 ] However, a judge suspended the application of the decree, arguing that it contradicted the international agreements signed by Ecuador.

[ 57 ] In October of the same year, a march by Venezuelans in Quito was confronted by a group of citizens who threatened to burn immigrants alive, while calling on the government for greater immigration controls. One of the group participants stated: [ 58 ] We are tired that Venezuelans in addition to their conceit, their arrogance, that they come to steal, to kill, all against us. I don't know what they demand, nor do I know who would organize that march, but we want to avoid confrontation.

In January 2019, after the brutal murder of an Ecuadorian woman at the hands of a Venezuelan in Ibarra , there were a series of attacks against migrants, including forced evictions and burning of property. A few hours after the murder, President Lenin Moreno had declared: [ 59 ] Ecuador is and will be a country of peace. I will not let any antisocial people take it away from us. The integrity of our mothers, daughters and friends is my priority.

I have arranged for the immediate formation of brigades to monitor the legal situation of Venezuelan immigrants in the streets, in the workplace and on the border.

We have opened the doors, but we will not sacrifice anyone's safety.

Moreno received harsh criticism for these statements, as some groups felt that his words prompted xenophobia.

[ citation needed ] Venezuelan president Nicolás Maduro called Moreno a "nazi", "fascist" and a traitor.

[ 60 ] Days later, Ecuador began to demand that Venezuelans entering the country show their criminal records, while some 250 migrants returned to Venezuela as part of a humanitarian corridor created by the Venezuelan government itself because of increased anti-Venezuelan sentiment after the event.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] Hungary [ edit ] Despite its anti-immigration rhetoric following the European migrant crisis , the government of Viktor Orbán has welcomed hundreds of Venezuelan migrants who have proven to have at least one Hungarian ancestor. However, the reception has not been as positive, with several citizens complaining to the police about the presence of black Venezuelans in the surroundings of the spa of Balatonoszod , where immigrants were initially housed.

[ 63 ] Iran [ edit ] During the 2017 presidential elections , the reformist press used the word venezueloi ("Venezuelanization"), to criticize the government for taking a course similar to that of the Nicolás Maduro regime and to warn of the possibility of an economic crisis similar to that of Venezuela.

[ 64 ] [ relevant?

] Panama [ edit ] In November 2016, the National Front of the Panamanian People called a protest under the slogan "no more arepas , no more tequeños " (in reference to two typical dishes of Venezuela). The organizers of the march argued that Venezuelan migrants harmed the country's economy, displacing local workers and increasing crime. The march generated alarm among some groups, but in the end it only gathered a few dozen people.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] In August 2017, president Juan Carlos Varela announced that a visa would be required for Venezuelans traveling to Panama, citing economic and security reasons: In the face of the rupture of the democratic order in Venezuela , a situation that puts our security, our economy and the sources of employment of Panamanians at risk, and after thorough consideration, I have made the decision to demand a visa from Venezuelan citizens who want to travel to Panama The Venezuelan government considered the measure anti-integrationist and said they would act with reciprocity.

[ 67 ] Shortly thereafter, advertisements appeared in which Panamanian bars offered discounts to those who beat Venezuelan immigrants.

[ 68 ] Peru [ edit ] Campaign slogan saying "We the good Venezuelans in Peru are more" It is reported that many Venezuelan criminals have arrived in Peru and continued to commit crimes, which causes the increase in xenophobia. In March 2018, an anti-Venezuelan campaign was spread on social networks, during which banners with the slogan "Peru without Venezuelans" were seen on several bridges in Lima .

[ 69 ] In June 2018, a person was injured after clashes between Peruvians and Venezuelans in the Lima district of San Martín de Porres .

[ 70 ] In July 2018, marches were called to reject the presence of Venezuelan immigrants in Peru.

[ 71 ] In August 2018, the Peruvian government introduced a passport requirement from those Venezuelans who intended to enter the country, but the measure was suspended in October, when the courts ruled that this requirement was against with the commitments Peru must follow as part of Mercosur .

[ 72 ] In the same month, 89 Venezuelans returned to their country sponsored by their own government. Nicolás Maduro said that his countrymen had been victims of a hate campaign, and that in Peru they had only found racism, contempt, economic persecution and slavery.

[ 73 ] In January 2019, a Venezuelan was killed after fights between Venezuelans and Peruvians in the district of Chao (La Libertad).

[ 74 ] In the same month there were clashes between Venezuelans protesting in front of their country's embassy in Lima and Peruvian citizens who demanded that their government close the borders.

[ 75 ] According to the International Organization for Migration , 35% of Venezuelans living in Peru have suffered acts of xenophobia.

[ 76 ] In September 2019, news was given of the discovery of two mutilated bodies whose remains had been distributed in different parts of Lima. After some investigations, the police reported that the bodies belonged to a citizen of Venezuelan origin and a Peruvian, apparently killed due to deals with a foreign criminal organization. In videos obtained from the security cameras of a hotel in San Martín de Porres, where both victims were killed, it was discovered that those involved in the crime were five Venezuelan nationals, three men and two women, one of whom already had a criminal record for homicide, who are seen moving the remains to a vehicle. This news spurred a wave of hatred and panic towards Venezuelan immigrants in social networks. The border security was also criticized, with the government of Martín Vizcarra facing condemnation for allowing the entry of the criminals.

[ citation needed ] Trinidad and Tobago [ edit ] In April 2018, 82 Venezuelan asylum seekers were deported from Trinidad and Tobago, which violated international laws on the matter. Given the criticism issued by UNHCR , Prime Minister Keith Rowley said he would not allow the UN or any other agency to "turn his country into a refugee camp". Venezuelan migrants in Trinidad and Tobago are victims of widespread discrimination, since unlike other countries, no refugee reception plan has been implemented on the islands so it is hard to find legal work without being sent back.

[ 77 ] Internet [ edit ] With the hyperinflation in Venezuela and the devalued Venezuelan bolívar , many Venezuelans have turned to virtual gold farming in massively multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPG) like Tibia and RuneScape . In Reddit , a user published a racially abusive guide on how to kill Venezuelans in the “ player-v-player ” places where the gold farming takes place; the guide was followed by intemperate comments. The moderators removed the post and the comments afterwards.

[ 78 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-Chilean sentiment Anti-Mexican sentiment Venezuelan refugee crisis References [ edit ] ^ "SENTIMIENTO ANTI VENEZOLANO – La Nación" . 23 January 2019.

^ Melo, Jorge Orlando (January 2008).

"Bolivar en Colombia: conservador y revolucionario" .

Boletín de la Academia Nacional de la Historia, Caracas .

^ Laos, Jorge Paredes (2018-05-01).

"Simón Bolívar: ¿Héroe o villano?" .

El Comercio (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Traiciones y dictadura del auténtico Simón Bolívar: el millonario "español" que se hizo revolucionario" .

abc (in Spanish). 2018-06-27 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "La independencia - La Independecia del Perú - Educared Perú - Estudiantes" .

educared.fundaciontelefonica.com.pe .

^ superuser (2014-02-03).

"Perú invade territorio boliviano para expulsar a las tropas bolivarianas" .

History Channel (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

{{ cite web }} : |last= has generic name ( help ) ^ "La Revolución Marcista" .

El Telégrafo - Noticias del Ecuador y del mundo (in European Spanish). 2014-03-06 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "La revolución nacionalista del 6 de Marzo de 1845 - MAR. 06, 2006 - El Gran Guayaquil - Historicos - EL UNIVERSO" .

www.eluniverso.com . 6 March 2006 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ a b "Venezuelans, Go Home: Xenophobia Haunts Refugees" .

Bloomberg . March 5, 2018 – via www.bloomberg.com.

^ "Ahora los venezolanos son "los mojados" " .

Las2orillas (in Spanish). 2017-07-14 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Palabras del presidente Álvaro Uribe en respuesta a su homólogo venezolano Hugo Chávez" .

Semana.com Últimas Noticias de Colombia y el Mundo . November 25, 2007.

^ "Preocupa en Bolivia injerencia venezolana - Economía - ABC Color" .

www.abc.com.py (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "El testigo clave del 'caso del maletín' dice que Chávez envió 5 millones de dólares a Cristina Fernández" .

El País (in Spanish). 2008-09-24.

ISSN 1134-6582 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ Sparrow, Thomas (30 January 2015).

"¿Quiere EE.UU. destronar a Petrocaribe?" .

BBC News Mundo (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Chávez apoya a las Farc, dice reporte de inteligencia de E.U." El Tiempo (in Spanish). 2010-02-04 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "ONU: ya son casi tres millones y medio de venezolanos los que huyeron de la crisis" .

Infobae (in European Spanish). 23 February 2019 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Bolivia expulsa a 6 venezolanos por actividades conspirativas - La Razón" .

www.la-razon.com . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Venezolanos en Bolivia: entre la solidaridad y la violación de sus derechos" .

France 24 . 2019-03-29 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Supremo de Brasil rechaza cerrar frontera con Venezuela, tras orden de juez" .

RCN Radio (in Spanish). 2018-08-07 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Ataque a venezolanos en Brasil: disturbios en Pacaraima contra campamento de inmigrantes" . BBC Mundo. 20 August 2018 . Retrieved 27 January 2019 .

^ "Bolsonaro sugiere crear campos de refugiados para venezolanos" .

El Comercio (in Spanish). 2018-08-24 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Jair Bolsonaro no devolverá a venezolanos en Roraima pero anuncia control migratorio" .

El Comercio (in Spanish). 2018-11-24 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ Chile, C. N. N.

"Chilenos se enfrentan a manifestantes venezolanos en Santiago" .

CNN Chile .

^ "Comunistas en Chile golpearon y robaron a manifestantes venezolanos" . Archived from the original on 2019-04-24 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Chilena protagonizó ataque xenófobo hacia una venezolana" .

EL NACIONAL (in Spanish). 2018-01-15 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Mujer trata de 'venezolano de mierda' a trabajador de bencinera en Valparaíso" .

www.adnradio.cl (in Spanish). 2018-01-15 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ " "Muerto de hambre": la agresión de un futbolista chileno a su colega de Venezuela que genera indignación" .

Infobae (in European Spanish). 20 January 2019 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Instagram ardiente: Nicki Minaj en una comprometedora pose y un bodysuit diminuto" .

THE TIMES CHILE (in Spanish). 2019-08-12 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Campaña xenófoba contra venezolanos" .

La Tercera (in Spanish). 2019-02-27 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ Bo, mor (2017-06-29).

"Inmigración en Chile: "No entras si eres negro o venezolano" " .

MOR.BO (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ a b "Fiscalía chilena abre investigación por violenta protesta contra venezolanos en Iquique" .

France 24 (in Spanish). 2021-09-26 . Retrieved 2021-09-27 .

^ "Manifestantes en Iquique quemaron carpas y pertenencias de inmigrantes que se encontraban en avenida Aeropuerto" .

ADN Radio (in Spanish). 2021-09-25 . Retrieved 2021-09-26 .

^ "Vargas Lleras sobre casas gratis: "no vayan a dejar meter a los 'venecos', esto no es para 'venecos'"" .

Vargas Lleras sobre casas gratis: "no vayan a dejar meter a los 'venecos', esto no es para 'venecos'" . 27 January 2017 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Germán Vargas Lleras: el término 'veneco' "no es para nada despectivo" " .

www.lafm.com.co (in Spanish). 2017-01-27 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Maduro acusa a Vargas Lleras de xenófobo" .

Semana.com Últimas Noticias de Colombia y el Mundo . January 29, 2017.

^ "Se vinieron los limosneros y desocupados de Venezuela para acá: Alcalde de Bucaramanga" .

RCN Radio (in Spanish). 12 May 2017 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Pelea de vendedores ambulantes colombianos y venezolanos en Bogotá habría causado un muerto" .

Noticias Caracol (in Spanish). 2017-09-15 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Alerta por xenofobia en contra de los venezolanos en Colombia" .

Semana.com Últimas Noticias de Colombia y el Mundo . June 2, 2018.

^ "Atacan con bombas incendiarias a venezolanos en Cúcuta" .

ELESPECTADOR.COM (in Spanish). 2018-01-23 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ Bermúdez, Jessica (2018-05-22).

"Xenofobia contra venezolanos en Subachoque alerta a la población" .

Conexión Capital (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "¿Xenofobia? Tras linchamiento, venezolanos denuncian persecución y bomba social [VIDEOS]" .

hsbnoticias.com . October 28, 2018.

^ "La verdadera historia del hombre linchado por falsa noticia en redes" .

El Tiempo (in Spanish). 2018-11-03 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "En Nariño priorizan combatir actos de xenofobia contra ciudadanos venezolanos" .

diariodelsur.com.co . January 26, 2019.

^ "Alcalde de Bucaramanga afirmó que venezolanas son "fábricas de hacer chinitos pobres" " .

ELESPECTADOR.COM (in Spanish). 2019-02-08 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Paren de parir" .

El Tiempo (in Spanish). 2019-06-12 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ Rincón, Ginna.

"Tres de los cuerpos desmembrados hallados en Bogotá son de venezolanos" .

Publimetro Colombia (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 2019-08-04 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Denuncian panfletos amenazantes contra venezolanos en Bucaramanga" .

ELESPECTADOR.COM (in Spanish). 2019-08-01 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Bogotanos se niegan a alquilar viviendas a los venezolanos – Sumarium" . Archived from the original on 2019-04-21 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ Tiempo, Casa Editorial El.

"¿Qué posibilidad real hay de que Petro convierta a Colombia en una Venezuela?" .

Portafolio.co .

^ "Si Colombia se 'venezolaniza' no será a manos de Petro, sino de Duque (Uribe)" .

pulzo.com . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Priorizar el derecho al trabajo de los colombianos pide Alejandro Ordóñez" .

Caracol Radio (in Spanish). 2018-03-06 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Ordóñez afirma que migración venezolana es estrategia para 'diseminar el socialismo' " .

www.wradio.com.co (in Spanish). 2019-05-03 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Los migrantes venezolanos tienen la palabra" .

Semana.com Últimas Noticias de Colombia y el Mundo . March 9, 2019.

^ "Venezuelan immigrants are ostracized in Colombia amid xenophobia and shifting politics" .

Los Angeles Times . 2023-10-27 . Retrieved 2024-03-14 .

^ "Venezuelan migrants seek refuge in Caribbean islands" .

The Guardian .

^ "Ecuador exigirá a extranjeros presentación de pasaporte para ingresar al país" .

El Universo . 16 August 2018 . Retrieved 27 January 2019 .

^ "Jueza amplía plazo para ingreso de ciudadanos venezolanos sin pasaporte" .

El Comercio . 24 August 2018 . Retrieved 27 January 2019 .

^ "YouTube: ecuatorianos amenazan con quemar vivos a venezolanos [VIDEO]" .

larepublica.pe (in Spanish). 2019-05-28 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ AFP (2019-01-21).

"Brotes de xenofobia por caso de feminicidio en Ecuador" .

Caracol Radio (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Maduro califica a Moreno de "nazi" y "traidor" " .

Ecuavisa (in Spanish). 2019-01-23 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "La exigencia del certificado de antecedentes penales sorprendió a venezolanos en Rumichaca" .

El Comercio . 26 January 2019 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Venezolanos dejan Ecuador tras incidentes en Ibarra" .

Ecuavisa (in Spanish). 2019-01-23 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Por qué el gobierno antiinmigrante de Hungría recibe en silencio a cientos de venezolanos" .

BBC News Mundo .

^ Gozzer, Stefania (2019-02-21).

"Rusia, Turquía, India, Zimbabue... : por qué lo que sucede en Venezuela interesa tanto fuera del continente" . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Marcha en Panamá contra inmigrantes venezolanos genera alarma" .

diariolasamericas.com (in European Spanish). 20 November 2016 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ Vidal, Brian (2016-11-20).

"FOTOS: Así fue "la marcha" en contra de los venezolanos en Panamá #20Nov" .

El Impulso (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Venezuela rechaza exigencia de visa a ciudadanos por parte de Panamá" .

El Tiempo (in Spanish). 2017-08-23 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Xenofobia en Panamá: "premian" con descuentos en bares al que golpee a un venezolano - TN.com.ar" .

Todo Noticias (in Spanish). 2017-08-29 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Rechazo masivo en Perú a campaña xenófoba contra exiliados venezolanos" .

PanAm Post (in Spanish). 2018-03-06 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Una persona resultó herida durante pelea entre peruanos y venezolanos" .

América Noticias (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "¡Xenofobia! Así fue una protesta en el Perú por la llegada de miles de venezolanos | 800Noticias" .

800noticias.com . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Venezolanos podrán ingresar a Perú sin pasaporte" .

El Comercio (in Spanish). 2018-10-05 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Nicolás Maduro denuncia campaña de odio contra venezolanos en Perú" .

América Noticias (in Spanish) . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Venezolano pierde la vida tras balacera en fiesta de aniversario de distrito liberteño (VIDEO)" .

Diario Correo (in Spanish). 2019-01-07 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Enfrentamientos durante protesta de venezolanos en Lima contra Nicolás Maduro" .

Peru21 (in Spanish). 2019-01-11 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ "Trabas burocráticas y ataques xenófobos contra venezolanos en América Latina" .

France 24 . 2018-08-19 . Retrieved 2019-09-19 .

^ Ebus, Bram (November 13, 2018).

"Venezuelan migrants live in shadows on Caribbean's sunshine islands" .

The Guardian – via www.theguardian.com.

^ "Venezuela's paper currency is worthless, so its people seek virtual gold" .

The Economist . 21 November 2019.

ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 2019-11-26 .

v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_incidents_of_xenophobia_during_the_Venezuelan_refugee_crisis&oldid=1304154008 " Categories : Anti-Venezuelan sentiment Foreign relations of Venezuela Anti-Hispanic and Latin American sentiment Venezuelan refugee crisis Venezuela-related lists Xenophobia Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 errors: generic name CS1 European Spanish-language sources (es-es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from March 2022 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from March 2022 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with topics of unclear notability from October 2024 All articles with topics of unclear notability Lists with topics of unclear notability Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2020 All articles that may have off-topic sections Wikipedia articles that may have off-topic sections from September 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2019 This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 08:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of incidents of xenophobia during the Venezuelan refugee crisis 1 language Add topic

