Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career 3 Awards 4 Books 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Andrés Duany 9 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی 한국어 Italiano مصرى Polski 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American architect and urban planner Andrés Duany Andrés Duany Born ( 1949-09-07 ) September 7, 1949 (age 75) New York City, US Occupation(s) Architect and urban planner Known for founder of the Congress for the New Urbanism Andrés Duany (born September 7, 1949) is an American architect, urban planner , and a founder of the Congress for the New Urbanism .

Early life and education [ edit ] Duany was born in New York City but grew up in Cuba until 1960.

[ 1 ] He attended The Choate School and Aiglon College and received his undergraduate degree in architecture and urban planning from Princeton University (1971). After a year of study at the École des Beaux-Arts in Paris, he received a master's degree from the Yale School of Architecture (1974).

[ 1 ] He has also received an honorary Doctorate of Fine Arts from Yale School of Architecture (2023).

[ 2 ] Career [ edit ] In 1977, Duany co-founded the Miami firm Arquitectonica with his wife, Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk , Bernardo Fort-Brescia , Laurinda Spear , and Hervin Romney. Arquitectonica was known for its playful, Latin-American influenced modernism . The firm's Atlantis Condominium was featured in the opening credits of the television series Miami Vice .

In 1980, Duany and Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk founded Duany Plater-Zyberk & Company (DPZ), an architecture firm based in Miami.

[ 1 ] DPZ participated in the formation of the international urban planning movement known as New Urbanism , intended to offer an alternative to suburban sprawl and urban disinvestment. The firm first received recognition as the designer of new towns such as Seaside, Florida and Kentlands, Maryland . The firm has since completed designs and codes for over three hundred new towns, regional plans, and inner-city revitalization projects. Duany is also considered to be a representative of New Classical Architecture .

Duany is a co-founder and emeritus board member of the Congress for the New Urbanism (CNU), established in 1993.

[ 1 ] He has co-authored five books: Suburban Nation: The Rise of Sprawl and the Decline of the American Dream ; The New Civic Art ; The Smart Growth Manual ; Garden Cities ; and Landscape Urbanism and Its Discontents . Duany has worked as visiting professor at many institutions and holds two honorary doctorates. He is a fellow of the American Institute of Architects and an adjunct professor at the University of Miami .

[ 3 ] Awards [ edit ] Duany and his partner, Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk , have been awarded several honorary doctorates and awards including the Vincent Scully Prize by the National Building Museum in recognition of their contributions to the American built environment.

[ 4 ] Duany has been awarded the Brandeis Award for Architecture, the Thomas Jefferson Medal in Architecture , the Arthur Ross Award in Community Planning, the Richard H.

Driehaus Prize for Classical Architecture, the Society of American Registered Architects International Award, and the Albert Simons Medal of Excellence, among other awards.

Books [ edit ] Duany, Andrés, Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk, and Jeff Speck (2000).

Suburban Nation: The Rise of Sprawl and the Decline of the American Dream . New York: North Point Press.

ISBN 0-86547-606-3 Duany, Andrés, Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk, and Robert Alminana (2003).

The New Civic Art: Elements of Town Planning . New York: Rizzoli International Publications.

ISBN 0-8478-2186-2 Duany, Andrés and Jeff Speck, with Mike Lydon (2009).

The Smart Growth Manual . New York: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 0-07-137675-5 Duany, Andrés and DPZ (2011).

Garden Cities: Theory & Practice of Agrarian Urbanism , The Prince's Foundation for the Built Environment References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Hetherington, Peter (2006-09-20).

"Urban legend" .

The Guardian .

^ "Andrés M. Duany '74 M.Arch. And Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk '74 M.Arch. | Yale 2023" .

^ Caves, R. W. (2004).

Encyclopedia of the City . Routledge. p. 198.

^ "Duany Plater-Zyberk" . Alysbeach.com. Archived from the original on 2012-04-09 . Retrieved 2012-08-15 .

Further reading [ edit ] Lombard, Joanna (2005).

The Architecture of Duany Plater-Zyberk and Company . New York: Rizzoli International Publications.

ISBN 0-8478-2600-7 External links [ edit ] Duany Plater-Zyberk & Company Congress for the New Urbanism Subdivided: Isolation and Community in America A Documentary Film featuring Andrés Duany Archived 2021-02-25 at the Wayback Machine media 2008 video of Andrés Duany on YouTube at the Driehaus Prize ceremony v t e Driehaus Architecture Prize laureates Léon Krier (2003) Demetri Porphyrios (2004) Quinlan Terry (2005) Allan Greenberg (2006) Jaquelin T. Robertson (2007) Andrés Duany & Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk (2008) Abdel-Wahed El-Wakil (2009) Rafael Manzano Martos (2010) Robert A. M. Stern (2011) Michael Graves (2012) Thomas H. Beeby (2013) Pier Carlo Bontempi (2014) David M. Schwarz (2015) Scott Merrill (2016) Robert Adam (2017) Marc Breitman & Nada Breitman-Jakov (2018) Maurice Culot [ fr ] (2019) Ong-ard Satrabhandhu (2020) Sebastian Treese (2021) Rob Krier (2022) Ben Pentreath (2023) Peter Pennoyer (2024) Liam O'Connor (2025) v t e Urban planning History Theories Index Outline General Urban area City Metropolitan area Suburb Land use Planning Planning and zoning commission Growth management World Urbanism Day Labor market area Major branches General Land-use planning Comprehensive planning (US) History of urban planning Spatial planning (Eur) Redevelopment Urban design Urban green space Urbanism Rural Conservation development Preservation development Rural housing Village design statement (UK) Regional planning Regional Planning Association of America Environmental planning Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Recreation resource planning Sustainable development Transportation planning Transportation forecasting Trip distribution Rational planning model Transit-oriented development Professional transportation planner Urban freight distribution Economic development Community economic development Concepts/ theories Movements Athens Charter Car-free movement City Beautiful movement Dark-sky movement Garden city movement Indigenous planning NIMBY New Urbanism Settlement movement Smart growth Structuralism Transition towns YIMBY Theories Collaborative planning Context theory Ekistics Intelligent urbanism Livable streets Market urbanism Radical planning Urban renewal Cities by type Company town / Monotown Commuter town Ghost town Global city Mining community Pit village Man camp Logging camp Model village Planned community (New town) Intentional community Arcology Urban village Boomtown Concepts Affordable housing Cityscape Cluster development Complete Communities Conservation community Creative city Eminent domain (US) Filtering (housing) Gentrification / Brusselization Infill Healthy cities / Healthy community design LEED-ND Leapfrog development Mixed-use development Permeability Placemaking Planning gain Planning Permission Rural flight Temporary use Third place Tract housing Transferable development rights Urban decay Urban growth boundary Urban sprawl / Peri-urbanisation Urban vitality Urbanization Verticalization / High-rise urbanism Zoning People Theorists/ practitioners Edward Bassett Andrés Duany Clarence Perry Clarence Stein Colin Buchanan Daniel Burnham Donald Appleyard Ebenezer Howard Edmund Bacon Guy Benveniste Ian McHarg James Rouse Konstantinos Doxiadis Kevin A. Lynch Le Corbusier Loretta Lees Peter Calthorpe Patrick Geddes Raymond Unwin Thomas Adams List of urban theorists List of urban planners Critics Elizabeth Farrelly Jane Jacobs James Howard Kunstler Lewis Mumford Randal O'Toole Training Planning education Planning Accreditation Board Real estate education Professional organizations Places Countries Australia China Czech Republic Russia Serbia Singapore United Kingdom Taiwan Cities Barcelona Shanghai Sydney Other Africa Communist countries Nazi Germany Ancient Egypt Related fields Architecture Civil engineering Development economics Environmental social science Geography Land development Landscape architecture Marine spatial planning Public health Public policy Real estate development Social sciences Urban ecology Urban economics Cities portal Category List of planned cities List of planning journals Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Andrés_Duany&oldid=1293174822 " Categories : New Urbanism American urban planners New Classical architects Driehaus Architecture Prize winners 21st-century American architects Choate Rosemary Hall alumni Princeton University School of Architecture alumni 1949 births Living people Yale School of Architecture alumni Arquitectonica people Alumni of Aiglon College Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 31 May 2025, at 04:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Andrés Duany 9 languages Add topic

