Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions 2 Examples of anti-Hindu sentiments 3 Asia Toggle Asia subsection 3.1 Afghanistan 3.2 Bangladesh 3.3 India 3.4 Malaysia 3.5 Pakistan 4 Outside Asia Toggle Outside Asia subsection 4.1 Australia 4.2 Fiji 4.3 United Kingdom 4.3.1 Conservative Party 4.4 United States 4.4.1 Pat Robertson 4.4.2 United States Congress 4.4.3 California Textbook Controversy 4.4.4 Dotbusters 5 Resolutions and proclamations recognizing Hinduphobia 6 Criticism 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Sources 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Anti-Hindu sentiment 7 languages العربية বাংলা हिन्दी Italiano मराठी Nederlands Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about hatred of, or prejudice towards Hindus. For religious persecution of Hindus, see Persecution of Hindus .

This article may be in need of reorganization to comply with Wikipedia's layout guidelines .

Please help by editing the article to make improvements to the overall structure.

( July 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Freedom of religion Concepts Laicism Religious discrimination Religious censorship Religious liberty Religious police Religious pluralism Secularism Separation of church and state Anti-clericalism School prayer Catholic priests in public office Confessionalism Theocracy State religion Secular state Confessional state Atheist state Status by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros DR Congo Egypt Mauritania Morocco South Africa Sudan Tanzania North and South America Brazil Canada Colombia Ecuador Guyana Panama Paraguay United States Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Northern Cyprus Georgia India Indonesia Japan Kazakhstan Laos Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal North Korea Pakistan Philippines Russia Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan Uzbekistan Vietnam Europe Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Northern Cyprus France Georgia Germany Hungary Italy Kosovo Montenegro North Macedonia Norway Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Bahrain Egypt Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Oman Palestinian territories Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria UAE Yemen Oceania Australia Topical Apostasy in Islam by country Blasphemy laws by country Female genital mutilation laws by country Legal aspects of ritual slaughter Religious male circumcision Religious persecution Traditional African religions Serers Atheism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Christophobia post–Cold War era Catholicism Catholic Church Mormonism Jehovah's Witness Eastern Orthodox Christianity Oriental Orthodox Christianity Protestantism Falun Gong Hinduism ( Anti-Hindu sentiment ) Islam Sunni Shi'a Ahmadiyya Alevism Sufis Islamophobia Persecution of non-believers Judaism Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Religious antisemitism New religious movements Christian countercult movement Neopaganism Rastafari Zoroastrianism Religion portal v t e Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Part of a series on Hinduism Hindus Mythology Origins Historical History Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic religion Dravidian folk religion Śramaṇa Tribal religions in India Traditional Itihasa-Purana Epic-Puranic royal genealogies Epic-Puranic chronology Sampradaya (traditions) Major Sampradaya (traditions) Vaishnavism Pancharatra Shaivism Kapalika Pashupata Pratyabhijña Shaktism Smartism Other Sampradaya (traditions) Deities Absolute Reality / Unifying Force Brahman Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Other major Devas / Devis Vedic Deities: Tridasha Adityas Rudras Vasus Ashvins Mahadevi Other Vedic Deities Post-Vedic: Avatar Dashavatara Durga Navadurga Mahavidya Kartikeya Ganesha Hanuman Radha Shakti Sita Devatas Vishvakarma Kubera Concepts Worldview Cosmology Mythology Ontology Tattvas Subtle elements Panchikarana Gross elements Guṇas Purusha Prakṛti Supreme reality Brahman Nirguna Saguna Om Saccidānanda God Ishvara Devas / Devi Devatas God in Hinduism God and gender Puruṣārtha (meaning of life) Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Āśrama (stages of life) Brahmacharya Gṛhastha Vānaprastha Sannyasa Three paths to liberation Bhakti yoga Jnana yoga Karma yoga Liberation Mokṣa-related topics: Paramātman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Mind Ātman (self) Anātman (non-self) Sūkṣma śarīra (subtle body) Antaḥkaraṇa (mental organs) Prajña (wisdom) Ānanda (happiness) Viveka (discernment) Vairagya (dispassion) Sama (equanimity) Dama (temperance) Uparati (self-settledness) Titiksha (forbearance) Shraddha (faith) Samadhana (concentration) Arishadvargas (six enemies) Ahamkara (attachment) Ethics Niti śastra Yamas Niyama Ahimsa Achourya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Damah Dayā Akrodha Arjava Santosha Tapas Svādhyāya Shaucha Mitahara Dāna Sources of dharma Epistemology Pratyakṣa (perception) Anumāṇa (inference) Upamāṇa (comparison, analogy) Arthāpatti (postulation, presumption) Anupalabdi (non-perception, negation) Śabda (word, testimony) Practices Worship , sacrifice, and charity Puja Ārtī Prarthana Śrauta Temple Murti Bhakti Japa Bhajana Kīrtana Yajna Homa Tarpana Vrata Prāyaścitta Tirtha Yatra Tirthadana Matha Nritta-Nritya Dāna Sevā Yoga Exorcism Meditation Tapas Dhyana Samādhāna Nididhyāsana Yoga Sadhu Yogi Yogini Asana Sādhanā Hatha yoga Jnana yoga Bhakti yoga Karma yoga Rāja yoga Kundalini yoga Arts Bharatanatyam Kathak Kathakali Kuchipudi Manipuri Mohiniyattam Odissi Sattriya Bhagavata Mela Yakshagana Dandiya Raas Carnatic music Pandav Lila Kalaripayattu Silambam Adimurai Rites of passage Garbhadhana Pumsavana Pumsavana Simantonayana Simantonnayana Jatakarma Nāmakaraṇa Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyāraṃbhaṃ Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyesti Festivals Diwali Holi Maha Shivaratri Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami-Dussehra Raksha Bandhan Ganesh Chaturthi Vasant Panchami Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Makar Sankranti Kumbh Mela Pongal Ugadi Vaisakhi Bihu Puthandu Vishu Ratha Yatra Philosophical schools Six Astika schools Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Advaita Dvaita Vishishtadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Shuddhadvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Akshar Purushottam Darshan Other schools Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Charvaka Gurus, Rishi, philosophers Ancient Saptarshi Vashistha Kashyapa Atri Jamadagni Gotama Vishvamitra Bharadwaja Agastya Angiras Aruni Ashtavakra Jaimini Kanada Kapila Patanjali Pāṇini Prashastapada Raikva Satyakama Jabala Valmiki Vyasa Yajnavalkya Medieval Abhinavagupta Adi Shankara Akka Mahadevi Allama Prabhu Alvars Basava Chaitanya Ramdas Kathiababa Chakradhara Chāngadeva Dadu Dayal Eknath Gangesha Upadhyaya Gaudapada Gorakshanatha Haridasa Thakur Harivansh Jagannatha Dasa Jayanta Bhatta Jayatīrtha Jiva Goswami Jñāneśvar Kabir Kanaka Dasa Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Madhusūdana Madhva Matsyendranatha Morya Gosavi Mukundarāja Namadeva Narahari Tirtha Narasimha Saraswati Nayanars Nimbarkacharya Srinivasacharya Prabhākara Purandara Dasa Raghavendra Swami Raghunatha Siromani Raghuttama Tirtha Ram Charan Ramananda Ramanuja Ramprasad Sen Ravidas Rupa Goswami Samarth Ramdas Sankardev Satyanatha Tirtha Siddheshwar Sripada Srivallabha Sripadaraja Surdas Swaminarayan Śyāma Śastri Tukaram Tulsidas Tyagaraja Vācaspati Miśra Vadiraja Tirtha Vallabha Valluvar Vedanta Desika Vidyaranya Vyasaraja Modern Aurobindo Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Bhaktivinoda Thakur Chandrashekarendra Saraswati Chinmayananda Dayananda Saraswati Jaggi Vasudev Krishnananda Saraswati Mahavatar Babaji Mahesh Yogi Narayana Guru Nigamananda Nisargadatta Maharaj Prabhupada Radhakrishnan R. D. Ranade Ramakrishna Rama Tirtha Ramana Maharshi Ravi Shankar Ramdas Samarth Sathya Sai Baba Shirdi Sai Baba Shraddhanand Satyadhyana Tirtha Siddharameshwar Maharaj Sivananda Trailanga U. G. Krishnamurti Upasni Maharaj Vethathiri Maharishi Vivekananda Yogananda Texts Sources and classification of scripture Śruti Smṛti Ācāra Ātmatuṣṭi Scriptures Timeline of Hindu texts Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Upanishads Principal Upanishads Rigveda: Aitareya Kaushitaki Yajurveda: Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Shvetashvatara Maitri Samaveda: Chandogya Kena Atharvaveda: Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Vedangas Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama s (Hinduism) Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Vishnu Purana Bhagavata Purana Devi Bhagavata Purana Naradiya Purana Vāmana Purana Matsya Purana Garuda Purana Brahma Purana Brahmanda Purana Brahma Vaivarta Purana Bhavishya Purana Padma Purana Agni Purana Shiva Purana Linga Purana Kūrma Purana Skanda Purana Varaha Purana Markandeya Purana Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Gandharvaveda Sthapatyaveda Shastras , sutras , and samhitas Dharma Shastra Artha Śastra Shilpa Shastras Kama Sutra Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Charaka Samhita Sushruta Samhita Natya Shastra Panchatantra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Ramcharitmanas Yoga Vasistha Swara yoga Panchadasi Stotras , stutis and Bhashya Kanakadhara Stotra Shiva Stuti Vayu Stuti Tamil literature Tirumurai Naalayira  Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Tiruppukal Kural Kamba Ramayanam/Ramavataram Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Other texts Hindu culture & society Society Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Kayastha Vaishya Shudra Dalit Jāti Gotra Dvija Dasa Hindu art Hindu art Hindu iconography Shilpa Shastras Rasa (aesthetics) Indian aesthetics Yantra Hindu architecture Hindu architecture Hindu temple architecture Vastu shastra Talamana Hindu music Hindu music Shruti (music) Svara Alankāra Tala (music) Raga Rasa (aesthetics) Sangita Vadya Natya Shastra Food & diet customs Ahimsa Diet in Hinduism Sattvic diet Mitahara Jhatka Vrata Time keeping practices Hindu units of time Hindu calendar Panchangam Vikram Samvat Shaka era Hindu pilgrimage Pilgrimage sites Other society-related topics Discrimination Persecution Nationalism Hindutva Organisations Reform movements Other topics Hinduism by country Greater India Balinese Hinduism Caribbean Shaktism Template:Hindu scriptures and texts Hinduism & other religions Hinduism and Jainism / and Buddhism / and Sikhism / and Judaism / and Christianity / and Islam Other related links (templates) Hindu scriptures & texts Hindu philosphy Sampradayas (traditions) Shaivism Vaishnavism Shaktism Glossary Outline Hinduism portal v t e Anti-Hindu sentiment , sometimes also referred to as Hinduphobia ,  is the fear of , hostility towards or negative perceptions pertaining to the practitioners or religion of Hinduism . It exists in many contexts in many countries, often due to historical conflict. There is also scholarly debate on what constitutes Hinduphobia in the Western World .

Definitions Scholar Jeffery D. Long defines the term "Hinduphobia" as an irrational aversion of Hindus or Hinduism .

[ 1 ] Vamsee Juluri , a Professor of Media Studies at the University of San Francisco agrees.

[ 2 ] [ a ] Examples of anti-Hindu sentiments Destroyed Hindu temple in Banshkhali , Chittagong , Bangladesh According to the religious dialogue activist P. N. Benjamin , some Christian evangelists denigrate Hindu gods and consider Hindu rituals barbaric, and such attitudes have caused tensions between religious communities.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Hindus have historically been, and continue to be, considered Kafirs (infidels) by some Muslims [ 7 ] and Heathen , Satanic or Demonic by some Christians .

[ 8 ] Asia Afghanistan See also: Hinduism in Afghanistan Religious persecution, discrimination of Hindus has caused Afghanistan's Hindu population to dwindle.

[ 9 ] Sikhs and Hindus are continuing to flee from Afghanistan as of July 2020.

[ 10 ] The Taliban government in Afghanistan , which enforced strict sharia (Islamic law), announced plans to require all Hindus (and Sikhs ) to wear identifying badges in public in May 2001 as part of the Taliban's campaign to segregate and repress non-Muslim parts of Afghan society .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] At the time, about 500 Hindus and 2,000 Sikhs remained in Afghanistan.

[ 13 ] The anti-Hindu decree was seen by many as being reminiscent of the Nazi law which required all Jews to wear identifying yellow badges .

[ 12 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] The order prompted international outrage, and it was denounced by the Indian and U.S. governments , [ 13 ] as well as by Abraham Foxman of the ADL .

[ 14 ] Following international pressure, the Taliban regime dropped the badge plans in June 2001.

[ 16 ] Bangladesh See also: Persecution of Hindus in Bangladesh In Bangladesh political leaders frequently face controversy for spreading anti-Hindu sentiment in an attempt to appeal to religious extremists and incite community outrage.

[ 17 ] [ failed verification ] One of the most well known instances of this occurred in 1996 when Khaleda Zia a previous Prime Minister , and then leader of the opposition, declared that the country was at risk of hearing "uludhhwani" (a Bengali Hindu custom involving women's ululation ) from mosques , replacing the azaan (Muslim call to prayer).

[ 18 ] [ full citation needed ] [ 19 ] The fundamentalists and right-wing parties such as the Bangladesh Nationalist Party and Jatiya Party often portray Hindus as being sympathetic to India, making accusations of dual loyalty and allegations of transferring economic resources to India, contributing to a widespread perception that Bangladeshi Hindus are disloyal to the state. Also, the right wing parties claim the Hindus to be backing the Awami League.

[ 20 ] On 28 February 2013, the International Crimes Tribunal sentenced Delwar Hossain Sayeedi , the Vice President of the Jamaat-e-Islami to death for the war crimes committed during the 1971 Bangladesh Liberation War . Following the sentence, Jamaat-e-Islami activists attacked Hindu communities across the country. Hindu properties were looted and burned down, and temples were desecrated and set on fire.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] While the government has held the Jamaat-e-Islami responsible for the attacks on the minorities, the Jamaat-e-Islami leadership has denied any involvement. The minority leaders have protested the attacks and appealed for justice. The Supreme Court of Bangladesh has directed the law enforcement to start suo motu investigation into the attacks.

US Ambassador to Bangladesh express concern about attack of Jamaat on Bengali Hindu community.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] The violence included the looting of Hindu properties and businesses, the burning of Hindu homes, and desecration and destruction of Hindu temples .

[ 25 ] According to community leaders, more than 50 Hindu temples and 1,500 Hindu homes were destroyed in 20 districts.

[ 26 ] On 5 May 2014, A mob of almost 3,000 attacked Hindu households and a temple in eastern Bangladesh after two youths from the community allegedly insulted the Islamic prophet, Muhammad on Facebook .

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] India See also: Persecution of Hindus § Post-Independence India This section needs expansion . You can help by making an edit request adding to it .

( February 2021 ) In March–April 2024, a Christian church in Andhra Pradesh came to attention when a video showing that the church's footwalk tiles consisted of sacred Hindu symbols of Om and Swastika went viral on social media and sparked outrage. Following the backlash, the tiles containing those symbols were removed by the church.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] Between 11:30 pm and midnight on 26 August 2024, the idol of the goddess in Bhoolaxmi temple was destroyed by vandals.  The temple is located in the Rakshapuram area of Hyderabad, and is 50 yards (46 m) from the police station. Local politician, Samreddy Surender Reddy said that the temple had been attacked by vandals five times during the past five years. The police used CCTV to identify two suspects, who they arrested. A crowd gathered outside the temple to protest against the vandalism. The police said that there was no evidence that the vandalism was politically motivated.

[ 32 ] In September 2024, stones were pelted at Ganesha idol processions in many parts of India.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] The police were also attacked in many places but managed to seize the swords used to attack the devotees; petrol bombs were also used to set shops on fire.

[ 38 ] In another incident, the Ganesh idol was taken from the demonstrators by the police, who then secured it in an unoccupied police van, the snaps of which went viral online, as well as in newspapers; some claimed it was, "belittling" to do so.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] Malaysia See also: Hinduism in Malaysia , 2001 Kampung Medan riots , 2009 cow head protests , HINDRAF , and 2007 HINDRAF rally In April 2006, local authorities demolished several Hindu temples to make way for developmental projects. Their reason was that these temples were unlicensed and squatting on government land. In April and May 2006, several Hindu temples were demolished by city hall authorities in the country, accompanied by violence against Hindus.

[ 42 ] [ unreliable source?

] On 21 April 2006, the Malaimel Sri Selva Kaliamman Temple in Kuala Lumpur was reduced to rubble after the city hall sent in bulldozers.

[ 43 ] The president of the Consumers Association of Subang and Shah Alam in Selangor had been helping to organise efforts to stop the local authorities in the Muslim dominated city of Shah Alam from demolishing a 107-year-old Hindu temple. The growing Islamization in Malaysia is a cause for concern to many Malaysians who follow minority religions such as Hinduism.

[ 44 ] On 11 May 2006, armed city hall officers from Kuala Lumpur forcefully demolished part of a 60-year-old suburban temple that serves more than 1,000 Hindus. The " Hindu Rights Action Force ", a coalition of several NGO's, have protested these demolitions by lodging complaints with the Malaysian Prime Minister .

[ 45 ] Many Hindu advocacy groups have protested what they allege is a systematic plan of temple cleansing in Malaysia . The official reason given by the Malaysian government has been that the temples were built "illegally". However, several of the temples are centuries old.

[ 45 ] According to a lawyer for the Hindu Rights Action Task Force, a Hindu temple is demolished in Malaysia once every three weeks.

[ 46 ] A group of Malaysian Muslims protested against the construction of a Hindu temple in a Muslim-majority neighborhood, using a cow's head in the demonstration, sparking concerns about racial and religious tensions in the country.

[ 47 ] Pakistan See also: Persecution of Hindus § Pakistan 2 , Decline of Hinduism in Pakistan , Sectarianism in Pakistan § Hindus , Pakistan studies , and Religious discrimination in Pakistan § Hindus In Pakistan , Hindus are often regarded as kafirs (unbelievers) and blamed for "causing all the problems in Pakistan".

[ 48 ] On Pakistan Day, the Pakistan Army dropped leaflets in South and North Waziristan warning tribesmen about foreigners and their local supporters, using the term "Yahood Aur Hanood" (Jews and Hindus) to describe the perceived enemies. The leaflets aimed to differentiate between the war on terror and local tribes, urging vigilance against intruders.

[ 49 ] At the time of Pakistan's creation the 'hostage theory' had been espoused. According to this theory the Hindu minority in Pakistan was to be given a fair deal in Pakistan in order to ensure the protection of the Muslim minority in India .

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] Separate electorates for Hindus and Christians were established in 1985—a policy which was originally proposed by Islamist leader Abul A'la Maududi . Christian and Hindu leaders complained that they felt excluded from the county's political process, but the policy had strong support from Islamists .

[ 52 ] The Muttahida Majlis-i-Amal (MMA), a coalition of Islamist political parties in Pakistan, calls for the increased Islamization of the government and society, specifically taking an anti-Hindu stance. The MMA leads the opposition in the national assembly , held a majority in the NWFP Provincial Assembly, and was part of the ruling coalition in Balochistan . However, some members of the MMA made efforts to eliminate their rhetoric against Hindus.

[ 53 ] The public school curriculum in Pakistan was Islamized during the 1980s.

[ 54 ] The government of Pakistan claims to undertake a major revision to eliminate such teachings and to remove Islamic teaching from secular subjects.

[ 53 ] The bias in Pakistani textbooks was also documented by Y. Rosser (2003). She wrote that "in the past few decades, social studies textbooks in Pakistan have been used as locations to articulate the hatred that Pakistani policy makers have attempted to inculcate towards their Hindu neighbours", and that as a result "in the minds of generations of Pakistanis, indoctrinated by the 'Ideology of Pakistan' are lodged fragments of hatred and suspicion." [ 55 ] The bias in Pakistani textbooks was studied by Rubina Saigol , K. K. Aziz , I. A. Rahman , Mubarak Ali , A. H. Nayyar , Ahmed Saleem , Y. Rosser and others.

A study by Nayyar & Salim (2003) that was conducted with 30 experts of Pakistan's education system, found that the textbooks contain statements that seek to create hate against Hindus. There was also an emphasis on Jihad , Shahadat, wars and military heroes. The study reported that the textbooks also had a lot of gender-biased stereotypes. Some of the problems in Pakistani textbooks cited in the report were: "Insensitivity to the existing religious diversity of the nation"; "Incitement to militancy and violence, including encouragement of Jihad and Shahadat"; a "glorification of war and the use of force"; "Inaccuracies of fact and omissions that serve to substantially distort the nature and significance of actual events in our history"; "Perspectives that encourage prejudice , bigotry and discrimination towards fellow citizens, especially women and religious minorities, and other towards nations" and "Omission of concepts ... that could encourage critical self awareness among students". (Nayyar & Salim 2003). The Pakistani Curriculum document for classes K-V stated in 1995 that "at the completion of Class-V, the child should be able to "Understand Hindu-Muslim differences and the resultant need for Pakistan. [p. 154] A more recent textbook which was published in Pakistan and titled A Short History of Pakistan , edited by Ishtiaq Hussain Qureshi , has been heavily criticized by academic peer-reviewers for anti-Hindu biases and prejudices that are consistent with Pakistani nationalism , where Hindus are portrayed as "villains" and Muslims as "victims" living under the "disastrous Hindu rule" and "betraying the Muslims to the British", characterizations that academic reviewers found "disquieting" and having a "warped subjectivity".

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] [ 58 ] Ameer Hamza, a leader of the terrorist group Lashkar-e-Taiba , wrote a highly derogatory book about Hinduism in 1999 called "Hindu Ki Haqeeqat" ("Reality of (a) Hindu"); he was not prosecuted by the Government.

[ 59 ] According to the Sustainable Development Policy Institute report 'Associated with the insistence on the Ideology of Pakistan has been an essential component of hate against India and the Hindus. For the upholders of the Ideology of Pakistan, the existence of Pakistan is defined only in relation to Hindus, and hence the Hindus have to be painted as negatively as possible' [ 60 ] A 2005 report by the National Commission for Justice and Peace a non profit organization in Pakistan, found that Pakistan Studies textbooks in Pakistan have been used to articulate the hatred that Pakistani policy-makers have attempted to inculcate towards the Hindus. "Vituperative animosities legitimise military and autocratic rule, nurturing a siege mentality. Pakistan Studies textbooks are an active site to represent India as a hostile neighbour", the report stated. "The story of Pakistan's past is intentionally written to be distinct from, and often in direct contrast with, interpretations of history found in India. From the government-issued textbooks, students are taught that Hindus are backward and superstitious." Further the report stated "Textbooks reflect intentional obfuscation. Today's students, citizens of Pakistan and its future leaders are the victims of these partial truths".

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] An editorial in Dawn discussed a report by The Guardian noted that state-run schools, promoted extremism and bigotry. It highlighted that textbooks in Pakistani state schools propagate concepts like jihad, the inferiority of non-Muslims, and hostility towards India, which foster a bigoted and obscurantist mindset.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] According to a study by a US government commission, textbooks in Pakistani schools foster prejudice and intolerance of Hindus and other religious minorities, and most teachers view non-Muslims as enemies of Islam.

[ 67 ] According to historian Professor Mubarak Ali , textbook reform in Pakistan began with Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto 's introduction of Pakistan Studies and Islamic Studies in 1971. General Zia-ul-Haq later intensified historical revisionism , exploiting these reforms to promote a religiously exclusive narrative, which has contributed to intolerance and extremism. The broader context includes issues with outdated and biased textbook content, with reform efforts struggling to address these problems comprehensively.

[ 68 ] Outside Asia Australia In April 2024, a Hindu woman named Swastika Chandra from Sydney was banned from using the Uber app because it considered her first name ( Swastika ) to be offensive and related to Nazism .

Swastika is a Hindu symbol of divinity and spirituality, however it's perception in other parts of the world is different due to the adoption of the symbol by the Nazi Party in the early 20th century. After a period of six months, Uber exempted the ban and apologized for the misunderstanding.

[ 69 ] Fiji This section may be unbalanced towards certain viewpoints .

Please improve the article or discuss the issue on the talk page .

( September 2021 ) By the time Fiji gained independence from colonial rule , Hindus and other Indo-Fijians constituted nearly fifty percent of the total Fijian population . Nevertheless, the colonial-era laws and the first constitution for Fiji, granted special rights to native Fijians .

[ citation needed ] These laws relegated Hindus as second class citizens of Fiji without full rights. For example, it denied them property rights, such as the ability to buy or own land. Hindus and other Indo-Fijians have since then not enjoyed equal human rights as other Fijians. They can only work as tenant farmers for Fijian landlords.

[ 70 ] The difference in human rights has been a continuing source of conflict between "native" Fijians and Indo-Fijians, with native Fijians believing Fiji to be their ancestral land that only they can own, and Indo-Fijians demanding equal rights for all human beings.

[ citation needed ] [ dubious – discuss ] Beyond land ownership, Hindus have been persecuted in the Fijian communal structure. Spike Boydell states, "the [colonial authorities] introduced the divisive and unworkable system of communal representation and communal electoral rolls. Thus, different communities were represented by their own kind. This still extends to schooling in a prevailing quasi apartheid educational system." [ 71 ] During the late 1990s, Fiji witnessed a series of riots by radical native Fijians against Hindus (and other Indo-Fijians). In the spring of 2000, the democratically elected Fijian government led by Prime Minister Mahendra Chaudhry , who was a Hindu, was held hostage by a group headed by George Speight . They demanded a segregated state exclusively for the native Fijians, thereby legally abolishing any human rights the Hindu inhabitants held up until then. Hindu owned shops, Hindu schools and temples were destroyed, vandalized and looted.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] The Methodist Church of Fiji and Rotuma , and particularly Sitiveni Rabuka who led the 1987 coup in Fiji , called for the creation of a Christian State and endorsed forceful conversion of Hindus after a coup d'état in 1987.

[ citation needed ] In 2012, Fiji Methodist Church's president, Tuikilakila Waqairatu, called for Fiji to officially declare Christianity as the state religion ; the Hindu community leaders demanded that Fiji be a secular state where religion and state are separate.

[ 74 ] United Kingdom After the Leicester riots in October 2022, Hindu groups were set to boycott a review by Dr. Chris Allen, the review's head, because of perceived lack of impartiality.

[ 75 ] A national report in the UK found that 51% of Hindu parents reported their children facing Anti-Hindu hate in schools, and found that schools had failed to monitor and address the issues. It also reported several cases of physical assault as well as beef being thrown at a student.

[ 76 ] Conservative Party In October 2018, it was reported that Conservative Party candidate for the Mayor of London Shaun Bailey had written a pamphlet, entitled No Man's Land , for the Centre for Policy Studies . In it, Bailey argued that accommodating Hindus "[robs] Britain of its community" and it is also turning the country into a "crime riddled cess pool". He also claimed that South Asians "bring their culture, their country and any problems they might have, with them" and that this was not a problem within the black community "because we've shared a religion and in many cases a language".

[ 77 ] In the pamphlet, Bailey confused the Hindu religion with the Hindi language : "You don't know what to do. You bring your children to school and they learn far more about Diwali than Christmas . I speak to the people who are from Brent and they've been having Hindi (sic) days off." [ 78 ] James Cleverly , the Deputy Chairman of the Conservative Party, defended Bailey and suggested that Bailey's remarks were being misconstrued. He implied that black boys were turning to crime due to exposure to other religions rather than focusing on "their own Christian culture ." However, the anti-racism organization Hope Not Hate condemned Bailey's comments as "grotesque." [ 79 ] United States See also: Persecution of Hindus § United States The rise of the Indian American community in the United States has triggered some isolated attacks on them, as has been the case with many minority groups in the United States. Attacks which specifically target Hindus in the United States stem from what is often referred to as the "racialization of religion" among Americans, a process that begins when certain phenotypical features which are associated with a group and attached to race in popular discourse become associated with a particular religion or religions. The racialization of Hinduism in American perception has led Americans to perceive Hindus as belonging to a separate group and this contributes to prejudices against them.

[ 80 ] In 2019, Swaminarayan Temple in Kentucky was vandalised. They sprayed black paint on the deity and sprayed " Jesus is the only God" on the walls. The Christian cross was also spray painted on various walls.

[ 81 ] In April 2015, a Hindu temple in north Texas was vandalised when nasty images were spray-painted on its walls. In February 2015, Hindu temples in Kent and the Seattle Metropolitan area were also vandalised.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] In July 2019, a Hindu priest wearing his religious attire was physically assaulted by Sergio Gouveia in Queens , New York, just two blocks from Shiv Shakti Peeth Temple in Glen Oaks . A Senator and the New York State Attorney General have labeled it a hate crime , stating, "If someone is targeted because of religious robe and a couple of blocks from the temple where he resides, it is difficult to believe this was random." However, the New York police have not classified it as a hate crime.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] Pat Robertson In addition, anti-Hindu views have been expressed which are specifically based on misperceptions of the religion of Hinduism as well as mistaken racial perceptions. In the United States Pat Robertson has denounced Hinduism as " demonic ", believing that when Hindus "feel any sort of inspiration, whether it's by a river or under a tree, on top of a hill, they figure that some God or spirit is responsible for that. And so they'll worship that tree, they'll worship that hill or they'll worship anything." [ 85 ] His remarks were widely condemned and disputed by Indian Americans and members of many non-partisan advocacy groups.

[ 86 ] [ better source needed ] Evangelical leader Albert Mohler defended Robertson's remarks, saying "any belief system, any world view , whether it's Zen Buddhism or Hinduism or dialectical materialism for that matter, Marxism , that keeps persons captive and keeps them from coming to faith in the Lord Jesus Christ , yes, is a demonstration of satanic power." [ 87 ] United States Congress Main article: Rajan Zed prayer protest In July, 2007, The United States Senate conducted its morning prayer services with a Hindu prayer, [ 88 ] a historical first. During the service, three disruptors, named Ante Nedlko Pavkovic, Katherine Lynn Pavkovic and Christen Renee Sugar, from the Fundamentalist Christian activist group Operation Save America [ 89 ] protested by arguing that the Hindu prayer was "an abomination ", and they also claimed that they were "Christians and Patriots". They were swiftly arrested and charged with disrupting Congress.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] The event generated a storm of protest by Christian right groups in the country, with the American Family Association (AFA) opposing the prayer and carrying out a campaign to lobby senators to protest against it.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Their representative attacked the proceedings as "gross idolatry".

[ 89 ] The AFA sent an "Action Alert" to its members in which it asked them to e-mail, write letters, or call their Senators and ask them to oppose the Hindu prayer, stating that it is "seeking the invocation of a non-monotheistic god." [ 94 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] The "alert" stated that "since Hindus worship multiple gods, the prayer will be completely outside the American paradigm, flying in the face of the American motto One Nation Under God .

" [ 97 ] The convocation by Zed was in fact disrupted by three protesters in the gallery reportedly shouting "this is an abomination" and other complaints.

[ 94 ] Barry W. Lynn , executive director of Americans United for Separation of Church and State , said the protest "shows the intolerance of many religious right activists. They say they want more religion in the public square, but it's clear they mean only their religion." [ 89 ] California Textbook Controversy Main article: California textbook controversy over Hindu history A controversy in the US state of California concerning the portrayal of Hinduism in history textbooks began in 2005. A protest was led by Vedic Foundation (VF) and the American Hindu Education Foundation (HEF) by complaining to the California's Curriculum Commission, saying the coverage in sixth grade history textbooks of Indian history and Hinduism was biased against Hinduism; and points of contention includes a textbook's portrayal of the caste system , the Indo-Aryan migration theory , and the status of women in Indian society as the main features of Hinduism.

The California Department of Education (CDE) initially sought to resolve the controversy by appointing Shiva Bajpai, Professor Emeritus at California State University Northridge , as a one-man committee to review revisions proposed by the groups.

[ 98 ] Michael Witzel and others revisited the proposed changed on behalf of the State Board of Education and suggested reverting some of the approved changes.

[ 99 ] In early 2006, the Hindu American Foundation sued the State Board over matters of process; [ 99 ] the case was settled in 2009.

Dotbusters Main article: Dotbusters The Dotbusters was a hate group in Jersey City, New Jersey , that attacked and threatened Indian-Americans in the fall of 1987.

[ 100 ] The name originates from the bindi traditionally worn by Hindu women and girls on their forehead. In July 1987, they had a letter published in the Jersey Journal [ 101 ] stating that they would take any means necessary to drive the Indians out of Jersey City: [ 102 ] I'm writing about your article during July about the abuse of Indian People . Well I'm here to state the other side. I hate them, if you had to live near them you would also. We are an organization called dot busters. We have been around for 2 years. We will go to any extreme to get Indians to move out of Jersey City. If I'm walking down the street and I see a Hindu and the setting is right, I will hit him or her. We plan some of our most extreme attacks such as breaking windows, breaking car windows, and crashing family parties. We use the phone books and look up the name Patel. Have you seen how many of them there are? Do you even live in Jersey City? Do you walk down Central avenue and experience what its  [ sic ] like to be near them: we have and we just don't want it anymore. You said that they will have to start protecting themselves because the police cannot always be there. They will never do anything. They are a week  [ sic ] race Physically  [ sic ] and mentally. We are going to continue our way. We will never be stopped.

Resolutions and proclamations recognizing Hinduphobia In April 2023, Georgia became the first state in the United States to pass a resolution condemning Hinduphobia.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] [ 105 ] That same month, the city of Fremont, California issued a proclamation acknowledging that "Hindu Americans have been the targets of bullying, discrimination, hate speech, harassment, and bias-motivated crimes." [ 106 ] Criticism Some academics question the usage of the term "Hinduphobia" in the West. Brian Collins [ b ] found the tropes of Hinduphobia to be a popular weapon employed by the affluent Hindu diaspora in stifling critical academic discourses on Hinduism—parallels with Kansas creationists were drawn.

[ 107 ] Scholars affiliated to South Asia Scholar Activist Collective (SASAC) [ 108 ] [ 109 ] reject "Hinduphobia" as an ahistorical and inappropriate neologism employed by the Hindu Right in order to suppress academic inquiry into topics concerned with Hinduism, Hindutva, caste, and Indian State.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] While racist and anti-Hindu prejudices have been indeed observed, in their view, Hindus have not faced any entrenched systematic oppression in India or United States.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] The claimants of Hinduphobia were also accused of engaging in discrimination against Muslims, lower-castes, Dalits, Christians, and progressive Hindus.

[ 111 ] See also Anti-Indian sentiment Antiziganism 2013 Bangladesh anti-Hindu violence 2024 Bangladesh anti-Hindu violence Hindu nationalism Hindutva Indomania Pat Robertson Goa Inquisition 2023 Haryana riots Mappila riots Noakhali riots 2025 Pahalgam attack Notes ^ In a discourse on the related issue of California textbook controversy , Chinnaiah Jangam (Professor of South Asian History at Carleton University ) had noted that Juluri did not have any academic training in history, swore by Brahminical ideology , and even wrote a book in defense of militant Hindu nationalism.

[ 3 ] Juluri rejected the charges.

[ 4 ] ^ Collins is the Chair Professor in Indian Religion and Philosophy at Ohio University .

References ^ Long, Jeffery D. (December 2017).

"Reflections on Hinduphobia: A Perspective from a Scholar-Practitioner" (PDF) .

Prabuddha Bharata .

122 : 797– 804.

^ Juluri, Vamsee (2020).

" "Hindu nationalism" or "Hinduphobia"? : Ethnocentrism, errors, and bias in media and media studies" . In Sharma, Divya (ed.).

Ethics, Ethnocentrism and Social Science Research . Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780429270260-8 .

ISBN 9780429270260 .

S2CID 226346622 .

^ Jangam, Chinnaiah (5 June 2015).

"What Is at Stake in Rewriting California School Textbooks?" .

Economic and Political Weekly .

51 (29): 7– 8.

^ Juluri, Vamsee (5 June 2015).

"California Textbooks Issue: A Response" .

Economic and Political Weekly : 7– 8.

^ "Who's afraid of dialogue?" .

The Hindu . 9 October 2001. Archived from the original on 23 May 2019 . Retrieved 2 June 2017 .

^ Bauman, Chad M. (2 February 2015).

Pentecostals, Proselytization, and Anti-Christian Violence in Contemporary India . Oxford University Press. p. 125.

ISBN 9780190266318 .

^ Engineer, Ashghar Ali (13–19 February 1999). "Hindu-Muslim Problem: An Approach".

Economic and Political Weekly .

37 (7): 397.

JSTOR 4407649 .

^ Altman, Michael (2017).

Heathen, Hindoo, Hindu: American Representations of India, 1721-1893 .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780190654924 .

^ Kumar, Ruchi (1 January 2017).

"The decline of Afghanistan's Hindu and Sikh communities" .

Al Jazeera .

Kabul . Retrieved 1 May 2020 .

^ Bagchi, Joymala (26 July 2020).

"Sikh Afghan Nationals Narrate Their Stories Of Fear, Suppression And Anxiety Faced In Kabul" .

Businessworld . New Delhi.

Asian News International . Retrieved 27 July 2020 .

^ "Taliban to mark Afghan Hindus" .

CNN .

Kandahar . 22 May 2001 . Retrieved 16 May 2025 .

^ a b "Taliban to Require Identity Badges for Non-Muslims" .

PBS News Hour . 22 May 2001 . Retrieved 16 May 2025 .

^ a b Harding, Luke (24 May 2001).

"Taliban defends Hindu badges plan" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 16 May 2025 .

.

^ a b Kelley, Jack (22 May 2001).

"Taliban: Hindus must wear identity labels" .

USA Today . Retrieved 16 May 2025 .

^ "Taliban to Enforce Hindu 'Badges' " .

Wired . Kabul.

Associated Press . 22 May 2001 . Retrieved 19 November 2020 .

^ "Taliban drop badge policy for Hindus" .

United Press International .

Islamabad . 27 June 2001 . Retrieved 16 May 2025 .

^ Dandapani, Vijay (12 August 2005).

"Wanted: Some Hindu spine" .

Rediff.com . Retrieved 16 May 2025 .

^ Bangladesh opposition leader accused of hurting religious sentiment . Agence-France Press. 18 November 1996.

^ Kabir, Bhuian Md Monoar (2006).

Politics and Development of the Jamaat-e-Islami, Bangladesh . South Asian Publishers. p. 168.

ISBN 978-81-7003-305-9 .

^ "Bangladesh: Attacks on members of the Hindu minority" .

Amnesty International . Archived from the original on 18 October 2006 . Retrieved 21 September 2006 .

^ Habib, Haroon (1 March 2013).

"44 killed in Bangladesh violence" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 17 October 2024 .

^ "Bagerhat Hindu Temple Set on Fire" .

bdnews24.com . 2 March 2013. Archived from the original on 7 April 2013 . Retrieved 20 March 2013 .

^ "US worried at violence" .

The Daily Star (Bangladesh) . 12 March 2013 . Retrieved 12 March 2013 .

^ "Mozena: Violence is not the way to resolution" .

The Daily Ittefaq . 11 March 2013. Archived from the original on 16 November 2014 . Retrieved 12 March 2013 .

^ "Bangladesh: Wave of violent attacks against Hindu minority" .

Amnesty International . Archived from the original on 9 March 2013 . Retrieved 8 March 2013 .

^ Ethirajan, Anbarasan (9 March 2013).

"Bangladesh minorities 'terrorised' after mob violence" .

BBC . Retrieved 17 March 2013 .

^ "Hindu households, temple attacked in Bangladesh" .

Deccan Herald . Dhaka. 5 May 2014 . Retrieved 27 May 2014 .

^ "Mob of 3000 attack Hindu households, temple in Bangladesh" .

Firstpost . Dhaka.

Press Trust of India . 5 May 2014 . Retrieved 27 May 2014 .

^ Kumar, Sumit (4 April 2024).

"ऊँ और स्वास्तिक के चिन्ह पर पैर रखकर चल रहे थे लोग, चर्च में नफरत वाला काम" [People were walking on the symbols Om and Swastika, a hateful action by a church].

News18 India (in Hindi).

Amaravati . Retrieved 18 April 2024 .

^ Commune, The (5 April 2024).

"Following Social Media Outcry, Pathway Leading To Church With Tiles Having Hindu Symbols Removed" .

The Commune . Retrieved 18 April 2024 .

^ "Deliberately hurting Hindu sentiments! Andhra Church uses 'Om' & 'Swastika' tiles for flooring" .

www.newsbharati.com . Retrieved 18 April 2024 .

^ "Telangana: Hyderabad Police arrests 2 men for vandalising Bhoolaxmi temple idol" .

Mint . 27 August 2024 . Retrieved 3 September 2024 .

^ Ansari, Nahid (15 September 2024).

"Clashes erupt in UP's Mahoba after stone pelting during Ganesh idol procession" .

India Today . Retrieved 15 September 2024 .

^ Singh, Umesh (11 September 2024).

"SP Lodha transferred following stone-pelting incident during a Ganesh idol procession in MP's Ratlam" .

Deccan Herald . Retrieved 15 September 2024 .

^ "Stones pelted at Ganesh pandal in Surat; 6 arrested" .

The Hindu . 9 September 2024 . Retrieved 15 September 2024 .

^ Samachar, Gujarat (11 September 2024).

"After Surat stones pelted at Ganesh Pandal in Kutch" .

GujaratSamachar English . Retrieved 15 September 2024 .

^ Raj, Gayathri V (11 September 2024).

"Nagamangala Ganesha procession news: Stone pelting, lathi charge during procession in Karnataka's Nagamangala, Section 144 imposed" .

Deccan Herald . Retrieved 15 September 2024 .

^ "Ganpati idol stone pelting incident: 52 held, BJP questions arrest of Hindu devotees" .

English.Mathrubhumi . 12 September 2024 . Retrieved 15 September 2024 .

^ "Bengaluru: Viral photo of Ganesh idol in police van sparks outrage" .

The Siasat Daily . 14 September 2024 . Retrieved 15 September 2024 .

^ Verma, Shivam (14 September 2024).

"Picture of Lord Ganesha's idol in police van sparks row in Bengaluru: Here's what we know so far" .

DNA India . Retrieved 15 September 2024 .

^ "Lord Ganesha murti in Bengaluru police van sparks row: PM Modi says 'in Congress-ruled Karnataka, even…' " .

mint . 15 September 2024 . Retrieved 15 September 2024 .

^ Kaliban, K. (16 June 2006).

"Temple row - a dab of sensibility please" .

Malaysiakini . Retrieved 17 May 2025 .

^ "Free domain sharing - Site not yet configured" .

gatago.com . Archived from the original on 4 November 2006.

^ "Pressure on multi-faith Malaysia" .

BBC . 16 May 2006 . Retrieved 17 May 2025 .

^ a b "Hindu group protests 'temple cleansing' in Malaysia" .

The Financial Express .

Kuala Lumpur .

Associated Press . 23 May 2006. Archived from the original on 4 July 2007 . Retrieved 17 May 2025 .

^ Hamid, Jalil (8 November 2007).

"Malaysia ethnic Indians in uphill fight on religion" .

Reuters . Kuala Lumpur. Archived from the original on 16 March 2017 . Retrieved 17 May 2025 .

^ Joshi, Vijay (28 August 2009).

"Malaysia Muslims protest proposed Hindu temple" .

Google News . Kuala Lumpur.

Associated Press . Archived from the original on 2 September 2009 . Retrieved 17 May 2025 .

^ "Why democracy didn't take roots in Pakistan?" .

kashmirherald.com .

^ Military drops leaflets in Waziristan Archived 17 August 2007 at the Wayback Machine , jang.com.pk ^ Zamindar, Vazira Fazila-Yacoobali (2010).

The Long Partition and the Making of Modern South Asia: Refugees, Boundaries, Histories . Columbia University Press. p. 72.

ISBN 9780231138475 .

The logic of the hostage theory tied the treatment of Muslim minorities in India to the treatment meted out to Hindus in Pakistan.

^ Dhulipala, Venkat (2015).

Creating a New Medina: State Power, Islam, and the Quest for Pakistan in Late Colonial North India . Cambridge University Press. p. 19.

ISBN 9781316258385 .

Within the subcontinent, ML propaganda claimed that besides liberating the 'majority provinces' Muslims it would guarantee protection for Muslims who would be left behind in Hindu India. In this regard, it repeatedly stressed the hostage population theory that held that 'hostage' Hindu and Sikh minorities inside Pakistan would guarantee Hindu India's good behaviour towards its own Muslim minority.

^ Jones, Owen Bennett (2002).

Pakistan: Eye of the Storm . Yale University Press. p.

31 .

ISBN 0300101473 . Retrieved 9 December 2014 .

separate electorates for minorities in pakistan.

^ a b International Religious Freedom Report 2006 Published by the US Department of State ^ "Pakistan" .

U.S. Department of State .

^ "Abuse of History in Pakistan: Bangladesh to Kargil" . Archived from the original on 14 November 2003 . Retrieved 2007-01-29 .

, by Dr. Yvette C Rosser ^ Lehmann, F., 1968, Pacific Affairs, University of British Columbia, pp. 644–645 ^ Calkins, P. B. Pacific Affairs, University of British Columbia , pp. 643–644, 1968 ^ Ahmed, A., Pacific Affairs, University of British Columbia, pp. 645–647, 1968 ^ "Pakistan" .

U.S. Department of State .

^ Nayyar, A.H. and Salim, A. (eds.)(2003).

The subtle Subversion: A report on Curricula and Textbooks in Pakistan . Report of the project A Civil Society Initiative in Curricula and Textbooks Reform . Sustainable Development Policy Institute, Islamabad.

^ Hate mongering worries minorities , Daily Times (Pakistan) , 2006-04-25 ^ In Pakistan's Public Schools, Jihad Still Part of Lesson Plan - The Muslim nation's public school texts still promote hatred and jihad, reformers say.

By Paul Watson, Times Staff Writer; 18 August 2005; Los Angeles Times . 4 Page article online Retrieved on 2 January 2010 ^ Primers Of Hate - History or biology, Pakistani students get anti-India lessons in all their textbooks; 'Hindu, Enemy Of Islam' - These are extracts from government-sponsored textbooks approved by the National Curriculum Wing of the Federal Ministry of Education.

Archived 7 September 2006 at the Wayback Machine By AMIR MIR; 10 October 2005; Outlook India Magazine Retrieved on 2 January 2010 ^ Noor's cure: A contrast in views ; by Arindam Banerji; 16 July 2003; Rediff India Abroad Retrieved on 2 January 2010 ^ Curriculum of hatred Archived 26 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine , Dawn , 2009-05-20 ^ ‘School texts spreading more extremism than seminaries’ By Our Special Correspondent; Tuesday, 19 May 2009; Dawn . Retrieved 1 January 2010 ^ "US commission: Pakistan schools teach Hindu hatred" .

The Boston Globe .

Associated Press . 9 November 2011 . Retrieved 26 January 2022 .

^ The threat of Pakistan's revisionist texts , The Guardian , 2009-05-18 ^ "A woman called Swastika got an apology from Uber after it banned her because of her name" .

Business Insider . Retrieved 20 April 2024 .

^ Vasil, R. K. (1972) 'Communalism and constitution-making in Fiji', in Pacific Affairs 45 (1 & 2):21-41 ^ Spike Boydell (2001), Philosophical Perceptions of Pacific Property - Land as a Communal Asset in Fiji Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine Department of Land Management and Development, School of Social and Economic Development, University of the South Pacific ^ "Hindus in South Asia and the Diaspora: A Survey of Human Rights 2005" . Hafsite.org. Archived from the original on 12 July 2012 . Retrieved 30 April 2013 .

^ FIJI 2012 INTERNATIONAL RELIGIOUS FREEDOM REPORT ^ Fiji Hindu group rejects Christian state calls Australian Broadcasting Corporation (6 Sep 2012) ^ Watson, Greig (29 October 2022).

"Leicester disorder: Hindu groups set to boycott review" .

BBC News . Retrieved 1 November 2022 .

^ "Anti-Hindu Hate In Schools" .

^ "Tory London mayoral candidate claimed celebrating Hindu and Muslim festivals has turned Britain into 'cesspool of crime' " .

The Independent . 4 October 2018.

Archived from the original on 7 May 2022 . Retrieved 12 January 2021 .

^ Sonwalkar, Prasun (4 October 2018).

"Anti-Hindu, Muslim views return to haunt London mayor candidate Shaun Bailey" .

Hindustan Times . Retrieved 4 October 2018 .

^ Sabbagh, Dan (4 October 2018).

"Tory deputy chairman admits concerns about Shaun Bailey remarks" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 4 October 2018 .

^ Joshi, Khyati, The Racialization of Hinduism, Islam, and Sikhism in the United States, Equity & Excellence in Education, Volume 39, Number 3, August 2006, pp. 211–226(16) ^ a b "Hindu temple vandalised in U.S." The Hindu . PTI. 31 January 2019.

ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 12 January 2021 .

^ "US: Hindu temple vandalized in Kentucky, deity sprayed black paint" .

in.news.yahoo.com . Retrieved 12 January 2021 .

^ "Community leaders rally around Hindu priest who was beaten" .

WPIX . 23 July 2019.

^ "State Attorney General James Calls Unprovoked Attack On Hindu Priest In Queens A Hate Crime" . 23 July 2019.

^ The 700 Club , 23 March 2006.

^ "Using TV, Christian Pat Robertson Denounces Hinduism as "Demonic" " . Archived from the original on 20 October 2009.

^ The O'Reilly Factor , Fox News Channel. 17 March 2006.

^ "Senate Prayer Led by Hindu Elicits Protest" .

The Washington Post . 13 July 2007. Archived from the original on 27 January 2020 . Retrieved 19 December 2008 .

^ a b c "Christian protesters disrupt first Senate prayer by a Hindu" .

Boston Herald . Washington. 12 July 2007 . Retrieved 20 March 2011 .

^ "A Hindu Prayer in the Senate Meets Protest" .

The New York Times . 13 July 2007 . Retrieved 25 April 2010 .

^ A link to YouTube video on YouTube ^ Michelle Boorstein, Hindu Groups Ask '08 Hopefuls to Criticize Protest , Washington Post (27 July 2007).

^ A Prayer and Protest , Las Vegas Sun (13 July 2007).

^ a b " Hindu Prayer in Senate Disrupted ." Associated Press (published on NBC News ). 2007-06-12. Retrieved on 2007-06-15 ^ "ActionAlert: Hindu to open Senate with prayer" . American Family Association. Archived from the original on 15 July 2007.

^ "Senate Prayer Led by Hindu Elicits Protest" .

washingtonpost.com .

^ " Hindu to open Senate with prayer AFA Action Alert, July 10, 2007" ^ flrvs.

"A saffron assault abroad" . Archived from the original on 20 February 2012 . Retrieved 6 February 2017 .

^ a b "Hindu groups sue California Board of Education" .

Rediff . Retrieved 6 February 2017 .

^ Gutierrez, Elizabeth.

" "THE -DOTBUSTER- ATTACKS: HATE CRIME AGAINST ASIAN INDIANS IN JERSEY CITY, NEW JERSEY" " (PDF) . Geography and Urban Studies Temple UniversitY Philadelphia, PA 19122. p. 30 . Retrieved 17 September 2024 .

^ Marriott, Michel (12 October 1987).

"In Jersey City, Indians Protest Violence" .

The New York Times . p. 1 . Retrieved 20 March 2011 .

^ "Dot Busters in New Jersey" .

The Pluralism Project . Archived from the original on 20 May 2011 . Retrieved 20 April 2025 .

^ Now |, Times (1 April 2023).

"Georgia legislature takes aim at attacks on Hinduism, passes resolution against Hinduphobia" .

The Economic Times . Retrieved 4 August 2023 .

^ "Georgia passes resolution condemning Hinduphobia, becomes first US state to do so" .

ANI News . 1 April 2023 . Retrieved 17 September 2024 .

^ "The resolution was initiated by representatives of Forsyth County as part of Hindu Advocacy Day!" .

Coalition of Hindus of North America . 21 April 2023 . Retrieved 17 September 2024 .

^ April 18, 2023 City Council Meeting , retrieved 4 August 2023 ^ Collins, Brian (2014). "Introduction".

The Head Beneath the Altar: Hindu Mythology and the Critique of Sacrifice . Michigan State University Press. pp.

26– 28.

ISBN 978-1-61186-116-7 .

JSTOR 10.14321/j.ctt7zt5hc.4 .

^ "Hindutva's threat to academic freedom" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 10 July 2021 .

^ Prakash, Priyali (10 July 2021).

" 'Targeted by hate': Audrey Truschke on why she helped write a 'Hindutva Harassment Field Manual' " .

Scroll.in . Retrieved 10 July 2021 .

^ a b "Bad Faith Bias Claims" .

Hindutva Harassment Field Manual . Retrieved 10 July 2021 .

^ a b c "Glossary" .

Hindutva Harassment Field Manual . Retrieved 10 July 2021 .

Sources Long, Jeffery D. (2011).

Historical Dictionary of Hinduism . Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 978-0-8108-6764-2 .

Further reading Balagangadhara, S.N.; Claerhout, Sarah (Spring 2008).

"Are Dialogues Antidotes to Violence? Two Recent Examples From Hinduism Studies" (PDF) .

Journal for the Study of Religions and Ideologies .

7 (19): 118– 143. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 August 2009 . Retrieved 17 January 2009 .

Benkin, Richard L. (2014).

A Quiet Case of Ethnic Cleansing - The Murder of Bangladesh's Hindus (2nd ed.). New Delhi: Akshaya Prakashan (published 1 January 2014).

ISBN 978-8188643523 .

Kamra, A. J. (2000).

The prolonged partition and its pogroms: Testimonies on violence against Hindus in East Bengal 1946-64 . Voice of India.

ISBN 9788185990637 . Retrieved 23 January 2023 .

Rosser, Yvette Claire (2003).

Islamization of Pakistani Social Studies Textbooks . Monograph (Observer Research Foundation). New Delhi: Rupa & Co.

ISBN 9788129102218 . Retrieved 23 January 2023 .

.

Chaturvedi, Vinayak (1 December 2021).

"The Hindu Right and Attacks on Academic Freedom in the US" .

The Nation . Retrieved 23 January 2023 .

External links Wikiquote has quotations related to Anti-Hindu sentiment .

HYPERLINK TO HINDUPHOBIA: Online hatred, extremism and bigotry against Hindus (PDF) . Hindu American Foundation. 2007 . Retrieved 23 January 2023 .

v t e Hinduism topics Glossary Index Timeline Philosophy Concepts Brahman Om Ishvara Atman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Puruṣārthas Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Niti Ahimsa Asteya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Dāna Damah Dayā Akrodha Schools Āstika : Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Svābhāvika Bhedābheda Dvaita Advaita Vishishtadvaita Nāstika : Charvaka Texts Classification Śruti Smṛti Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Aitareya Kaushitaki Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Maitrayaniya Shvetashvatara Chandogya Kena Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Natyaveda Sthapatyaveda Vedanga Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other Bhagavad Gita Agamas Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Minor Upanishads Arthashastra Nitisara Dharmaśāstra Manusmriti Nāradasmṛti Yājñavalkya Smṛti Sutras Stotras Subhashita Tantras Yoga Vasistha Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Sangam literature Tirumurai Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Thiruppugal Thirukkural Kamba Ramayanam Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abhirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Vedarthasamgraha Deities Gods Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Agni Dattatreya Ganesha Hanuman Indra Kartikeya Krishna Rama Surya Varuna Vayu more Goddesses Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Bhumi Durga Kali Mahavidya Matrika Radha Rukmini Sati Shakti Shashthi Sita more Practices Worship Temple Murti Puja Bhakti Japa Bhajan Naivedhya Yajna Homa Tapas Dhyāna Tirthatana Sanskaras Garbhadhana Pumsavana Simantonayana Jatakarma Namakarana Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyarambha Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyeshti Varnashrama Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Vaishya Shudra Ashrama Brahmacharya Grihastha Vanaprastha Sannyasa Festivals Diwali Holi Shivaratri Raksha Bandhan Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami Ganesh Chaturthi Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Pongal Makar Sankranti New Year Bihu Gudi Padwa Pahela Baishakh Puthandu Vaisakhi Vishu Ugadi Kumbh Mela Haridwar Nashik Prayag Ujjain Ratha Yatra Teej Vasant Panchami Others Other Svādhyāya Namaste Bindi Tilaka Related Hindus Etymology List Denominations Law Calendar Anti-Hindu sentiment Criticism Hindu gurus and sants Hindu studies Iconography Mythology Nationalism Hindutva Persecution Pilgrimage sites India Relations with other religions Baháʼí Buddhism Islam Jainism Judaism Sikhism Theosophy Glossary Hinduism by country Hindu temples List Architecture Outline Category Portal WikiProject v t e Religious persecution and discrimination By group Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Methods Censorship Blasphemy law Blood libel Communal violence Cultural genocide Deprogramming Desecration Domicide Discrimination Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Extrajudicial killing Extrajudicial punishment Exclusivism Forced conversion Forced displacement Hate crime Iconoclasm Intolerance Pogrom Police Political violence Population cleansing Population transfer Sectarian violence Social cleansing Segregation State atheism State religion Terrorism Violence War Events Golden calf massacre (c.1250 BC) Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire (64–313) Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire (c. 324–c. 491) Decline of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent (c.550–c. 1200) Yellow Turban Rebellion (c.184–c. 205) Battle of Tours (732) Rhineland massacres (1096) Jerusalem massacre (1099) Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent (643–1526) Inquisition (1184–1908) Massacre at Ayyadieh (1191) Northern Crusades (12th–16th cent.) Crusades against Christians (13th–15th cent.) Forced conversions of Muslims in Spain (1500–1526) European wars of religion (1522–1712) Ottoman–Habsburg wars (1526–1791) Goa Inquisition (1561–1812) French Wars of Religion (1562–1598) Expulsion of the Moriscos (1609–1614) Test Acts (1673–1829) Persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction (1683–1922) Christianization of the Sámi people (1700s) French Revolutionary dechristianisation (1789–1801) Utah War (1857–1858) 1860 Mount Lebanon civil war (1860) Circassian genocide (1864) Dungan Revolt (1862–1877) Adana massacre (1909) Massacres of Albanians in the Balkan Wars (1912–1913) Greek genocide (1913–1922) Pontic Greek genocide Assyrian genocide (1914–1924) Armenian genocide (1915–1923) Persecution of Christians in the Eastern Bloc (1917–1990) Soviet persecution (1922–1991) 1917–1921 1921–1928 1928–1941 1958–1964 1970–1987 legislation Šahovići massacre (1924) White Terror (Spain) (1936–1975) Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses (1933) The Holocaust (1939–1945) Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia (1941–1945) Communist Polish persecution (1945–1989) Communist Romanian persecution (1945–1989) Noakhali riots (1946) Direct Action Day (1946) 1946 Bihar riots (1946) Rawalpindi massacres (1947) Persecution of Hindus in Pakistan (1947–ongoing) Violence against Muslims in India (1947–ongoing) Violence against Hindus in independent India (1947–ongoing) 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight (1948) Jewish exodus from the Muslim world (1948–1980) Antireligious campaigns in China (1949–ongoing) Persecution of Tibetans (1950–ongoing) Exodus of Turks from Bulgaria (1950) Religious violence in Nigeria (1953–ongoing) Istanbul pogrom (1955) Persecution of Papuans (1962–ongoing) Buddhist crisis (1963) Huế Phật Đản shootings (1963) Thích Quảng Đức (1963) Xá Lợi Pagoda raids (1963) Cultural Revolution (1966–1976) Four Olds (1966) Famen Temple (1966) Bangladesh genocide (1971) Persecution of Hindus in Bangladesh (1971–ongoing) Lebanese Civil War (1975–1990) Cambodian genocide (1975–1979) East Timor genocide (1975–1999) 1984 anti-Sikh riots (1984) Revival Process (1984–1989) 1989 expulsion of Turks from Bulgaria (1989) Exodus of Kashmiri Hindus (1990) Yugoslav Wars (1991–2001) Ethnic cleansing in the Bosnian War (1992–1996) Bosnian genocide (1995) War crimes in the Kosovo War (1999) Walisongo school massacre (2000) Kosheh massacres (2000) September 11 attacks (2001) 2002 Gujarat riots (2002) South Thailand insurgency (2004–ongoing) Boko Haram insurgency (2009–ongoing) Maspero demonstrations (2011) Attacks by Islamic extremists in Bangladesh (2013–2016) Yazidi genocide (2014–2017) Genocide of Christians by ISIL (2014–ongoing) Iraqi Turkmen genocide (2014–2017) Persecution of Uyghurs in China (2014–ongoing) Rohingya genocide (2016–ongoing) Christchurch mosque shootings (2019) 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings (2019) 2020 Delhi riots (2020) 2024 Istanbul church shooting Crocus City Hall attack (2024) Mar Elias Church attack (2025) Religion v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Hindu_sentiment&oldid=1302375912 " Categories : Anti-Hindu sentiment Persecution of Hindus Hidden categories: CS1 Hindi-language sources (hi) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia articles needing reorganization from July 2021 Use British English from July 2016 Use dmy dates from July 2016 Articles with excerpts All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from May 2025 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from May 2025 Articles to be expanded from February 2021 All articles to be expanded All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from May 2025 Articles needing more viewpoints from September 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from June 2016 Articles lacking reliable references from April 2025 This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 01:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Hindu sentiment 7 languages Add topic

