Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Main composers 3 See also 4 References and further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Monody 33 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français Gaeilge Galego Հայերեն Italiano עברית ქართული Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Poetic or musical vocal style This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( September 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is about the term monody . For other uses, see Monody (disambiguation) .

Caccini, Le nuove musiche , 1601, title page In music, monody refers to a solo vocal style distinguished by having a single melodic line and instrumental accompaniment. Although such music is found in various cultures throughout history, the term is specifically applied to Italian song of the early 17th century, particularly the period from about 1600 to 1640. The term is used both for the style and for individual songs (so one can speak both of monody as a whole as well as a particular monody). The term itself is a recent invention of scholars. No composer of the 17th century ever called a piece a monody.  Compositions in monodic form might be called madrigals , motets , or even concertos (in the earlier sense of " concertato ", meaning "with instruments").

In poetry , the term monody has become specialized to refer to a poem in which one person laments another's death.  (In the context of ancient Greek literature , monody, μονῳδία , could simply refer to lyric poetry sung by a single performer, rather than by a chorus .) History [ edit ] Musical monody, which developed out of an attempt by the Florentine Camerata in the 1580s to restore ancient Greek practices of melody and declamation (probably with little historical accuracy), one solo voice sings a melodic part, usually with considerable ornamentation , over a rhythmically independent bass line.  Accompanying instruments could be lute , chitarrone , theorbo , harpsichord , organ , and even on occasion guitar .  While some monodies were arrangements for smaller forces of the music for large ensembles which was common at the end of the 16th century, especially in the Venetian School , most monodies were composed independently.  The development of monody was one of the defining characteristics of early Baroque practice, as opposed to late Renaissance style, in which groups of voices sang independently and with a greater balance between parts.

Contrasting passages in monodies could be for the most part melodic or for the most part declamatory and the two styles of presentation developed into the aria and the recitative respectively, both of which came to be incorporated into the cantata by about 1635.

The parallel development of solo song with accompaniment in France was called the air de cour :  the term monody is not normally applied to these more conservative songs, however, which retained many musical characteristics of the Renaissance chanson .

An important early treatise on monody is contained in Giulio Caccini 's song collection, Le nuove musiche (Florence, 1601).

Main composers [ edit ] Vincenzo Galilei (1520 – 1591) Giulio Caccini (c. 1545 – 1618) Emilio de' Cavalieri (c. 1550 – 1602) Lucia Quinciani (b. c. 1566) Bartolomeo Barbarino (c. 1568 – c. 1617) Jacopo Peri (1561 – 1633) Claudio Monteverdi (1567 – 1643) Alessandro Grandi (c. 1575 – 1630) Giovanni Pietro Berti (d. 1638) Sigismondo d'India (c. 1582 – 1629) Claudio Saracini (1586 – c. 1649) Francesca Caccini (1587 – after 1641) Benedetto Ferrari (c. 1603 – 1681) See also [ edit ] Monodies by Mehdi Hosseini Threnody Texture (music) References and further reading [ edit ] Nigel Fortune , "Monody", in The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , ed. Stanley Sadie.  20 vol.  London, Macmillan Publishers Ltd., 1980.

ISBN 1-56159-174-2 Gustave Reese , Music in the Renaissance .  New York, W.W. Norton & Co., 1954.

ISBN 0-393-09530-4 Manfred Bukofzer , Music in the Baroque Era .  New York, W.W. Norton & Co., 1947.

ISBN 0-393-09745-5 External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of monody at Wiktionary [1] more on Monody and the Vocal Concerto Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Monody&oldid=1183901071 " Categories : Ancient Greek theatre Baroque music Renaissance music Musical texture Vocal music Genres of poetry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from September 2018 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 7 November 2023, at 05:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Monody 33 languages Add topic

