Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Remedies 3 Healers 4 Modern and non-Indigenous use Toggle Modern and non-Indigenous use subsection 4.1 20th century use 4.2 21st century use 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Bush medicine 1 language فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Traditional medicine used by Indigenous Australians For general article on traditional medicine, see Traditional medicine .

Part of a series on Alternative medicine General information Alternative medicine History Terminology Alternative veterinary medicine Quackery (health fraud) Rise of modern medicine Pseudoscience Antiscience Skepticism Scientific Therapeutic nihilism Fringe medicine and science Acupressure Acupuncture Alkaline diet Anthroposophic medicine Apitherapy Applied kinesiology Aromatherapy Association for Research and Enlightenment Auriculotherapy Bates method Biological terrain assessment Black salve Bodywork Bone-setting Bowen technique Breathwork Fake COVID-19 treatments Camel urine Cancer treatments Charcoal cleanse Chiropractic Chiropractic treatment techniques Vertebral subluxation Christian Science Chromotherapy Colloidal silver Colon cleansing Coffee enema Colorpuncture Conversion therapy Craniosacral therapy Crystal healing Cupping therapy Dental amalgam controversy Detoxification Foot detox Dry needling Ear candling Energy medicine Correactology Esoteric energy Reiki Therapeutic touch Estrogen dominance Fabunan Antiviral Injection Facilitated communication FasciaBlaster Feldenkrais method Functional medicine Hair analysis Holistic dentistry Hologram bracelet Homeopathy Bach flower remedies Hydrotherapy Hypnotherapy Ionized jewelry Iridology Jilly Juice Lightning Process Lymphotherapy Magnet therapy Manual therapy Manual lymphatic drainage Medical intuitive Megavitamin therapy Mesmerism Mind–body interventions MMS Myofascial release NAET Naturopathy Oil pulling Orgone Orthomolecular medicine Orthopathy Osteomyology Osteopathy Ozone therapy Parapsychology Phrenology Postural Integration Psychic surgery Psychodermatology Quantum healing Radionics Rapid prompting method Reflexology RBOP Rolfing Scientific racism ThetaHealing Thomsonianism Thought Field Therapy Urophagia Vaginal steaming Vegetotherapy Vision therapy Vitalism Young blood transfusion Zero balancing Controversies Big Pharma conspiracy theories HIV/AIDS denialism OPV AIDS hypothesis Anti-vaccinationism Vaccine misinformation Vaccines and autism MMR vaccine and autism in chiropractic Water fluoridation controversy COVID-19 misinformation Turbo cancer Classifications Alternative medical systems Mind–body intervention Biologically based therapy Manipulative methods Energy therapy Traditional medicine African Muti Southern Africa Ayurveda Dosha MVAH Balneotherapy Brazilian Bush medicine Cambodian Chinese Blood stasis Chinese herbology Dit da Gua sha Gill plate trade Long gu Meridian Moxibustion Pressure point Qi San Jiao Tui na Zang-fu Chumash Curandero Faith healing Herbal medicine Hilot Iranian Jamu Kayakalpa Kambo Japanese Korean Maya Mien Shiang Mongolian Naftalan oil Prophetic medicine Shamanism Shiatsu Siddha Sri Lankan Thai massage Tibetan Unani Vietnamese Alternative diagnoses Adrenal fatigue Aerotoxic syndrome Candida hypersensitivity Chronic Lyme disease Electromagnetic hypersensitivity Heavy legs Leaky gut syndrome Multiple chemical sensitivity Vertebral subluxation Wilson's temperature syndrome v t e Bush medicine comprises traditional medicines used by Indigenous Australians , being Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. Indigenous people have been using various components of native Australian flora and some fauna as medicine for thousands of years, and a minority turn to healers in their communities for medications aimed at providing physical and spiritual healing.

Traditional methods of healing have underwritten the development of non-Indigenous medicines throughout history. One notable example would be the development of a seasickness medication.

Today, traditional healers and medicines have been incorporated into modern clinical settings to help treat sick Indigenous people within some healthcare networks.

Overview [ edit ] Traditional medicine has been defined as the sum of the total knowledge, skills and practices based on the theories, beliefs and experiences indigenous to different cultures, whether explicable or not, used in the maintenance of health, [ 1 ] as well as in the prevention, diagnosis, improvement or treatment of physical and mental illness. Bush medicine is also connected to the holistic worldview in such a way that the interplay between the physical, emotional, social and spiritual aspects is crucial in attaining wellbeing.

[ 2 ] The modern world and Aboriginal cultures have differing approaches for health. Whilst conventional medicine deals with direct causes of illness and science-based views of health, the Aboriginal view on health as defined by the National Aboriginal Health Strategy considers "not just the physical well being of the individual, but the social, emotional and cultural well-being of the whole community. This is the whole-of-life view and it also includes the cyclical concept of life-death-life".

[ 3 ] Broadly, most human societies see the manifestation of illness as natural, human or supernatural.

[ 4 ] According to Patrick Maher, the traditional Aboriginal model of illness sees social and spiritual dysfunction as a cause of illness, while supernatural intervention is regarded as the main cause of serious illness.

[ 5 ] Aboriginal concepts of illness and pain and its causes are quite different from western medicine ; for example, a severe headache may be attributed to an evil spirit having taken up residence in the head. It is also believed that damage to sacred sites associated with Dreamtime mythology may cause serious illness. The basic structures and more complex systems of belief need to be understood before the role of bush medicine or traditional healers can be grasped.

[ 4 ] Generally, bush medicine in Australia is made from plant materials, such as bark , leaves and seeds, although animal products were used as well.

[ 6 ] A major component of traditional medicine is herbal medicine , which is the use of natural plant substances to treat or prevent illness.

[ 7 ] Aboriginal remedies vary among the many Aboriginal groups in different parts of the country. There is no single set of Aboriginal medicines and remedies, just as there is no single Aboriginal language .

[ 6 ] Remedies [ edit ] Herbal medicine is a major component of traditional medicine. The Aboriginal people view E. alternifolia as a medicinal plant and some carry the leaves with them. They use it to treat symptoms of the common cold and flu .

[ 8 ] Other plants used in bush medicine includes the leaves of the emu bush , which some Northern Territory Aboriginal people used to sterilise sores and cuts. It could also be gargled when necessary. The stinging nettle has also been used in some Aboriginal bush medicine to treat paralysis and rheumatism.

[ 9 ] Mitchell Park, now within Cattai National Park and situated near Sydney Basin in NSW, had many plants that were used as remedies for Aboriginal people.

[ 10 ] Nine species of eucalyptus present in the park could act as remedies. The red gum kino is known to be rich in astringent tannins .

[ 11 ] Additionally, this park also contained native plants that were actually used by early European settlers. The nectar-laden liquid from banksia flowers was used as a cough syrup, and from the native grapes ( Cissus hypoglauca ) a throat gargle was made.

[ 11 ] The use of animals and other living things may also be used in bush medicine. In Warrabri , Northern Territory , one believed cure for earache is squeezing the fatty part of a witchetty grub into the sore ear.

[ 12 ] In Uluru , the purported cure involves squeezing rabbit urine into the ear.

[ 13 ] Healers [ edit ] Aboriginal people believe that their healers, their "medicine men", have special powers which are bestowed upon them by their spiritual ancestors to heal. They have the roles of both a general practitioner and a psychiatrist , healing both the body and mind.

[ 14 ] For the Aṉangu of the Western Desert cultural bloc , practitioners of bush medicine are known as ngangkari . They cure illnesses through healing rituals that may involve magic. An example of such ritual would be singing, massaging and sucking to remove a foreign object that has entered the body, and invoking the power of the war god Ancestor Ngurunderi to heal the wounds of soldiers caused by spears and clubs. Aside from physical healing, ngangkaris also act as mental health practitioners, as they try to resolve conflicts within the community and offer advice as well. With every sickness, in addition to giving a diagnosis and advice on suitable remedies, the duty of the ngangkari is also to assess the impact of the sickness to the community.

[ 15 ] Many Aboriginal people choose to be treated by bush medicine instead of, or as well as, Western treatments for a number of reasons. These include: some Aboriginal people feel uncomfortable and out of place in a sterilised, Western clinic; Aboriginal bush medicine incorporates physical, spiritual and emotional healing, whereas Western medicine does not; and they believe that by using these treatments they are being drawn closer to their ancestors.

[ 2 ] Modern and non-Indigenous use [ edit ] 20th century use [ edit ] A medicine developed by Aboriginal peoples of the eastern states of Australia , from the soft corkwood tree, or Duboisia myoporoides , was used by the Allies in World War II to stop soldiers getting seasick when they sailed across the English Channel on their way to liberate France and defeat Hitler during the Invasion of Normandy. It had been flown over to Europe and developed in great secrecy by Canadian researchers, before the "mystery pill" was dispensed to every participating soldier for the massive military operation, which was pivotal to winning the war but had been delayed several times because of seasickness. Later, it was found that the same medicine could be used in the production of the tropane alkaloid drugs, scopolamine and hyoscyamine , which are useful for eye surgery , and a multi-million dollar industry was built in Queensland based on this substance. As a bush medicine, the substance was or is used by various Aboriginal groups for catching fish, as part of ceremonies , and as a sleeping potion , among other uses.

[ 16 ] A 1969 study reported that variety of bush medicine techniques were still being used. In Western Australia and the Northern Territory , eucalypt kino (gum) was drunk for influenza , colds and coughs.

[ 17 ] A 1994 survey reported that 22% of the 15,000 Aboriginal people from all over Australia in the sample had practised bush medicine in the previous six months.

[ 18 ] 21st century use [ edit ] Traditions in southern and eastern Australia have largely been lost, but efforts are being made by anthropologists to record traditions from Aboriginal people in central and north-western Australia.

[ 6 ] In the Northern Territory, however, it is still relatively well-preserved.

Ngangkaris are said to be present in health clinics to perform rituals and give medical advice when necessary.

[ 15 ] The use of bush medicine and natural remedies in Australia has declined, partly due to the loss of information. This can primarily be attributed to the effects of colonisation, and policies made to eradicate Aboriginal people's and their culture such as the Stolen Generation . In Aboriginal culture they do not pass on information through writing, but through singing and dancing ceremonies, which are becoming far rarer. This oral traditions means records do not last without a living culture. Without these ceremonies, the tens of thousands of years of knowledge that the Aboriginal elders hold can be lost.

[ 19 ] In 2019, the Northern Adelaide Local Health Network developed the first formalised, clinically endorsed mechanism to support ngangkaris working in accessed in acute, rehab, and palliative care inhospitals including Lyell McEwin and Modbury hospitals, as well as other units, including mental health facilities. Traditional healing methods used include Pampuni (healing touch), Mapampa (blowing), and Marali (spiritual healing and bush medicines) to complement mainstream treatment.

[ 20 ] As of 2022 [update] , research into various types of bush medicine is being carried out by Central Queensland University in consultation with Ghungalu elder Uncle Steve Kemp, who has been providing plant materials including gumby gumby and Alstonia constricta (bitterbark) parts for the project. The study will include examination of the methods used to extract and process the plants.

[ 21 ] See also [ edit ] Medicinal plants of Australia Ngangkari , traditional healers of Anangu Prehistoric medicine Puckowe , a spirit who comes to the aid of medicine men References [ edit ] ^ "Traditional, Complementary and Integrative Medicine" . Health Topics.

WHO.int .

World Health Organization .

Archived from the original on 12 February 2020 . Retrieved 15 December 2021 .

^ a b S. Shahid; R. Bleam; D. Bessarab & S. C. Thompson (2010).

" "If you don't believe it, it won't help you": use of bush medicine in treating cancer among Aboriginal people in Western Australia" .

Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine .

6 : 18.

doi : 10.1186/1746-4269-6-18 .

PMC 2902429 .

PMID 20569478 .

^ National Aboriginal Health Strategy (NAHS) Working Party (1989) National Aboriginal Health Strategy Report Canberra: Department of Affairs ^ a b Clarke, P.A. (2011).

Aboriginal People and Their Plants . EBL ebooks online. Rosenberg Pub. p. 96.

ISBN 978-1-921719-73-8 . Retrieved 2 June 2020 .

^ Maher, Patrick (1999).

"A Review of 'Traditional' Aboriginal Health Beliefs" .

Australian Journal of Rural Health .

7 (4). Published online 1 May 2002. Wiley: 229– 236.

doi : 10.1046/j.1440-1584.1999.00264.x .

ISSN 1038-5282 .

PMID 10732513 .

PDF ^ a b c "Traditional Aboriginal Bush Medicine" . Aboriginal Art Online. Archived from the original on 25 May 2013 . Retrieved 26 June 2013 .

^ "Select Your Library - Credo Reference" .

search.credoreference.com . Retrieved 17 April 2015 .

^ Richmond, Guy S.; Ghisalberti, Emilio L. (1 January 1994). "The Australian desert shrubEremophila (myoporaceae): Mmedicinal, cultural, horticultural and phytochemical uses".

Economic Botany .

48 (1): 35– 59.

doi : 10.1007/BF02901379 .

ISSN 1874-9364 .

S2CID 35228662 .

^ Top 10 Aboriginal bush medicines , Australian Geographic, 8 February 2011 ^ Wohlmuth, H. (1997). Bush medicines of Western Sydney. Australian Journal of Medical Herbalism, 9(2), 50-3.

^ a b Low, T (1990) Bush Medicine: A pharmacopoeia of natural remedies Sydney : Angus & Robertson ^ Nabarula, Ada Dickinson (1978).

"Bush medicines used at Warrabri" .

Aboriginal and Islander Health Worker Journal .

2 (4): 12– 14 . Retrieved 14 April 2015 .

^ Umbidong, Emantura (1 September 1983).

"Bush medicine at Uluru" .

Aboriginal and Islander Health Worker Journal .

7 (3): 24– 28 . Retrieved 14 April 2015 .

^ Clarke, Philip (2008).

"Aboriginal healing practices and Australian bush medicine" (PDF) .

Journal of the Anthropological Society of South Australia . Retrieved 16 April 2015 .

^ a b Clarke, Philip (2008).

"Aboriginal healing practices and Australian bush medicine" (PDF) .

Journal of the Anthropological Society of South Australia . Retrieved 15 April 2015 .

^ "Visitors to Art of Healing exhibition told how Australian Indigenous bush medicine was given to every allied soldier landing at Normandy on D-Day" .

King's College London . 7 June 2019 . Retrieved 2 June 2020 .

^ Webb LJ. 1969.

The use of plant medicines and poisons by Australian Aborigines.

Mankind 7: 137-46.

^ Australian Bureau of Statistics (1994).

"National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander survey: Social atlas" (PDF) .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Kamenev, Marina (2011).

"Top 10 Aboriginal bush medicines" .

Australian Geographic . Retrieved 16 April 2015 .

^ Dragon, Natalie (7 May 2019).

"Aboriginal healers treat patients in SA hospitals" .

Australian Nursing & Midwifery Journal . Retrieved 30 May 2019 .

^ Hines, Jasmine (25 April 2022).

"Gumby gumby trees and other Aboriginal medicines to be researched by CQ University" .

ABC News .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 2 May 2022 .

Further reading [ edit ] Critchley, Cheryl (13 May 2018).

"The endurance of bush medicine" .

Pursuit . Exhibition at University of Melbourne 's Medical History Museum. University of Melbourne.

Grieves, Victoria (4 June 2018).

"Traditional Aboriginal healers should work alongside doctors to help close the gap" .

The Conversation .

Hanifie, Sowaibah (28 March 2018).

"Ngangkari healers: 60,000 years of traditional Aboriginal methods make headway in medical clinics" .

ABC News . Australian Broadcasting Corporation.

Oliver, Stefanie J (22 March 2013).

"The role of traditional medicine practice in primary health care within Aboriginal Australia: a review of the literature" .

Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine .

9 : 46.

doi : 10.1186/1746-4269-9-46 .

PMC 3702459 .

PMID 23819729 .

"Traditional healing - Healing" .

Australian Indigenous HealthInfoNet . 26 August 2015.

v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights v t e Traditional medicine Africa Ancient Egyptian medicine Tabernanthe iboga Muti Nganga Saltigue Traditional African medicine Traditional Hausa medicine Traditional healers of Southern Africa Yorùbá medicine Americas Aztec medicine Brazilian traditional medicine Chumash traditional medicine Curandero Kallawaya Mapuche medicine Maya medicine Navajo medicine Traditional Alaska Native medicine Asia Ayurveda Dhivehi beys Georgian folk medicine Hilot Iranian traditional medicine Ancient Jamu Kampo Ramuan Siddha medicine Sri Lankan traditional medicine Traditional Thai medicine Traditional Chinese medicine Traditional Korean medicine Traditional Mongolian medicine Traditional Tibetan medicine Traditional Vietnamese medicine Unani medicine Europe Ancient Greek medicine Byzantine medicine Medicine in ancient Rome Medieval medicine of Western Europe Oceania Bush medicine Other Alchemy Alternative medicine Apothecary Medicine in the medieval Islamic world Electuary Ethnomedicine Health care Herbal medicine herbs and fungi History of alternative medicine Humorism Mithridatism Naturopathy Prehistoric medicine Shamanism Theriac Category:Traditional medicine v t e Australian cuisine History Bushfood industry The English and Australian Cookery Book Dishes Anzac biscuit Avocado toast Battered sausage Caramel tart Caramel shortbread Chocolate crackles Cheese slaw Chiko Roll Devon (sausage) Smiley fritz Democracy sausage Frog cake Frozie cup Friand Halal snack pack Jelly slice Kitchener bun Lamb's fry Lamington Lemon chicken Lemon delicious pudding Meat pie Neenish tart Pavlova Pie floater Rissole Rocky road Saveloy Sticky toffee pudding Vanilla slice White Christmas Zucchini slice Breads Boston bun Bush bread Cheese and bacon roll Cheese on toast Cheesymite scroll Cruffin Crumpet Conti roll Damper English muffin Fairy bread Finger bun Hamdog Hot cross bun Prawn roll Puftaloon Savoury toast Scone Steak and oyster pie Steak sandwich Beverages Alcohol Beer Blow my skull Blue Heaven (flavour) Death Flip Flat white Japanese slipper Lemon, lime and bitters Long black Milo Tea Two Dogs Whisky Wine Ingredients Bush tucker Australian Aboriginal sweets Indigenous Australian food groups Citrus australasica Eucalyptus honey Flake (fish) Kangaroo meat List of Australian herbs and spices Mānuka honey Seafood Smallgoods Vegemite Wattleseed Witchetty grub Culture Australian pub Coffee culture Goon of Fortune Milk bar Pie shop Sausage sizzle Six o'clock swill Shrimp on the barbie Sly-grog shop The Great Aussie Pie Competition Regional and ethnic cuisines Australian Chinese cuisine Cuisine of Brisbane Christmas Island cuisine Cocos (Keeling) Islands cuisine Miscellaneous Bedourie oven Billycan List of Australian and New Zealand dishes List of breweries in Australia List of pizzerias in Australia List of pubs in Australia List of restaurant chains in Australia Related Agriculture in Australia Wheatbelt Alcoholism in rural Australia Bush medicine Gardening in Australia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bush_medicine&oldid=1282801000 " Categories : Bush medicine Aboriginal Australian health Australian Aboriginal bushcraft Biologically based therapies Medicinal plants of Australia Australian outback Rural culture in Oceania Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Australian English from July 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from January 2020 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2022 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 28 March 2025, at 17:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bush medicine 1 language Add topic

