Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Synopsis 2 Magazine publication 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Operation Chaos (novel) 3 languages Italiano Nederlands Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1971 science fantasy fixup novel by Poul Anderson This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Operation Chaos" novel – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Operation Chaos Cover of first edition (hardcover) Author Poul Anderson Cover artist Pat Steir Language English Genre Science fantasy Publisher Doubleday Publication date 1971 Publication place United States Media type Print (hardback & paperback) ISBN 0-385-00588-1 Followed by Operation Luna Operation Chaos is a 1971 science fantasy fixup novel by American writer Poul Anderson .

[ 1 ] A sequel, Operation Luna , was published in 1999.

Synopsis [ edit ] In an alternate world , where the existence of God has been scientifically proven and magic has been harnessed for the practical needs of the adept by the degaussing of cold iron , the United States is part of an alternative Second World War in which the enemy is not Germany but a resurgent Islamic Caliphate , which has invaded the United States.

Werewolf Steven Matuchek and witch Virginia Graylock meet on a military mission to stop the invading Islamic army from unleashing a secret superweapon, a genie released from a bottle in which it had been sealed by King Solomon . Together, they fight against the demon and incidentally fall in love with each other.

After the end of the war (an Allied victory as in our World War II, but US forces remain in occupation of former enemy lands for much longer) the two of them continue and deepen their liaison and have various additional adventures (which were originally published as a series of independent stories). Among other things they stop an elemental summoned as a student prank which had gone amok, confront a succubus / incubus on their honeymoon, and enter the hell dimension to save their daughter (who has been kidnapped and taken there, with a changeling left in her crib in her place).

While in Hell the protagonists are at a loss to understand the identity of a  moustached man with a strange armband who speaks with a strong Germanic accent , and why the most powerful demons tremble at the sight of him, or why he uses the "ancient and honorable symbol of the fylfot ". Their alternative history never had a Nazi Germany .

Another part of the book features a magical analogue to the counterculture of the 1960s , presented rather facetiously (reflecting Anderson's attitude to the real-life original). Given the supernatural metaphysics of this world, however, it takes the form of gnosticism , within a "Johannine Church" that is based on either an esoteric reading of the Gospel of John , or an alternative gnostic gospel version of that canonical New Testament book.

In his werewolf form, Matuchek does not suffer many of the liabilities of a werewolf of folklore.  He remains himself while turning into a wolf, and is able to fully use his four-leg incarnation to fight various enemies; and in this magical world, there is no social stigma attached to lycanthropy. Dependence on the moon is lightly tossed aside with a comment that the necessary components of moonlight (specific frequencies of polarized light ) have been isolated, and his Polaroid "Were-flash" lets him turn into a wolf or back to his human form at any time, its controls having been designed to be operable even with paws and no opposable thumbs. However, his invulnerability to silver is limited. Conservation of mass makes him a rather large wolf, although other weres in the book, taking far more drastic forms, have more serious problems. (A 600-pound weretiger has to be a 600-pound man in human form, again in order to not violate the law of conservation of mass .) The couple's daughter, Valeria Matuchek, appears as a minor character in Anderson's A Midsummer Tempest —where she is a self-assured young woman, exploring by herself the various timelines. In a mysterious "Inn Between the Worlds" she meets with Prince Rupert of the Rhine , the main character of Midsummer Tempest , as well as meeting Holger Carlsen, the protagonist of Three Hearts and Three Lions and helping him in his own quest.

Magazine publication [ edit ] "Operation Afreet", in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction , September 1956 "Operation Salamander", in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction , January 1957 "Operation Incubus", [ 2 ] in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction , October 1959 "Operation Changeling" (serial), in The Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction , May–June 1969 See also [ edit ] Magic, Inc.

, a similar fantasy world by Robert Heinlein The Case of the Toxic Spell Dump , a similar fantasy world by Harry Turtledove References [ edit ] ^ OpenLibrary.org.

"Operation Chaos" .

Open Library . Retrieved August 23, 2019 .

^ Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction . October 1959.

External links [ edit ] Operation Chaos title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database v t e Works by Poul Anderson Hoka Earthman's Burden Star Prince Charlie Hoka!

The Psychotechnic League Star Ways The Snows of Ganymede Virgin Planet The Psychotechnic League Cold Victory Starship Technic History Polesotechnic League period of Nicholas van Rijn War of the Wing-Men Trader to the Stars The Trouble Twisters Satan's World The Earth Book of Stormgate Mirkheim The People of the Wind Terran Empire period of Dominic Flandry Ensign Flandry A Circus of Hells The Rebel Worlds The Day of Their Return Agent of the Terran Empire Flandry of Terra A Knight of Ghosts and Shadows A Stone in Heaven The Game of Empire The Long Night Let the Spacemen Beware History of Rustum Orbit Unlimited New America Maurai Maurai and Kith Orion Shall Rise Other science fiction novels Flight to Forever Vault of the Ages Brain Wave Question and Answer No World of Their Own The Long Way Home Perish by the Sword War of Two Worlds The Enemy Stars The High Crusade Murder in Black Letter Twilight World After Doomsday The Makeshift Rocket Murder Bound Shield Three Worlds to Conquer The Corridors of Time The Star Fox The Fox, the Dog and the Griffin: A Folk Tale Adapted from the Danish of C. Molbeck World Without Stars Tau Zero The Byworlder The Dancer from Atlantis There Will Be Time Fire Time Inheritors of Earth The Winter of the World The Avatar The Demnon of Scattery The Devil's Game The Boat of a Million Years The Longest Voyage War of the Gods Starfarers Genesis Mother of Kings For Love and Glory Collections Strangers from Earth Un-Man and Other Novellas Time and Stars The Horn of Time Beyond the Beyond Seven Conquest Tales of the Flying Mountains The Queen of Air and Darkness and Other Stories The Worlds of Poul Anderson The Many Worlds of Poul Anderson Homeward and Beyond The Best of Poul Anderson Homebrew Winners The Night Face & Other Stories The Dark Between the Stars Explorations Fantasy Winners Cold Victory The Gods Laughed Starship The Winter of the World / The Queen of Air and Darkness Conflict The Long Night Past Times The Unicorn Trade Dialogue With Darkness Space Folk Alight in the Void The Armies of Elfland Inconstant Star Kinship With the Stars All One Universe Going for Infinity Swordsmen from the Stars Operation Otherworld Operation Chaos Operation Luna Other fantasy novels Three Hearts and Three Lions The Broken Sword Hrolf Kraki's Saga A Midsummer Tempest The Merman's Children Conan the Rebel War of the Gods Historical novels The Golden Slave Rogue Sword Mother of Kings Novellas and short stories " Brake " " Call Me Joe " " Delenda Est " " Entity " " Eutopia " " Goat Song " " The Light " " The Longest Voyage " " The Man Who Came Early " " Marius " " Memory " " Night Piece " " No Truce with Kings " " The Pirate " " The Queen of Air and Darkness " " Quest " " Sam Hall " " The Saturn Game " " The Sensitive Man " " The Sharing of Flesh " " Un-Man " Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Operation_Chaos_(novel)&oldid=1282906719 " Categories : 1971 American novels 1971 fantasy novels 1971 science fiction novels Novels by Poul Anderson American fantasy novels American science fiction novels American alternate history novels Werewolf novels Novels about World War II alternate histories Science fantasy novels Doubleday (publisher) books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2021 All articles needing additional references Use mdy dates from March 2025 This page was last edited on 29 March 2025, at 09:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Operation Chaos (novel) 3 languages Add topic

