Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theory of binaries 2 Deconstruction of binaries 3 In relation to logocentrism 4 In literature 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References Toggle the table of contents Binary opposition 10 languages العربية Eesti فارسی 한국어 IsiXhosa עברית 日本語 Русский Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pair of related terms or concepts that are opposite in meaning A binary opposition (also binary system ) is a pair of related terms or concepts that are opposite in meaning. Binary opposition is the system of language and/or thought by which two theoretical opposites are strictly defined and set off against one another.

[ 1 ] It is the contrast between two mutually exclusive terms, such as on and off, up and down, left and right.

[ 2 ] Binary opposition is an important concept of structuralism , which sees such distinctions as fundamental to all language and thought.

[ 2 ] In structuralism , a binary opposition is seen as a fundamental organizer of human philosophy, culture, and language.

Binary opposition originated in Saussurean structuralist theory.

[ 3 ] According to Ferdinand de Saussure , the binary opposition is the means by which the units of language have value or meaning; each unit is defined in reciprocal determination with another term, as in binary code. For instance, 'hot' gains meaning because of its relation to 'cold,' and vice versa . It is not a contradictory relation but a structural, complementary one.

[ 3 ] Saussure demonstrated that a sign's meaning is derived from its context ( syntagmatic dimension) and the group ( paradigm ) to which it belongs.

[ 4 ] An example of this is that one cannot conceive of 'good' if we do not understand 'evil'.

[ 5 ] Typically, one of the two opposites assumes a role of dominance over the other. The categorization of binary oppositions is "often value-laden and ethnocentric", with an illusory order and superficial meaning.

[ 6 ] Furthermore, Pieter Fourie discovered that binary oppositions have a deeper or second level of binaries that help to reinforce meaning. As an example, the concepts hero and villain involve secondary binaries: good/bad, handsome/ugly, liked/disliked, and so on.

[ 7 ] Theory of binaries [ edit ] A classic example of binary opposition is the presence-absence dichotomy. According to structuralism , distinguishing between presence and absence , viewed as polar opposites, is a fundamental element of thought in many cultures. In addition, according to post-structuralist criticisms, presence occupies a position of dominance in human society over absence , because absence is traditionally seen as what you get when you take away presence . (Were absence dominant, presence might have most traditionally been seen as what you get when you take away absence .) [ 8 ] According to Jacques Derrida , [ 9 ] meaning is often defined in terms of binary oppositions, where "one of the two terms governs the other." An example of binary opposition is the male-female dichotomy. A post-structuralist view is that male can be seen, according to traditional thought, as dominant over female because male is the presence of a phallus , while the vagina is an absence or loss. American philosopher John Searle has suggested that the concept of binary oppositions—as taught and practiced by postmodernists and poststructuralists—is specious and lacking in rigor.

[ 10 ] Deconstruction of binaries [ edit ] The political (rather than analytic or conceptual) critique of binary oppositions is an important part of third wave feminism , post-colonialism , post-anarchism , and critical race theory , which argue that the perceived binary dichotomy between man/woman, civilized/uncivilised, and white/black have perpetuated and legitimized societal power structures favoring a specific majority. In the last fifteen years it has become routine for many social and/or historical analyses to address the variables of gender, class, sexuality, race and ethnicity.

[ 11 ] Within each of these categories there is usually an unequal binary opposition: bourgeoisie/working class man; men/women; heterosexual/homosexual.

[ 11 ] In critical race theory, the paradigm is known as the black–white binary .

[ 12 ] Post-structural criticism of binary oppositions is not simply the reversal of the opposition, but its deconstruction , which is described as apolitical—that is, not intrinsically favoring one arm of a binary opposition over the other. Deconstruction is the "event" or "moment" at which a binary opposition is thought to contradict itself, and undermine its own authority.

[ 13 ] Deconstruction assumes that all binary oppositions need to be analyzed and criticized in all their manifestations; the function of both logical and axiological oppositions must be studied in all discourses that provide meaning and values. But deconstruction does not only expose how oppositions work and how meaning and values are produced in a nihilistic or cynic position, "thereby preventing any means of intervening in the field effectively". To be effective, and simply as its mode of practice, deconstruction creates new notions or concepts, not to synthesize the terms in opposition but to mark their difference, undecidability, and eternal interplay.

[ 14 ] In relation to logocentrism [ edit ] Logocentrism is an idea related to binary opposition that suggests certain audiences will favor one part of a binary opposition pair over the other. This favoritism is often most strongly influenced by readers' cultural backgrounds.

An example of such logocentrism is the strong patriarchal themes in 'The Women and the Pot', an Amharic folktale that tells the story of two women who are upset at their diminished role in society, and who consequently go to their King for help. He effectively conveys the message that women cannot be relied upon to take on a greater role in society, which becomes the moral of the tale. Prasad explains this idea: "The logocentric value is seen through the 'Eternal Knowledge'—the naturalness of male superiority—that is conveyed through the folktale. The hidden a priori binary opposition is 'Man over Woman'." [ 15 ] In relation to the cultural heritage of an audience having an influence on their unconscious preference for one part of binary opposition, Prasad says; "By way of studying a selection of Ethiopian folktales, the paper uncovers the presence of logocentrism and a priori binary opposition being at work in Ethiopian folktales. These two elements attempt to endorse and validate the 'given' subservient position of women in society".

[ 15 ] In literature [ edit ] Binary opposition is deeply embedded within literature as language, and paired opposites, rely upon a relation with adjoining words inside a paradigmatic chain. If one of the paired opposites were removed the other's precise meaning would be altered.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Antinomy Dichotomy Gender binary Opposite (semantics) Polarization (politics) Yin and yang Notes [ edit ] ^ Smith, G. (1996). "Binary opposition and sexual power in Paradise Lost".

Midwest Quarterly .

27 (4): 383.

^ a b Baldick, C 2004. The concise Oxford Dictionary of literary terms, ^ a b Fogarty, S 2005, The literary encyclopedia, viewed 12 October 2024, https://www.litencyc.com/php/stopics.php?rec=true&UID=122 ^ Lacey, N 2000, Narrative and Genre, p.64, Palgrave, New York.

^ Lacey, N 2000, Narrative and Genre, p. 65, Palgrave, New York ^ Goody 1977 , p. 36 ^ Fourie, Pieter (2001).

Media Studies Volume 2: Content, Audiences and Production . Lansdowne: Juta Education.

^ Britannica 2011, Binary opposition, viewed 9 March 2011, http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/65552/binary-opposition ^ Derrida, Jacques (1992).

Positions . p. 41.

^ In 1983 , Searle reviewed Johnathan Culler's On Deconstruction: Theory and Criticism after Structuralism for the New York Review of Books , writing, "In Culler's book, we get the following examples of knowledge and mastery [attained from analysis of binary opposites and deconstruction]: speech is a form of writing ( passim ), presence is a certain type of absence (p. 106), the marginal is in fact central (p. 140), the literal is metaphorical (p. 148), truth is a kind of fiction (p. 181), reading is a form of misreading (p. 176), understanding is a form of misunderstanding (p. 176), sanity is a kind of neurosis (p. 160), and man is a form of a woman (p. 171). Some readers may feel that such a list generates not so many feelings of mastery as of monotony. There is in deconstructive writing a constant straining of the prose to attain something that sounds profound by giving it the air of a paradox , e.g., "truths are fictions whose fictionality has been forgotten" (p. 181).

^ a b Dunk, T 1997, 'White guys: studies in post-modern domination and difference', Labour, vol. 40, p. 306, (online Infotrac).

^ Perea, Juan (1997).

"The Black/White Binary Paradigm of Race: The "Normal Science" of American Racial Thought" .

California Law Review, la Raza Journal .

85 (5): 1213– 1258.

doi : 10.2307/3481059 .

JSTOR 3481059 .

^ "One sometimes gets the impression that deconstruction is a kind of game that anyone can play. One could, for example, invent a deconstruction of deconstructionism as follows: In the hierarchical opposition, deconstruction/logocentrism (phono-phallo-logocentrism), the privileged term "deconstruction" is in fact subordinate to the devalued term "logocentrism," for, in order to establish the hierarchical superiority of deconstruction, the deconstructionist is forced to attempt to represent its superiority, its axiological primacy, by argument and persuasion, by appealing to the logocentric values they try to devalue. But their efforts to do this are doomed to failure because of the internal inconsistency in the concept of deconstructionism itself, because of its very self-referential dependence on the authority of a prior logic. By an aporetical Aufhebung , deconstruction deconstructs itself." Searle, ibid.

^ Cf., Jacques Derrida, "Positions" (The University of Chicago Press, 1981), pp. 41–43 ^ a b Prasad, A. "8. Logocentrism and a priori Binary Opposition vis-a-vis Women. Politics in Ethiopia Folktales- A Study of Selected Ethiopian Folktales".

Fabula .

48 ( 1– 2): 108.

^ Barry, P., 2009.

Beginning Theory: An Introduction to Literary and Cultural Theory . 3rd ed. New York, USA: Manchester University Press.

References [ edit ] Goody, Jack (1977).

The Domestication of the Savage Mind . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-29242-9 .

v t e Critical theory Origins Frankfurt School Freudo-Marxism Concepts Outline of critical theory Reconstructivism Derivatives Archetypal literary criticism Deconstructivism New historicism Technocriticism Critical ...

animal studies applied linguistics cartography consciousness criminology data studies design discourse analysis ethnography geography geopolitics historiography international relations theory language awareness legal studies literacy management studies medical anthropology pedagogy mathematics pedagogy university studies practice psychiatry psychology queer theory race theory regionalism security studies social theory social work technical practice terrorism studies Theorists Theodor W. Adorno Walter Benjamin Erich Fromm Jürgen Habermas Axel Honneth Max Horkheimer Otto Kirchheimer Siegfried Kracauer Leo Löwenthal Herbert Marcuse Friedrich Pollock Alfred Schmidt Related Binary opposition Critical rationalism Critical realism perception social sciences Theological Cultural Marxism conspiracy theory Hermeneutics of suspicion Immanent critique Phallogocentrism Privilege (social inequality) 2020s controversies around critical race theory Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Binary_opposition&oldid=1305491186 " Categories : Concepts in the philosophy of mind Concepts in epistemology Dichotomies Critical theory Neo-Marxism Deconstruction Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 10:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Binary opposition 10 languages Add topic

