Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concepts and issues 2 Historical development 3 List of Marxist sociologists 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Marxist sociology 20 languages العربية Български Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of sociology from a Marxist perspective Statues of Marx and Engels in Bishkek , Kyrgyzstan .

Part of a series on Sociology History Outline Index Key themes Society Globalization Human behavior Human environmental impact Identity Industrial revolutions 3 / 4 / 5 Popularity Social complexity Social environment Social equality Social equity Social power Social stratification Social structure Social cycle theory Perspectives Conflict theory Critical theory Structural functionalism Positivism Social constructionism Social darwinism Symbolic interactionism Branches Aging Architecture Art Astrosociology Body Criminology Consciousness Culture Death Demography Deviance Disaster Economic Education Emotion ( Jealousy ) Environmental Family Feminist Fiscal Food Gender Generations Health Historical Immigration Industrial Internet Jewry Knowledge Language Law Leisure Literature Marxist Mathematic Medical Military Music Peace, war, and social conflict Philosophy Political Public Punishment Race and ethnicity Religion Rural Science ( History of science ) Social movements Social psychology Sociocybernetics Sociology Space Sport Technology Terrorism Urban Utopian Victimology Visual Methods Quantitative Qualitative Comparative Computational Ethnographic Conversation analysis Historical Interview Mathematical Network analysis Social experiment Survey Major theorists 1700s: Comte · Sieyès 1800s: Martineau · Tocqueville · Marx · Spencer · Le Bon · Ward · Pareto · Tönnies · Veblen · Simmel · Durkheim · Addams · Mead · Weber · Du Bois · Mannheim · Elias 1900s: Fromm · Adorno · Gehlen · Aron · Merton · Nisbet · Mills · Bell · Schoeck · Goffman · Bauman · Foucault · Luhmann · Habermas · Baudrillard · Bourdieu · Giddens Lists Bibliography Terminology Journals Organizations People Timeline By country Society portal v t e Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Marxist sociology refers to the application of Marxist epistemologies within the study of sociology .

[ 1 ] It can often be economic sociology , political sociology or cultural sociology . Marxism itself is recognised as both a political philosophy and a social theory , insofar as it attempts to remain scientific, systematic , and objective rather than purely normative and prescriptive . This approach would come to facilitate the developments of critical theory and cultural studies as loosely distinct disciplines. Marx himself has been considered a founding father of sociology.

The foundational basis of Marxist sociology is the investigation of capitalist stratification . An important concept of Marxist sociology is "a form of conflict theory associated with…Marxism's objective of developing a positive ( empirical ) science of capitalist society as part of the mobilization of a revolutionary working class ." [ 2 ] The American Sociological Association (ASA) has a section dedicated to the issues of Marxist sociology that is "interested in examining how insights from Marxist methodology and Marxist analysis can help explain the complex dynamics of modern society." [ 3 ] Concepts and issues [ edit ] Marxist sociology is primarily concerned with, but not limited to, the relations between society and economics.

[ 3 ] More specifically, key concepts in the sub-field include historical materialism , modes of production , and the capital - labour relation.

[ 2 ] Marxist sociology is also concerned with the way in which police forces are used to control indigenous populations, enslaved peoples, and the labouring poor in the name of capitalism .

[ 4 ] Key questions asked by Marxist sociologists include: [ 1 ] How does capital control workers?

How does a mode of production influence the social class ?

What is the relation between workers, capital, the state and culture ?

How do economic factors influence inequalities such as those relating to gender and race ?

What role do police play within Marxist socialism?

Within theoretical field, Marxist sociology is recognized as one of the major sociological paradigms and is associated with conflict and critical theory . Unlike Marxism and Marxist philosophy , Marxist sociology has put relatively little weight on creating class revolution , [ 1 ] pursuing instead the development of an objective, politico-economic study of society rather than a critical philosophy of praxis .

[ 2 ] As such, it may be understood as a field of economic sociology .

The study of "socio-nature" emerged from this line of thought.

Socio-nature is "a concept that is used to argue that society and nature are inseparable and should not be analyzed in abstraction from each other." [ 5 ] Historical development [ edit ] References for this section: [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 6 ] Influenced by the thought of Karl Marx , Marxist sociology emerged around the turn of the 20th century . The first Marxist School of sociology was known as Austro-Marxism , of which Carl Grünberg and Antonio Labriola were among its most notable members.

Much of the development in the field occurred on the outskirts of academia, pitting Marxist against " bourgeois " sociology. For some time, this division was reinforced by the Russian Revolution that then led to the creation of the Soviet Union . Soon, however, sociology found itself a victim of the suppression of "bourgeois" science within the Soviet Union. While, after several decades, sociology was reestablished in the Communist states, two separate currents of thought evolved within Marxist sociology: Soviet Marxism : a Marxist-Leninist school that developed under 20th-century Communism (primarily the Soviet Union) to serve state interests. The school was heavily influenced by Marx's theory of historical materialism .

Western Marxism : a Marxist school centered on the studies of Marxism in the West . It would become accepted within Western academia during the 1940s, and would subsequently fracture into several different perspectives, such as the Frankfurt School ( critical theory ) Due to its former state-supported position, there has been a backlash against Marxist thought in post-Communist states (e.g.

sociology in Poland ). However, Marxist sociology is still dominant in sociological research that is sanctioned and supported by remaining Communist states (e.g.

sociology in China ).

List of Marxist sociologists [ edit ] Benedict Anderson Perry Anderson Giovanni Arrighi Zygmunt Bauman Himani Bannerji Michael Burawoy Simon Clarke Oliver Cox W. E. B. Du Bois John Bellamy Foster Paulo Freire Erich Fromm Antonio Gramsci Stuart Hall John Holloway Max Horkheimer Bob Jessop Boris Kagarlitsky Henri Lefebvre Marcel Liebman Michael Löwy Maria Mies Robert Miles Ralph Miliband Antonio Negri Evgeny Pashukanis Nicos Poulantzas Gillian Rose Göran Therborn Lise Vogel Immanuel Wallerstein Erik Olin Wright References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Johnson, Allan G. (2000). "Marxist sociology".

The Blackwell Dictionary of Sociology: A User's Guide to Sociological Language .

Wiley-Blackwell . pp. 183–184 Marxist sociology at Google Books .

ISBN 0-631-21681-2 .

^ a b c d "Marxist Sociology" .

Encyclopedia of Sociology . USA: Macmillan Reference . 2006.

^ a b Jipson, Art. 2013. " About the Section on Marxist Sociology ." American Sociological Association . Retrieved on April 21, 2020.

Archived 2009-01-09 at the Wayback Machine ^ Correia, David , and Tyler Wall. 2018.

Police: A Field Guide . Brooklyn: Verso Books .

ISBN 9781786630148 .

^ Bear, Christopher (2017-03-06), "Socio-Nature" , in Richardson, Douglas; Castree, Noel; Goodchild, Michael F.; Kobayashi, Audrey (eds.), International Encyclopedia of Geography: People, the Earth, Environment and Technology , Oxford, UK: John Wiley & Sons , Ltd, pp.

1– 5, doi : 10.1002/9781118786352.wbieg0212 , ISBN 978-0-470-65963-2 , retrieved 2021-08-06 ^ Bottomore, Tom B . 1991.

A Dictionary of Marxist Thought (2nd ed.) at Google Books .

Wiley-Blackwell .

ISBN 0-631-18082-6 . p. 505–08.

Further reading [ edit ] Tom B. Bottomore, Marxist sociology , Macmillan, 1975 Martin Shaw, Marxist sociology revisited: critical assessments , Macmillan, 1985 External links [ edit ] ASA section on Marxist sociology About the Section on Marxist Sociology Lucien Goldmann, Is There a Marxist Sociology?

, International Socialism, Autumn 1968 v t e Sociology Outline History Timeline Index General aspects Public sociology Social research Social theory Sociological theory Sociological practice Perspectives Conflict theory Critical theory Structural functionalism Positivism Social constructionism Social darwinism Symbolic interactionism Related fields and subfields Anthropology Comparative sociology Criminology Cultural anthropology Demography Historical sociology Industrial society Marxist sociology Political sociology Rural sociology Social anthropology Social movements Social psychology Sociolinguistics Urban sociology Sociology of art body consciousness culture death deviance disaster economics education emotions environment family food gender health immigration Internet knowledge language law leisure literature medicine military music peace, war, and social conflict philosophy punishment race and ethnicity religion sociology space sport science small groups space stratification technology terrorism visual work Major theorists Sieyès Comte Martineau Tocqueville Marx Spencer Le Bon Ward Pareto Tönnies Veblen Simmel Durkheim Addams Mead Weber Du Bois Mannheim Elias Fromm Adorno Gehlen Aron Merton Nisbet Mills Bell Schoeck Goffman Bauman Foucault Luhmann Habermas Baudrillard Bourdieu Giddens Methods Quantitative Qualitative Comparative Computational Ethnographic Conversation analysis Historical Interview Mathematical Network analysis Social experiment Survey Key themes Society Globalization Human behavior Human environmental impact Identity Industrial revolutions 3 / 4 / 5 Popularity Social complexity Social environment Social equality Social equity Social power Social stratification Social structure Social cycle theory Categories lists Journals Commons WikiProject Society portal Authority control databases : National Latvia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marxist_sociology&oldid=1296326343 " Categories : Marxist sociology Marxism Sociology Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 09:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marxist sociology 20 languages Add topic

