Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Upbringing and influences 1.2 Teaching career 1.3 Death 2 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 2.1 Physics 2.2 Epistemology 2.2.1 Criteria of truth 2.2.2 Principle of Multiple Explanations 2.2.3 Epilogism 2.3 Ethics 2.4 Politics 2.5 Theology 2.5.1 Epicurean paradox 2.6 Death 3 Works Toggle Works subsection 3.1 On Nature 3.2 Canon 3.3 Principal Doctrines 3.3.1 Tetrapharmakos 3.4 Letters of Epicurus 3.4.1 Letter to Herodotus 3.4.2 Letter to Pythocles 3.4.3 Letter to Menoeceus 3.4.4 Letter to Mother 3.5 Vatican Sayings 4 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 4.1 Ancient Epicureanism 4.2 Middle Ages 4.3 Renaissance 4.4 Revival 4.5 Modern 5 Notes 6 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 6.1 Primary source texts 6.1.1 Philodemus 6.1.2 Lucretius 6.1.3 Aetius 6.1.4 Plutarch 6.1.5 Lucian of Samosata 6.1.6 Diogenes of Oenoanda 6.1.7 Sextus Empiricus 6.1.8 Diogenes Laërtius 6.1.9 Lacantius 6.1.10 Epicurea 6.1.11 Modern compilations 6.2 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Epicurus 94 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kapampangan ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Li Niha Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Volapük Walon Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek philosopher, founder of Epicureanism Not to be confused with Epictetus .

Epicurus Roman marble bust of Epicurus Born February 341 BC Samos , Greece Died 270 BC (aged about 72) Athens , Greece Philosophical work Era Hellenistic philosophy Region Western philosophy School Epicureanism Main interests Ethics epistemology physics theology Notable ideas Ataraxia Aponia "Moving" and "static" pleasures Attributed: Epicurean paradox Epicurus ( / ˌ ɛ p ɪ ˈ k j ʊər ə s / , EH -pih- KURE -əs ; Ancient Greek : Ἐπίκουρος Epikouros ; 341–270 BC) was an ancient Greek philosopher who founded Epicureanism , a highly influential school of philosophy ; it asserted that philosophy's purpose is to attain as well as to help others attain tranquil lives, characterized by freedom from fear and the absence of pain.

Epicurus advocated that people were best able to pursue philosophy by living a self-sufficient life surrounded by friends; he and his followers were known for eating simple meals and discussing a wide range of philosophical subjects at "The Garden", the school he established in Athens . Epicurus taught that although the gods exist, they have no involvement in human affairs. Like the earlier philosopher Democritus , Epicurus claimed that all occurrences in the natural world are ultimately the result of tiny, invisible particles known as atoms moving and interacting in empty space, though Epicurus also deviated from Democritus by proposing the idea of atomic "swerve" , which holds that atoms may deviate from their expected course, thus permitting humans to possess free will in an otherwise deterministic universe.

Of the over 300 works said to have been written by Epicurus about various subjects, the vast majority have been lost. Only a few letters and a collection of quotes—the Principal Doctrines —have survived intact, along with several fragments of his other writings, such as his major work On Nature ; most knowledge about his philosophy is due to later authors.

Epicureanism reached the height of its popularity during the late years of the Roman Republic , but by late antiquity, it had died out. Throughout the Middle Ages , Epicurus was popularly, though inaccurately, remembered as a patron of drunkards, whoremongers, and gluttons. His teachings gradually became more widely known in the fifteenth century with the rediscovery of important texts, but his ideas did not become acceptable until the seventeenth century, when the French Catholic priest Pierre Gassendi revived a modified version of them, which was promoted by other writers, including Walter Charleton and Robert Boyle . His influence grew considerably during and after the Enlightenment , impacting the ideas of major thinkers, including John Locke and Karl Marx .

Life [ edit ] Upbringing and influences [ edit ] Athens Mytilene Samos Colophon Lampsacus class=notpageimage| Map of Greece showing locations associated with Epicurus Epicurus was born in the Athenian settlement on the Aegean island of Samos in February 341 BC.

[ 1 ] His parents, Neocles and Chaerestrate, were both Athenian-born, and his father was an Athenian citizen. Epicurus grew up during the final years of the Greek Classical Period. Plato had died seven years before Epicurus was born and Epicurus was seven years old when Alexander the Great crossed the Hellespont into Persia. As a child, Epicurus would have received a typical ancient Greek education. Epicurus is known to have studied under the instruction of a Samian Platonist named Pamphilus, probably for about four years. His Letter of Menoeceus and surviving fragments of his other writings strongly suggest that he had extensive training in rhetoric. After the death of Alexander the Great , Perdiccas expelled the Athenian settlers on Samos to Colophon , on the coast of what is now Turkey. Epicurus joined his family there after the completion of his military service. He studied under Nausiphanes , who followed the teachings of Democritus .

[ 2 ] Epicurus's teachings were heavily influenced by those of earlier philosophers, particularly Democritus. Nonetheless, Epicurus differed from his predecessors on several key points of determinism and vehemently denied having been influenced by any previous philosophers, whom he denounced as "confused". Instead, he insisted that he had been "self-taught".

[ 3 ] According to DeWitt, Epicurus's teachings also show influences from the contemporary philosophical school of Cynicism . The Cynic philosopher Diogenes of Sinope was still alive when Epicurus would have been in Athens for his required military training and it is possible they may have met. Diogenes's pupil Crates of Thebes ( c.

365 – c.

285 BC) was a close contemporary of Epicurus. Epicurus agreed with the Cynics' quest for honesty, but rejected their "insolence and vulgarity", instead teaching that honesty must be coupled with courtesy and kindness. Epicurus shared this view with his contemporary, the comic playwright Menander .

[ 2 ] Epicurus's Letter to Menoeceus , possibly an early work of his, is written in an eloquent style similar to that of the Athenian rhetorician Isocrates (436–338 BC), but, for his later works, he seems to have adopted the bald, intellectual style of the mathematician Euclid . Epicurus's epistemology also bears an unacknowledged debt to the later writings of Aristotle (384–322 BC), who rejected the Platonic idea of hypostatic Reason and instead relied on nature and empirical evidence for knowledge about the universe. During Epicurus's formative years, Greek knowledge about the rest of the world was rapidly expanding due to the Hellenization of the Near East and the rise of Hellenistic kingdoms . Epicurus's philosophy was consequently more universal in its outlook than those of his predecessors, since it took cognizance of non-Greek peoples as well as Greeks. He may have had access to the now-lost writings of the historian and ethnographer Megasthenes , who wrote during the reign of Seleucus I Nicator (ruled 305–281 BC).

[ 2 ] Teaching career [ edit ] Herm of Epicurus (left) leaning against his disciple Metrodorus in the Louvre Museum During Epicurus's lifetime, Platonism was the dominant philosophy in higher education. Epicurus's opposition to Platonism formed a large part of his thought. Over half of the forty Principal Doctrines of Epicureanism are flat contradictions of Platonism. In around 311 BC, Epicurus, when he was around thirty years old, began teaching in Mytilene . Around this time, Zeno of Citium , the founder of Stoicism , arrived in Athens, at the age of about twenty-one, but Zeno did not begin teaching what would become Stoicism for another twenty years. Although later texts, such as the writings of the first-century BC Roman orator Cicero , portray Epicureanism and Stoicism as rivals, this rivalry seems to have only emerged after Epicurus's death.

[ 2 ] Epicurus's teachings caused strife in Mytilene and he was forced to leave. He then founded a school in Lampsacus before returning to Athens in c.

306 BC, where he remained until his death.

[ 1 ] There he founded The Garden (κῆπος), a school named for the garden he owned that served as the school's meeting place, about halfway between the locations of two other schools of philosophy, the Stoa and the Academy .

[ 4 ] Philodemus of Gadara lists four "guides" (hoi kathēgemones) of the first generation of the Garden who worked to establish its fundamental principles: Metrodorus , Hermarchus , Polyaneus , and Epicurus himself. Other disciples of Epicurus whose doctrines are known include Colotes , whose work On the Impossibility of Living According to the Doctrines of Other Philosophers was disputed in two extant works by Plutarch , and Carneiscus , whose work criticizing the peripatetic conception of friendship survives in a fragmentary state.

[ 5 ] Other students include Idomeneus , Pythocles , and Epicurus's three brothers: Neocles , Chaeridemus , and Aristobulus . The Garden also welcomed many female students during Epicurus's tenure, including Themista , Batis , Boidion , Demetria , Hedeia , Leontion , Mammarion , and Nikidion .

[ 6 ] Reconstruction by K. Fittschen of an Epicurus enthroned statue, presumably set up after his death.

University of Göttingen , Abgußsammlung During the first generation, Epicurus and the other members of The Garden practiced a communal lifestyle, with the assets of all the members held in common, and no rigid hierarchy between teachers and students. They shared celebrations, festivals, banquets and funerals. Several rites that were celebrated at different times of the year: an annual funeral rite established by Epicurus in memory of his brothers and parents, two rites established for Epicurus himself; an annual one on his birthday (the 20th of Gamelion month ) and one celebrated on the 20th of every other month in honor of both Epicurus and Metrodorus, another day dedicated to the memory of his brothers in the month of Poseidon , and another one for Polyaenus in the month of Metageitneon .

[ 7 ] Death [ edit ] Diogenes Laërtius records that, according to Epicurus's successor Hermarchus , Epicurus died a slow and painful death in 270 BC at the age of seventy-two from a stone blockage of his urinary tract. Despite being in immense pain, Epicurus is said to have remained cheerful and to have continued to teach until the very end. Possible insights into Epicurus's death may be offered by the extremely brief Epistle to Idomeneus , included by Diogenes Laërtius in Book X of his Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers . The authenticity of this letter is uncertain; it may be a later pro-Epicurean forgery intended to counter the large number of forged epistles in Epicurus's name portraying him unfavorably.

[ 8 ] I have written this letter to you on a happy day to me, which is also the last day of my life. For I have been attacked by a painful inability to urinate, and also dysentery, so violent that nothing can be added to the violence of my sufferings. But the cheerfulness of my mind, which comes from the recollection of all my philosophical contemplation, counterbalances all these afflictions. And I beg you to take care of the children of Metrodorus , in a manner worthy of the devotion shown by the young man to me, and to philosophy.

[ 9 ] If authentic, this letter would support the idea that Epicurus was able to remain joyful to the end, even in the midst of his suffering. It would also indicate that he maintained a special concern for the well-being of children.

[ 8 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Epicureanism Physics [ edit ] Further information: Ancient atomism Epicurus believed in an eternal universe , where anything that comes into being must come from something that exists, all that is destroyed does not cease to exist, but all that exists always will.

[ 10 ] He held that this universe consists of two things; matter and void.

[ 11 ] Matter is made up of atoms , tiny bodies that are unable to be broken down into smaller parts, that only have the unchanging qualities of shape, size, and weight.

[ 12 ] There are an infinite number of these atoms, though only a finite number of types, and an infinite amount of void. Because of the infinite supply of atoms, there are an infinite number of worlds, each separated from each other by vast areas of void, some of which could be vastly different from our own.

[ 13 ] The atoms are in constant motion through the void, moving in one of four different ways. They can collide with each other, either bouncing back, or joining together and vibrating to maintain the overall shape of the larger object.

[ 14 ] When not prevented by other atoms, all atoms naturally move at the same speed downwards in relation to the rest of the world, though they must also occasionally " swerve " randomly out of their usual path; without the swerving motion, atoms would never collide with each other from their parallel trajectory downwards.

[ 15 ] Epicurus argued that the swerve, which was absent in Democritus ' earlier atomic theory , was also what accounted for humanity's free will; if it were not for the swerve, humans would be subject to a never-ending chain of cause and effect.

[ 16 ] Epicurus also believed that senses relied on atoms; which were constantly being emitted from every object. Atoms themselves, which only had size, shape, and weight, did not possess the qualities perceived by the senses, such as redness, but instead would cause the observer to experience them in their mind. Because atoms moved sufficiently quickly, this would be experienced as a continuous sensation of vision.

[ 17 ] Epistemology [ edit ] Epicurus considered sense perception to be the foundation of knowledge. Although he had explained perception in terms of his atomic theory, he also designed his theory of knowledge to be independent of atomism, because he intended it to serve as justification for his philosophy of nature. Since Epicurus believed that sense perceptions were the basis of our knowledge, errors can only arise in how we judge those perceptions; although the senses sometimes receive contradictory information, they are the only means by which we receive information from the external world, and, recognizing the limits of our senses, it is necessary to use reason ( dianoia ) in order to organize the information we receive and determine whether our sense-organs are functioning correctly. However, reason still ultimately depends on the senses; Epicurus did not believe in the existence of abstract objects such as Plato 's Theory of Forms that are derived entirely from thought.

[ 18 ] Criteria of truth [ edit ] In order to make judgements about the information we receive from our senses, Epicurus proposed three criteria of truth constituting the method through which we gain knowledge: [ 19 ] sensations ( aisthêsis ), preconceptions ( prolepsis ), and feelings ( pathê ).

[ 20 ] Sensations are the first and main criterion of truth for Epicureans; when judgments about things are formed, they can be verified or corrected through further closer examination, [ 21 ] which eventually allows the observer to obtain "clear vision" ( enargeia ), a sensation of an object that is unchanged by further judgments or opinions and is a clear and direct perception of that object.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Preconceptions, Epicurus's second criterion of truth, are the concepts of what different things are that are formed in a person's mind through prior sense data. They are the background knowledge required for learning, allowing an observer to make judgments about perceived phenomena . When a word that relates to the preconception is used, these preconceptions are brought by the mind into the person's thoughts.

[ 24 ] Epicurus's third criterion of truth are "choices and avoidances" which are the feelings of pleasure and pain that determine our actions. If something is pleasurable, we pursue it, and if something is painful, we avoid it. They are analogous to sensations in that they are a means of perception, but they perceive our internal state as opposed to external things.

[ 20 ] Principle of Multiple Explanations [ edit ] Epicurus applied his theory of knowledge to his understanding of nature; for understanding natural phenomena, we cannot rely on direct sense impressions alone, but must rely on inferences based on preconceptions. Hypotheses about phenomena that cannot be directly observed must be tested via relation to known observable facts, from which they are considered either contested or non-contested; a hypothesis that is not observable can be accepted as true if it is not contested by any explanations or observable phenomena.

[ 25 ] However, a hypothesis can still be contested by other explanations without being directly contradicted by observable phenomena, so long as it is inconsistent with other potential explanations for how similar phenomena that can be closely observed are produced. For example, with the existence of atoms and void, Epicurus argues that there are no other possible explanations for the world we observe, so we must accept them as true. On the other hand, for various meteorological and cosmological phenomena, such as thunder and lightning or the waxing and waning of the moon and the motions of the stars, Epicurus produces several different possible explanations for the causes underlying the observed phenomena. Since none of the multiple explanations proposed can be verified or falsified, we must list them all and consider each of them to be possible, and cannot accept any of them as true.

[ 25 ] Although Epicurus conceded that it may not be feasible to exhaustively list all possible causes, he believed it is still preferable to list several, rather than one, as becoming fixated on one possible explanation for all phenomena allows for the possibility of mythology and divine intervention as explanations, despite the fact that these have never been directly observed.

[ 25 ] Epilogism [ edit ] Main article: Epilogism In addition to deductions based on the criteria of truth and inference of explanations based on observation, Epicurus also used a proof-free method of philosophical argumentation which he called Epilogism ( ἐπίλογισμός ), often translated as "appraisal" or "assessment," which was intended to provide insight via reflection when neither observation nor preconceptions about a given phenomena could provide a consistent answer. For example, Epicurus claimed that although we do not have a preconception of time as an independent object, we nonetheless speak of having "a lot of time" or "little time" and we can arrive at a better understanding of how we conceive of time falling into discrete periods by reflecting on what we mean when we say "a lot of time." Epicurus also argued that we can arrive at insight on the relations between pleasure and pain, desire, and happiness through an assessment of our own sense experience, preconceptions and feelings beyond what we already know from them alone.

[ 26 ] Ethics [ edit ] Part of a series on Hedonism Thinkers Ajita Aristippus Bentham Chandler Epicurus Feldman Gassendi Guisán Jovinian La Mettrie Mill Onfray Pearce Piper Singer Tännsjö Yang Schools of hedonism Axiological hedonism Charvaka Christian hedonism Jovinianism Cyrenaics Epicureanism Ethical hedonism Libertinage Psychological hedonism Utilitarianism Yangism Key concepts Aponia Ataraxia Eudaimonia Felicific calculus Happiness Hedone Pain Pleasure Sensation Suffering Tetrapharmakos Related articles Hedonic treadmill Joie de vivre Paradox of hedonism "Wine, women and song" Zichan v t e Epicurus was a hedonist , meaning he taught that what is pleasurable is morally good and what is painful is morally evil. For his ethical system he redefined "pleasure" as the absence of suffering and taught that all humans should seek to attain the state of ataraxia , meaning "untroubledness", a state in which the person is completely free from all pain or suffering.

[ 1 ] Epicureans had a very specific understanding of what the greatest pleasure was, and the focus of their ethics was on the avoidance of pain rather than seeking out pleasure.

[ 27 ] As evidence for this, Epicureans say that nature seems to command us to avoid pain, and they point out that all animals try to avoid pain as much as possible.

[ 28 ] Epicureanism divided pleasure into two broad categories: pleasures of the body and pleasures of the mind .

Pleasures of the body involve sensations of the body, such as the act of eating delicious food or of being in a state of comfort free from pain, and exist only in the present. One can only experience pleasures of the body in the moment, meaning they only exist as a person is experiencing them.

Pleasures of the mind involve mental processes and states; feelings of joy, the lack of fear, and pleasant memories are all examples of pleasures of the mind. These pleasures of the mind exist not only in the present, but also in the past and future, since memory of a past pleasant experience or the expectation of some potentially pleasing future can both be pleasurable experiences. Because of this, the pleasures of the mind are considered to be greater than those of the body.

[ 27 ] Emphasis was placed on pleasures of the mind rather than on physical pleasures.

[ 29 ] The Epicureans further divided each of these types of pleasures into two categories: kinetic pleasure and katastematic pleasure .

Kinetic pleasure is the physical or mental pleasures that involve action or change. Eating delicious food, as well as fulfilling desires and removing pain, which is itself considered a pleasurable act, are all examples of kinetic pleasure in the physical sense. According to Epicurus, feelings of joy would be an example of mental kinetic pleasure.

Katastematic pleasure is the pleasure one feels while in a state without pain. Like kinetic pleasures, katastematic pleasures can also be physical, such as the state of not being thirsty, or mental, such as freedom from a state of fear. While the pursuit of pleasure formed the focal point of the philosophy, this was largely directed to the "katastematic pleasures" of minimizing pain, anxiety and suffering. From this understanding, Epicureans concluded that the greatest pleasure a person could reach was the absence of pain, aponia , and lack of disturbance of mind, ataraxia , and, therefore, the ultimate goal then of Epicurean ethics was to reach a state of aponia and ataraxia .

[ 27 ] In order to do this an Epicurean had to control their desires, because desire itself was seen as painful. Not only will controlling one's desires bring about aponia , as one will rarely suffer from not being physically satisfied, but controlling one's desires will also help to bring about ataraxia because one will not be anxious about becoming discomforted since one would have so few desires anyway. The Epicureans divide desires into three classes: natural and necessary, natural but not necessary, and vain and empty: [ 30 ] Natural and necessary : These desires are limited desires that are innately present in all humans; it is part of human nature to have them. They are necessary for one of three reasons: necessary for happiness, necessary for freedom from bodily discomfort, and necessary for life. Clothing and shelter would belong to the first two categories, while something like food would belong to the third.

[ 30 ] Natural but not necessary : These desires are innate to humans, but they do not need to be fulfilled for their happiness or their survival. Wanting to eat delicious food when one is hungry is an example of a natural but not necessary desire. The main problem with these desires is that they fail to substantially increase a person's happiness, and at the same time require effort to obtain and are desired by people due to false beliefs that they are actually necessary. It is for this reason that they should be avoided.

[ 30 ] Vain and empty : These desires are neither innate to humans nor required for happiness or health; indeed, they are also limitless and can never be fulfilled. Desires of wealth or fame would fall in this class, and such desires are to be avoided because they will ultimately only bring about discomfort.

[ 30 ] If one follows only natural and necessary desires, then, according to Epicurus, one would be able to reach aponia and ataraxia and thereby the highest form of happiness. Unnecessary and, especially, artificially produced desires were to be suppressed.

[ 30 ] Politics [ edit ] Epicurus laid great emphasis on developing friendships as the basis of a satisfying life. The avoidance or freedom from hardship and fear is ideal to the Epicureans. While this avoidance or freedom could conceivably be achieved through political means, Epicurus insisted that involvement in politics would not release one from fear and he advised against a life of politics. Epicurus also discouraged contributing to political society by starting a family, as the benefits of a wife and children are outweighed by the trouble brought about by having a family. Instead Epicurus encouraged a formation of a community of friends outside the traditional political state. This community of virtuous friends would focus on internal affairs and justice. However, Epicureanism is adaptable to circumstance as is the Epicurean approach to politics. The same approaches will not always work in protection from pain and fear. In some situations it will be more beneficial to have a family and in other situations it will be more beneficial to participate in politics. It is ultimately up to the Epicurean to analyse their circumstance and take whatever action befits the situation.

[ 31 ] Epicurus was also an early thinker to develop the notion of justice as a social contract , and in part attempts to address issues with the society described in Plato 's Republic . The social contract theory established by Epicureanism is based on mutual agreement, not divine decree. He defined justice as an agreement made by people not to harm each other. The point of living in a society with laws and punishments is to be protected from harm so that one is free to pursue happiness. Because of this, laws that do not contribute to promoting human happiness are not just. He gave his own unique version of the ethic of reciprocity , which differs from other formulations by emphasizing minimizing harm and maximizing happiness for oneself and others.

[ 32 ] The Epicurean understanding of justice was inherently self-interested. Justice was deemed good because it was seen as mutually beneficial. Individuals would not act unjustly even if the act was initially unnoticed because of possibly being caught and punished. Both punishment and fear of punishment would cause a person disturbance and prevent them from being happy.

[ 33 ] Epicurean ideas on politics disagree with other philosophical traditions, namely the Stoic, Platonist and Aristotelian traditions.

[ 34 ] To Epicureans all our social relations are a matter of how we perceive each other, of customs and traditions. No one is inherently of higher value or meant to dominate another.

[ 35 ] That is because there is no metaphysical basis for the superiority of one kind of person, all people are made of the same atomic material and are thus naturally equal.

[ 35 ] Epicureans also discourage political participation and other involvement in politics.

[ 35 ] However Epicureans are not apolitical ; it is possible that some political association could be seen as beneficial by some Epicureans. Some political associations could lead to certain benefits to the individual that would help to maximize pleasure and avoid physical or mental distress.

[ 34 ] Theology [ edit ] Epicurus does not deny the existence of the gods; rather he denies their involvement in the world. According to Epicureanism, the gods do not interfere with human lives or the rest of the universe in any way [ 36 ] – thus, it shuns the idea that frightening weather events are divine retribution.

[ 37 ] One of the fears the Epicurean ought to be freed from is fear relating to the actions of the gods.

[ 38 ] The manner in which the Epicurean gods exist is still disputed. Some scholars say that Epicureanism believes that the gods exist outside the mind as material objects (the realist position), while others assert that the gods only exist in our minds as ideals (the idealist position). The realist position holds that Epicureans understand the gods as existing as physical and immortal beings made of atoms that reside somewhere in reality. However, the gods are completely separate from the rest of reality; they are uninterested in it, play no role in it, and remain completely undisturbed by it. Instead, the gods live in what is called the metakosmia , or the space between worlds. Contrarily, the idealist (sometimes called the "non-realist position" to avoid confusion) position holds that the gods are just idealized forms of the best human life, and it is thought that the gods were emblematic of the life one should aspire towards. While a scholarly consensus has yet to be reached, the realist position remains the prevailing viewpoint at this time.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Epicurean paradox [ edit ] Main article: Epicurean paradox Part of a series on Theodicy Key concepts Absence of good Augustinian theodicy Best of all possible worlds Divine retribution Dystheism Epicurean paradox Free will Irenaean theodicy Misotheism Moral evil Natural evil Problem of evil Notable figures Saint Augustine Ehrman Epicurus Hick Hume Saint Irenaeus Leibniz Maistre Nietzsche Plantinga Rowe Swinburne Wiesel v t e The Epicurean paradox is a version of the problem of evil .

Lactantius attributes this trilemma to Epicurus in De Ira Dei , 13, 20-21: God, he says, either wishes to take away evils, and is unable; or He is able, and is unwilling; or He is neither willing nor able, or He is both willing and able. If He is willing and is unable, He is feeble, which is not in accordance with the character of God; if He is able and unwilling, He is envious , which is equally at variance with God; if He is neither willing nor able, He is both envious and feeble, and therefore not God; if He is both willing and able, which alone is suitable to God, from what source then are evils? Or why does He not remove them?

Although no extant writings of Epicurus contain this argument, it is possible that some form of this argument may have been found in his lost treatise On the Gods . However, since Epicurus did believe in the existence of gods, if he really did make some form of this argument, it would have been an argument against divine providence, the idea that the gods interfere in the world.

[ 41 ] Death [ edit ] Epicurus rejected immortality . Epicureans believe in the soul, but Epicureanism suggests that the soul is mortal and material, just like the body.

[ 42 ] Epicurus rejected any possibility of an afterlife, while still contending that one need not fear death: "Death is nothing to us; for that which is dissolved, is without sensation, and that which lacks sensation is nothing to us." [ 43 ] From this doctrine arose the Epicurean Epitaph: Non fui, fui, non sum, non curo ("I was not; I have been; I am not; I do not mind."), which is inscribed on the gravestones of his followers and seen on many ancient gravestones of the Roman Empire .

[ 44 ] Works [ edit ] Epicurus was an extremely prolific writer who wrote around 300 treatises on a variety of subjects.

[ 41 ] Known titles of works of Epicurus include: [ 45 ] On Nature, in 37 books Doctrine of the Twelve Elements , [ 46 ] On Atoms and the Void On the Angle of the Atom Against the Megarians Against Democritus Against Theophrastus Canon , or On the Criterion On Sensory Presentation On the Sensation of Touch On Vision On Images Prognostication Exhortation to Study Philosophy Principal Doctrines Problems On the End-Goal On Lifecourses , in four books On Choices and Avoidances Theories of the Passions , against Timocrates On Love On Justice and Other Virtues Symposium On Gifts and Gratitude On Fair Dealing On Kingship On Music On Wealth On Rhetoric On the Gods On Holiness On Destiny Theories about Diseases and Death , Dedicated to Mithres Neocles , addressed to Themista Eurylochus , addressed to Metrodorus Chaeridemus Hegesianax Aristobulus Polymedes Timocrates , in three books Metrodorus , in five books Antidorus , in two books Callistolas Anaximenes Letters An illustration of an unrolled papyrus recovered from the Epicurean Villa of the Papyri in Herculaneum Although more original writings of Epicurus have survived to the present day than of any other Hellenistic Greek philosopher, [ 1 ] the vast majority of everything he wrote has still been lost.

[ 41 ] The only surviving complete works by Epicurus are the Principal Doctrines (Κύριαι Δόξαι) and a few letters which summarize Epicurean doctrines. Numerous fragments of Epicurus's lost thirty-seven volume treatise On Nature have also been found among the charred papyrus fragments at the Villa of the Papyri at Herculaneum .

[ 47 ] On Nature [ edit ] On Nature ( Ancient Greek : Περὶ φύσεως ) is Epicurus's main philosophical work, a treatise in 37 books. The work is not preserved intact, however, many parts have been discovered among the Herculaneum papyri , a collection of papyrus scrolls carbonized by the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 AD, which were discovered at an Epicurean villa in Herculaneum : [ 47 ] Book 2 discusses the existence, formation, and motion of simulacra , the objects of perception.

Book 11 discusses cosmology, the shape and stability of the earth, and an argument against the use of astronomical instruments.

Book 14 criticizes the theory of Classical elements in the Timaeus of Plato , along with the doctrines of the pre-Socratic pluralist philosophers .

Book 15, which is very fragmentary, discusses atoms and compounds, along with a critique of Anaxagoras theory of Homoeomeria Book 25 discusses moral responsibility and perfection , and argues from these premises for the existence of free will and self-determination from a physicalist perspective.

Book 28 contains a record of a discussion between Epicurus and Metrodorus , among other members of the Garden, focused on the use of philosophical terminology to convey concepts accurately, and whether or not a philosopher can verify the truth of statements made using ordinary language without risking inaccuracy or ambiguity.

Book 34 discusses fear that arises from superstition, and the problem of mental perception .

Another book, whose number has not been preserved, discusses the Epicurean theory of time.

Canon [ edit ] Canon ( Ancient Greek : Κανών lit.

Rule ) was Epicurus's principal work on epistemology, the theory of knowledge, which was intended to serve as a justification for his philosophy of nature.

[ 48 ] Although this work has not survived, a brief summary of its contents has been preserved by Diogenes Laertius, which can be compared with other testimonies of Epicurus's epistemology in order to reconstruct an outline of its contents. The title, which was likely taken from a similar work, Canons , written by Democritus , is a reference to a mason 's rule , the straightedge instrument used as a standard to determine the straightness of beams and walls, which was a metaphor for the criteria of truth set out in the work, which were intended to be used as a standard to assess the truth of other beliefs.

[ 49 ] Principal Doctrines [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Principal Doctrines Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article: Κύριαι Δόξαι The Principal Doctrines are forty authoritative conclusions set up as official doctrines by Epicurus. Some of the Principal Doctrines are organized into groups and are meant to be studied together. The first four doctrines make up the Tetrapharmakos (Four Cures). Doctrines 5-21 and 26-30 discuss other topics in ethics, 22-25 deal with epistemology, and 31-40 explain the Epicurean doctrines on justice and societal relations.

[ 50 ] Tetrapharmakos [ edit ] Part of Herculaneum Papyrus 1005 (P.Herc.1005), col. 5. Contains Epicurean tetrapharmakos from Philodemus' Adversus Sophistas.

Tetrapharmakos ( τετραφάρμακος ), or "The four-part cure", is a basic guideline as to how to live the happiest possible life, based on the first four of the doctrines. These are short recommendations to avoid anxiety or existential dread .

[ 51 ] The name "tetrapharmakon" comes from a compound of four drugs ( wax , tallow , pitch and resin ); used metaphorically by Roman-era Epicureans to refer to the four remedies for healing the soul.

[ 52 ] Don't fear god, Don't worry about death; What is good is easy to get, and What is terrible is easy to endure.

[ 53 ] — Philodemus , Herculaneum Papyrus, 1005, 4.9–14 Letters of Epicurus [ edit ] A collection of at least 24 of Epicurus's letters organized by date circulated in antiquity, referred to by Philodemus, the majority of which are lost.

[ 54 ] Three letters of Epicurus are preserved by Diogenes Laertius in his Life of Epicurus : the Letter to Herodotus and the Letter to Pythocles , Epicurus summarizes his philosophy on nature and, in the Letter to Menoeceus , he summarizes his moral teachings.

[ 50 ] Another letter is preserved by Diogenes of Oenoanda , the Letter to Mother , which discusses overcoming fears with an understanding of natural science as a means of attaining happiness.

[ 55 ] Letter to Herodotus [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Letter to Herodotus Epicurus's Letter to Herodotus was written as an introduction to Epicurean philosophy and method of studying nature. It is divided into three parts: the first deals with physical principles, the second deals with compound structures that are formed from the motions of atoms within the void, and the third deals with the purposes for studying nature.

[ 50 ] Letter to Pythocles [ edit ] Epicurus's Letter to Pythocles deals with meteorological and astronomical phenomena, arguing that the knowledge of learning such things has no purpose other than the attainment of ataraxia . After discussing methodology, Epicurus moves on to cosmology, including the stars and the movement of the sun and moon, and then weather patterns, concluding with other astronomical topics. Epicurus's authorship of this letter has occasionally been contested.

[ 50 ] Letter to Menoeceus [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Letter to Menoeceus Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article: Ἐπιστολὴ πρὸς Μενοικέα Epicurus's Letter to Menoeceus is a summary of his ethical teachings. It addresses theology, the hierarchies of desires, how to weigh choices and avoidances in order to achieve net pleasure and self-sufficiency, and then concludes with a discussion of phronesis and the Epicurean sage in terms of the tetrapharmakos.

[ 50 ] Letter to Mother [ edit ] Epicurus's Letter to Mother was inscribed onto the portico walls of the 2nd century Epicurean philosopher Diogenes ' residence in Oenoanda , Lycia , in modern day Turkey , along with numerous other Epicurean letters and treatises.

Epicurus's Letter to Mother is a letter addressed to Epicurus's mother, reassuring her that the disturbing dreams that she had about him do not reflect reality and asking her to stop sending him supplies and money rather than saving it for herself, as he is already well supported by his friends. As a means of combating her superstitions about dreams, he describes the mechanics of dreams from a scientific perspective, comparing a vision in a dream to the process of how images formed in the mind from ordinary sight.

[ 55 ] Epicurus then discusses incremental progress towards happiness, and how doing so allows a philosopher to emulate the gods, not by becoming immortal, but by experiencing what it feels like to be a god during one's mortal life, by attaining the long-term stability associated with ataraxia .

[ 56 ] The majority of scholars attribute this letter to Epicurus himself, on the basis of a comparison with doctrines in other fragments of his writing, other independent characterizations of his mother as a superstitious person, and a linguistic analysis of the use of accurate terminology from his own time period. However, it has also been suggested that the letter was written by Diogenes of Oenoanda , who preserved the letter, or that the letter is part of a lost epistolary novel written by a later author, such as the collection of letters attributed to the Platonist philosopher Chion of Heraclea .

[ 55 ] Vatican Sayings [ edit ] In 1888, another collection of eighty-one Epicurean sayings was discovered in a manuscript in the Vatican Library , now commonly referred to as the Vatican Sayings , which repeats many of the Principal Doctrines and likely preserves the views of Epicurus and some of his immediate followers.

[ 50 ] Legacy [ edit ] Ancient Epicureanism [ edit ] Bust of Hermarchus, Roman copy of a 3rd century BC original. Hermarchus was the scholarch of the Garden after Epicurus's death in 270 BC After Epicurus's death, his follower Hermarchus had succeeded him as the scholarch of the Garden in Athens. Hermarchus' successor, Polystratus (died c.

220 BC ), probably never knew Epicurus himself; one work by him survives criticizing philosophers who have contempt for public opinion. The next two heads of the school were Dionysius of Lamptrai (died c.

200 ), about whom little is known, and Basilides (died c.

175 ). Epicurus's doctrines seem to have become rather popular in Asia Minor in the 2nd century BC; before becoming head of the school in Athens, Basilides appears to have originally studied under an Epicurean community in Syria, where he collaborated with the mathematicians Apollonius of Perga and Hypsicles , and taught Philonides of Laodicea , a mathematician and Epicurean philosopher who was a member of the Seleucid court of Antiochus IV Epiphanes and Demetrius I Soter .

[ 57 ] There were also several divisions within the school early on; even in Epicurus's lifetime, Timocrates of Lampsacus , the brother of his closest disciple Metrodorus, had left the school and published several tracts critical of Epicureanism. During the 2nd and 1st centuries BC, dissident sects of Epicureans established themselves in Cos and Rhodes who broke with the scholarchs of the Garden. While these Epicureans still considered the works of Epicurus and his closest followers to be authoritative, disputes arose about the interpretation of the works; determining which works were genuine, textual criticism of corrupt or contradictory passages, and clarification of difficult passages, which occasionally seemed to present errors.

[ 58 ] Bronze bust of Epicurus recovered from the Villa of the Papyri in Herculaneum , which contains a library of Epicurean works collected by Philodemus .

After Basilides, there is a gap in the historical record; the next known head of the Garden in Athens was Apollodorus , nicknamed "the tyrant of the Garden" who served as head from roughly the middle of the second century BC until 110 BC; though he apparently wrote over 400 books, only traces of a life of Epicurus and a few other works survive.

[ 57 ] Another Epicurean writing at the same time whose works are more thoroughly preserved is Demetrius Lacon ( c.

150-75 BCE ), who taught at an Epicurean school in Miletus . Demetrius wrote works not only on traditional Epicurean subjects such as cosmology, theology, and ethics, but also mathematics, poetry, and rhetoric, testifying to the expanding interests of the school, as well as philological works defending the orthodox readings and interpretations of the works of Epicurus. He was followed in this approach by Zeno of Sidon ( c.

150-75 BCE ), who took over as the next head of the Athenian school. Both Zeno and Demetrius seem to have been in communication with important figures in Rome, and Zeno's most prominent pupil, Philodemus , left to establish a school there. During Zeno's tenure, Athens' role in the First Mithridatic war (88-86 BC), and Sulla 's subsequent reconquest of the city in 86 BC, plunged all of the philosophical schools in Athens into crisis; after Zeno's death, the next two heads of the Garden, Phaedrus (died c.

70 BC ) and Patro (died after c.

51 BC ), both returned to Athens from Rome, where they had fled during the war, to head the school, and the middle of the 1st century BCE last evidence for the Athenian Garden's existence.

[ 59 ] In Rome, the first Epicureans to attempt to spread their doctrines there, Alcaeus and Philiscus , had been expelled from the city in 155 BC, while the earliest Epicurean writers in Latin, Amafinius , Catius , and Rabirus , mostly drew the ire of Cicero for their ethical shortcomings and poor prose. However, three Epicurean philosophers in the 1st century BC, Philodemus , Lucretius , and Siro , did much to establish Epicurus's reputation in Italy, even as it began to decline in Athens. Philodemus, a student of Zeno of Sidon, attracted a wealthy patron, Calpurnius Piso the father-in-law of Julius Caesar , and founded a school that was intended to be a continuation of the Epicurean Garden in Athens, circulating the works of his predecessors and writing treatises on the whole scope of Epicurean philosophy, many of which have been found at the Villa of the Papyri .

Lucretius , a poet who seems to have read Epicurus's works outside the Epicurean school tradition, wrote De rerum natura , a long didactic poem in Latin dactylic hexameter verse, which is still extant, that explained Epicurus's natural philosophy to a Roman audience, covering roughly the first 15 books of Epicurus's On Nature . Meanwhile, Siro established another school in Italy where he instructed a circle of Roman poets in Epicureanism, which included Virgil .

[ 60 ] Diogenes of Oenoanda , an Epicurean philosopher living in Lycia , in the early 2nd century AD, inscribed roughly 260 square meters of Epicurean writings onto the portico walls of his own residence, which were rediscovered in the 1880s.

In the first and second centuries AD, Epicureanism gradually began to decline as it failed to compete with Stoicism, which had an ethical system more in line with traditional Roman values. Prominent critics of his philosophy include prominent authors such as the Roman Stoic Seneca the Younger ( c.

4 BC – AD 65) and the Greek Middle Platonist Plutarch ( c.

46 – c.

120).

[ 61 ] Some time in the 2nd century CE, an otherwise an unknown Epicurean philosopher, Diogenes of Oenoanda , attempted to preserve the doctrines of his school in an enormous wall inscription in Lycia that originally spanned 260 square meters and contained several treatises totalling over 25000 words of writing, roughly a third of which has been preserved.

[ 62 ] Mosaic from a Roman villa, from the late 2nd or early 3rd century AD, depicting the Epicurean philosopher Metrodorus of Lampsacus During the third century AD, Christianity rapidly expanded throughout the Roman Empire. Of all the Greek philosophical schools, Epicureanism was the one most at odds with the new Christian teachings, since Epicureans believed that the soul was mortal, denied the existence of an afterlife, denied that the divine had any active role in human life, and advocated pleasure as the foremost goal of human existence. As such, Christian writers such as Justin Martyr ( c.

100– c.

165 AD), Athenagoras of Athens ( c.

133– c.

190), Tertullian ( c.

155– c.

240), and Clement of Alexandria ( c.

150– c.

215), Arnobius (died c.

330), and Lactantius (c. 250-c.325) all singled it out for the most vitriolic criticism.

[ 61 ] By the early fifth century AD, Epicureanism was virtually extinct. The Christian Church Father Augustine of Hippo (354–430 AD) declared, "its ashes are so cold that not a single spark can be struck from them." [ 61 ] Middle Ages [ edit ] Epicurus in Raphael 's School of Athens (1509–1511). In the Middle ages, Epicurus was depicted in popular culture as a vain pleasure-seeker.

While Plato and Aristotle enjoyed a privileged place in Christian philosophy throughout the Middle Ages , Epicurus, whose ideas could less easily be adapted to suit a Christian worldview, was not held in such esteem. Information about Epicurus's teachings was available, through Lucretius's On the Nature of Things , quotations of it found in medieval Latin grammars and florilegia and encyclopedias, such as Isidore of Seville 's Etymologiae (seventh century) and Hrabanus Maurus 's De universo (ninth century), but there is little evidence that these teachings were systematically studied or comprehended.

[ 61 ] During the Middle Ages, Epicurus frequently appeared in popular culture as a gatekeeper to the Garden of Delights, the "proprietor of the kitchen, the tavern, and the brothel." He appears in this guise in Martianus Capella 's Marriage of Mercury and Philology (fifth century), John of Salisbury 's Policraticus (1159), John Gower 's Mirour de l'Omme , and Geoffrey Chaucer 's Canterbury Tales . Epicurus and his followers also appear in Dante Alighieri 's Inferno in the Sixth Circle of Hell, where they are imprisoned in flaming coffins for having believed that the soul dies with the body.

[ 61 ] In Medieval Jewish philosophy , several philosophers discussed Epicurean doctrines. Although the first apparent reference to Epicurus in Rabbinic literature appears much earlier, the term epikoros , cited in the Mishnah , [ 63 ] meaning "a heretic," earlier uses of the term do not show any knowledge of specific Epicurean doctrines.

[ 64 ] However, in the 10th through 12th centuries, Abraham ibn Ezra , Abraham ibn Daud , and Judah Halevi reference specific Epicurean doctrines, such as the treatment of pleasure as the only good and the eternity of the world, which they were likely introduced to via Arabic translations of the works of the Aristotelian commentator Alexander of Aphrodisias . A much fuller discussion of Epicurean doctrines, however, is given by Maimonides in The Guide to the Perplexed , where he compares Epicurean atomism to the atomistic doctrines of Saadia Gaon and other philosophers of the Jewish Kalam school, which Maimonides believed were ultimately derived from Epicurus, and may derive from earlier encounters between Rabbinic Judaism and Epicurean literature during Late antiquity .

[ 65 ] Renaissance [ edit ] De rerum natura manuscript, c. 1483. The rediscovery of this ancient Epicurean work in 1417 by Poggio Bracciolini provided Renaissance humanists with a thorough account of Epicurus's teachings In 1417, Poggio Bracciolini discovered a copy of Lucretius's On the Nature of Things in a monastery near Lake Constance , which contained a comprehensive account of Epicurus's teachings. The first scholarly dissertation on Epicurus, De voluptate ( On Pleasure ) by the Italian Humanist and Catholic priest Lorenzo Valla was published in 1431. In the treatise, Valla presented the treatise a discussion on the nature of the highest good between an Epicurean, a Stoic, and a Christian. Although Valla's dialogue ultimately rejects Epicureanism, by presenting an Epicurean as a member of the dispute, Valla lent Epicureanism credibility as a philosophy that deserved to be taken seriously.

Francesco Zabarella (1360–1417), Francesco Filelfo (1398–1481), Cristoforo Landino (1424–1498), and Leonardo Bruni ( c.

1370–1444) also gave Epicureanism a fairer analysis than it had traditionally received.

[ 61 ] Nonetheless, "Epicureanism" remained a pejorative, synonymous with extreme egoistic pleasure-seeking, rather than a name of a philosophical school. Even liberal religious skeptics who might have been expected to take an interest in Epicureanism evidently did not; Étienne Dolet (1509–1546) only mentions Epicurus once in all his writings and François Rabelais (between 1483 and 1494–1553) never mentions him at all. Although Michel de Montaigne (1533–1592) quoted 450 lines of Lucretius's On the Nature of Things in his Essays , his interest in Lucretius, however, seems to have been primarily literary and he is ambiguous about his feelings on Lucretius's Epicurean worldview.

[ 61 ] Revival [ edit ] The French priest and philosopher Pierre Gassendi is responsible for reviving Epicureanism in modernity as an alternative to Aristotelianism.

[ 61 ] The French Catholic priest and scholar Pierre Gassendi (1592–1655) published several books expounding Epicureanism that exerted a profound influence on later writings about Epicurus. However, he modified some of Epicurus's doctrines in order to make them more palatable for a Christian audience; for example, by stating that atoms were not eternal, uncreated, and infinite in number, instead contending that an extremely large but finite number of atoms were created by God at creation. Gassendi's version of Epicurus's teachings became popular among some members of English scientific circles, who treated Epicurean atomism as a starting point for their own idiosyncratic theories. To orthodox thinkers, however, Epicureanism was still regarded as immoral and heretical until Walter Charleton (1619–1707) provided the English public with readily available descriptions of Epicurus's philosophy and assured orthodox Christians that Epicureanism was no threat to their beliefs. The Royal Society , chartered in 1662, advanced Epicurean atomism; one of its most prolific defenders of atomism was the chemist Robert Boyle (1627–1691).

John Locke (1632–1704) also adapted Gassendi's modified version of Epicurus's epistemology, which became highly influential on English empiricism.

[ 61 ] Epicureanism was also beginning to lose its associations with indiscriminate and insatiable gluttony, which had been characteristic of its reputation ever since antiquity. Instead, the word "epicure" began to refer to a person with extremely refined taste in food, for example, "such an epicure was Potiphar —to please his tooth and pamper his flesh with delicacies" from William Whately 's Prototypes (1646).

[ 61 ] Around the same time, the Epicurean injunction to "live in obscurity" was beginning to gain popularity as well. In 1685, Sir William Temple (1628–1699) abandoned a promising career as a diplomat and instead retired to his garden, devoting himself to writing essays on Epicurus's moral teachings. That same year, John Dryden translated the celebrated lines from Book II of Lucretius's On the Nature of Things : "'Tis pleasant, safely to behold from shore / The rowling ship, and hear the Tempest roar." [ 61 ] Modern [ edit ] Imagined reconstruction of the Epicurean Villa of the Papyri , which was rediscovered in Herculaneum in the 18th century. The Herculaneum Papyri , which were carbonized by the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 AD, contain numerous Epicurean treatises.

In 19th century Britain, Jeremy Bentham , John Stuart Mill , and Henry Sidgwick adapted Epicurus's psychological hedonism to their own ethical theories of Utilitarianism , which sought to maximize overall happiness.

[ 66 ] Although Epicurus himself, unlike the Utilitarians, did not promote the idea of pursuing happiness as a general ethical goal, these philosophers drew on Epicurus explanations of happiness ( Eudaimonia ) in terms of the relations between pleasures and pains for insight into their own ethical theories.

[ 67 ] In his doctoral thesis , The Difference Between the Democritean and Epicurean Philosophy of Nature , Karl Marx (1818–1883) interpreted Democritus as a rationalist skeptic, whose epistemology was inherently contradictory, but saw Epicurus as a dogmatic empiricist, whose worldview is internally consistent and practically applicable.

[ 68 ] The British poet Alfred Tennyson (1809–1892) praised "the sober majesties / of settled, sweet, Epicurean life" in his 1868 poem "Lucretius". Epicurus's ethical teachings also had an indirect impact on the philosophy of Utilitarianism in England during the nineteenth century.

[ 61 ] Friedrich Nietzsche once noted: "Even today many educated people think that the victory of Christianity over Greek philosophy is a proof of the superior truth of the former – although in this case it was only the coarser and more violent that conquered the more spiritual and delicate. So far as superior truth is concerned, it is enough to observe that the awakening sciences have allied themselves point by point with the philosophy of Epicurus, but point by point rejected Christianity." [ 69 ] Academic interest in Epicurus and other Hellenistic philosophers increased over the course of the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, with an unprecedented number of monographs, articles, abstracts, and conference papers being published on the subject. The texts from the library of Philodemus of Gadara in the Villa of the Papyri in Herculaneum , first discovered between 1750 and 1765, are being deciphered, translated, and published by scholars part of the Philodemus Translation Project, funded by the United States National Endowment for the Humanities , and part of the Centro per lo Studio dei Papiri Ercolanesi in Naples . Epicurus's popular appeal among non-scholars is difficult to gauge, but it seems to be relatively comparable to the appeal of more traditionally popular ancient Greek philosophical subjects such as Stoicism, Aristotle, and Plato.

[ 61 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d Barnes 1986 .

^ a b c d DeWitt 1976 , pp. 8–12.

^ Erler 2011 , p. 9.

^ Konstan .

^ Dorandi 2020 , pp. 19–21.

^ Dorandi 2020 , p. 15.

^ Dorandi 2020 , pp. 37–38.

^ a b Gordon 2012 , pp. 141–142.

^ Diogenes Laërtius , Lives of Eminent Philosophers , 10.22 (trans. C.D. Yonge).

^ Long & Sedley 1987 , p. 26.

^ O'Keefe 2010 , pp. 11–13.

^ O'Keefe 2010 , pp. 18–21.

^ Wilson 2015 , p. 9.

^ Wilson 2015 , p. 11.

^ O'Keefe 2010 , pp. 25–28.

^ Sharples 1996 , pp. 64–66.

^ Wilson 2015 , pp. 54–55.

^ Striker 2020 , pp. 48–49.

^ O'Keefe 2010 , p. 85.

^ a b Asmis 2009 , pp. 93=94.

^ O'Keefe 2010 , pp. 97–98.

^ Asmis 2009 , p. 85.

^ Sharples 1996 , p. 12-16.

^ O'Keefe 2010 , pp. 101–104.

^ a b c Striker 2020 , pp. 52–56.

^ Striker 2020 , pp. 56–58.

^ a b c O'Keefe 2010 , pp. 117–121.

^ Wilson 2015 , p. 93.

^ O'Keefe 2010 , pp. 107–115.

^ a b c d e O'Keefe 2010 , pp. 124–127.

^ Brown 2009 , pp. 182–184.

^ O'Keefe 2010 , pp. 139–142.

^ O'Keefe 2010 , pp. 142–145.

^ a b Brown 2009 , p. 179.

^ a b c Wilson 2015 .

^ O'Keefe 2010 , pp. 155–156.

^ Taub 2009 , p. 124.

^ Taub 2009 , p. 105.

^ Sedley 2011 , pp. 29–30.

^ Konstan 2011 , pp. 53–54.

^ a b c Hickson 2014 .

^ Wilson 2015 , p. 52.

^ Russell, Bertrand.

A History of Western Philosophy , pp. 239–40 ^ "Death is Not the End" .

Catholic Exchange . 26 June 2015 . Retrieved 14 September 2023 .

^ Epicurus (2010). Usener, Hermann (ed.).

Epicurea .

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511711077 .

ISBN 9780511711077 .

^ Clay 1998 , p. 11.

^ a b Dorandi 2020 , pp. 17–18.

^ Striker 2020 , p. 49.

^ Striker 2020 , p. 44.

^ a b c d e f Dorandi 2020 , pp. 16–17.

^ "The fundamental obstacle to happiness, says Epicurus, is anxiety ,"  Hutchinson 1994, p. vii.

^ Gordon 1996 , p. 61.

^ Hutchinson, D. S. (Introduction) (1994).

The Epicurus Reader: Selected Writings and Testimonia . Cambridge: Hackett. pp. vi.

^ Clay 1998 , pp. 41–42.

^ a b c Gordon 2020 , p. 542.

^ Tsouna 2020 , pp. 162–163.

^ a b Dorandi 2020 , pp. 21–22.

^ Dorandi 2020 , pp. 32–36.

^ Dorandi 2020 , pp. 23–25.

^ Dorandi 2020 , pp. 25–30.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m Jones 2010 .

^ Gordon 2020 , p. 531.

^ Mishnah , Seder Nezikin , tractate Sanhedrin , 10a ^ "Jewish Encyclopedia" . Funk and Wagnalls . Retrieved 30 March 2013 .

^ Danzig 2020 , pp. 566, 571.

^ Long 2020 , pp. 742–743.

^ Long 2020 , pp. 757–758.

^ Schafer 2003 , pp. 127–129.

^ Friedrich Nietzsche: Human, All Too Human: A Book for Free Spirits , p. 44.

Bibliography [ edit ] Primary source texts [ edit ] Philodemus [ edit ] On Frank Criticism . (1998), David Konstan , Diskin Clay, Clarence, E. Glad. SBL.

ISBN 1-58983-292-2 On Music (PHerc.

1497 ) On Piety , Part 1. (1996). Critical Text with Commentary by Dirk Obbink . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-815008-3 On Property Management . (2013), Voula Tsouna. SBL.

ISBN 1-58983-667-7 On Rhetoric Books 1 and 2: Translation and Exegetical Essays. (2005). Clive Chandler (editor). Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-97611-1 On Epicurus (PHerc.

1232 , 1289 ) On the Way of Life of the Gods (PHerc.

152 , 157) Lucretius [ edit ] Lucretius Carus, Titus (1976).

On the nature of the universe . Translated by Latham, R. E. London: Penguin Books.

ISBN 978-0-14-044018-8 .

Aetius [ edit ] Mansfeld, Jaap; Runia, David T. (2023).

Aetius: Placita . Cambridge, Mass. London: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-99759-2 . Retrieved 22 May 2025 .

Plutarch [ edit ] Babbitt, Frank Cole (1957).

Moralia, in fifteen volumes, with an English translation by Frank Cole Babbitt . Vol. 14. Cambridge Harvard University Press ; London : Heinemann . Retrieved 22 May 2025 .

Lucian of Samosata [ edit ] Peter Thonemann, ed. (2021).

Lucian: Alexander Or the False Prophet . Translated by Peter Thonemann. Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-886824-8 . Retrieved 22 May 2025 .

Diogenes of Oenoanda [ edit ] Diogenes of Oinoanda (1993).

The Epicurean inscription . Translated by Smith, Martin Ferguson. Napoli: Bibliopolis.

ISBN 978-88-7088-270-4 .

Sextus Empiricus [ edit ] Sextus Empiricus: Against the professors . W. Heinemann. 1949 [1949].

ISBN 978-0-434-99273-7 . Retrieved 22 May 2025 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Diogenes Laërtius [ edit ] Laërtius, Diogenes .

"Epicurus" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 2:10. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library.

Laërtius, Diogenes (1969). Caponigri, A. Robert (ed.).

Lives of the Philosophers . Chicago: Henry Regnery Co.

Lacantius [ edit ] "De ira Dei" .

The Works of Lactantius . T. & T. Clark. 1871.

Epicurea [ edit ] The Epicurea is a collection of texts, fragments, and testimonies by Epicurus that was collected by Hermann Usener in 1887. This work features a collection of writings by Epicurus that explain the values and beliefs of Ancient Epicurian philosophy.

Epicurus (2010). Usener, Hermann (ed.).

Epicurea .

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511711077 .

ISBN 9780511711077 .

"Epicurus: Fragments - translation" .

www.attalus.org . Translated by Anderson, Erik. 2006 . Retrieved 22 May 2025 .

Modern compilations [ edit ] Bailey, Cyril (1926).

Epicurus The Extant Remains . Oxford University Press . Retrieved 24 May 2025 .

Long, A. A.; Sedley, D. N. (9 April 1987).

The Hellenistic Philosophers: Volume 1, Translations of the Principal Sources with Philosophical Commentary . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-139-64289-7 . Retrieved 22 May 2025 .

Epicurus (1994). Inwood, Brad; Gerson, Lloyd P. (eds.).

The Epicurus Reader. Selected Writings and Testimonia . Indianapolis: Hackett.

ISBN 978-0-87220-242-9 .

References [ edit ] Asmis, Elizabeth (2009). "Epicurean empiricism". In Warren, James (ed.).

The Cambridge Companion to Epicureanism . Cambridge University Press.

Barnes, Jonathan (1986), "15: Hellenistic Philosophy and Science", in Boardman, John; Griffin, Jasper; Murray, Oswyn (eds.), The Oxford History of the Classical World , Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, pp.

365– 385, ISBN 978-0198721123 Brown, Eric (2009). "Politics and society". In Warren, James (ed.).

The Cambridge Companion to Epicureanism . New York: Cambridge University Press. pp.

179– 196.

ISBN 978-05218-7347-5 .

Clay, Diskin (1998).

Paradosis and survival: three chapters in the history of Epicurean philosophy . University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 978-0-472-10896-1 .

DeWitt, Norman Wentworth (1976) [1954], Epicurus and His Philosophy , Minneapolis, Minnesota: University of Minnesota Press, ISBN 978-0-816-65745-2 Danzig, Gabriel (2020). "Epicurus and the Epicureanism in Rabbinic Literature". In Mitsis, Phillip (ed.).

The Oxford handbook of Epicurus and epicureanism . Oxford: Oxford university press. pp.

549– 581.

ISBN 9780199744213 .

Dorandi, Tiziano (2020). "Epicurus and the Epicurean School". In Mitsis, Phillip (ed.).

The Oxford handbook of Epicurus and epicureanism . Oxford: Oxford university press. pp.

13– 42.

ISBN 9780199744213 .

Erler, Michael (2011), "Chapter II: Autodidact and student: on the relationship of authority and autonomy in Epicurus and the Epicurean tradition", in Fish, Jeffrey; Sanders, Kirk R. (eds.), Epicurus and the Epicurean Tradition , Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, pp.

9– 28, ISBN 978-0-521-19478-5 Gordon, Pamela (2012), The Invention and Gendering of Epicurus , Ann Arbor, Michigan: The University of Michigan Press, ISBN 978-0-472-02817-7 Gordon, Pamela (1996).

Epicurus in Lycia. The Second-Century World of Diogenes of Oenoanda . Ann Arbor: Univ. of Michigan Press.

ISBN 978-0-472-10461-1 .

Gordon, Pamela (2020). "Diogenes of Oenoanda". In Mitsis, Phillip (ed.).

The Oxford handbook of Epicurus and epicureanism . Oxford: Oxford university press. pp.

531– 548.

ISBN 9780199744213 .

Jones, Howard (2010), "Epicurus and Epicureanism", in Grafton, Anthony ; Most, Glenn W.

; Settis, Salvatore (eds.), The Classical Tradition , Cambridge, Massachusetts and London, England: The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, pp.

320– 324, ISBN 978-0-674-03572-0 Hickson, Michael W. (2014), "A Brief History of Problems of Evil" , in McBrayer, Justin P.; Howard-Snyder, Daniel (eds.), The Blackwell Companion to The Problem of Evil , Hoboken, New Jersey: Wiley-Blackwell, pp.

26– 27, ISBN 978-1-118-60797-8 Konstan, David (2011). "Epicurus on the gods". In Fish, Jeffrey; Sanders, Kirk R. (eds.).

Epicurus and the Epicurean Tradition . United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521194785 .

Konstan, David.

"Epicurus" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Long, A. A. (2020). "Epicureanism and Utilitarianism". In Mitsis, Phillip (ed.).

The Oxford handbook of Epicurus and epicureanism . Oxford: Oxford university press. pp.

742– 760.

ISBN 9780199744213 .

O'Keefe, Tim (2010).

Epicureanism . University of California Press.

Schafer, Paul M. (2003), "The Young Marx on Epicurus: Dialectical Atomism and Human Freedom" , in Gordon, Dane L.; Suits, David B. (eds.), Epicurus: His Continuing Influence and Contemporary Relevance , Rochester, New York: Rochester Institute of Technology, Cary Graphic Arts Press, pp.

127– 138, ISBN 978-0-9713-4596-6 Sedley, David (2011). "Epicurus' theological innatism". In Fish, Jeffrey; Sanders, Kirk R. (eds.).

Epicurus and the Epicurean Tradition . United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521194785 .

Sharples, R. W. (1996).

Stoics, Epicureans, and Sceptics: An introduction to Hellenistic Philosophy . New York, NY: Routledge.

Striker, Gisela (2020). "Epistemology". In Mitsis, Phillip (ed.).

The Oxford handbook of Epicurus and epicureanism . Oxford: Oxford university press. pp.

43– 58.

ISBN 9780199744213 .

Taub, Liba (2009). "Cosmology and meterology". In Warren, James (ed.).

The Cambridge Companion to Epicureanism . New York: Cambridge University Press. pp.

105– 124.

ISBN 978-05218-7347-5 .

Tsouna, Voula (2020). "Hedonism". In Mitsis, Phillip (ed.).

The Oxford handbook of Epicurus and epicureanism . Oxford: Oxford university press. pp.

141– 188.

ISBN 9780199744213 .

Wilson, Catherine (2015).

Epicureanism: a very short introduction . Oxford, United Kingdom: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199688326 .

OCLC 917374685 .

Further reading [ edit ] Mitsis, Phillip, ed. (2020).

The Oxford handbook of Epicurus and epicureanism . Oxford: Oxford university press.

ISBN 9780199744213 .

Fish, Jeffrey; Sanders, Kirk R., eds. (26 May 2011), Epicurus and the Epicurean Tradition , Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-19478-5 Frischer, Bernard (1982), The Sculpted Word: Epicureanism and Philosophical Recruitment in Ancient Greece , Berkeley and Los Angeles, California and London, England: University of California Press, ISBN 978-0-520-04190-5 Gordon, Pamela (2013), "Epistulatory Epicureans" , in Boter, G. J.; Chaniotis, A.; Coleman, K. M.; de Jong, I. J. F.; Reinhardt, T. (eds.), Epistolary Narratives in Ancient Greek Literature , Mnemosyne: Supplements: Monographs on Greek and Latin Language and Literature, vol. 359, Leiden, The Netherlands: Koninklijke Brill, ISBN 978-90-04-25303-2 Jones, Howard (1989).

The Epicurean Tradition . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-02069-5 .

Warren, James (2002).

Epicurus and Democritean Ethics: An Archaeology of Ataraxia . New York, NY: University of Cambridge.

Warren, James (2009).

The Cambridge Companion to Epicureanism . New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-05218-7347-5 .

External links [ edit ] Epicurus at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Works by or about Epicurus at the Internet Archive Works by Epicurus at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) .

Epicurus on PhilPapers O'Keefe, Tim.

"Epicurus" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Epicureanism Philosophers Greek Founders Epicurus Metrodorus Polyaenus Hermarchus Students of Epicurus Idomeneus of Lampsacus Colotes Carneiscus Leontion Themista Leonteus Batis Nikidion Scholarchs of The Garden Epicurus Hermarchus Polystratus Dionysius Basilides Apollodorus Zeno of Sidon Phaedrus Patro Philonides of Laodicea Diogenes of Seleucia Diogenes of Tarsus Demetrius Lacon Roman Alcaeus and Philiscus Amafinius Rabirus Titus Albucius Catius Calpurnius Piso Philodemus Atticus Lucretius Siro Diogenes of Oenoanda Works On Nature Canon Principal Doctrines Letters of Epicurus To Herodotus To Pythocles To Menoeceus To Mother De rerum natura English Herculaneum papyri Paris 4 Vatican Sayings Concepts Atomism Ataraxia Clinamen Epilogism Eudaimonia Free will Hedone Javelin argument Otium Parrhesia Phantasiai Epicurean paradox Principle of Multiple Explanations Problem of the criterion Related articles Villa of the Papyri Epicuri de grege porcum Epikoros Epicurea Pierre Gassendi v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Academics CiNii zbMATH Artists ULAN People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐pvc89
Cached time: 20250817043643
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.508 seconds
Real time usage: 1.785 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 15473/1000000
Revision size: 80376/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 427478/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14388/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 246231/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.954/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24683001/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1437.680      1 -total
 16.78%  241.292    102 Template:Sfn
 12.40%  178.282     35 Template:Cite_book
 10.60%  152.376      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
  7.58%  108.911     24 Template:Navbox
  7.11%  102.155      3 Template:Langx
  6.92%   99.518      1 Template:Reflist
  6.68%   96.067      5 Template:Wikisource/outer_core
  6.42%   92.240      5 Template:Wikisource/inner_core
  6.29%   90.437      5 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:10073:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043643 and revision id 1302803068. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Epicurus&oldid=1302803068 " Categories : 4th-century BC Greek philosophers 3rd-century BC Greek philosophers 341 BC births 270 BC deaths Ancient Greek epistemologists Ancient Greek ethicists Ancient Greek metaphysicians Ancient Greek philosophers of mind Ancient Greek physicists Ancient Samians Empiricists Epicurean philosophers Greek male writers Materialists Philosophers of death Hellenistic-era philosophers in Athens Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Good articles Use dmy dates from March 2020 Articles with hCards Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text CS1 errors: ISBN date Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 14:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Epicurus 94 languages Add topic

