Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nuclear Science Abstracts 2 EDB Scope Toggle EDB Scope subsection 2.1 Subject coverage 3 Sources 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Energy Science and Technology Database Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Nuclear Science Abstracts ) The Energy Science and Technology Database (EDB) is a multidisciplinary file containing worldwide references to basic and applied scientific and technical research literature . The information is collected for use by (United States) government managers, researchers at the national laboratories , and other research efforts sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy , and the results of this research are transferred to the public. Abstracts are included for records from 1976 to the present day.

Nuclear Science Abstracts [ edit ] The EDB also contains the Nuclear Science Abstracts which is a comprehensive abstract and index collection to the international nuclear science and technology literature for the period 1948 through 1976. Included are scientific and technical reports of the US Atomic Energy Commission , United States Energy Research and Development Administration and its contractors, other agencies, universities, and industrial and research organizations. Approximately 25% of the records in the file contain abstracts. Nuclear Science Abstracts contains over 900,000 bibliographic records. In comparison, the entire Energy Science and Technology Database contains over 3 million bibliographic records.

[ 1 ] EDB Scope [ edit ] Moreover, this database is designed to be a source for any individual who requires  access to worldwide energy related information . This database is applicable to the following: Obtaining results of current energy research efforts.

[ 1 ] Access subject specific information on energy sources, use, and conservation ; environmental effects ; waste processing and disposal; regulatory consideration, as well as basic scientific studies.

Review energy information from a wide variety of sources, including journal literature, conference, patents, books, monographs, theses, and engineering and software materials.

Access historical records of the US Atomic Energy Commission, and US Energy Research and Development Administration.

Review subject specific information on nuclear science from a wide variety of sources, including books, conference proceedings, papers, patents , dissertations, engineering drawings, and journal literature .

[ 1 ] Subject coverage [ edit ] Subject coverage includes: [ 1 ] Biology Biomedicine Chemistry Coal , Gas , Oil , Hydroelectricity Conservation technology Energy Conversion Energy Policy Engineering Environmental Science Geosciences , Geothermal Energy Hazardous waste management [ permanent dead link ] Human Genome Project Methodology Isotope / Radiation technology Materials Handling Metals and Ceramics Renewable Energy Source Nuclear and Thermonuclear Power Physics Synthetic fuels Sources [ edit ] A combination of national, and international agencies, as well as multiple non-governmental organizations are the source for, and provide information to, this database. Information is provided through the Energy Technology Data Exchange (ETDE), which is the International Energy Agency's (IEA) multilateral information program, and through the International Atomic Energy Agency's International Nuclear Information System (INIS), and IEA Coal Research . Other source information is provided by the U.S. Department of Energy , its contractors, other government agencies, professional societies .

Engineering and software materials, references to journal literature , conferences , patents , books, monographs , and thesis , make up the files of this database. Approximately 50% of these references are from non-U.S. sources.

[ 2 ] See also [ edit ] List of academic databases and search engines References [ edit ] ^ a b c d EDB (2010).

"What is the Energy Science and Technology Database?" .

U.S. Department of Commerce . Archived from the original (National Technical Information Service) on 2010-05-27 . Retrieved 1 June 2010 .

^ Dialog Bluesheets (June 1, 2010).

"Energy Science and Technology" . Dialog, LLC. Archived from the original on 2011-07-10 . Retrieved 2010-06-29 .

This article incorporates public domain material from websites or documents of the United States government .(Dept. of Commerce) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Energy_Science_and_Technology_Database&oldid=1214306987 " Categories : Bibliographic databases and indexes Energy organizations Government databases in the United States Scientific databases United States Department of Commerce Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Wikipedia articles incorporating text from public domain works of the United States Government This page was last edited on 18 March 2024, at 04:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Energy Science and Technology Database Add languages Add topic

