Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions 2 Examples 3 Properties 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Continuum (topology) 4 languages Deutsch فارسی 日本語 Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Nonempty compact connected metric space Not to be confused with Continuity (topology) .

In the mathematical field of point-set topology , a continuum (plural: "continua") is a nonempty compact connected metric space , or, less frequently, a compact connected Hausdorff space .

Continuum theory is the branch of topology devoted to the study of continua.

Definitions [ edit ] A continuum that contains more than one point is called nondegenerate .

A subset A of a continuum X such that A itself is a continuum is called a subcontinuum of X . A space homeomorphic to a subcontinuum of the Euclidean plane R 2 is called a planar continuum .

A continuum X is homogeneous if for every two points x and y in X , there exists a homeomorphism h : X → X such that h ( x ) = y .

A Peano continuum is a continuum that is locally connected at each point.

An indecomposable continuum is a continuum that cannot be represented as the union of two proper subcontinua. A continuum X is hereditarily indecomposable if every subcontinuum of X is indecomposable.

The dimension of a continuum usually means its topological dimension . A one-dimensional continuum is often called a curve .

Examples [ edit ] An arc is a space homeomorphic to the closed interval [0,1]. If h : [0,1] → X is a homeomorphism and h (0) = p and h (1) = q then p and q are called the endpoints of X ; one also says that X is an arc from p to q . An arc is the simplest and most familiar type of a continuum. It is one-dimensional, arcwise connected , and locally connected.

The topologist's sine curve is a subset of the plane that is the union of the graph of the function f ( x ) = sin(1/ x ), 0 < x ≤ 1 with the segment −1 ≤ y ≤ 1 of the y -axis. It is a one-dimensional continuum that is not arcwise connected, and it is locally disconnected at the points along the y -axis.

The Warsaw circle is obtained by "closing up" the topologist's sine curve by an arc connecting (0,−1) and (1,sin(1)). It is a one-dimensional continuum whose homotopy groups are all trivial, but it is not a contractible space .

Warsaw circle An n -cell is a space homeomorphic to the closed ball in the Euclidean space R n . It is contractible and is the simplest example of an n -dimensional continuum.

An n -sphere is a space homeomorphic to the standard n-sphere in the ( n + 1)-dimensional Euclidean space. It is an n -dimensional homogeneous continuum that is not contractible, and therefore different from an n -cell.

The Hilbert cube is an infinite-dimensional continuum.

Solenoids are among the simplest examples of indecomposable homogeneous continua. They are neither arcwise connected nor locally connected.

The Sierpinski carpet , also known as the Sierpinski universal curve , is a one-dimensional planar Peano continuum that contains a homeomorphic image of any one-dimensional planar continuum.

The pseudo-arc is a homogeneous hereditarily indecomposable planar continuum.

Properties [ edit ] There are two fundamental techniques for constructing continua, by means of nested intersections and inverse limits .

If { X n } is a nested family of continua, i.e.

X n ⊇ X n +1 , then their intersection is a continuum.

If {( X n , f n )} is an inverse sequence of continua X n , called the coordinate spaces , together with continuous maps f n : X n +1 → X n , called the bonding maps , then its inverse limit is a continuum.

A finite or countable product of continua is a continuum.

See also [ edit ] Linear continuum Menger sponge Shape theory (mathematics) References [ edit ] Sources [ edit ] Sam B. Nadler, Jr, Continuum theory. An introduction . Pure and Applied Mathematics, Marcel Dekker.

ISBN 0-8247-8659-9 .

External links [ edit ] Open problems in continuum theory Examples in continuum theory Continuum Theory and Topological Dynamics , M. Barge and J. Kennedy, in Open Problems in Topology, J. van Mill and G.M. Reed (Editors) Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. (North-Holland), 1990.

Hyperspacewiki v t e Topology Fields General (point-set) Algebraic Combinatorial Continuum Differential Geometric low-dimensional Homology cohomology Set-theoretic Digital Key concepts Open set / Closed set Interior Continuity Space compact connected Hausdorff metric uniform Homotopy homotopy group fundamental group Simplicial complex CW complex Polyhedral complex Manifold Bundle (mathematics) Second-countable space Cobordism Metrics and properties Euler characteristic Betti number Winding number Chern number Orientability Key results Banach fixed-point theorem De Rham cohomology Invariance of domain Poincaré conjecture Tychonoff's theorem Urysohn's lemma Category Mathematics portal Wikibook Wikiversity Topics general algebraic geometric Publications Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Continuum_(topology)&oldid=1306062636 " Category : Continuum theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 18:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Continuum (topology) 4 languages Add topic

