Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Ethics and theology 3 Psychology during the Islamic Golden Age 4 Major contributors Toggle Major contributors subsection 4.1 Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi 4.2 Abu-Ali al-Husayn ibn Abdalah ibn-Sina 4.3 Abu Zayd al-Balkhi 5 Melancholia 6 Mental healthcare Toggle Mental healthcare subsection 6.1 Treatment of mental illness 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References Toggle the table of contents Psychology in the medieval Islamic world 7 languages العربية বাংলা فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Русский Српски / srpski Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Historical Islamic psychological studies A medical work by Ibn al-Nafis , who corrected some of the erroneous theories of Galen and Avicenna on the anatomy of the brain [ citation needed ] .

Islamic psychology or ʿilm al-nafs [ 1 ] ( Arabic : علم النفس), the science of the nafs (" self " or " psyche "), [ 2 ] is the medical and philosophical study of the psyche from an Islamic perspective and addresses topics in psychology , neuroscience , philosophy of mind , and psychiatry as well as psychosomatic medicine . In Islam, mental health and mental illness were viewed with a holistic approach. This approach emphasized the mutual connection between maintaining adequate mental wellbeing and good physical health in an individual. People who practice Islam thought it was necessary to maintain positive mental health in order to partake in prayer and other religious obligations.

[ 3 ] Concepts from Islamic thought have been reexamined by Muslim psychologists and scholars in the 20th and 21st centuries.

[ 4 ] Terminology [ edit ] In the writings of Muslim scholars, the term Nafs (self) was used to denote individual personality and the term fitrah for human nature.

Nafs encompassed a broad range of faculties including the qalb (heart), the ruh (soul), the aql (intellect) and irada (will). Muslim scholarship was strongly influenced by Greek as well as by the study of scripture, drawing particularly from Galen 's understanding of the four humors of the body.

In medieval Islamic medicine in particular, the study of mental illness was a speciality of its own, [ 5 ] and was variously known as A‘ilaj al-nafs (approximately "curing/treatment of the soul/self/ideas), [ 6 ] al-tibb al-ruhani ("the healing of the spirit," or "spiritual health") and tibb al-qalb ("healing of the heart/self," or "mental medicine").

[ 2 ] The Classical Arabic term for the mentally ill was "majnoon" which is derived from the term " Jenna ", which means "covered".  It was originally thought that mentally ill individuals could not differentiate between the real and the unreal. However, due to the nuanced nature of individual cases, the treatment of the mentally ill could not be generalized as it was in medieval Europe [ 7 ] This term was gradually redefined among the educated, and was defined by Avicenna (Ibn Sīnā) as "one who suffers from a condition in which reality is replaced with fantasy".

Ethics and theology [ edit ] In the Islamic world , special legal protections were given to the mentally ill.  This attitude was reinforced by scripture, as exemplified in Sura 4:5 of the Qur'an : Do not give your property which God assigned you to manage to the insane: but feed and clothe the insane with this property and tell splendid words to them.

— " [ 5 ] This Quranic verse summarized Islam's attitudes towards the mentally ill, who were considered unfit to manage property but must be treated humanely and be kept under care by either a guardian or the state.

[ 5 ] Psychology during the Islamic Golden Age [ edit ] The period comprising the 8th to the 15th centuries of the Gregorian calendar is known to scholars as the Islamic Golden Age . This marked a time of numerous advances and discoveries in the Islamic arts and sciences, during which Islamic scholars came to  understand that certain conditions can alter an individual's spiritual and psychological states (those seen as majnoon (mad) being perceived as having imbalances in these states). A prominent philosopher during this time was al-Ghazali (1058–1111), [ 3 ] who proposed that maintaining a balanced connection between the spiritual and psychological conditions within the body was vital in order to sustain a close relationship with God. al-Ghazali further explained that divergence from this interconnectedness could result in abnormalities within an individual's mental health.

[ 3 ] Major contributors [ edit ] Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi [ edit ] Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi (865–925), known as Rhazes in the western tradition, was an influential Persian physician, philosopher, and scientist during the Golden Age of Islam, and among the first in the world to write on mental illness and psychotherapy.

[ 8 ] As chief physician of Baghdad hospital, he was also the director of one of the first psychiatric wards in the world. Two of his works in particular, El-Mansuri and Al-Hawi , provide descriptions and treatments for mental illnesses.

[ 8 ] Abu-Ali al-Husayn ibn Abdalah ibn-Sina [ edit ] Abu-Ali al-Husayn ibn Abdalah ibn-Sina (980–1030), known to the west as Avicenna , was a Persian polymath who is widely regarded for his writings on such diverse subjects as philosophy, physics, medicine, mathematics, geology, Islamic theology, and poetry. In his most widely celebrated work, the Canon of Medicine (Al-Qanun-fi-il-Tabb), he provided descriptions and treatments for such conditions as insomnia , mania , vertigo , paralysis , stroke , epilepsy , and depression as well as male sexual dysfunction . He was a pioneer in the field of psychosomatic medicine , linking changes in mental state to changes in the body.

[ 9 ] Abu Zayd al-Balkhi [ edit ] Abu Zayd al-Balkhi (850-934) was a Muslim psychologist and physician during the Islamic Golden Age. His many contributions were vital to the understanding of mental health as well as how to treat various mental illnesses. Al-Balkhi is famous for his work titled “Sustenance of the Body and Soul.” [ 10 ] In it, he encouraged other physicians to treat the body and mind as a whole and thus take a holistic approach to medicine. This thinking is significant because it laid the foundation for a psychophysiological approach to healthy living in Medieval Islam. In al-Balkhi’s writings, he explains that the soul experiences an array of emotions such as distress, sadness, and fear when the body undergoes physical illnesses.

[ 10 ] The establishment of cognitive therapy is credited to al-Balkhi. When his patients experienced distress, he developed an approach that motivated them to think positively using healthy cognitions. al-Balkhi and other important Islamic scholars also implemented the technique of reciprocal inhibition when treating their patients.

[ 11 ] Furthermore, al-Balkhi also places emphasis on how environmental factors, such as housing, exercise, and nutrition, can affect a person’s mental wellbeing. al-Balkhi’s contributions also consisted of identifying the difference between psychosis and neurosis . He categorized neuroses into four groups: obsessions, sadness and depression, fear and anxiety, and anger and aggression. The analysis al-Balki made in medieval Islamic psychology is still relevant to modern psychology.

[ 3 ] Melancholia [ edit ] The mental health disorder melancholia came under intensive study in the Islamic world of the Middle Ages. Islamic scholars described melancholia as a condition the principal symptom of which was a state of constant sadness, the cause of which was believed to be an excess of black bile in the body. The varied symptoms of melancholia were believed to derive from the particular area of the body in which the (conjectural) black bile had become concentrated. The resulting state of sadness experienced by sufferers was categorized into three different types: first sadness originating in trauma or stress, secondly sadness caused by external (organic/physiological) factors, such as inadequate nourishment of the body and thirdly the everyday sadness inherent in the human condition. This classification system is similar to the way in which present models analyze depression. In the medieval Islamic world, however, a diagnosis of melancholia could also encompass such varied cerebral phenomena as epilepsy and mania .

[ 3 ] Mental healthcare [ edit ] The earliest bimaristans were built in the 9th century, and large bimaristans built in the 13th century contained separate wards for mentally ill patients.

[ 12 ] Treatment of mental illness [ edit ] In addition to medication, treatment for mental illness might include baths, music, talk therapy, hijama (cupping), and aromatherapy. Scholars and physicians of this time period were some of the first to emphasize psychosomatic medicine, the emphasis placed on the relationship between illness of the mind and problems in the body.

[ 13 ] Medicine would be prescribed in order to re-balance the four humors of the body, an imbalance of which might result in psychosis.

[ 9 ] Insomnia, for example, was thought to result from excessive amounts of the dry humors which could be remedied by the use of humectants .

See also [ edit ] Islamic philosophy Medicine in the medieval Islamic world Ophthalmology in medieval Islam Science in medieval Islam Sufi psychology Notes [ edit ] ^ ( Haque 2004 , p. 358) ^ a b Deuraseh, Nurdeen; Mansor Abu, Talib (2005), "Mental health in Islamic medical tradition", The International Medical Journal , 4 (2): 76– 79.

^ a b c d e Mitha, Karim (December 2020).

"Conceptualising and addressing mental disorders amongst Muslim communities: Approaches from the Islamic Golden Age" .

Transcultural Psychiatry .

57 (6): 763– 774.

doi : 10.1177/1363461520962603 .

ISSN 1363-4615 .

PMC 7689558 .

PMID 33059527 .

^ ( Haque 2004 ) ^ a b c ( Youssef, Youssef & Dening 1996 , p. 58) ^ ( Haque 2004 , p. 376) ^ Okasha, A. (2001), "Egyptian Contribution to the Conception of Mental Health", Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal , 7 (3): 377– 380, doi : 10.26719/2001.7.3.377 , PMID 12690756 , S2CID 37684357 .

^ a b Wael Mohamed, C.R. (2012). "Arab and Muslim Contributions to Modern Neuroscience".

International Brain Research Organization History of Neuroscience .

^ a b A. Okasha, C.R. (2001).

"Mental Health and Psychiatry in the Middle East" .

Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal .

7 : 336– 347.

doi : 10.26719/2001.7.3.336 .

S2CID 21512463 .

^ a b Moffic, Steven; Peteet, John; Hankir, Ahmed; Awaad, Rania (2018).

Islamophobia and psychiatry: recognition, prevention, and treatment . Springer. pp.

4– 8.

ISBN 978-3-030-00511-5 .

^ Moffic, Steven; Peteet, John; Hankir, Ahmed; Awaad, Rania (2018).

Islamophobia and psychiatry: Recognition, prevention, and treatment . Springer. pp.

14– 15.

ISBN 978-3-030-00511-5 .

^ Miller, Andrew C (December 2006).

"Jundi-Shapur, bimaristans, and the rise of academic medical centres" .

Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine .

99 (12): 615– 617.

doi : 10.1177/014107680609901208 .

PMC 1676324 .

PMID 17139063 . Archived from the original on 2013-02-01 . Retrieved 2018-08-26 .

^ Mitha, Karim (2020).

"Conceptualising and addressing mental disorders amongst Muslim communities: Approaches from the Islamic Golden Age" .

Transcultural Psychiatry .

57 (6): 763– 774.

doi : 10.1177/1363461520962603 .

PMC 7689558 .

PMID 33059527 .

S2CID 222832853 .

References [ edit ] Bakhtiar, Laleh (2019), Quranic Psychology of the Self: A Textbook on Islamic Moral Psychology (ilm al-nafs) , Kazi Publications, ISBN 978-1567446418 Haque, Amber (2004), "Psychology from Islamic Perspective: Contributions of Early Muslim Scholars and Challenges to Contemporary Muslim Psychologists", Journal of Religion and Health , 43 (4): 357– 377, doi : 10.1007/s10943-004-4302-z , S2CID 38740431 Plott, C. (2000), Global History of Philosophy: The Period of Scholasticism , Motilal Banarsidass , ISBN 81-208-0551-8 Youssef, Hanafy A.; Youssef, Fatma A.; Dening, T. R. (1996), "Evidence for the existence of schizophrenia in medieval Islamic society", History of Psychiatry , 7 (25): 55– 62, doi : 10.1177/0957154X9600702503 , PMID 11609215 , S2CID 44459712 v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine v t e Islamic studies Arts Arabesque Architecture Calligraphy Gardens Geometric pattern Literature Music Poetry Pottery Influences on Western art Economics History Agency Banking Capitalism Poverty Socialism Trust Usury Welfare History Timeline Historiography Early social change Early conquests Golden Age Contributions to Medieval Europe Reception in early modern Europe Law and politics Democracy consensus consultation Feminism Jurisprudence use of analogy decision-making schools Peace Quietism Secularism Early social change State Philosophy Early Contemporary Theology dialectic Ethics Logic Astrology Early sociology solidarity Medieval science Timeline Alchemy and chemistry Astronomy cosmology Geography and cartography Inventions Mathematics Medicine ophthalmology Physics Psychology Other fields Arab Agricultural Revolution Education Ijazah elementary school Sufi studies mysticism cosmology philosophy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Psychology_in_the_medieval_Islamic_world&oldid=1289352996 " Categories : Psychological schools Psychology in the medieval Islamic world Medicine in the medieval Islamic world Islamic Golden Age Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2011 This page was last edited on 8 May 2025, at 02:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Psychology in the medieval Islamic world 7 languages Add topic

