Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Painting Toggle Painting subsection 1.1 Centre d’Art 1.2 Saint Soleil School 1.3 Artibonite artists 1.4 Diaspora outside of Haiti 1.5 Market painting 2 Sculpture Toggle Sculpture subsection 2.1 Haitian flag-making 3 2010 Haiti earthquake 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Haitian art 1 language Kreyòl ayisyen Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Expression of Haitian culture and history Part of a series on the Culture of Haiti History Timeline Taíno chiefdoms Captaincy General of Santo Domingo Colonial governors Devastations of Osorio Atlantic slave trade Maroons Peace of Ryswick Saint-Domingue Colonial governors Slavery Le Jeune Case Haitian Revolution 1804 massacre First Empire State Kingdom Republic 1806–1820 1820–1849 Unification of Hispaniola Second Empire Post-imperial Republic U.S. occupation Duvalier family Anti-Duvalier protest movement 1991 coup d'état 2004 coup d'état 2010 earthquake 2010s cholera outbreak Hurricane Matthew Crisis (2018–present) Gang war 2022 fuel protests COVID-19 pandemic 2021 earthquake List of massacres List of revolutions and coups d'état People Languages French Haitian Creole Cuisine Religion Art Literature Music Media Radio Television Cinema Sport Monuments World Heritage Sites Symbols Flag Coat of arms National anthem Haiti portal v t e Haitian art is a complex tradition, reflecting African roots with strong Indigenous, American and European aesthetic and religious influences. It is an important expression of Haitian culture and history.

Many artists cluster in "schools" of painting, such as the Cap-Haïtien school, which features depictions of daily life in the city, the Jacmel School, which reflects the steep mountains and bays of that coastal town, or the Saint-Soleil School, which is characterized by abstracted human forms and is heavily influenced by "Vaudou" symbolism .

Painting [ edit ] Centre d’Art [ edit ] The Centre d'Art is an art center, school and gallery located in Port-au-Prince, Haiti. It was founded in 1944 by American watercolorist DeWitt Peters and several prominent Haitians from the intellectual and cultural circles including: Maurice Borno , Andrée Malebranche , Albert Mangonès , Lucien Price , and Georges Remponeau .

[ 1 ] Popular artists of this movement often were influenced by vaudou and include: André Pierre , Hector Hippolyte , Castera Bazile , Wilson Bigaud and Rigaud Benoit .

[ 2 ] Haitian art is a type of artwork often characterized by vivid colors, spatial composition and spontaneity of painting.

[ 2 ] By the mid 1950s, Haitian naïve art was firmly established, and other institutions began to emerge, such as the Foyer des Arts Plastiques (1950) and the Galerie Brochette (1956).

[ 3 ] Saint Soleil School [ edit ] Saint Soleil School, also known as "Movement Saint-Soleil" was founded in 1973 as a rural arts community called Soisson-la-Montagne, in Pétion-Ville , Haiti.

[ 4 ] This community was started by Jean-Claude Garoute and Maud Robart and they encouraged the academic study of painting, as well as maintaining influence by vaudou.

[ 4 ] Saint Soleil art is characterized by abstract human forms and the heavy influence of vaudou symbolism.

After Saint Soleil School disbanded, five remaining members of the school were renamed "Cinq Soleil" and include: Levoy Exil , Prosper Pierre Louis , Louisiane Saint Fleurant , Dieuseul Paul , Denis Smith.

[ 4 ] A second generation member is Magda Magloire , the daughter of Louisiane Saint Fleurant .

Artibonite artists [ edit ] The painters of the Artibonite department in north-western Haiti, where Hôpital Albert Schweitzer is located, have developed their own style, which is quite recognizable. The style began with Saincilus Ismaël (1940–2000), who was influenced by Byzantine art he had seen in books. Ismaël began to paint in 1956 after visiting the Centre d'Art in Port-au-Prince . His paintings are marked by exquisite detail. Every article of clothing, house, or tree is painted with a different intricate geometric pattern.

Délouis Jean-Louis grew up in Petite Rivière under the influence of Ismaël. Although he worked under Ismaël for 15 years, he never had formal painting lessons. He began painting to make money, but gradually began to paint carefully executed scenes from his imagination.

Alix Dorléus also learned to paint with Ismaël and Mrs. Mellon. He paints all day long and will paint anywhere he feels the spirit to motivate him. His best paintings are detailed depictions, like activity maps, of daily life in the Artibonite Valley.

Ernst Louizor is considered one of the best impressionist painters of Haiti.

[ citation needed ] Louizor was born in Port-au-Prince on 16 October 1938.  After high school (Lycée Toussaint L'Ouverture '57), he worked in the tax section of Customs. Louizor's painting career began in 1951, when at the age of 13 he joined the Centre d'Art and studied under Wilmino Domond . He later entered the Académie des Beaux-Arts shortly after its founding in 1959 and furthered his studies with Georges Remponeau . Louizor has many disciples including his wife Gerda Louizor .  He has exhibited in Europe and the United States.

Diaspora outside of Haiti [ edit ] Notable artists of Haitian descent and members of the diaspora include Jean-Michel Basquiat , Hersza Barjon and Ernst Registre .

Market painting [ edit ] Market painting is a Haitian archetype, originating with Laurent Casimir. It typically depicts a Haitian market and is done in the trademark colors of Casimir red, yellow and orange. The motive is often dense with people. These paintings were mass-produced by Laurent Casimir and his apprentices in the mid-1970s, all signed by Casimir.

[ 5 ] [ non-primary source needed ] This archetype is later taken up by contemporary Haitian artist like Jean-Louis, many of which studied under Laurent Casimir.

Sculpture [ edit ] There is evidence that sculpture from the Tainos in Haiti existed in the Pre-Columbian era and they would create dolls, drawings, signs.

[ 2 ] It is speculated by researchers that these sculptures may have been representing their deities (maybe the ancestors of the vèvè in vaudou ).

[ 2 ] Contemporary Haitian sculpture is made of natural materials, traditional art mediums, and recycled materials.

"Haitian Steel Drum Sculpture" – The village of Noailles in Croix-des-Bouquets is home to more than a dozen artisan workshops producing countless pieces for over two decades. The work is created out of recycled oil drums. In August 2011, the Clinton Global Initiative along with Greif Inc., donated 40 tons of scrap metal to the artists in Croix-des-Bouquets.  After the earthquake in 2010, artists had a difficult time finding material to work from.  According to deputy Jean Tholbert Alèxis , 8,000 people in the area are directly or indirectly benefit from the villages' artisans.

[ 6 ] Haitian flag-making [ edit ] Flags most often commemorate specific spirits or saints, but the 2010 Haiti earthquake has become a common subject of art flags. The use of sequins in these flags became prevalent in the 1940s, and many of today's flags  cover the entire flag in colored sequins and beads. These flags are traded as art by dealers around the world.

2010 Haiti earthquake [ edit ] On 12 January 2010 a devastating earthquake struck Port-au-Prince and its surrounding area and resulted in mass devastation.

[ 7 ] The Haitian art world suffered great losses in the earthquake. Museums and art galleries were extensively damaged, among them Port-au-Prince's main art museum, Centre d'Art , where many art works were destroyed. The collection at Collège Saint Pierre also was devastated, as was the collection of priceless murals in the Holy Trinity Cathedral .

[ 8 ] Some private art galleries were also severely damaged, including the Monnin Gallery in Pétion-Ville, [ 8 ] and the Nader Art Gallery and Musée Nader in Port-au-Prince. The personal collection of Georges Nader Sr, the Nader collection was worth an estimated US$30-US$100 million. Shortly after the earthquake struck, UNESCO assigned special envoy Bernard Hadjadj to evaluate damage to artwork.

[ 9 ] The Smithsonian Institution , led by Under Secretary Richard Kurin , and with the assistance of the U.S. Embassy in Port-au-Prince and the Government of Haiti among others, embarked on a multiyear project and survey to help restore key Haitian cultural treasures and train local Haitians on art preservation and recovery techniques.

[ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ Benson, LeGrace (2016). "Malebranche, Andrée (1916–2013)". In Knight, Franklin W.; Gates Jr., Henry Louis (eds.).

Dictionary of Caribbean and Afro–Latin American Biography . Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-199-93580-2 .

– via Oxford University Press 's Reference Online (subscription required) ^ a b c d "A History of Haitian Art" .

DiscoverHaiti.com . 2001. Archived from the original on 2 August 2009 . Retrieved 27 March 2018 .

^ Nadal-Gardère, Marie-José; Bloncourt, Gérald (1986).

La Peinture Haïtienne - Haitian Arts . Translated by Bell, Elizabeth. Paris: Éditions Nathan . pp.

18– 19.

ISBN 9782091615011 .

^ a b c "Saint Soleil Movement" .

Ok Haiti . 23 June 2016 . Retrieved 27 March 2018 .

^ "Galerie Macondo" . Retrieved 20 April 2013 .

^ "Clinton Foundation makes first loan to Haiti craft business under new program to boost economy" . Associated Press. Archived from the original on 29 May 2015 . Retrieved 18 August 2011 .

^ "USGS Magnitude 7.0 – HAITI REGION" . Archived from the original on 15 January 2010 . Retrieved 13 January 2010 .

^ a b Tracy Wilkinson (24 January 2010).

"A cultural agony in a nation where art is life" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 24 January 2010 .

^ Pooja Bhatia (25 January 2010).

"Art Trove Is Among Nation's Losses" .

Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 26 January 2010 .

^ "Haiti Cultural Recovery Project - Cultural Recovery Center" .

haiti.si.edu . Retrieved 2024-01-19 .

External links [ edit ] Museum Collections Huntington Museum of Art Milwaukee Art Museum Waterloo Center for the Arts Films List of films on Haitian artists and Haitian art by Arnold Antonin v t e Haiti articles History Timeline Taíno chiefdoms Captaincy General of Santo Domingo Colonial governors Devastations of Osorio Atlantic slave trade Maroons Peace of Ryswick Saint-Domingue Colonial governors Slavery Le Jeune Case Haitian Revolution 1804 massacre First Empire State Kingdom Republic 1806–1820 1820–1849 Unification of Hispaniola Second Empire Post-imperial Republic U.S. occupation Duvalier family Anti-Duvalier protest movement 1991 coup d'état 2004 coup d'état 2010 earthquake 2010s cholera outbreak Hurricane Matthew Crisis (2018–present) Gang war 2022 fuel protests COVID-19 pandemic 2021 earthquake List of massacres List of revolutions and coups d'état Geography Administrative divisions Arrondissements Border Cities Deforestation Departments Earthquakes Environment Hispaniola Islands National parks Rivers Wildlife World Heritage Sites Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights LGBT rights Law enforcement Military Commanders-in-chief Parliament Senate Chamber of Deputies Political parties President List Prime Minister List Supreme Court Economy Agriculture Central bank External debt Foreign aid Gourde (currency) Poverty Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Crime Demographics Education Ethnic groups Health Religion People Social class Squatting Water and sanitation Culture Art Coat of arms Cinema Citadelle Laferrière Cuisine Flag Languages Haitian Creole Haitian French Literature Media Music Mythology National anthem Sans-Souci Palace Public holidays Television The Unknown Maroon Outline Index Category Portal v t e North American art Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Haitian_art&oldid=1301565605 " Category : Haitian art Hidden categories: Subscription required using via Pages containing links to subscription-only content Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2012 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from June 2020 Region topic template using suffix This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 14:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Haitian art 1 language Add topic

