Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Profession 2 Education Toggle Education subsection 2.1 United Kingdom 2.2 France 3 Public protection Toggle Public protection subsection 3.1 United Kingdom 4 Organisations Toggle Organisations subsection 4.1 Australia 4.2 United Kingdom 4.3 United States 5 Examples of restoration Toggle Examples of restoration subsection 5.1 United Kingdom 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Conservation and restoration of historic gardens 3 languages العربية Deutsch 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia An 1835 estate map of the landscaped parkland at Blenheim Palace , in Oxfordshire , England Historic garden conservation is a specialised type of historic preservation and conservation or restoration concerned with historical and landmark gardens and designed landscapes .

Profession [ edit ] Practitioners predominantly come from backgrounds in horticulture , garden design , landscape design , and landscape architecture . To prepare a management plan for a historic garden, such experts require knowledge and skills in environmental design , horticulture, landscape history , architectural history , and management. Specialist educational programs are available (see section below).

Portrait of Capability Brown by Nathaniel Dance-Holland , 1769. One of the most famous historical landscape architects, Lancelot "Capability" Brown (1716–1783) Historic garden restoration is the professional task of restoring historic gardens to the character they had at a previous point in history. Since the use of old gardens is in flux, this normally involves a consideration of current and future use. The job of researching historic gardens and preparing a policy for their conservation involves landscape archaeology , historic knowledge, design judgment and technical skill in horticulture and construction.

Education [ edit ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Several universities and colleges in England run undergraduate and postgraduate courses related to historic garden conservation.

MA in garden and landscape history, Institute of Historical Research ( London ) [ 1 ] BSc landscape management course, University of Greenwich [ 2 ] Historic environment (landscapes and gardens) courses, Institute of Continuing Education ( Cambridge ) [ 3 ] BSc garden design, restoration and management, Writtle College [ 4 ] The University of Bath ran a specialist MSc / PGDip course in the conservation of historic gardens and cultural landscapes, until the 2014–15 academic year.

France [ edit ] The Institut national du patrimoine (The National Institute of Cultural Heritage) trains curators specialized in "scientific, technical and natural heritage".

Public protection [ edit ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Statutory protection exists for registered parks, gardens and designed landscapes. There are separate heritage registers maintained for each of the four countries of the United Kingdom : The Register of Historic Parks and Gardens of special historic interest in England is maintained by English Heritage ; [ 5 ] The Cadw/ICOMOS Register of Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in Wales is maintained by Cadw ; [ 6 ] The Inventory of Gardens and Designed Landscapes in Scotland is maintained by Historic Scotland ; [ 7 ] The Register of Parks, Gardens and Demesnes of Special Historic Interest is maintained by the Northern Ireland Environment Agency .

[ 8 ] Organisations [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] In Australia , the Australian Garden History Society is a similar organization to the UK's Garden History Society.

United Kingdom [ edit ] The Baroque terraced garden at Powis Castle in Wales, restored in the early 20th century and now cared for by the National Trust In England , Wales and Northern Ireland , the National Trust , and likewise in Scotland the National Trust for Scotland , own or manage many country houses and/or the gardens and parkland attached to them, as well as other treasured gardens, parks and landscapes, on behalf of the nation.

The Garden History Society is the oldest such society in the world, forming in 1966. It became The Gardens Trust [ 9 ] in 2015, having merged with the Association of Gardens Trusts. Its aims are to study garden history and conserve historic gardens. Since 1995 it is a statutory consultee on proposals affecting registered parks, gardens and landscapes in England. It has about 1,500 members and publishes the Garden History journal twice-yearly, as well as a regular members' newsletter. The society has an active group for Scotland, with its own regular newsletter and conservation officer.

The Welsh Historic Gardens Trust is a similar society specifically for gardens, parks and landscapes in Wales. Most of the counties of England also have their own trust, which were represented by the Association of Gardens Trusts, which since 2015 forms part of The Gardens Trust.

In London there is the Garden Museum , covering all aspects of gardening history and with a large and growing collection of historic objects such as old tools and plans.

United States [ edit ] In the United States , The Garden Conservancy actively assists in the preservation of notable gardens and designed landscapes in the country.

There is also the California Garden and Landscape History Society for events and education in California specifically.

[ 10 ] The Garden Club of Virginia has restored many of the most notable historic gardens in Virginia since its founding around 1913. A Historic Garden Week is run, in part to raise money for restorations.

The Archives of American Gardens is an archive which preserves documentation and content related to gardens in the United States. Housing over 80,000 photographic images and records pertaining to over 6,000 gardens throughout the United States, some as old as the 1870s, the Archive is part of Smithsonian Gardens , a unit of the Smithsonian Institution .

Examples of restoration [ edit ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Restoration work on a parterre at Wrest Park Recent and ongoing examples of garden conservation and restoration in England include the Privy Garden at Hampton Court Palace , Painshill in Surrey , Lowther Castle in Cumbria , Lever Park in Lancashire , Biddulph Grange in Staffordshire , Kenilworth Castle in Warwickshire , Croome Court and Witley Court in Worcestershire , [ 11 ] Wrest Park in Bedfordshire , Westbury Court Garden in Gloucestershire , and the Lost Gardens of Heligan in Cornwall .

Many of these aim to restore a garden, or parts of it, to as near as possible its state at some earlier date. At Kenilworth this is 1575, Hampton Court and Westbury Court about 1700, rather later at Wrest Park and Painshill, and around 1760 at Croome Park.  Biddulph Grange, Witley Court and Heligan are Victorian gardens (of rather different types), and Lever Park early 20th century.

See also [ edit ] Gardening portal Gardens portal History of gardening Landscape design history References [ edit ] ^ "Study & Training | Institute of Historical Research" .

^ "Landscape Management (Land Use), BSC Hons - Landscape and Gardens Programmes - University of Greenwich" .

www2.gre.ac.uk . Archived from the original on 19 April 2012 . Retrieved 11 January 2022 .

^ "Garden History - University of Cambridge Institute of Continuing Education" .

www.ice.cam.ac.uk . Archived from the original on 29 December 2010 . Retrieved 11 January 2022 .

^ "Home - Writtle University College" . Archived from the original on 2015-01-18.

^ "Historic Parks and Gardens" . English Heritage . Retrieved 18 November 2011 .

^ "Historic Parks and Gardens" . Cadw. Archived from the original on 9 March 2012 . Retrieved 18 November 2011 .

^ "Gardens and Designed Landscapes" . Historic Scotland . Retrieved 18 November 2011 .

^ "Historic Parks, Gardens and Demesnes" . NIEA. Archived from the original on 13 December 2011 . Retrieved 18 November 2011 .

^ The Gardens Trust ^ "California Garden & Landscape History Society - Home" .

cglhs.org . Retrieved 2021-11-23 .

^ BBC News Croome parkland restored by National Trust (4 October 2014) External links [ edit ] Historic Gardens Foundation The Gardens Trust Garden Museum The Garden Conservancy v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Cultural heritage and historic preservation Topics and issues Agents of deterioration Archival processing Archaeological science Archaeology Archive Bioarchaeology Book Calendar (archives) Conservation and restoration of cultural property Conservation and restoration of immovable cultural property Conservation and restoration of movable cultural property Conservation science (cultural property) Collecting Collection (museum) Collection catalog Collections maintenance Collections management Collections management system Cultural heritage Cultural heritage management Cultural property Cultural property documentation Cultural property exhibition Cultural property imaging Cultural property storage Cultural resource management Database preservation Deaccessioning Digital library Digital photograph restoration Digital preservation Disaster preparedness (cultural property) Film preservation Finding aid Fonds Found in collection Heritage asset Heritage science Historic site Inherent vice Intangible cultural heritage Integrated pest management (cultural property) Inventory (library and archive) Inventory (museums) Media preservation Midden Mold control and prevention (library and archive) Museum Optical media preservation Preservation (library and archive) Preservation metadata Preservation survey Provenance Repatriation Ruins Sustainable preservation Treasure Web archiving Roles and expertise Archivist Art dealer Art handler Auctioneer Collection manager Conservator-restorer Conservation scientist Conservation technician Curator Exhibition designer Mount maker Objects conservator Paintings conservator Photograph conservator Preservationist Registrar (cultural property) Textile conservator Methods and techniques Aging (artwork) Anastylosis Arrested decay Cradling (paintings) Cultural property radiography Detachment of wall paintings Desmet method Display case Digital repository audit method based on risk assessment Historic paint analysis Inpainting Kintsugi Leafcasting Lining of paintings Mass deacidification Overpainting Paleo-inspiration Paper splitting Reconstruction (architecture) Rissverklebung Textile stabilization Transfer of panel paintings UVC-based preservation VisualAudio Conservation and restoration of immovable cultural property by item type Archaeological sites Cultural venues Frescos Heritage railways Historic gardens Outdoor artworks Outdoor bronze objects Outdoor murals Conservation and restoration of movable cultural property by item type Aircraft Ancient Greek pottery Bone, horn, and antler objects Books, manuscripts, documents and ephemera Ceramic objects Clocks Copper-based objects Feathers Film Flags and banners Fur objects Glass objects Herbaria Human remains Illuminated manuscripts Insect specimens Iron and steel objects Ivory objects Judaica Lacquerware Leather objects Lighthouses Metals Musical instruments Neon objects New media art Paintings Painting frames Panel paintings Papyrus Parchment Performance art Photographs Photographic plates Plastic objects Rail vehicles Road vehicles Shipwreck artifacts Silver objects South Asian household shrines Stained glass Taxidermy Textiles Tibetan thangkas Time-based media art Totem poles Vinyl discs Woodblock prints Wooden artifacts Wooden furniture Intangible cultural heritage preservation Ancient music Applied folklore Dance notation Early music Endangered language Ethnochoreology Ethnomusicology Ethnopoetics Family folklore Folklore Folk art Folk dance Folk etymology Folk instrument Folk music Folk process Folk play Foodways Folklore studies Heritage language Heritage language learning Indigenous intellectual property Indigenous culture Indigenous language Language death Language preservation Language revitalization Living history Oral history preservation Preservation of meaning Prehistoric music Tradition preservation Traditional knowledge Traditional medicine Notable projects Conservation issues of Pompeii and Herculaneum Conservation-restoration of Ecce Homo by Elías García Martínez Conservation-restoration of The Gross Clinic by Thomas Eakins Conservation-restoration of Leonardo da Vinci's The Last Supper Pompeian frescoes Conservation-restoration of the Shroud of Turin Conservation-restoration of the Sistine Chapel frescoes Conservation-restoration of the Statue of Liberty Conservation-restoration of the H.L. Hunley Conservation response to flood of Arno, Florence Modern and Contemporary Art Research Initiative Preservation Metadata: Implementation Strategies World Heritage Site Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conservation_and_restoration_of_historic_gardens&oldid=1278263269 " Categories : Conservation and restoration of cultural heritage Historic preservation Garden design history Architectural history Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 March 2025, at 12:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conservation and restoration of historic gardens 3 languages Add topic

