Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Intellectual legacy Toggle Intellectual legacy subsection 2.1 The History of British India 2.2 British politics 2.3 Other areas 3 Major works 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents James Mill 45 languages العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Русский Scots Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scottish intellectual (1773–1836) James Mill Born James Milne [ 1 ] ( 1773-04-06 ) 6 April 1773 Northwater Bridge, parish of Logie Pert, Angus, Scotland Died 23 June 1836 (1836-06-23) (aged 63) Kensington , London, England Spouse Harriet Burrow Children John Stuart Mill Education Alma mater University of Edinburgh Philosophical work Era Modern philosophy 19th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy British philosophy Scottish philosophy School Associationism Classical liberalism Economic liberalism Ricardian economics Utilitarianism Main interests Psychology Ethics Economics Notable works The History of British India (1817) Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Part of a series on Radicalism History Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Belgian Revolution Chartism Progressive Era Ideas Anti-clericalism Civic nationalism Civil liberties Classical liberalism Cultural radicalism Classical radicalism Direct democracy Egalitarianism Freedom of movement Jacobinism Labor movement Laissez-faire Liberal socialism Social democracy Libertarianism left Liberté, égalité, fraternité Modernity Populism left-wing Progressivism Rationalism Reform movement Republicanism Revolution Secularism Laicité Social change Social justice Social liberalism Suffrage women Utilitarianism Utopian socialism Welfare People Alem Alfonsín Atatürk Bentham Bolívar Bonino Bright Bryan Cartwright Castberg Clemenceau Cobbett Cobden Daladier Dewey Dilke Domergue Fox Garibaldi George Godwin Green Hébert Herriot Hobhouse Hunt Jefferson Lacombe La Follette Leclerc Lerroux Lloyd George Mazzini Mendès France Mill (James) Mill (John Stuart) Mommsen Mossadegh Paine Pannella Papanastasiou Papandreou Plastiras Robespierre Roosevelt Rosselli Roux Sacchi Saint-Just Servan-Schreiber Stevens Varlet Venizelos Videla Virchow Wilkes Wilson Wollstonecraft Yrigoyen Zahle Groups Alfarista Radical Front Association of Radicals for the United States of Europe Authentic Radical Liberal Party Ecuadorian Radical Liberal Party European Radical Alliance Independent Radicals Italian Radical Party Italian Radicals Liberals, Democrats and Radicals National Radical Party Partido Ecologista Radical Intransigente People's Radical Party 1881 1919 1990 Political Party of Radicals Radical Cause Radical Change Radical Civic Union Radicales K Radical Democracy Radical Democratic Party Bulgaria Estonia India Spain United States Radical Federative Movement Radical International Radical League Radical Liberal Party Luxembourg Paraguay Radical Movement Radical Movement of Social Democratic Alliance Radical Party Bolivia France Hungary Italy Luxembourg Radical Party of Chile 1863 2018 Radical Party of the Left Radical People's Party Finland Norway Turkey Radical Republican Party Radical Republicans Radical Socialist Party Luxembourg Estonia Radical Socialist Republican Party Radical Whigs Radicals of the Left Radicals (UK) Socialist Radical Party Stratford Dialectical and Radical Club Transnational Radical Party Ultra-radicals By region Bulgaria Chile Denmark Ecuador France Hungary Italy Paraguay Romania Spain Switzerland United States Works Rights of Man (1791) The English Constitution Produced and Illustrated (1824) Related Conservative liberalism History of socialism Irish republicanism Liberalism in Europe History portal Liberalism portal v t e James Mill (born James Milne ; [ 1 ] 6 April 1773 – 23 June 1836 [ 2 ] ) was a Scottish historian , economist , political theorist and philosopher . He is counted among the founders of the Ricardian school of economics.

[ 3 ] He also wrote The History of British India (1817) and was one of the prominent historians to take a colonial approach.

[ 4 ] He was the first writer to divide Indian history into three parts: Hindu, Muslim and British, [ 5 ] [ 2 ] a classification which has proved surpassingly influential in the field of Indian historical studies.

Mill was the father of John Stuart Mill , a noted philosopher of liberalism and utilitarianism , and a colonial administrator at the East India Company .

Biography [ edit ] James Milne, later known as James Mill, was born in Northwater Bridge, in the parish of Logie Pert, Angus, Scotland , the son of James Milne, a shoemaker and small farmer. His mother, Isabel Fenton, of a family that had suffered from connection with the Stuart rising , [ which?

] resolved that he should receive a first-rate education, and after the parish school they sent him on to the Montrose Academy , where he remained until the unusual age of seventeen and a half. He then entered the University of Edinburgh , where he distinguished himself as a Greek scholar.

[ 2 ] In October 1789, he was ordained as a minister of the Church of Scotland , but met with little further success. According to John Stuart Mill's Autobiography, his father, though "educated in the creed of Scotch Presbyterianism, had, by his own studies and reflections, been early led to reject not only the belief in Revelation, but the foundations of what is commonly called Natural Religion." [ 6 ] From 1790 to 1802, while supporting himself by various tutorships, he also pursued various historical and philosophical studies. With little prospect of a career in Scotland, in 1802, he went to London in company with Sir John Stuart of Fettercairn , then member of parliament for Kincardineshire , and devoted himself to his literary work. From 1803 to 1806, he was editor of an ambitious periodical called the Literary Journal , which tried to give a summary view of all the leading departments of human knowledge. During this time, he also edited the St James's Chronicle , published by the same proprietor. In 1804, he wrote a pamphlet on the corn trade, arguing against a tariff (or 'bounty') on the export of grain. In 1805, he published a translation (with notes and quotations) of An Essay on the Spirit and Influence of the Reformation of Luther by Charles de Villers on the Reformation , and an attack on the alleged vices of the papal system.  About the end of this year, he began work on The History of British India , which was to occupy him for twelve years, rather than the three or four that he had expected.

[ 2 ] In that year, too, he married Harriet Burrow, whose mother, a widow, kept what was then known as an establishment for lunatics in Hoxton . They took a house in Pentonville where their eldest son John Stuart Mill was born in 1806.

[ 2 ] The back of No. 19, York Street (1848). In 1651, John Milton moved into a "pretty garden-house" in Petty France . He lived there until the Restoration . Later it became No. 19 York Street, belonged to Jeremy Bentham , was occupied successively by James Mill and William Hazlitt , and was demolished in 1877.

[ 7 ] In 1808, he became acquainted with Jeremy Bentham , who was twenty-five years his senior and, for many years, his chief companion and ally. He adopted Bentham's principles in their entirety, and determined to devote all his energies to bringing them before the world. Between 1806 and 1818, he wrote for the Anti-Jacobin Review , the British Review and The Eclectic Review ; but there is no means of tracing his contributions. In 1808, he began to write for the more prominent Edinburgh Review , to which he contributed steadily till 1813, his first known article being "Money and Exchange". He also wrote on Spanish America, China, Francisco de Miranda , the East India Company , and freedom of the press. In the Annual Review for 1808, two articles of his are traced – a "Review of Fox's History", and an article on "Bentham's Law Reforms", probably his first published notice of Bentham. In 1811, he co-operated with William Allen (1770–1843), a Quaker and chemist , in a periodical called the Philanthropist . He contributed largely to every issue – his principal topics being Education, Freedom of the Press, and Prison Discipline (under which he expounded Bentham's Panopticon ). He made powerful onslaughts on the Church in connection with the Bell and Lancaster controversy, and took a part in the discussions that led to the foundation of the University of London in 1825. In 1814, he wrote a number of articles, containing an exposition of utilitarianism , for the supplement to the fifth edition of the Encyclopædia Britannica , the most important being those on "Jurisprudence", "Prisons", "Government" [ 2 ] and "Law of Nations".

The History of British India was published in 1818, and obtained a great immediate and enduring success.

[ 8 ] It brought about a matching change in the author's fortunes, and in the year following, he was appointed an official in India House in the important department of the Examiner of Indian Correspondence. He gradually rose through the ranks until, in 1830, he was appointed head of the office, with a salary of £1900, raised in 1836 to £2000. His great work on economics, the Elements of Political Economy , appeared in 1821 (3rd and revised ed. 1825).

[ 2 ] [ 9 ] From 1824 to 1826, Mill contributed a number of articles to The Westminster Review , the organ of the Radical party, in which he attacked the Edinburgh and the Quarterly Reviews, and the ecclesiastical establishment. In 1829, appeared the Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind . From 1831 to 1833, Mill was largely occupied in the defence of the East India Company, during the controversy attending the renewal of its charter, he being in virtue of his office the spokesman of its Court of Directors. For the London Review , founded by Sir William Molesworth in 1834, he wrote a notable article entitled "The Church and its Reform", which was much too sceptical for the time and injured The Westminster Review . Mill himself was an atheist .

[ 10 ] His last published book was the Fragment on Mackintosh (1835).

[ 2 ] Intellectual legacy [ edit ] The History of British India [ edit ] Main article: The History of British India Mill was a proponent of British imperialism, justifying it on utilitarian grounds.

[ 11 ] He considered it part of a civilising mission for Britain to impose its rule on India.

[ 11 ] Mill saw his own work for the East India Company as important for the improvement of Indian society.

[ 11 ] Mill portrayed Indian society as morally degraded and argued that Hindus had never possessed "a high state of civilisation".

[ 12 ] Mill preferred to take a more theoretical approach to social subjects than the empirical one common at the time. His best known literary work is his History of British India , in which he describes the acquisition of the Indian Empire by England and later the United Kingdom . In the work, he characterises Indian society as barbaric and Indians as incapable of self-government.

[ 11 ] He also brings political theory to bear on the delineation of the Hindu civilization, and subjects the conduct of the actors in the successive stages of the conquest and administration of India to severe criticism. The work itself, and the author's official connection with India for the last seventeen years of his life, effected a complete change in the whole system of governance in the country.

[ 2 ] Mill never visited the Indian colony, relying solely on documentary material and archival records in compiling his work. This fact has led to severe criticism of Mill's History of India by notable economist Amartya Sen .

[ 13 ] According to Thomas Trautmann , "James Mill's highly influential History of British India (1817) – most particularly the long essay "Of the Hindus" comprising ten chapters – is the single most important source of British Indophobia and hostility to Orientalism".

[ 14 ] In the chapter titled General Reflections in "Of the Hindus", Mill wrote "under the glosing exterior of the Hindu, lies a general disposition to deceit and perfidy".

[ 15 ] According to Mill, "the same insincerity, mendacity, and perfidy; the same indifference to the feelings of others; the same prostitution and venality" were the conspicuous characteristics of both the Hindoos and the Muslims. The Muslims, however, were perfuse, when possessed of wealth, and devoted to pleasure; the Hindoos almost always penurious and ascetic; and "in truth, the Hindoo like the eunuch, excels in the qualities of a slave". Furthermore, similar to the Chinese, the Hindoos were "dissembling, treacherous, mendacious, to an excess which surpasses even the usual measure of uncultivated society". Both the Chinese and the Hindoos were "disposed to excessive exaggeration with regard to everything relating to themselves". Both were "cowardly and unfeeling". Both were "in the highest degree conceited of themselves, and full of affected contempt for others". And both were "in physical sense, disgustingly unclean in their persons and houses".

[ 16 ] Max Müller argued against the opinion that Indians were an 'inferior race', not only because such a view was wrong but because it made an Englishman's life there a 'moral exile'. One source of such mistaken notions and 'poison' had been, and still was, Mill's History of British India , which in his view was 'responsible for some of the greatest misfortunes' that had happened to India. Those who were going out to rule India 'should shake off national prejudices, which are apt to degenerate into a kind of madness'.

British politics [ edit ] Mill also played a great part in British politics, and was a dominant figure in the establishment of what was called " philosophic radicalism ". His writings on government and his personal influence among the Liberal politicians of his time determined the change of view from the French Revolution theories of the rights of man and the absolute equality of men to the claiming of securities for good government through a wide extension of the franchise. It was under this banner that the Reform Bill was fought and won. His Elements of Political Economy followed up the views of his friend David Ricardo . By 1911, the Encyclopædia Britannica described it as being of mainly historical interest, "an accurate summary of views that are now largely discarded".

[ 2 ] Among the more important of its theses are: [ 2 ] that the chief problem of practical reformers is to limit the increase of population, on the assumption that capital does not naturally increase at the same rate as population (ii. § 2, art. 3) that the value of a thing depends entirely on the quantity of labour put into it; and that what is now known as the " unearned increment " of land is a proper object for taxation.

Other areas [ edit ] By his Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind and his Fragment on Mackintosh Mill acquired a position in the history of psychology and ethics. He took up the problems of mind very much after the fashion of the Scottish Enlightenment , as then represented by Thomas Reid , Dugald Stewart and Thomas Brown , but made a new start, due in part to David Hartley , and still more to his own independent thinking. He carried out the principle of association into the analysis of the complex emotional states, as the affections, the aesthetic emotions and the moral sentiment, all which he endeavoured to resolve into pleasurable and painful sensations. But the salient merit of the Analysis is the constant endeavour after precise definition of terms and clear statement of doctrines. He had a great effect on Franz Brentano who discussed his work in his own empirical psychology.

[ 17 ] The Fragment on Mackintosh severely criticizes the alleged flimsiness and misrepresentations of Sir James Mackintosh 's Dissertation on the Progress of Ethical Philosophy (1830), and discusses the foundations of ethics from the author's utilitarian point of view.

[ 18 ] Major works [ edit ] Alexander Bain , James Mill. A biography , 1882 An essay of the impolicy of a bounty on the exportation of grain , 1804.

"Lord Lauderdale on Public Wealth", 1804, Literary Journal Vol. IV, No. 1 [ 19 ] Commerce Defended , 1808.

"Thomas Smith on Money and Exchange", 1808, Edinburgh Review no. XXV, pp. 35–68 [ 20 ] The History of British India , 3 vols., 1817 (and many later editions) "Government" , 1820, Encyclopædia Britannica Elements of Political Economy ,  1821 "Liberty of the Press", 1825, Encyclopædia Britannica Essays on Government, Jurisprudence, Liberty of the Press, Education, and Prisons and Prison Discipline , 1823.

Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind , 2 vols., 1829.

[ 21 ] Revised edn, 2 vols, 1869.

[ 22 ] Essay on the Ballot [ 23 ] and Fragment on Mackintosh [ 24 ] , 1830.

"Whether Political Economy is Useful", 1836, London Review , vol. II, pp. 553–572.

The Principles of Toleration , 1837.

See also [ edit ] Capitalism Free trade James Tod List of liberal theorists Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Ball, Terence (19 June 2014).

"James Mill" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Stanford University . Retrieved 4 April 2018 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Chisholm 1911 , p. 453.

^ Keynes, John Maynard . "The General Theory".

The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money . Retrieved 4 April 2018 .

^ Ahir, Rajiv (2018).

A Brief History of Modern India . Spectrum Books (P) Limited. p. 14.

ISBN 978-8179306888 .

^ "Explained: Who was Prithviraj Chauhan, the fearless hero of folk legend?" .

The Indian Express . 25 May 2022 . Retrieved 26 May 2022 .

^ "AUTO Chapter 2, John Stuart Mill, Autobiography" .

^ Stephen 1894 , p. 32.

^ Mill, James (1817), The History of British India (1 ed.), London: Baldwin, Cradock, and Joy , retrieved 11 December 2012 ^ Mill, James (1821), Elements of Political Economy (First ed.), London: Baldwin, Cradock, and Joy , retrieved 11 December 2012 ^ Kanopiadmin (28 March 2012).

"James Mill: Laissez-Faire's Lenin" .

Mises Institute .

^ a b c d Pitts, Jennifer (2005).

A Turn to Empire: The Rise of Imperial Liberalism in Britain and France . Princeton University Press. pp.

123– 126.

ISBN 978-1400826636 .

^ Elkins, Caroline (2022).

Legacy of Violence: A History of the British Empire . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. pp.

43– 44.

ISBN 978-0593320082 .

^ Amartya Sen 's address given to the Millennium Session of the Indian History Congress [1] ^ Trautmann, Thomas R. (2006) [1997].

Aryans and British India (2nd Indian ed.). New Delhi: YODA Press. p. 117.

ISBN 8190227211 .

^ Mill, James (1858).

The History of British India . Madden. p.

150 .

^ Dharampal, The Beautiful Tree .

^ Franz Brentano: Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkt . Ed. Oskar Kraus, 2 vols. Leipzig: Meiner, 1924–25; ed. Mauro Antonelli. Heusenstamm: Ontos, 2008 ^ Chisholm 1911 , p. 4543.

^ Sowell, Thomas (8 March 2015).

Say's Law: An Historical Analysis . Princeton University Press. p. 115.

ISBN 978-1400871223 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

^ Henderson, John P.; Davis, John B. (6 December 2012).

The Life and Economics of David Ricardo . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 668.

ISBN 978-1461561293 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

^ Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind . Vol. 1. 1829.

Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind . Vol. 2. New York, A. M. Kelley. 1829.

^ Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind . Vol. 1. Longmans, Green, Reader , and Dyer. 1869.

Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind . Vol. 2. New York, A. M. Kelley. 1869.

^ Essay on the Ballot . 1830.

^ A Fragment on Mackintosh . 1835.

References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Mill, James ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 19 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

453– 454.

Endnotes: Stephen, Leslie (1900).

The English Utilitarians: James Mill . Vol. ii. Duckworth & Co.

Stephen, Leslie (1894).

"Mill, James (1773–1836)" . In Lee, Sidney (ed.).

Dictionary of National Biography . Vol. 37. London: Smith, Elder & Co. pp.

382– 388.

Bain, Alexander (1882).

James Mill, A Biography (1 ed.). London: Logmans, Green & Co.

Bower, G.S. (1881).

Hartley and James Mill . Putnam.

McCosh, James (1885).

Scottish Philosophy .

Mill, J.S.

(1873).

Autobiography . Henry Holt.

Ribot, Théodule-Armand (1873) [1870].

La Psychologie anglaise (Eng. trans. ed.).

Morley, John (1882).

"The Life of James Mill" .

Fortnightly Review . xxxvii: 476.

Wallas, Graham (1898).

The Life of Francis Place .

Further reading [ edit ] Bain, Alexander (January 1876).

"The Early Life of James Mill" .

Mind .

1 (1).

Rudolph, Lloyd I. (2008). "Tod vs Mill: Clashing Perspectives on British Rule in India and Indian Civilization". In Tillotson, Giles (ed.).

James Tod's Rajasthan: The Historian and His Collections . Mumbai: Radhika Sabavala for Marg Publications on behalf of the National Centre for the Performing Arts.

ISBN 978-8185026800 .

"Mill, James" .

New International Encyclopedia . 1905.

" Mill, James ", A Short Biographical Dictionary of English Literature , 1910 – via Wikisource Stephen, Leslie (1894).

"Milton, John (1608–1674)" .

Dictionary of National Biography . Vol. 38. p. 32.

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original works by or about: James Mill Wikiquote has quotations related to James Mill .

James Mill at Find a Grave Works by James Mill at Project Gutenberg James Mill Archived 1 March 2005 at the Wayback Machine Works by James Mill at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry James Mill's common place books E-text of Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind , as edited by J.S. Mill, with commentaries by himself and others.

"James Mill" . HET, The Institute for New Economic Thinking .

v t e Age of Enlightenment Topics Atheism Capitalism Civil liberties Classicism Counter-Enlightenment Critical thinking Deism Democracy Empiricism Encyclopédistes Enlightened absolutism Haskalah Humanism Human rights Individualism Liberalism Liberté, égalité, fraternité Lumières Methodological skepticism Midlands Modernity Natural philosophy Objectivity Progressivism Rationality Rationalism Reason Reductionism Sapere aude Science Scientific method Spanish America Universality Utopianism Thinkers England Addison Ashley-Cooper Bacon Bentham Collins Gibbon Godwin Harrington Hooke Johnson Locke Milton Newton Pope Price Priestley Reynolds Sidney Tindal Wollstonecraft France d'Alembert d'Argenson Bayle Beaumarchais Chamfort Châtelet Condillac Condorcet Descartes Diderot Fontenelle Gouges Helvétius d'Holbach Jaucourt La Mettrie Lavoisier Leclerc Mably Maréchal Meslier Montesquieu Morelly Pascal Quesnay Raynal Sade Turgot Voltaire Geneva Abauzit Bonnet Burlamaqui Prévost Rousseau Saussure Germany Goethe Herder Humboldt Kant Leibniz Lessing Lichtenberg Mendelssohn Pufendorf Schiller Thomasius Weishaupt Wieland Wolff Greece Farmakidis Feraios Kairis Korais Ireland Berkeley Boyle Burke Swift Toland Italy Beccaria Galiani Galvani Genovesi Pagano Verri Vico Volta Netherlands Bekker de la Court Grotius Huygens Koerbagh Leeuwenhoek Mandeville Meyer Nieuwentyt Spinoza Swammerdam Poland Kołłątaj Konarski Krasicki Niemcewicz Poniatowski Śniadecki Staszic Wybicki Portugal Carvalho e Melo Romania Budai-Deleanu Cantemir Golescu Maior Micu-Klein Pann Șincai Văcărescu Russia Catherine II Fonvizin Kantemir Kheraskov Lomonosov Novikov Radishchev Vorontsova-Dashkova Scotland Beattie Black Blair Boswell Burnett Burns Cullen Ferguson Hume Hutcheson Hutton Mill Playfair Reid Smith Stewart Serbia Obradović Mrazović Spain Cadalso Charles III Feijóo y Montenegro Moratín Jovellanos Villarroel United States Franklin Jefferson Madison Mason Paine Romanticism → Category v t e Classical economists Francis Hutcheson Bernard Mandeville David Hume Adam Smith Anders Chydenius Jean-Baptiste Say Thomas Malthus James Mill Francis Place David Ricardo Henry Thornton John Ramsay McCulloch James Maitland, 8th Earl of Lauderdale Jeremy Bentham Jean Charles Léonard de Sismondi Johann Heinrich von Thünen John Stuart Mill Nassau William Senior Edward Gibbon Wakefield Frédéric Bastiat Thomas Tooke Robert Torrens Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=James_Mill&oldid=1294432990 " Categories : 1773 births 1836 deaths 18th-century ministers of the Church of Scotland 18th-century Scottish Presbyterian ministers 19th-century Scottish essayists 19th-century Scottish philosophers 19th-century Scottish historians 19th-century Scottish translators Alumni of the University of Edinburgh British radicals Classical economists Committee members of the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge Consequentialists Historians of India People from Angus, Scotland People of the Scottish Enlightenment Scottish atheists Scottish economists Scottish educators Scottish male essayists Scottish Indologists Scottish literary critics Scottish magazine editors Scottish political philosophers Scottish political writers Utilitarians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2025 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2018 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles incorporating Cite DNB template CS1: long volume value Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from SBDEL Articles with Project Gutenberg links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with LibriVox links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 17:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents James Mill 45 languages Add topic

