Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Cause 3 Countermeasures 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Spaceflight osteopenia 1 language Српски / srpski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bone loss caused by microgravity Spaceflight osteopenia refers to the characteristic bone loss that occurs during spaceflight .

Astronauts lose an average of more than 1% bone mass per month spent in space .

[ 1 ] There is concern that during long-duration flights, excessive bone loss and the associated increase in serum calcium ion levels will interfere with execution of mission tasks and result in irreversible skeletal damage.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Bone loss has been observed during spaceflight since at least as early as Gemini in the 1960s.  Although most early measurements of the amount of bone loss were not reliable, they did show bone loss in Gemini, Soyuz 9 , Apollo , Skylab , Salyut 7 , Mir , and the International Space Station .

[ 3 ] William E. Thornton , an astronaut and physician, was one of the biggest proponents of exercise as a way of preventing bone loss.

[ 4 ] Cause [ edit ] Bone remodels in response to stress in order to maintain constant strain energy per bone mass throughout.

[ 5 ] To do this, it grows more dense in areas experiencing high stress, while resorbing density in areas experiencing low stress.  For example, on Mars , where gravity is about one-third that of earth, the gravitational forces acting on astronauts' bodies would be much lower, causing bones to decrease in mass and density.

[ 6 ] Average bone loss of 1–2% was recorded in astronauts on Mir each month.

[ 2 ] This is in comparison to 1–1.5% bone loss in the elderly per year , and 2–3% in postmenopausal women.

[ 7 ] Countermeasures [ edit ] Astronaut Sunita "Suni" Williams bungeed to the TVIS treadmill aboard the International Space Station .

Since Gemini, exercise has been tried as a way of preventing bone loss, but it has not been shown to be successful. This may be in part due to lack of adequately designed studies (no controlled study had been done as of 2005, either in space or using bedrest as an attempt to simulate conditions which lead to bone loss). It is not known whether a different exercise regiment (perhaps including larger loads than past ones) would be effective.

[ 4 ] Bone is difficult to regain once it is lost. Data from immobilization studies and from patients with spinal cord injuries support this.

[ 8 ] Spaceflight data suggest this as well.

[ 9 ] This suggests that bone loss prevention over postflight bone recovery is an important factor in countermeasure success.

Increasing dietary calcium and vitamin D is a standard countermeasure for osteoporosis .

[ 4 ] Clay is reportedly used by NASA for retaining calcium.

[ 10 ] A variety of drug remedies currently used or proposed for osteoporosis may work for spaceflight, including hormone therapy (estrogen or progestin), selective estrogen receptor modulators , bisphosphonates , teriparatide , and others. Whether they can provide the same benefits for spaceflight as they do for osteoporosis is not yet known.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Artificial gravity Effect of spaceflight on the human body Space medicine Space adaptation syndrome Microgravity University Reduced-gravity aircraft Timeline of longest spaceflights References [ edit ] ^ Kelly, Scott (2017).

Endurance: A Year in Space, a Lifetime of Discovery . With Margaret Lazarus Dean. Alfred A. Knopf, a division of Penguin Random House. p. 174.

ISBN 9781524731595 .

If I don't exercise six days a week for at least a couple of hours a day, my bones will lose significant mass - 1 percent each month ... Our bodies are smart about getting rid of what's not needed, and my body has started to notice that my bones are not needed in zero gravity.

^ a b "Space Bones" . NASA. October 1, 2001. Archived from the original on October 6, 2001 . Retrieved 2012-05-12 .

^ Dupzyk, Kevin (November 20, 2018).

"What ISS Taught Us In the Past 20 Years" .

Popular Mechanics .

In space, astronauts lose bone density more quickly than they do on Earth. (In fact, all that extra calcium their bodies were flushing initially caused problems for the ISS's water purification system.) ^ a b c d Peter R. Cavanagh; Angelo A. Licata & Andrea J. Rice (June 2005), "Exercise and pharmacological countermeasures for bone loss during long-duration space flight" , Gravitational and Space Biology , 18 (2): 39– 58, PMID 16038092 ^ Ali Marzban (January 1, 2008).

"Different approaches of remodeling of bone to predict bone density distribution of proximal femur" . Archived from the original on April 19, 2014 . Retrieved 2013-02-23 .

^ "Trip to Mars Will Challenge Bones, Muscles: Former Astronaut calls for More NASA Research on Exercise in Space" . American College of Sports Medicine. April 12, 2006 . Retrieved 2013-02-23 .

^ "Lost in Space: Bone Density" . NASA . Retrieved 2013-02-23 .

^ Wilmet, E.; Ismail, A. A.; Heilporn, A.; Welraeds, D.; Bergmann, P. (November 1995).

"Longitudinal study of the bone mineral content and of soft tissue composition after spinal cord section" .

Spinal Cord .

33 (11): 674– 677.

doi : 10.1038/sc.1995.141 .

ISSN 1476-5624 .

PMID 8584304 .

^ Long-Term Follow-Up of Skylab Bone Demineralization (Report).

^ Ubick, Suzanne; Mud, Mud, Glorious Mud, The Magazine of the California Academy of Sciences, Apr. 3, 2008 v t e Space medicine Main areas Artificial gravity Astronautical hygiene Bioastronautics Neuroscience in space Space exposure Space food Space nursing Space weather Weightlessness Illness and injuries Asthenization Ebullism Illness and injuries during spaceflight Medical treatment during spaceflight Space adaptation syndrome Space and survival Spaceflight osteopenia Organizations Aerospace Medical Association National Space Biomedical Research Institute Rubicon Foundation Space Nursing Society Other topics Adverse health effects from lunar dust exposure Alcohol Cardiac rhythm problems during space flight Central nervous system effects from radiation exposure during spaceflight Effect of spaceflight on the human body Effects of sleep deprivation in space Epidemiology data for low-linear energy transfer radiation Sleep in space Health threat from cosmic rays Intervertebral disc damage and spaceflight List of microorganisms tested in outer space Psychological and sociological effects of spaceflight Radiobiology evidence for protons and HZE nuclei Reduced muscle mass, strength and performance in space Renal stone formation in space Spaceflight radiation carcinogenesis Team composition and cohesion in spaceflight missions Visual impairment due to intracranial pressure Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spaceflight_osteopenia&oldid=1281441266 " Categories : Space hazards Human spaceflight Space medicine Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 March 2025, at 11:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Spaceflight osteopenia 1 language Add topic

