Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Composition 2 Characteristics 3 NSK State 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Neue Slowenische Kunst 18 languages Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Deutsch Eesti Français Galego Hrvatski Italiano Latviešu Македонски Polski Русский Shqip Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art collective This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( May 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Logo of Neue Slowenische Kunst Neue Slowenische Kunst ( German: [ˈnɔʏə sloˈveːnɪʃə ˈkʊnst] ; NSK ; German for 'New Slovenian Art') is a political art collective that formed in Slovenia in 1984, when the Socialist Republic of Slovenia was part of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . NSK's name was chosen to reflect the theme in its works of the complicated relationship Slovenes have had with Germans . The name of NSK's music wing, Laibach , is also the German name of the Slovene capital Ljubljana . The name created controversy because some felt it evoked memories of the Nazi annexation of Slovenia during the Second World War . It also refers to Slovenia's previous seven centuries as part of the Habsburg monarchy .

[ 1 ] Composition [ edit ] NSK was founded by the musical group Laibach . Other NSK members include groups such as IRWIN (visual art), Scipion Nasice Sisters Theatre (also known as Red Pilot and Cosmokinetic Theatre Noordung), New Collective Studio (graphics; also known as New Collectivism), Retrovision (film and video), and the Department of Pure and Applied Philosophy (theory).

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] The founding groups of the NSK were Laibach, IRWIN, and Scipion Nasice Sisters Theater. Membership has traditionally been open to all artistic groups who show an interest in challenging the norms and taboos of Slovene national identity.

[ 5 ] Characteristics [ edit ] NSK art often draws on symbols from totalitarian or extreme nationalist movements, often appropriating totalitarian kitsch in a visual style reminiscent of Dada . NSK artists often juxtapose symbols from different (and often incompatible) political ideologies. For example, a 1987 NSK-designed poster caused a scandal by winning a competition for the Yugoslavian Youth Day Celebration. The poster appropriated a painting by Nazi artist Richard Klein , replacing the flag of Nazi Germany with the Yugoslav flag and the German eagle with a dove.

[ 3 ] Intended as an ironic joke, the painting soon fell foul of the authorities, who interpreted it as equating Marshal Josip Broz Tito with Adolf Hitler . It was later reproduced on the cover of Mladina magazine, and that particular issue was subsequently banned.

[ 6 ] The NSK was the subject of a 1996 documentary film entitled Predictions of Fire ( Prerokbe Ognja ), [ 7 ] which was written and directed by Michael Benson . Among those interviewed is Slovenian intellectual Slavoj Žižek .

NSK State [ edit ] Since 1991, the NSK has claimed to be a sovereign state of sorts.

[ 8 ] As such, displays of its members' work are performed under the guise of an embassy, or a territory of the supposed state. Since 1994, the NSK has maintained consulates in several cities, including Umag , Croatia .

[ 9 ] It has also issued passports and postage stamps.

[ 10 ] NSK passports are considered an art project. As such, they are not valid for travel. Laibach's 2006 album Volk , which consisted of songs based on national anthems, included a national anthem of NSK, an arrangement of the Laibach song "The Great Seal".

[ 11 ] In 2010, the first NSK Citizens Congress was held in Berlin. It was followed by a "NSK Rendez-Vous" in Lyon, France, where Alexei Monroe revealed NSK's aim : to make people "aware that totalitarianism isn't a discrete historical phenomenon which went on from 1933 to 1989 and then it's over so let's have a nice triumph of liberal democracy".

[ 12 ] On 26 February 2011, another "NSK Rendez-Vous" took place in London. In 2012, yet another "NSK Rendez-Vous" was set to take place in New York City 's Museum of Modern Art .

[ 13 ] 2017 saw NSK set up a pavilion at the Venice Biennale where Slavoj Žižek stated that "the uniqueness of NSK is this idea of the 'stateless state'.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Noordung (NSK) Culture of Slovenia New wave music in Yugoslavia References [ edit ] ^ Monroe, Alexei.  Interrogation Machine.  MIT Press, 2005. p 3.

^ Anonymous. "State of Art: the new Slovene Avant Garde" (2004).

Northwest Film Forum and Scala House, program for exhibit 18–24 November 2004 at Northwest Film Forum, Seattle .

^ a b Regina Hackett. " Slovenian art collective is adept at working politics and art ".

Seattle Post-Intelligencer , 19 November 2004.

^ "Laibach" . Laibach.nsk.si. Archived from the original on 12 June 2008 . Retrieved 11 June 2008 .

^ James Gow & Cathie Carmichael, Slovenia and the Slovenes: A Small State and the New Europe , C. Hurst & Company, 2001, pp. 98-99 ^ Gow & Carmichael, Slovenia and the Slovenes , p. 96 ^ Holden, Steven (2 October 1996).

"Facing the Menace of Totalitarianism" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 11 June 2008 .

^ "[ NSKSTATE.COM ] [ The Slovenia of Athens ]" . Nskstate.com. Archived from the original on 9 March 2008 . Retrieved 11 June 2008 .

^ "[ NSKSTATE.COM ]" . Nskstate.com. Archived from the original on 6 April 2008 . Retrieved 11 June 2008 .

^ "[ NSKSTATE.COM ] [ HOW TO GET A PASSPORT ]" . Nnskstate.com. Archived from the original on 6 April 2008 . Retrieved 11 June 2008 .

^ "Laibach - Volk" .

nskstate.com . Retrieved 25 May 2024 .

^ "NSK à Lyon : Perspektive 2/2" . Archived from the original on 8 July 2011.

^ "NSK Passport Office, New York & NSK Rendezvous MoMA" .

^ "A passport from a country that does not exist" . BBC. 16 May 2017.

Further reading [ edit ] Arns, Inke (2002).

Neue Slowenische Kunst (NSK) - eine Analyse ihrer künstlerischen Strategien im Kontext der 1980er Jahre in Jugoslawien . Museum Ostdeutsche Galerie, Regensburg.

ISBN 961-90851-1-6 .

Arns, Inke, ed. (2003).

Irwin: Retroprincip 1983-2003 . Frankfurt/Main: Revolver - Archiv für aktuelle Kunst.

ISBN 3-936919-56-9 .

Monroe, Alexei (2005).

Interrogation Machine: Laibach and NSK . The MIT Press.

ISBN 0-262-63315-9 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Neue Slowenische Kunst .

Official website of NSK Predictions of Fire at IMDb v t e Micronations List of micronations Africa Kalakuta Republic M'Simbati Reunion North America Conch Republic Eastport Fredonia Ganienkeh Global Country of World Peace Islandia Kingdom of L'Anse-Saint-Jean Republic of Molossia Most Serene Federal Republic of Montmartre New Atlantis New Utopia North Dumpling Nova Roma Nutopia Operation Atlantis Outer Baldonia Redonda Slowjamastan Talossa Vikesland Zaqistan South America Glacier Republic Melchizedek Parva Domus Antarctica Flandrensis Westarctica Asia Akhzivland Freedomland Kingdom of Humanity Keraton Agung Sejagat Koneuwe Morac-Songhrati-Meads Naminara Republic Sedang Sunda Empire Atlantic islands Islands of Refreshment Trinidad Europe Aigues-Mortes Austenasia Christiania Elgaland-Vargaland Elleore Enclava Filettino Frestonia Jamtland Kugelmugel Laàs Ladonia Liberland Llanrwst Ongal Other World Kingdom Perloja Peščenica Romanov Empire Republic of Rose Island Saugeais Sealand Seborga Tavolara Užupis Vevčani Verdis Wallachia Waveland Wendland Oceania Aeterna Lucina Aramoana Atlantium Avram Bumbunga Coral Sea Islands EnenKio Hutt River Marlborough Minerva Murrawarri Republic Rainbow Creek Snake Hill Whangamōmona Wiradjuri Central West Republic Wy Sovereign Yidindji Government Extraterrestrial Aerican Empire Asgardia Celestia Related Antarctic Micronational Union Flags International Micropatrological Society League of Secessionist States MicroCon MicroWiki Organisation de la microfrancophonie PoliNation In popular culture Empire Me: New Worlds Are Happening!

How to Rule Your Own Country: The Weird and Wonderful World of Micronations How to Start Your Own Country (book) How to Start Your Own Country (TV) How to Start Your Own Country (film) Micronations and the Search for Sovereignty Micro Nation Micronations: The Lonely Planet Guide to Home-Made Nations Rose Island (film) Category v t e Pop and rock music of Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Main Music of Yugoslavia Popular music in the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Punk rock in Yugoslavia New wave music in Yugoslavia Neue Slowenische Kunst New Primitivism New Partisans YU Rock Misija Yugoslavia in the Eurovision Song Contest Record labels Dallas Records Diskos Diskoton Jugodisk Jugoton PGP-RTB Sarajevo Disk Suzy Records ZKP RTVLJ Music magazines Džuboks Hard Metal Heroina Pop Express Ritam (Novi Sad magazine) Ritam Rock Music festivals BOOM Festival Festival Omladina Gitarijada (Belgrade) Gitarijada (Zaječar) Parada ritma / Vatromet ritma v t e Avant-garde movements Visual art Abstract expressionism Art Nouveau Art & Language Conceptual art Constructivism Proto-Cubism Cubism Functionalism Bauhaus Grosvenor School Devětsil Divisionism Fauvism Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Post-Impressionism Color Field Incoherents Lyrical Abstraction Mail art Minimalism Mir iskusstva Multidimensional art Neoplasticism De Stijl Neue Slowenische Kunst Nonconformism Nouveau réalisme Orphism Performance art Pop art Process art Purism Rayonism Suprematism Temporary art Vorticism Literature and poetry Acmeism Angry Penguins Asemic writing Conceptual poetry Cyberpunk Ego-Futurism Experimental literature Flarf poetry Hungry generation Imaginism Imagism Language poets Neoavanguardia Neoteric Nouveau roman Oberiu Oulipo Slam poetry Ultraísmo Visual poetry Zaum Music By style Funk Jazz Free funk Yass Pop Rock Prog Punk Metal Others Aleatoric music Ars nova Ars subtilior Atonal music Electroacoustic music Electronic music Industrial music Experimental pop Free jazz Free improvisation Futurism Microtonal music Minimal music Drone music Music theatre Musique concrète New Complexity No wave Noise music Post-rock Rock in Opposition Second Viennese School Serialism Spectral music Stochastic music Textural music Totalism Twelve-tone technique Cinema and theatre Cinéma pur Dogme 95 Drop Art Epic theatre Experimental film Experimental theatre Modernist film Poetic realism Postdramatic theatre Remodernist film Structural film Theatre of the Absurd Theatre of Cruelty General Constructivism Dada Expressionism Fluxus Futurism Russian Futurism Cubo-Futurism Lettrism Modernism Minimalism Postminimalism Neo-minimalism Neo-Dada Neoism Postmodernism Postmodernist film Late modernism Primitivism Situationist International Social realism Socialist realism Surrealism Symbolism Russian symbolism Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neue_Slowenische_Kunst&oldid=1302816049 " Categories : Cultural organizations based in Slovenia European artist groups and collectives Joke political parties 1984 establishments in Slovenia 1984 in art Avant-garde art Cultural history of Slovenia Yugoslav rock music Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from May 2021 All articles that may contain original research Use dmy dates from March 2023 Pages with German IPA Pages with Langnf omitting second positional parameter Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using IMDb title with no id set This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 16:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neue Slowenische Kunst 18 languages Add topic

