Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Theory Toggle Theory subsection 2.1 Sound waves in water, bottom of sea 2.2 Speed of sound, density and impedance 2.3 Absorption of sound 2.4 Sound reflection and scattering 2.4.1 Boundary interactions 2.4.1.1 Surface 2.4.1.2 Seabed 2.4.2 At target 2.5 Propagation of sound 2.5.1 Propagation modelling 2.5.2 Reverberation 2.5.3 Doppler shift 2.5.4 Intensity fluctuations 2.5.5 Non-linearity 3 Measurements Toggle Measurements subsection 3.1 Sound speed 3.2 Absorption 3.3 Ambient noise 3.4 Reverberation 3.5 Bottom loss 4 Underwater hearing Toggle Underwater hearing subsection 4.1 Comparison with airborne sound levels 4.2 Human hearing 4.2.1 Hearing sensitivity 4.2.2 Safety thresholds 4.3 Other species 4.3.1 Aquatic mammals 4.3.2 Fish 4.3.3 Aquatic birds 5 Applications of underwater acoustics Toggle Applications of underwater acoustics subsection 5.1 Sonar 5.2 Underwater communication 5.3 Underwater navigation and tracking 5.4 Seismic exploration 5.5 Weather and climate observation 5.6 Acoustical oceanography 5.6.1 History 5.6.2 Equipment used 5.7 Marine biology 5.8 Particle physics 5.9 Other applications 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Bibliography 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Underwater acoustics 14 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia עברית മലയാളം Norsk bokmål Português Српски / srpski Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Acoustical oceanography ) Study of the propagation of sound in water Output of a computer model of underwater acoustic propagation in a simplified ocean environment.

A seafloor map produced by multibeam sonar Underwater acoustics (also known as hydroacoustics ) is the study of the propagation of sound in water and the interaction of the mechanical waves that constitute sound with the water, its contents and its boundaries. The water may be in the ocean, a lake, a river or a tank . Typical frequencies associated with underwater acoustics are between 10 Hz and 1 MHz .  The propagation of sound in the ocean at frequencies lower than 10 Hz is usually not possible without penetrating deep into the seabed, whereas frequencies above 1 MHz are rarely used because they are absorbed very quickly.

Hydroacoustics, using sonar technology, is most commonly used for monitoring of underwater physical and biological characteristics. Hydroacoustics can be used to detect the depth of a water body ( bathymetry ), as well as the presence or absence, abundance, distribution, size, and behavior of underwater plants [ 1 ] and animals.  Hydroacoustic sensing involves " passive acoustics " (listening for sounds) or active acoustics making a sound and listening for the echo, hence the common name for the device, echo sounder or echosounder .

There are a number of different causes of noise from shipping. These can be subdivided into those caused by the propeller, those caused by machinery, and those caused by the movement of the hull through the water. The relative importance of these three different categories will depend, amongst other things, on the ship type.

One of the main causes of hydro acoustic noise from fully submerged lifting surfaces is the unsteady separated turbulent flow near the surface's trailing edge that produces pressure fluctuations on the surface and unsteady oscillatory flow in the near wake. The relative motion between the surface and the ocean creates a turbulent boundary layer (TBL) that surrounds the surface. The noise is generated by the fluctuating velocity and pressure fields within this TBL.

The field of underwater acoustics is closely related to a number of other fields of acoustic study, including sonar , transduction , signal processing , acoustical oceanography , bioacoustics , and physical acoustics .

History [ edit ] Underwater sound has probably been used by marine animals for millions of years. The science of underwater acoustics began in 1490, when Leonardo da Vinci wrote the following, [ 2 ] "If you cause your ship to stop and place the head of a long tube in the water and place the outer extremity to your ear, you will hear ships at a great distance from you." In 1687 Isaac Newton wrote his Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy which included the first mathematical treatment of sound. The next major step in the development of underwater acoustics was made by Daniel Colladon , a Swiss physicist , and Charles Sturm , a French mathematician . In 1826, on Lake Geneva , they measured the elapsed time between a flash of light and the sound of a submerged ship's bell heard using an underwater listening horn.

[ 3 ] They measured a sound speed of 1435 metres per second over a 17 kilometre (km) distance, providing the first quantitative measurement of sound speed in water.

[ 4 ] The result they obtained was within about 2% of currently accepted values. In 1877 Lord Rayleigh wrote the Theory of Sound and established modern acoustic theory.

The sinking of Titanic in 1912 and the start of World War I provided the impetus for the next wave of progress in underwater acoustics. Systems for detecting icebergs and U-boats were developed. Between 1912 and 1914, a number of echolocation patents were granted in  Europe and the U.S., culminating in Reginald A. Fessenden 's echo-ranger in 1914. Pioneering work was carried out during this time in France by Paul Langevin and in Britain by A B Wood and associates.

[ 5 ] The development of both active ASDIC and passive sonar (SOund Navigation And Ranging) proceeded apace during the war, driven by the first large scale deployments of submarines . Other advances in underwater acoustics included the development of acoustic mines .

In 1919, the first scientific paper on underwater acoustics was published, [ 6 ] theoretically describing the refraction of sound waves produced by temperature and salinity gradients in the ocean. The range predictions of the paper were experimentally validated by propagation loss measurements.

The next two decades saw the development of several applications of underwater acoustics. The fathometer , or depth sounder, was developed commercially during the 1920s. Originally natural materials were used for the transducers, but by the 1930s sonar systems incorporating piezoelectric transducers made from synthetic materials were being used for passive listening systems and for active echo-ranging systems. These systems were used to good effect  during World War II by both submarines and anti-submarine vessels.  Many advances in underwater acoustics were made which were summarised later in the series Physics of Sound in the Sea , published in 1946.

After World War II, the development of sonar systems was driven largely by the Cold War , resulting in advances in the theoretical and practical understanding of underwater acoustics, aided by computer-based techniques.

Theory [ edit ] Sound waves in water, bottom of sea [ edit ] A sound wave propagating underwater consists of alternating compressions and rarefactions of the water. These compressions and rarefactions are detected by a receiver, such as the human ear or a hydrophone , as changes in pressure .  These waves may be man-made or naturally generated.

Speed of sound, density and impedance [ edit ] The speed of sound c {\displaystyle c\,} (i.e., the longitudinal motion of wavefronts) is related to frequency f {\displaystyle f\,} and wavelength λ λ {\displaystyle \lambda \,} of a wave by c = f ⋅ ⋅ λ λ {\displaystyle c=f\cdot \lambda } .

This is different from the particle velocity u {\displaystyle u\,} , which refers to the motion of molecules in the medium due to the sound, and relates the plane wave pressure p {\displaystyle p\,} to the fluid density ρ ρ {\displaystyle \rho \,} and sound speed c {\displaystyle c\,} by p = c ⋅ ⋅ u ⋅ ⋅ ρ ρ {\displaystyle p=c\cdot u\cdot \rho } .

The product of c {\displaystyle c} and ρ ρ {\displaystyle \rho \,} from the above formula is known as the characteristic acoustic impedance . The acoustic power (energy per second) crossing unit area is known as the intensity of the wave and for a plane wave the average intensity is given by I = q 2 / ( ρ ρ c ) {\displaystyle I=q^{2}/(\rho c)\,} , where q {\displaystyle q\,} is the root mean square acoustic pressure.

At 1 kHz, the wavelength in water is about 1.5 m. Sometimes the term "sound velocity" is used but this is incorrect as the quantity is a scalar.

The large impedance contrast between air and water (the ratio is about 3600) and the scale of surface roughness means that the sea surface behaves as an almost perfect reflector of sound at frequencies below 1 kHz. Sound speed in water exceeds that in air by a factor of 4.4 and the density ratio is about 820.

Absorption of sound [ edit ] Absorption of low frequency sound is weak.

[ 7 ] (see Technical Guides – Calculation of absorption of sound in seawater for an on-line calculator).  The main cause of sound attenuation in fresh water, and at high frequency in sea water (above 100 kHz) is viscosity .  Important additional contributions at lower frequency in seawater are associated with the ionic relaxation of boric acid (up to c. 10 kHz) [ 7 ] and magnesium sulfate (c. 10 kHz-100 kHz).

[ 8 ] Sound may be absorbed by losses at the fluid boundaries. Near the surface of the sea losses can occur in a bubble layer or in ice, while at the bottom sound can penetrate into the sediment and be absorbed.

Sound reflection and scattering [ edit ] Boundary interactions [ edit ] Both the water surface and bottom are reflecting and scattering boundaries.

Surface [ edit ] For many purposes the sea-air surface can be thought of as a perfect reflector.  The impedance contrast is so great that little energy is able to cross this boundary.  Acoustic pressure waves reflected from the sea surface experience a reversal in phase, often stated as either a "pi phase change" or a "180 deg phase change".  This is represented mathematically by assigning a reflection coefficient of minus 1 instead of plus one to the sea surface.

[ 9 ] At high frequency (above about 1 kHz) or when the sea is rough, some of the incident sound is scattered, and this is taken into account by assigning a reflection coefficient whose magnitude is less than one.  For example, close to normal incidence, the reflection coefficient becomes R = − − e − − 2 k 2 h 2 sin 2 ⁡ ⁡ A {\displaystyle R=-e^{-2k^{2}h^{2}\sin ^{2}A}} , where h is the rms wave height.

[ 10 ] A further complication is the presence of wind-generated bubbles or fish close to the sea surface.

[ 11 ] The bubbles can also form plumes that absorb some of the incident and scattered sound, and scatter some of the sound themselves.

[ 12 ] Seabed [ edit ] The acoustic impedance mismatch between water and the bottom is generally much less than at the surface and is more complex. It depends on the bottom material types and depth of the layers. Theories have been developed for predicting the sound propagation in the bottom in this case, for example by Biot [ 13 ] and by Buckingham.

[ 14 ] At target [ edit ] The reflection of sound at a target whose dimensions are large compared with the acoustic wavelength depends on its size and shape as well as the impedance of the target relative to that of water. Formulae have been developed for the target strength of various simple shapes as a function of angle of sound incidence.  More complex shapes may be approximated by combining these simple ones.

[ 2 ] Propagation of sound [ edit ] Underwater acoustic propagation depends on many factors. The direction of sound propagation is determined by the sound speed gradients in the water. These speed gradients transform the sound wave through refraction, reflection, and dispersion. In the sea the vertical gradients are generally much larger than the horizontal ones. Combining this with a tendency towards increasing sound speed at increasing depth, due to the increasing pressure in the deep sea , causes a reversal of the sound speed gradient in the thermocline , creating an efficient waveguide at the depth, corresponding to the minimum sound speed. The sound speed profile may cause regions of low sound intensity called "Shadow Zones", and regions of high intensity called "Caustics".  These may be found by ray tracing methods.

At the equator and temperate latitudes in the ocean, the surface temperature is high enough to reverse the pressure effect, such that a sound speed minimum occurs at depth of a few hundred meters.  The presence of this minimum creates a special channel known as deep sound channel, or SOFAR (sound fixing and ranging) channel, permitting guided propagation of underwater sound for thousands of kilometers without interaction with the sea surface or the seabed. Another phenomenon in the deep sea is the formation of sound focusing areas, known as convergence zones. In this case sound is refracted downward from a near-surface source and then back up again. The horizontal distance from the source at which this occurs depends on the positive and negative sound speed gradients. A surface duct can also occur in both deep and moderately shallow water when there is upward refraction, for example due to cold surface temperatures.  Propagation is by repeated sound bounces off the surface.

In general, as sound propagates underwater there is a reduction in the sound intensity over increasing ranges, though in some circumstances a gain can be obtained due to focusing.

Propagation loss (sometimes referred to as transmission loss ) is a quantitative measure of the reduction in sound intensity between two points, normally the sound source and a distant receiver.  If I s {\displaystyle I_{s}} is  the far field intensity of the source referred to a point 1 m from its acoustic center and I r {\displaystyle I_{r}} is the intensity at the receiver, then the propagation loss is given by [ 2 ] P L = 10 log ⁡ ⁡ ( I s / I r ) {\displaystyle {\mathit {PL}}=10\log(I_{s}/I_{r})} .
In this equation I r {\displaystyle I_{r}} is not the true acoustic intensity at the receiver, which is a vector quantity, but a scalar equal to the equivalent plane wave intensity (EPWI) of the sound field.  The EPWI is defined as the magnitude of the intensity of a plane wave of the same RMS pressure as the true acoustic field. At short range the propagation loss is dominated by spreading while at long range it is dominated by absorption and/or scattering losses.

An alternative definition is possible in terms of pressure instead of intensity, [ 15 ] giving P L = 20 log ⁡ ⁡ ( p s / p r ) {\displaystyle {\mathit {PL}}=20\log(p_{s}/p_{r})} , where p s {\displaystyle p_{s}} is the RMS acoustic pressure in the far-field of the projector, scaled to a standard distance of 1 m, and p r {\displaystyle p_{r}} is the RMS pressure at the receiver position.

These two definitions are not exactly equivalent because the characteristic impedance at the receiver may be different from that at the source.  Because of this, the use of the intensity definition leads to a different sonar equation to the definition based on a pressure ratio.

[ 16 ] If the source and receiver are both in water, the difference is small.

Propagation modelling [ edit ] The propagation of sound through water is described by the wave equation, with appropriate boundary conditions. A number of models have been developed to simplify propagation calculations. These models include ray theory, normal mode solutions, and parabolic equation simplifications of the wave equation.

[ 17 ] Each set of solutions is generally valid and computationally efficient in a limited frequency and range regime, and may involve other limits as well. Ray theory is more appropriate at short range and high frequency, while the other solutions function better at long range and low frequency.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Various empirical and analytical formulae have also been derived from measurements that are useful approximations.

[ 21 ] Reverberation [ edit ] Transient sounds result in a decaying background that can be of much larger duration than the original transient signal.  The cause of this background, known as reverberation, is partly due to scattering from rough boundaries and partly due to scattering from fish and other biota .  For an acoustic signal to be detected easily, it must exceed the reverberation level as well as the background noise level .

Doppler shift [ edit ] If an underwater object is moving relative to an underwater receiver, the frequency of the received sound is different from that of the sound radiated (or reflected) by the object.  This change in frequency is known as a Doppler shift .  The shift can be easily observed in active sonar systems, particularly narrow-band ones, because the transmitter frequency is known, and the relative motion between sonar and object can be calculated.  Sometimes the frequency of the radiated noise (a tonal ) may also be known, in which case the same calculation can be done for passive sonar.   For active systems the change in frequency is 0.69 Hz per knot per kHz and half this for passive systems as propagation is only one way.  The shift corresponds to an increase in frequency for an approaching target.

Intensity fluctuations [ edit ] Though acoustic propagation modelling generally predicts a constant received sound level, in practice there are both temporal and spatial fluctuations. These may be due to both small and large scale environmental phenomena.  These can include sound speed profile fine structure and frontal zones as well as internal waves.  Because in general there are multiple propagation paths between a source and receiver, small phase changes in the interference pattern between these paths can lead to large fluctuations in sound intensity.

Non-linearity [ edit ] In water, especially with air bubbles, the change in density due to a change in pressure is not exactly linearly proportional.  As a consequence for a sinusoidal wave input additional harmonic and subharmonic frequencies are generated. When two sinusoidal waves are input, sum and difference frequencies are generated. The conversion process is greater at high source levels than small ones. Because of the non-linearity there is a dependence of sound speed on the pressure amplitude so that large changes travel faster than small ones. Thus a sinusoidal waveform gradually becomes a sawtooth one with a steep rise and a gradual tail.  Use is made of this phenomenon in parametric sonar and theories have been developed to account for this, e.g. by Westerfield.

Measurements [ edit ] Sound in water is measured using a hydrophone , which is the underwater equivalent of a microphone .  A hydrophone measures pressure fluctuations, and these are usually converted to sound pressure level (SPL), which is a logarithmic measure of the mean square acoustic pressure .

Measurements are usually reported in one of two forms: RMS acoustic pressure in pascals (or sound pressure level (SPL) in dB re 1 μPa) spectral density (mean square pressure per unit bandwidth) in pascals squared per hertz (dB re 1 μPa 2 /Hz) The scale for acoustic pressure in water differs from that used for sound in air. In air the reference pressure is 20 μPa rather than 1 μPa. For the same numerical value of SPL, the intensity of a plane wave (power per unit area, proportional to mean square sound pressure divided by acoustic impedance) in air is about 20 2 ×3600 = 1 440 000 times higher than in water. Similarly, the intensity is about the same if the SPL is 61.6 dB higher in the water.

The 2017 standard ISO 18405 defines terms and expressions used in the field of underwater acoustics, including the calculation of underwater sound pressure levels.

Sound speed [ edit ] Approximate values for fresh water and seawater , respectively, at atmospheric pressure are 1450 and 1500 m/s for the sound speed, and 1000 and 1030 kg/m 3 for the density.

[ 22 ] The speed of sound in water increases with increasing pressure , temperature and salinity .

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] The maximum speed in pure water under atmospheric pressure is attained at about 74 °C; sound travels slower in hotter water after that point; the maximum increases with pressure.

[ 25 ] Absorption [ edit ] Many measurements have been made of sound absorption in lakes and the ocean [ 7 ] [ 8 ] (see Technical Guides – Calculation of absorption of sound in seawater for an on-line calculator).

Ambient noise [ edit ] Measurement of acoustic signals are possible if their amplitude exceeds a minimum threshold, determined partly by the signal processing used and partly by the level of background noise.  Ambient noise is that part of the received noise that is independent of the source, receiver and platform characteristics.  Thus it excludes reverberation and towing noise for example.

The background noise present in the ocean, or ambient noise, has many different sources and varies with location and frequency.

[ 26 ] At the lowest frequencies, from about 0.1 Hz to 10 Hz, ocean turbulence and microseisms are the primary contributors to the noise background.

[ 27 ] Typical noise spectrum levels decrease with increasing frequency from about 140 dB re 1 μPa 2 /Hz at 1 Hz to about 30 dB re 1 μPa 2 /Hz at 100 kHz. Distant ship traffic is one of the dominant noise sources [ 28 ] in most areas for frequencies of around 100 Hz, while wind-induced surface noise is the main source between 1 kHz and 30 kHz. At very high frequencies, above 100 kHz, thermal noise of water molecules begins to dominate. The thermal noise spectral level at 100 kHz is 25 dB re 1 μPa 2 /Hz.  The spectral density of thermal noise increases by 20 dB per decade (approximately 6 dB per octave ).

[ 29 ] Transient sound sources also contribute to ambient noise. These can include intermittent geological activity, such as earthquakes and underwater volcanoes, [ 30 ] rainfall on the surface, and biological activity. Biological sources include cetaceans (especially blue , fin and sperm whales), [ 31 ] [ 32 ] certain types of fish, and snapping shrimp .

Rain can produce high levels of ambient noise. However the numerical relationship between rain rate and ambient noise level is difficult to determine because measurement of rain rate is problematic at sea.

Reverberation [ edit ] Many measurements have been made of sea surface, bottom and volume reverberation.  Empirical models have sometimes been derived from these.  A commonly used expression for the band 0.4 to 6.4 kHz is that by Chapman and Harris.

[ 33 ] It is found that a sinusoidal waveform is spread in frequency due to the surface motion. For bottom reverberation a Lambert's Law is found often to apply approximately, for example see Mackenzie.

[ 34 ] Volume reverberation is usually found to occur mainly in layers, which change depth with the time of day, e.g., see Marshall and Chapman.

[ 35 ] The under-surface of ice can produce strong reverberation when it is rough, see for example Milne.

[ 36 ] Bottom loss [ edit ] Bottom loss has been measured as a function of grazing angle for many frequencies in various locations, for example those by the US Marine Geophysical Survey.

[ 37 ] The loss depends on the sound speed in the bottom (which is affected by gradients and layering) and by roughness.  Graphs have been produced for the loss to be expected in particular circumstances. In shallow water bottom loss often has the dominant impact on long range propagation. At low frequencies sound can propagate through the sediment then back into the water.

Underwater hearing [ edit ] Comparison with airborne sound levels [ edit ] As with airborne sound , sound pressure level underwater is usually reported in units of decibels , but there are some important differences that make it difficult (and often inappropriate) to compare SPL in water with SPL in air.  These differences include: [ 38 ] difference in reference pressure: 1 μPa (one micropascal, or one millionth of a pascal ) instead of 20 μPa.

[ 15 ] difference in interpretation: there are two schools of thought, one maintaining that pressures should be compared directly, and the other that one should first convert to the intensity of an equivalent plane wave.

difference in hearing sensitivity : any comparison with ( A-weighted ) sound in air needs to take into account the differences in hearing sensitivity, either of a human diver or other animal.

[ 39 ] Human hearing [ edit ] Hearing sensitivity [ edit ] The lowest audible SPL for a human diver with normal hearing is about 67 dB re 1 μPa, with greatest sensitivity occurring at frequencies around 1 kHz.

[ 40 ] This corresponds to a sound intensity 5.4 dB, or 3.5 times, higher than the threshold in air (see Measurements above).

Safety thresholds [ edit ] High levels of underwater sound create a potential hazard to human divers.

[ 41 ] Guidelines for exposure of human divers to underwater sound are reported by the SOLMAR project of the NATO Undersea Research Centre .

[ 42 ] Human divers exposed to SPL above 154 dB re 1 μPa in the frequency range 0.6 to 2.5 kHz are reported to experience changes in their heart rate or breathing frequency. Diver aversion to low frequency sound is dependent upon sound pressure level and center frequency .

[ 43 ] Other species [ edit ] Aquatic mammals [ edit ] Dolphins and other toothed whales are known for their acute hearing sensitivity, especially in the frequency range 5 to 50 kHz.

[ 39 ] [ 44 ] Several species have hearing thresholds between 30 and 50 dB re 1 μPa in this frequency range.  For example, the hearing threshold of the killer whale occurs at an RMS acoustic pressure of 0.02 mPa (and frequency 15 kHz), corresponding to an SPL threshold of 26 dB re 1 μPa.

[ 45 ] High levels of underwater sound create a potential hazard to marine and amphibious animals.

[ 39 ] The effects of exposure to underwater noise are reviewed by Southall et al.

[ 46 ] Fish [ edit ] The hearing sensitivity of fish is reviewed by Ladich and Fay.

[ 47 ] The hearing threshold of the soldier fish , is 0.32 mPa (50 dB re 1 μPa) at 1.3 kHz, whereas the lobster has a hearing threshold of 1.3 Pa at 70 Hz (122 dB re 1 μPa).

[ 45 ] The effects of exposure to underwater noise are reviewed by Popper et al.

[ 48 ] Aquatic birds [ edit ] Several aquatic bird species have been observed to react to underwater sound in the 1–4 kHz range, [ 49 ] which follows the frequency range of best hearing sensitivities of birds in air. Seaducks and cormorants have been trained to respond to sounds of 1–4 kHz with lowest hearing threshold (highest sensitivity) of 71 dB re 1 μPa [ 50 ] (cormorants) and 105 dB re 1 μPa (seaducks).

[ 49 ] Diving species have several morphological differences in the ear relative to terrestrial species, suggesting some adaptations of the ear in diving birds to aquatic conditions [ 51 ] Applications of underwater acoustics [ edit ] Sonar [ edit ] Main article: Sonar Sonar is the name given to the acoustic equivalent of radar .  Pulses of sound are used to probe the sea, and the echoes are then processed to extract information about the sea, its boundaries and submerged objects.  An alternative use, known as passive sonar , attempts to do the same by listening to the sounds radiated by underwater objects.

Underwater communication [ edit ] Main article: Underwater acoustic communication The need for underwater acoustic telemetry exists in applications such as data harvesting for environmental monitoring, communication with and between crewed and uncrewed underwater vehicles , transmission of diver speech, etc. A related application is underwater remote control , in which acoustic telemetry is used to remotely actuate a switch or trigger an event.  A prominent example of underwater remote control are acoustic releases , devices that are used to return sea floor deployed instrument packages or other payloads to the surface per remote command at the end of a deployment.  Acoustic communications form an active field of research [ 52 ] [ 53 ] with significant challenges to overcome, especially in horizontal, shallow-water channels. Compared with radio telecommunications , the available bandwidth is reduced by several orders of magnitude. Moreover, the low speed of sound causes multipath propagation to stretch over time delay intervals of tens or hundreds of milliseconds, as well as significant Doppler shifts and spreading. Often acoustic communication systems are not limited by noise, but by reverberation and time variability beyond the capability of receiver algorithms. The fidelity of underwater communication links can be greatly improved by the use of hydrophone arrays, which allow processing techniques such as adaptive beamforming and diversity combining.

Underwater navigation and tracking [ edit ] Main article: Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater navigation and tracking is a common requirement for exploration and work by divers, ROV , autonomous underwater vehicles (AUV) , crewed submersibles and submarines alike. Unlike most radio signals which are quickly absorbed, sound propagates far underwater and at a rate that can be precisely measured or estimated.

[ 54 ] It can thus be used to measure distances between a tracked target and one or multiple reference of baseline stations precisely, and triangulate the position of the target, sometimes with centimeter accuracy.  Starting in the 1960s, this has given rise to underwater acoustic positioning systems which are now widely used.

Seismic exploration [ edit ] Main article: Reflection seismology Seismic exploration involves the use of low frequency sound (< 100 Hz) to probe deep into the seabed.  Despite the relatively poor resolution due to their long wavelength, low frequency sounds are preferred because high frequencies are heavily attenuated when they travel through the seabed.  Sound sources used include airguns , vibroseis and explosives .

Weather and climate observation [ edit ] Acoustic sensors can be used to monitor the sound made by wind and precipitation .  For example, an acoustic rain gauge is described by Nystuen.

[ 55 ] Lightning strikes can also be detected.

[ 56 ] Acoustic thermometry of ocean climate (ATOC) uses low frequency sound to measure the global ocean temperature.

Acoustical oceanography [ edit ] A 38 kHz hydroacoustic tow fin used to conduct acoustic surveys by NOAA. Alaska, Southeast.

Acoustical oceanography is the use of underwater sound to study the sea , its boundaries and its contents.

History [ edit ] Interest in developing echo ranging systems began in earnest following the sinking of the RMS Titanic in 1912. By sending a sound wave ahead of a ship, the theory went, a return echo bouncing off the submerged portion of an iceberg should give early warning of collisions. By directing the same type of beam downwards, the depth to the bottom of the ocean could be calculated.

[ 57 ] The first practical deep-ocean echo sounder was invented by Harvey C. Hayes, a U.S. Navy physicist. For the first time, it was possible to create a quasi-continuous profile of the ocean floor along the course of a ship. The first such profile was made by Hayes on board the U.S.S. Stewart, a Navy destroyer that sailed from Newport to Gibraltar between June 22 and 29, 1922. During that week, 900 deep-ocean soundings were made.

[ 58 ] Using a refined echo sounder, the German survey ship Meteor made several passes across the South Atlantic from the equator to Antarctica between 1925 and 1927, taking soundings every 5 to 20 miles. Their work created the first detailed map of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. It showed that the Ridge was a rugged mountain range, and not the smooth plateau that some scientists had envisioned. Since that time, both naval and research vessels have operated echo sounders almost continuously while at sea.

[ 59 ] Important contributions to acoustical oceanography have been made by: Leonid Brekhovskikh Walter Munk Herman Medwin John L. Spiesberger C.C. Leroy David E. Weston D. Van Holliday Charles Greenlaw Equipment used [ edit ] The earliest and most widespread use of sound and sonar technology to study the properties of the sea is the use of a rainbow echo sounder to measure water depth. Sounders were the devices used that mapped the many miles of the Santa Barbara Harbor ocean floor until 1993.

Fathometers measure the depth of the waters. It works by electronically sending sounds from ships, therefore also receiving the sound waves that bounces back from the bottom of the ocean. A paper chart moves through the fathometer and is calibrated to record the depth.

As technology advances, the development of high resolution sonars in the second half of the 20th century made it possible to not just detect underwater objects but to classify them and even image them. Electronic sensors are now attached to ROVs since nowadays, ships or robot submarines have Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROVs). There are cameras attached to these devices giving out accurate images. The oceanographers are able to get a clear and precise quality of pictures. The 'pictures' can also be sent from sonars by having sound reflected off ocean surroundings. Oftentimes sound waves reflect off animals, giving information which can be documented into deeper animal behaviour studies.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] Marine biology [ edit ] Main article: Bioacoustics Due to its excellent propagation properties, underwater sound is used as a tool to aid the study of marine life, from microplankton to the blue whale .

Echo sounders are often used to provide data on marine life abundance, distribution, and behavior information.  Echo sounders, also referred to as hydroacoustics is also used for fish location, quantity, size, and biomass.

Acoustic telemetry is also used for monitoring fish and marine wildlife. An acoustic transmitter is attached to the fish (sometimes internally) while an array of receivers listen to the information conveyed by the sound wave. This enables the researchers to track the movements of individuals in a small-medium scale.

[ 63 ] Pistol shrimp create sonoluminescent cavitation bubbles that reach up to 5,000 K (4,700 °C) [ 64 ] Particle physics [ edit ] A neutrino is a fundamental particle that interacts very weakly with other matter.  For this reason, it requires detection apparatus on a very large scale, and the ocean is sometimes used for this purpose.  In particular, it is thought that ultra-high energy neutrinos in seawater can be detected acoustically.

[ 65 ] Other applications [ edit ] Other applications include: rain rate measurement wind speed measurement global thermometry monitoring of ocean-atmospheric gas exchange Surveillance Towed Array Sensor System Acoustic Doppler current profiler for water speed measurement Acoustic camera Liquid sound Passive acoustic monitoring See also [ edit ] Bioacoustics – Study of sound relating to biology Cambridge Interferometer Echo sounder – Measuring the depth of water by transmitting sound waves into water and timing the return Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Fisheries acoustics Ocean exploration – Part of oceanography describing the exploration of ocean surfaces Ocean Tracking Network – Global network research and monitoring efforts to study fish migration Refraction (sound) – Change of direction of propagation due to variation of velocity Sonar – Acoustic sensing method Underwater acoustic positioning system – System for tracking and navigation of underwater vehicles or divers using acoustic signals Underwater acoustic communication – Wireless technique of sending and receiving messages through water Underwater Audio , an electronics company Notes [ edit ] References [ edit ] ^ "Submersed Aquatic Vegetation Early Warning System (SAVEWS)" . Archived from the original on 2012-02-19 . Retrieved 2008-12-02 .

^ a b c Urick, Robert J.

Principles of Underwater Sound, 3rd Edition.

New York. McGraw-Hill, 1983.

^ C. S. Clay & H. Medwin, Acoustical Oceanography (Wiley, New York, 1977) ^ Annales de Chimie et de Physique 36 [2] 236 (1827) ^ A. B. Wood, From the Board of Invention and Research to the Royal Naval Scientific Service ,  Journal of the Royal Naval Scientific Service Vol 20, No 4, pp 1–100 (185–284).

^ H. Lichte (1919). "On the influence of horizontal temperature layers in sea water on the range of underwater sound signals".

Phys. Z .

17 (385).

^ a b c R. E. Francois & G. R. Garrison, Sound absorption based on ocean measurements. Part II: Boric acid contribution and equation for total absorption, J. Acoust. Soc. Am.

72 , 1879–1890 (1982).

^ a b R. E. Francois and G. R. Garrison, Sound absorption based on ocean measurements. Part I: Pure water and magnesium sulfate contributions, J. Acoust. Soc. Am.

72 , 896–907 (1982).

^ Ainslie, M. A. (2010). Principles of Sonar Performance Modeling. Berlin: Springer. p36 ^ H. Medwin & C. S. Clay, Fundamentals of Acoustical Oceanography (Academic, Boston, 1998).

^ D. E. Weston & P. A. Ching, Wind effects in shallow-water transmission, J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 86, 1530–1545 (1989).

^ G. V. Norton & J. C. Novarini, On the relative role of sea-surface roughness and bubble plumes in shallow-water propagation in the low-kilohertz region, J. Acoust. Soc. Am.

110 , 2946–2955 (2001) ^ N Chotiros, Biot Model of Sound Propagation in Water Saturated Sand. J. Acoust. Soc. Am.

97 , 199 (1995) ^ M. J. Buckingham, Wave propagation, stress relaxation, and grain-to-grain shearing in saturated, unconsolidated marine sediments, J. Acoust. Soc. Am.

108 , 2796–2815 (2000).

^ a b C. L. Morfey, Dictionary of Acoustics (Academic Press, San Diego, 2001).

^ M. A. Ainslie, The sonar equation and the definitions of propagation loss, J. Acoust. Soc. Am.

115 , 131–134 (2004).

^ F. B. Jensen, W. A. Kuperman, M. B. Porter & H. Schmidt, Computational Ocean Acoustics (AIP Press, NY, 1994).

^ C. H. Harrison, Ocean propagation models, Applied Acoustics 27 , 163–201 (1989).

^ Muratov, R. Z.; Efimov, S. P. (1978).

"Low frequency scattering of a plane wave by an acoustically soft ellipsoid" .

Radiophysics and Quantum Electronics .

21 (2): 153– 160.

Bibcode : 1978R&QE...21..153M .

doi : 10.1007/BF01078707 .

S2CID 118762566 .

^ Morse, Philip M.; Ingard, K. Uno (1987).

Theoretical Acoustics . Princeton: Princeton University Press. p. 949.

ISBN 9780691024011 .

^ L. M. Brekhovskikh & Yu. P. Lysanov, Fundamentals of Ocean Acoustics, 3rd edition (Springer-Verlag, NY, 2003).

^ A. D. Pierce, Acoustics: An Introduction to its Physical Principles and Applications (American Institute of Physics, New York, 1989).

^ Mackenzie, Nine-term equation for sound speed in the oceans, J. Acoust. Soc. Am.

70 , 807–812 (1982).

^ C. C. Leroy, The speed of sound in pure and neptunian water, in Handbook of Elastic Properties of Solids, Liquids and Gases, edited by Levy, Bass & Stern, Volume IV: Elastic Properties of Fluids: Liquids and Gases (Academic Press, 2001) ^ Wilson, Wayne D. (26 Jan 1959).

"Speed of Sound in Distilled Water as a Function of Temperature and Pressure" .

J. Acoust. Soc. Am .

31 (8): 1067– 1072.

Bibcode : 1959ASAJ...31.1067W .

doi : 10.1121/1.1907828 . Archived from the original on 14 May 2016 . Retrieved 11 February 2012 .

^ G. M. Wenz, Acoustic ambient noise in the ocean: spectra and sources, J. Acoust. Soc. Am.

34 , 1936–1956 (1962).

^ S. C. Webb, The equilibrium oceanic microseism spectrum, J. Acoust. Soc. Am.

92 , 2141–2158  (1992).

^ Gemba, Kay L.; Sarkar, Jit; Cornuelle, Bruce; Hodgkiss, William S.; Kuperman, W. A. (2018).

"Estimating relative channel impulse responses from ships of opportunity in a shallow water environment" .

The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America .

144 (3): 1231– 1244.

Bibcode : 2018ASAJ..144.1231G .

doi : 10.1121/1.5052259 .

ISSN 0001-4966 .

PMID 30424623 .

^ R. H. Mellen, The Thermal-Noise Limit in the Detection of Underwater Acoustic Signals, J. Acoust. Soc. Am.

24 , 478–480 (1952).

^ R. S. Dietz and M. J. Sheehy, Transpacific detection of myojin volcanic explosions by underwater sound. Bulletin of the Geological Society 2 942–956 (1954).

^ M. A. McDonald, J. A. Hildebrand & S. M. Wiggins, Increases in deep ocean ambient noise in the Northeast Pacific west of San Nicolas Island, California, J. Acoust. Soc. Am.

120 , 711–718 (2006).

^ Ocean Noise and Marine Mammals, National Research Council of the National Academies (The National Academies Press, Washington DC, 2003).

^ R  Chapman and J Harris, Surface backscattering Strengths Measured with Explosive Sound Sources.  J. Acoust. Soc. Am.

34 , 547 (1962) ^ K Mackenzie, Bottom Reverberation for 530 and 1030 cps Sound in Deep Water. J. Acoust. Soc. Am.

36 , 1596 (1964) ^ J. R. Marshall and R. P. Chapman, Reverberation from a Deep Scattering Layer Measured with Explosive Sound Sources. J. Acoust. Soc. Am.

36 , 164 (1964) ^ A. Milne, Underwater Backscattering Strengths of Arctic Pack Ice. J. Acoust. Soc. Am.

36 , 1551 (1964) ^ MGS Station Data Listing and Report Catalog, Nav Oceanog Office Special Publication 142, 1974 ^ D.M.F. Chapman, D.D. Ellis, The elusive decibel – thoughts on sonars and marine mammals, Can. Acoust.

26 (2), 29–31 (1996) ^ a b c W. J. Richardson, C. R. Greene, C. I. Malme and D. H. Thomson, Marine Mammals and Noise (Academic Press, San Diego, 1995).

^ S. J. Parvin, E. A. Cudahy & D. M. Fothergill, Guidance for diver exposure to underwater sound in the frequency range 500 to 2500 Hz, Underwater Defence Technology  (2002).

^ Steevens CC, Russell KL, Knafelc ME, Smith PF, Hopkins EW, Clark JB (1999).

"Noise-induced neurologic disturbances in divers exposed to intense water-borne sound: two case reports" .

Undersea Hyperb Med .

26 (4): 261– 5.

PMID 10642074 . Archived from the original on July 27, 2011 . Retrieved 2009-03-31 .

^ NATO Undersea Research Centre Human Diver and Marine Mammal Risk Mitigation Rules and Procedures , NURC Special Publication NURC-SP-2006-008, September 2006 ^ Fothergill DM, Sims JR, Curley MD (2001).

"Recreational scuba divers' aversion to low-frequency underwater sound" .

Undersea Hyperb Med .

28 (1): 9– 18.

PMID 11732884 . Archived from the original on July 27, 2011 . Retrieved 2009-03-31 .

^ W. W. L. Au, The Sonar of Dolphins (Springer, NY, 1993).

^ a b D. Simmonds & J. MacLennan, Fisheries Acoustics: Theory and Practice, 2nd edition (Blackwell, Oxford, 2005) ^ Southall, B. L., Bowles, A. E., Ellison, W. T., Finneran, J. J., Gentry, R. L., Greene, C. R., ... & Richardson, W. J. (2007). Marine Mammal Noise Exposure Criteria Aquatic Mammals.

^ Ladich, F., & Fay, R. R. (2013). Auditory evoked potential audiometry in fish. Reviews in fish biology and fisheries, 23(3), 317-364.

^ Popper, A. N., Hawkins, A. D., Fay, R. R., Mann, D. A., Bartol, S., Carlson, T. J., ... & Løkkeborg, S. (2014). ASA S3/SC1. 4 TR-2014 Sound exposure guidelines for fishes and sea turtles: A technical report prepared by ANSI-Accredited standards committee S3/SC1 and registered with ANSI. Springer.

^ a b McGrew, Kathleen A.; Crowell, Sarah E.; Fiely, Jonathan L.; Berlin, Alicia M.; Olsen, Glenn H.; James, Jennifer; Hopkins, Heather; Williams, Christopher K. (2022-10-15).

"Underwater hearing in sea ducks with applications for reducing gillnet bycatch through acoustic deterrence" .

Journal of Experimental Biology .

225 (20).

Bibcode : 2022JExpB.225B3953M .

doi : 10.1242/jeb.243953 .

ISSN 0022-0949 .

PMC 10658911 .

PMID 36305674 .

^ Hansen, Kirstin Anderson; Maxwell, Alyssa; Siebert, Ursula; Larsen, Ole Næsbye; Wahlberg, Magnus (2017-05-05).

"Great cormorants (Phalacrocorax carbo) can detect auditory cues while diving" .

The Science of Nature .

104 (5): 45.

Bibcode : 2017SciNa.104...45H .

doi : 10.1007/s00114-017-1467-3 .

ISSN 1432-1904 .

PMID 28477271 .

S2CID 253640329 .

^ Zeyl, Jeffrey N.; Snelling, Edward P.; Connan, Maelle; Basille, Mathieu; Clay, Thomas A.; Joo, Rocío; Patrick, Samantha C.; Phillips, Richard A.; Pistorius, Pierre A.; Ryan, Peter G.; Snyman, Albert; Clusella-Trullas, Susana (2022-03-28).

"Aquatic birds have middle ears adapted to amphibious lifestyles" .

Scientific Reports .

12 (1): 5251.

Bibcode : 2022NatSR..12.5251Z .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-022-09090-3 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 8960762 .

PMID 35347167 .

^ D. B. Kilfoyle and A. B. Baggeroer, "The state of the art in underwater acoustic telemetry," IEEE J. Oceanic Eng. 25, 4–27 (2000).

^ M.Stojanovic, "Acoustic (Underwater) Communications," entry in Encyclopedia of Telecommunications, John G. Proakis, Ed., John Wiley & Sons, 2003.

^ Underwater Acoustic Positioning Systems, P.H. Milne 1983, ISBN 0-87201-012-0 ^ J. A. Nystuen, Listening to raindrops from underwater: An acoustic disdrometer, J Atmospheric and Oceanic Technology, 18 (10), 1640–1657 (2001).

^ R. D. Hill, Investigation of lightning strikes to water surfaces, J. Acoust. Soc. Am.

78 , 2096–2099 (1985).

^ Garrison 2012 , p. 79.

^ Kunzig 2000 , pp. 40–41.

^ Stewart 2009 , p. 28.

^ "Oceanography" .

Scholastic Teachers .

^ "Tools of the Oceanographer" .

marinebio.net .

^ "Technology used" .

noc.ac.uk . Archived from the original on 2015-01-21 . Retrieved 2015-01-21 .

^ Moore, A., T. Storeton-West, I. C. Russell, E. C. E. Potter, and M. J. Challiss. 1990. A technique for tracking Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.) smolts through estuaries. International Council for the Ex- ploration of the Sea, C.M. 1990/M: 18, Copenhagen.

^ D. Lohse, B. Schmitz & M. Versluis (2001).

"Snapping shrimp make flashing bubbles" (PDF) .

Nature .

413 (6855): 477– 478.

Bibcode : 2001Natur.413..477L .

doi : 10.1038/35097152 .

PMID 11586346 .

S2CID 4429684 .

^ S. Bevan, S. Danaher, J. Perkin, S. Ralph, C. Rhodes, L. Thompson, T. Sloane, D. Waters and The ACoRNE Collaboration, Simulation of ultra high energy neutrino induced showers in ice and water, Astroparticle Physics Volume 28, Issue 3, November 2007, Pages 366–379 Bibliography [ edit ] Garrison, Tom S. (1 August 2012).

Essentials of Oceanography . Cengage Learning.

ISBN 978-0-8400-6155-3 .

Kunzig, Robert (17 October 2000).

Mapping the Deep: The Extraordinary Story of Ocean Science . W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0-393-34535-3 .

Stewart, Robert H. (September 2009).

Introduction to Physical Oceanography . University Press of Florida.

ISBN 978-1-61610-045-2 .

Further reading [ edit ] This " further reading " section may need cleanup .

Please read the editing guide and help improve the section.

( March 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Quality assurance of hydroacoustic surveys: the repeatability of fish-abundance and biomass estimates in lakes within and between hydroacoustic systems (free link to document) Hydroacoustics as a tool for assessing fish biomass and size distribution associated with discrete shallow water estuarine habitats in Louisiana Acoustic assessment of squid stocks Summary of the use of hydroacoustics for quantifying the escapement of adult salmonids (Oncorhynchus and Salmo spp.) in rivers.

Ransom, B.H., S.V. Johnston, and T.W. Steig. 1998. Presented at International Symposium and Workshop on Management and Ecology of River Fisheries, University of Hull, England, 30 March-3 April 1998 Multi-frequency acoustic assessment of fisheries and plankton resources.

Torkelson, T.C., T.C. Austin, and P.H. Weibe. 1998. Presented at the 135th Meeting of the Acoustical Society of America and the 16th Meeting of the International Congress of Acoustics, Seattle, Washington.

Acoustics Unpacked [ usurped ] A great reference for freshwater hydroacoustics for resource assessment Inter-Calibration of Scientific Echosounders in the Great Lakes Hydroacoustic Evaluation of Spawning Red Hind Aggregations Along the Coast of Puerto Rico in 2002 and 2003 Feasibility Assessment of Split-Beam Hydroacoustic Techniques for Monitoring Adult Shortnose Sturgeon in the Delaware River Categorising Salmon Migration Behaviour Using Characteristics of Split-beam Acoustic Data Evaluation of Methods to Estimate Lake Herring Spawner Abundance in Lake Superior Estimating Sockeye Salmon Smolt Flux and Abundance with Side-Looking Sonar Herring Research: Using Acoustics to Count Fish.

Hydroacoustic Applications in Lake, River and Marine environments for study of plankton, fish, vegetation, substrate or seabed classification, and bathymetry.

Hydroacoustics: Rivers (in: Salmonid Field Protocols Handbook: Chapter 4) Hydroacoustics: Lakes and Reservoirs (in: Salmonid Field Protocols Handbook: Chapter 5) PAMGUARD:  An Open-Source Software Community Developing Marine Mammal Acoustic Detection and Localisation Software to Benefit the Marine Environment; https://web.archive.org/web/20070904035315/http://www.pamguard.org/home.shtml External links [ edit ] Ultrasonics and Underwater Acoustics Monitoring the global ocean through underwater acoustics ASA Underwater Acoustics Technical Committee An Ocean of Sound Archived 2017-04-21 at the Wayback Machine Underwater Acoustic Communications Archived 2009-07-24 at the Wayback Machine Acoustic Communications Group at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution Sound in the Sea SFSU Underwater Acoustics Research Group Archived 2010-01-29 at the Wayback Machine Discovery of Sound in the Sea Marine acoustics research v t e Hydroacoustics Sonar Active acoustics Baffles (submarine) Bistatic sonar Echo sounding Fessenden oscillator GLORIA sidescan sonar Multibeam echosounder Passive acoustics Scientific echosounder Side-scan sonar Sonar beamforming Sonobuoy Surveillance Towed Array Sensor System Synthetic aperture sonar Towed array sonar Upward looking sonar Ocean acoustics Acoustic release Acoustic Doppler current profiler Acoustic seabed classification Acoustical oceanography Hydrophone Long baseline acoustic positioning system Ocean acoustic tomography Short baseline acoustic positioning system Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Sound speed gradient Sound velocity probe Ultra-short baseline acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustics Underwater acoustic communication Underwater acoustic positioning system Acoustic ecology Acoustic survey in fishing Acoustic tag Animal echolocation Beached whale Deep scattering layer Fishfinder Fisheries acoustics Hearing range of marine mammals Marine mammals and sonar Whale song Related topics Acoustic signature Bioacoustics Biophony Geophysical MASINT Hydrographic survey Noise map Soundscape v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐mz2kh
Cached time: 20250814230618
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.028 seconds
Real time usage: 1.414 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5969/1000000
Revision size: 55197/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 580819/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1784/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 10/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 128230/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.499/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17517825/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  835.425      1 -total
 24.98%  208.649      2 Template:Reflist
 20.42%  170.614     37 Template:Navbox
 18.85%  157.449     10 Template:Annotated_link
 10.42%   87.032      4 Template:Cite_web
 10.15%   84.778      1 Template:Underwater_diving
  9.57%   79.960      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.64%   72.160      1 Template:Hydroacoustics
  8.33%   69.576     10 Template:Cite_journal
  8.03%   67.087      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:10567426:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814230618 and revision id 1303170179. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Underwater_acoustics&oldid=1303170179#Acoustical_oceanography " Categories : Acoustics Sound Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Wikipedia spam cleanup from March 2022 Wikipedia further reading cleanup Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 13:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Underwater acoustics 14 languages Add topic

