Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Framework 2 Usage 3 Intellectual property rights 4 References Toggle the table of contents indecs Content Model Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "Indecs" redirects here. For the journal title abbreviated to INDECS, see Interdisciplinary Description of Complex Systems .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Indecs Content Model" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) indecs [ 1 ] (an acronym of " interoperability of data in e-commerce systems"; written in lower case) was a project partly funded by the European Community Info 2000 initiative and by several organisations representing the music, rights, text publishing, authors, library and other sectors in 1998–2000, which has since been used in a number of metadata activities. A final report and related documents were published; the indecs Metadata Framework document [ 2 ] is a concise summary.

indecs provided an analysis of the requirements for metadata for e-commerce of content ( intellectual property ) in the network environment, focusing on semantic interoperability .

indecs was built from a simple generic model of commerce (the "model of making"): a model of the life cycle of any kind of content from conception to the final physical or digital copies . Central to the analysis is the assumption that it is possible to produce a generic mechanism to handle complex metadata for all different types of content. So, for example, instead of treating sound carriers, books, videos and photographs as fundamentally different things with different (if similar) characteristics, they are all recognised as creations with different values of the same higher-level attributes, whose metadata can be supported in a common environment.

Framework [ edit ] The indecs framework underlines the importance of unique identification of all entities. It also raises the question of authority: the identification of the person making the claim is as significant as the identification of any other entity.

Usage [ edit ] The indecs framework does not presuppose any specific business model or legal framework; it can be used to describe transactions involving copyrighted, open source, or freely available material. The framework has been further developed as a generic ontology -based approach. Its main use to date has been in applications of commercial transactions of content and in some library-related applications. Developments include the OntologyX semantic engineering tools and services from Rightscom.com. The approach also has much in common with the CIDOC Conceptual Reference Model (CRM), an ontology for cultural heritage information, and the Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records (FRBR) model.

One of the deliverables of the indecs project was a specification for a directory of parties. This led to a subsequent project, Interparty, [ 3 ] funded under the European Commission 's Information Society Technologies Programme, to design and specify a network to support interoperability of party identification (for both natural and corporate names) across different domains, building on the indecs principles. InterParty was not proposed as a replacement for existing schemes, but as a means of effecting their interoperation. Some of its conclusions have been used elsewhere, e.g., in the work on the proposed ISO ISNI ( International Standard Name Identifier ).

[ 4 ] Intellectual property rights [ edit ] indecs does not attempt to replace intellectual property rights law, though a specific set of legal elements might be included in an indecs-based structure, and the indecs framework specifically includes some definitions of intellectual property rights from major international treaties such as the Berne Convention and the WIPO Copyright Treaty .

References [ edit ] ^ "CORDIS | European Commission" .

^ https://www.doi.org/resources/indecs_framework_2000.pdf "Principles, model and data dictionary" ^ "Home" .

interparty.org .

^ "ISNI" .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indecs_Content_Model&oldid=1303254977 " Categories : Intellectual property law Metadata standards Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles with style issues from December 2023 All articles with style issues Articles needing additional references from May 2014 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 22:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents indecs Content Model Add languages Add topic

