Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life Toggle Early life subsection 1.1 Education 1.2 Naval history and strategy 1.3 First marriage and widowerhood 2 Early political career Toggle Early political career subsection 2.1 State Assemblyman 2.2 Presidential election of 1884 3 Cattle rancher in Dakota 4 Second marriage 5 Reentering public life Toggle Reentering public life subsection 5.1 Civil Service Commission 5.2 New York City Police Commissioner 6 Emergence as national figure Toggle Emergence as national figure subsection 6.1 Assistant Secretary of the Navy 6.2 War in Cuba 6.3 Governor of New York 6.4 Vice presidency (1901) 7 Presidency (1901–1909) Toggle Presidency (1901–1909) subsection 7.1 Domestic policies: The Square Deal 7.1.1 Trust busting and regulation 7.1.2 Coal strike 7.1.3 Prosecuted misconduct 7.1.4 Railroads 7.1.5 Pure food and drugs 7.1.6 Conservation 7.1.7 Business panic of 1907 7.2 Foreign policy 7.2.1 Japan 7.2.2 China 7.2.3 Europe 7.2.4 Latin America and the Panama Canal 7.3 Media 7.4 Election of 1904 7.5 Second term 7.5.1 Rhetoric of righteousness 8 Post-presidency (1909–1919) Toggle Post-presidency (1909–1919) subsection 8.1 Election of 1908 8.2 Africa and Europe (1909–1910) 8.3 The Great Rapprochement with Great Britain 8.4 Republican Party schism 8.4.1 Dispute over court power 8.4.2 Roosevelt's "New Nationalism" 8.4.3 Battling Taft over arbitration treaties 8.5 Election of 1912 8.5.1 Republican primaries and convention 8.5.2 Progressive Party 8.5.3 Attempted assassination 8.5.4 Democratic victory 8.6 South American expedition (1913–1914) 8.7 Final years 8.7.1 World War I 8.7.2 League of Nations 8.7.3 Final political activities 9 Death 10 Writer 11 Character and beliefs 12 Political positions Toggle Political positions subsection 12.1 Foreign policy beliefs 13 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 13.1 Persona and masculinity 13.2 Memorials and cultural depictions 13.3 Audiovisual media 14 See also 15 Notes 16 References 17 Sources 18 External links Toggle External links subsection 18.1 Organizations 18.2 Libraries and collections 18.3 Media 18.4 Other Toggle the table of contents Theodore Roosevelt 143 languages Acèh Afrikaans አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Asturianu Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Bislama Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qırımtatarca Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Tiếng Việt Volapük 文言 Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Yerwa Kanuri Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia President of the United States from 1901 to 1909 This article is about the president of the United States. For other people with the same name, see Theodore Roosevelt (disambiguation) .

Theodore Roosevelt Roosevelt in 1904 26th President of the United States In office September 14, 1901 – March 4, 1909 Vice President None (1901–1905) [ a ] Charles W. Fairbanks (1905–1909) Preceded by William McKinley Succeeded by William Howard Taft 25th Vice President of the United States In office March 4, 1901 – September 14, 1901 President William McKinley Preceded by Garret Hobart Succeeded by Charles W. Fairbanks 33rd Governor of New York In office January 1, 1899 – December 31, 1900 Lieutenant Timothy L. Woodruff Preceded by Frank S. Black Succeeded by Benjamin Barker Odell Jr.

5th Assistant Secretary of the Navy In office April 19, 1897 – May 10, 1898 President William McKinley Preceded by William McAdoo Succeeded by Charles Herbert Allen President of the New York City Board of Police Commissioners In office May 6, 1895 – April 19, 1897 Appointed by William Lafayette Strong Preceded by James J. Martin Succeeded by Frank Moss Member of the New York State Assembly from the 21st district In office January 1, 1883 – December 31, 1884 Preceded by William J. Trimble Succeeded by Henry A. Barnum Personal details Born Theodore Roosevelt Jr.

( 1858-10-27 ) October 27, 1858 New York City , U.S.

Died January 6, 1919 (1919-01-06) (aged 60) Oyster Bay, New York , U.S.

Resting place Youngs Memorial Cemetery Political party Republican (1880–1912, 1916–1919) Other political affiliations Progressive "Bull Moose" (1912–1916) Spouses Alice Lee ​ ​ ( m.

1880 ; died 1884 ) ​ Edith Carow ​ ( m.

1886 ) ​ Children 6 Relatives Roosevelt family Alma mater Harvard University ( AB ) Columbia University Occupation Author conservationist explorer historian naturalist police commissioner politician soldier Civilian awards Nobel Peace Prize (1906) Signature Military service Allegiance United States Branch/service United States Army Years of service 1882–1886 (guard) 1898 Rank Colonel Unit New York Army National Guard Commands 1st U.S. Volunteer Cavalry Battles/wars Spanish–American War Battle of Las Guasimas Battle of San Juan Hill Military awards Medal of Honor ( posthumous , 2001) Theodore Roosevelt's voice Roosevelt giving a speech during his second presidential campaign Recorded 1912 Theodore Roosevelt Jr.

[ b ] (October 27, 1858 – January 6, 1919), also known as Teddy or T.

R.

, was the 26th president of the United States , serving from 1901 to 1909. Roosevelt previously was involved in New York politics, including serving as the state's 33rd governor for two years. He served as the 25th vice president under President William McKinley for six months in 1901, assuming the presidency after McKinley's assassination . As president, Roosevelt emerged as a leader of the Republican Party and became a driving force for anti-trust and Progressive Era policies.

A sickly child with debilitating asthma , Roosevelt overcame health problems through a strenuous lifestyle . He was homeschooled and began a lifelong naturalist avocation before attending Harvard University . His book The Naval War of 1812 established his reputation as a historian and popular writer. Roosevelt became the leader of the reform faction of Republicans in the New York State Legislature . His first wife Alice Hathaway Lee Roosevelt and mother Martha Bulloch Roosevelt died on the same night, devastating him psychologically. He recuperated by buying and operating a cattle ranch in the Dakotas . Roosevelt served as the assistant secretary of the Navy under McKinley, and in 1898 helped plan the successful naval war against Spain . He resigned to help form and lead the Rough Riders , a unit that fought the Spanish Army in Cuba to great publicity. Returning a war hero, Roosevelt was elected New York's governor in 1898 . The New York state party leadership disliked his ambitious agenda and convinced McKinley to choose him as his running mate in the 1900 presidential election ; the McKinley–Roosevelt ticket won a landslide victory.

Roosevelt began his presidency at age 42 once McKinley was killed. He thus became (and remains) the youngest person to assume the position . As a leader of the progressive movement , he championed his " Square Deal " domestic policies, which called for fairness for all citizens, breaking bad trusts , regulating railroads, and pure food and drugs . Roosevelt prioritized conservation and established national parks , forests , and monuments to preserve U.S. natural resources. In foreign policy , he focused on Central America , beginning construction of the Panama Canal . Roosevelt expanded the Navy and sent the Great White Fleet on a world tour to project naval power. His successful efforts to end the Russo-Japanese War won him the 1906 Nobel Peace Prize , the first American to win a Nobel Prize. Roosevelt was elected to a full term in 1904 and convinced William Howard Taft to succeed him in 1908 .

Roosevelt grew frustrated with Taft's brand of conservatism and tried, and failed, to win the 1912 Republican presidential nomination . He founded the Progressive Party and ran in 1912 ; the split allowed the Democrat Woodrow Wilson to win. Roosevelt led a four-month expedition to the Amazon basin , where he nearly died of tropical disease . During World War I, he criticized Wilson for keeping the U.S. out; his offer to lead volunteers to France was rejected. Roosevelt's health deteriorated and he died in 1919.

Polls of historians and political scientists rank him as one of the greatest American presidents.

Early life Theodore Roosevelt Jr. was born on October 27, 1858, at 28 East 20th Street in Manhattan .

[ 1 ] His parents were Martha Stewart Bulloch and businessman Theodore Roosevelt Sr.

He had an older sister named Anna (called Bamie ), a younger brother named Elliott , and a younger sister named Corinne .

[ 2 ] Roosevelt's youth was shaped by his poor health and debilitating asthma attacks, which terrified him and his parents. Doctors had no cure.

[ 3 ] Nevertheless, he was energetic and mischievously inquisitive.

[ 4 ] His lifelong interest in zoology began at age seven when he saw a dead seal at a market; after obtaining the seal's head, Roosevelt and cousins formed the "Roosevelt Museum of Natural History". Having learned the rudiments of taxidermy , he filled his makeshift museum with animals he killed or caught. Aged nine, he recorded his observations in a paper entitled "The Natural History of Insects".

[ 5 ] Roosevelt aged 11 Family trips, including tours of Europe in 1869 and 1870, and Egypt in 1872, shaped his cosmopolitan perspective.

[ 6 ] Hiking with his family in the Alps in 1869, Roosevelt discovered the benefits of physical exertion to minimize his asthma and bolster his spirits.

[ 7 ] Roosevelt began a heavy regimen of exercise. After being manhandled by older boys on the way to a camping trip, he found a boxing coach to train him.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Education Roosevelt was homeschooled. Biographer H. W. Brands wrote that, "The most obvious drawback...was uneven coverage of...various areas of...knowledge." [ 10 ] He was solid in geography and bright in history, biology, French, and German; however, he struggled in mathematics and the classical languages.

In September 1876, he entered Harvard University . His father instructed him to, "take care of your morals first, your health next, and finally your studies." [ 11 ] His father's sudden death in 1878 devastated Roosevelt.

[ 12 ] He inherited $60,000 (equivalent to $1.66 million in 2023), enough on which he could live comfortably for the rest of his life.

[ 13 ] Theodore Roosevelt as an undergraduate at Harvard University c.

1877 His father, a devout Presbyterian , regularly led the family in prayers. Young adult Theodore emulated him by teaching Sunday School for more than three years at Christ Church in Cambridge, Massachusetts while at Harvard. When the minister at Christ Church, which was Episcopal, insisted he become an Episcopalian to continue teaching, Roosevelt declined, and began teaching a mission class in a poor section of Cambridge.

[ 14 ] Roosevelt did well in science, philosophy, and rhetoric courses but struggled in Latin and Greek. He studied biology intently and was already an accomplished naturalist and a published ornithologist . He read prodigiously with an almost photographic memory.

[ 15 ] Roosevelt participated in rowing and boxing , and was a member of the Alpha Delta Phi literary society, the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity, and the prestigious Porcellian Club . In 1880, Roosevelt graduated Phi Beta Kappa (22nd of 177) with an A.B.

magna cum laude .

Henry F. Pringle wrote: Roosevelt, attempting to analyze his college career and weigh the benefits he had received, felt that he had obtained little from Harvard. He had been depressed by the formalistic treatment of many subjects, by the rigidity, the attention to minutiae that were important in themselves, but which somehow were never linked up with the whole.

[ 16 ] Roosevelt gave up his plan of studying natural science and attended Columbia Law School , moving back into his family's home in New York. Although Roosevelt was an able student, he found law to be irrational.

[ 17 ] Determined to enter politics, Roosevelt began attending meetings at Morton Hall, the headquarters of New York's 21st District Republican Association. Though Roosevelt's father had been a prominent member of the Republican Party , Roosevelt made an unorthodox career choice for someone of his class, as most of Roosevelt's peers refrained from becoming too closely involved in politics. Roosevelt found allies in the local Republican Party and defeated a Republican state assemblyman tied to the political machine of Senator Roscoe Conkling closely. After his election victory, Roosevelt dropped out of law school, later saying, "I intended to be one of the governing class." [ 17 ] Naval history and strategy While at Harvard, Roosevelt began a systematic study of the role played by the United States Navy in the War of 1812 .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] He ultimately published The Naval War of 1812 in 1882. The book included comparisons of British and American leadership down to the ship-to-ship level. It was praised for its scholarship and style, and remains a standard study of the war.

[ 20 ] With the 1890 publication of The Influence of Sea Power upon History , Alfred Thayer Mahan was hailed as the world's outstanding naval theorist by European leaders. Mahan popularized a concept that only nations with significant naval power had been able to influence history, dominate oceans, exert their diplomacy to the fullest, and defend their borders.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] It has been believed Roosevelt's naval ideas were derived from Mahan's book, but naval historian Nicholas Danby felt Roosevelt's ideas predated Mahan's book.

[ 23 ] First marriage and widowerhood In 1880, Roosevelt married socialite Alice Hathaway Lee .

[ 24 ] Their daughter, Alice Lee Roosevelt , was born on February 12, 1884. Two days later, the new mother died of undiagnosed kidney failure , on the same day as Roosevelt's mother Martha died of typhoid fever . In his diary, Roosevelt wrote a large "X" on the page and then, "The light has gone out of my life." Distraught, Roosevelt left baby Alice in the care of his sister Bamie while he grieved; he assumed custody of Alice when she was three.

[ 25 ] After the deaths of his wife and mother, Roosevelt focused on his work, specifically by re-energizing a legislative investigation into corruption of the New York City government , which arose from a bill proposing power be centralized in the mayor's office.

[ 26 ] For the rest of his life, he rarely spoke about his wife Alice and did not write about her in his autobiography.

[ 27 ] Early political career State Assemblyman Roosevelt as a member of the New York State Assembly in 1884 In 1881 , Roosevelt won election to the New York State Assembly , representing the 21st district , then centered on the "Silk Stocking District" of New York County's Upper East Side . He served in the 1882 , 1883 , and 1884 sessions of the legislature. He began making his mark immediately: he blocked a corrupt effort of financier Jay Gould to lower his taxes. Roosevelt exposed the collusion of Gould and Judge Theodore Westbrook and successfully argued for an investigation, aiming for the judge to be impeached. Although the investigation committee rejected the impeachment, Roosevelt had exposed corruption in Albany and assumed a high and positive profile in New York publications.

[ 28 ] Roosevelt's anti-corruption efforts helped him win re-election in 1882 by a margin greater than two-to-one, an achievement made more impressive by the victory that Democratic gubernatorial candidate Grover Cleveland won in Roosevelt's district.

[ 29 ] With Conkling's Stalwart faction of the Republican Party in disarray following the assassination of President James Garfield , Roosevelt won election as party leader in the state assembly. He allied with Governor Cleveland to win passage of a civil service reform bill.

[ 30 ] Roosevelt won re-election and sought the office of Speaker , but Titus Sheard obtained the position.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Roosevelt served as Chairman of the Committee on Affairs of Cities, during which he wrote more bills than any other legislator.

[ 33 ] Presidential election of 1884 See also: 1884 United States presidential election With numerous presidential hopefuls, Roosevelt supported Senator George F. Edmunds of Vermont. The state Republican Party preferred incumbent president, Chester Arthur , who was known for passing the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act . Roosevelt succeeded in influencing the Manhattan delegates at the state convention. He then took control of the convention, bargaining through the night and outmaneuvering supporters of Arthur and James G. Blaine ; consequently, he gained a national reputation as a key politician in his state.

[ 34 ] Roosevelt attended the 1884 Republican National Convention in Chicago , where he gave a speech convincing delegates to nominate African American John R. Lynch , an Edmunds supporter, to be temporary chair. Roosevelt fought alongside the Mugwump reformers against Blaine. However, Blaine gained support from Arthur's and Edmunds's delegates, and won the nomination. In a crucial moment of his budding career, Roosevelt resisted the demand of fellow Mugwumps that he bolt from Blaine. He bragged: "We achieved a victory in getting up a combination to beat the Blaine nominee for temporary chairman...this needed...skill, boldness and energy... to get the different factions to come in... to defeat the common foe." [ 35 ] He was impressed by an invitation to speak before an audience of ten thousand, the largest crowd he had addressed up to then.

Having gotten a taste of national politics, Roosevelt felt less aspiration for advocacy on the state level; he retired to his new "Chimney Butte Ranch" on the Little Missouri River .

[ 36 ] Roosevelt refused to join other Mugwumps in supporting Cleveland, the Democratic nominee in the general election. After Blaine won the nomination, Roosevelt carelessly said he would give "hearty support to any decent Democrat". He distanced himself from the promise, saying that it had not been meant "for publication".

[ 37 ] When a reporter asked if he would support Blaine, Roosevelt replied, "I decline to answer." [ 38 ] In the end, he realized he had to support Blaine to maintain his role in the party and did so in a press release.

[ 39 ] Having lost the support of many reformers, and still reeling from the deaths of his wife and mother, Roosevelt decided to retire from politics and moved to North Dakota .

[ 40 ] Cattle rancher in Dakota Roosevelt as a Badlands hunter in 1885 Roosevelt first visited the Dakota Territory in 1883 to hunt bison . Exhilarated by the western lifestyle and with the cattle business booming, Roosevelt invested $14,000 (equivalent to $390,000 in 2023) in hope of becoming a prosperous cattle rancher. For several years, he shuttled between his home in New York and ranch in Dakota.

[ 41 ] Following the 1884 United States presidential election , Roosevelt built Elkhorn Ranch 35 mi (56 km) north of the boomtown of Medora, North Dakota . Roosevelt learned to ride western style, rope, and hunt on the banks of the Little Missouri . A cowboy, he said, possesses, "few of the emasculated, milk-and-water moralities admired by the pseudo-philanthropists; but he does possess, to a very high degree, the stern, manly qualities that are invaluable to a nation".

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] He wrote about frontier life for national magazines and published books: Hunting Trips of a Ranchman , Ranch Life and the Hunting-Trail , and The Wilderness Hunter .

[ 44 ] Roosevelt successfully led efforts to organize ranchers to address the problems of overgrazing and other shared concerns, which resulted in the formation of the Little Missouri Stockmen's Association. He formed the Boone and Crockett Club , whose primary goal was the conservation of large game animals and their habitats.

[ 45 ] In 1886, Roosevelt served as a deputy sheriff in Billings County, North Dakota . He and ranch hands hunted down three boat thieves.

[ 46 ] The severe winter of 1886–1887 wiped out his herd and over half of his $80,000 investment (equivalent to $2.38 million in 2023).

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] He ended his ranching life and returned to New York, where he escaped the damaging label of an ineffectual intellectual.

[ 49 ] Second marriage Roosevelt and members of his family . Left to right: Ethel , Kermit , Quentin , Edith , Theodore III (Ted) , Theodore, Archibald , Alice , and Nicholas Longworth On December 2, 1886, Roosevelt married his childhood friend, Edith Kermit Carow , at St George's, Hanover Square , in London , England.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] Roosevelt felt deeply troubled that his second marriage was soon after the death of his first wife and he faced resistance from his sisters.

[ 52 ] The couple had five children: Theodore "Ted" III in 1887, Kermit in 1889, Ethel in 1891, Archibald in 1894, and Quentin in 1897. They also raised Roosevelt's daughter from his first marriage, Alice , who often clashed with her stepmother.

[ 53 ] Reentering public life Upon Roosevelt's return to New York, Republican leaders approached him about running for mayor of New York City in the 1886 election .

[ 54 ] Roosevelt accepted the nomination despite having little hope against United Labor Party candidate Henry George and Democrat Abram Hewitt . Roosevelt campaigned hard, but Hewitt won with 41%, taking the votes of many Republicans who feared George's radical policies. George was held to 31%, and Roosevelt took third with 27%.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] Fearing his political career might never recover, Roosevelt turned to writing The Winning of the West , tracking the westward movement of Americans; it was a great success, earning favorable reviews and selling all copies from the first printing.

[ 57 ] Civil Service Commission After Benjamin Harrison unexpectedly defeated Blaine for the presidential nomination at the 1888 Republican National Convention , Roosevelt gave stump speeches in the Midwest in support of Harrison.

[ 58 ] On the insistence of Henry Cabot Lodge , President Harrison appointed Roosevelt to the United States Civil Service Commission , where he served until 1895.

[ 59 ] While many of his predecessors had approached the office as a sinecure , [ 60 ] Roosevelt fought the spoilsmen and demanded enforcement of civil service laws.

[ 61 ] The Sun described Roosevelt as "irrepressible, belligerent, and enthusiastic".

[ 62 ] Roosevelt clashed with Postmaster General John Wanamaker , who handed out patronage positions to Harrison supporters, and Roosevelt's attempt to force out several postal workers damaged Harrison politically.

[ 63 ] Despite Roosevelt's support for Harrison's reelection in the 1892 presidential election , the winner, Grover Cleveland, reappointed him.

[ 64 ] Roosevelt's close friend and biographer, Joseph Bucklin Bishop , described his assault on the spoils system: The very citadel of spoils politics, the hitherto impregnable fortress that had existed unshaken since it was erected on the foundation laid by Andrew Jackson , was tottering to its fall under the assaults of this audacious and irrepressible young man... Whatever may have been the feelings of the (fellow Republican party) President (Harrison)—and there is little doubt that he had no idea when he appointed Roosevelt that he would prove to be so veritable a bull in a china shop—he refused to remove him and stood by him firmly till the end of his term.

[ 62 ] New York City Police Commissioner In 1894, reform Republicans approached Roosevelt about running for Mayor of New York again; he declined, mostly due to his wife's resistance to being removed from the Washington social set. Soon after, he realized he had missed an opportunity to reinvigorate a dormant political career. He retreated to the Dakotas; Edith regretted her role in the decision and vowed there would be no repeat.

[ 65 ] William Lafayette Strong won the 1894 mayoral election and offered Roosevelt a position on the board of the New York City Police Commissioners .

[ 58 ] [ 66 ] Roosevelt became president of commissioners and radically reformed the police force: he implemented regular inspections of firearms and physical exams, appointed recruits based on their physical and mental qualifications rather than political affiliation, established Meritorious Service Medals , closed corrupt police hostelries, and had telephones installed in station houses.

[ 67 ] In 1894, Roosevelt met Jacob Riis , the muckraking Evening Sun journalist who was opening the eyes of New Yorkers to the terrible conditions of the city's immigrants with such books as How the Other Half Lives .

Riis described how his book affected Roosevelt: When Roosevelt read [my] book, he came... No one ever helped as he did. For two years we were brothers in (New York City's crime-ridden) Mulberry Street . When he left I had seen its golden age... There is very little ease where Theodore Roosevelt leads, as we all of us found out. The lawbreaker found it out who predicted scornfully that he would "knuckle down to politics the way they all did", and lived to respect him, though he swore at him, as the one of them all who was stronger than pull... that was what made the age golden, that for the first time a moral purpose came into the street. In the light of it everything was transformed.

[ 68 ] Roosevelt made a habit of walking officers' beats at night and early in the morning to make sure that they were on duty.

[ 69 ] He made a concerted effort to uniformly enforce New York's Sunday closing law ; in this, he ran up against Tom Platt and Tammany Hall —he was notified the Police Commission was being legislated out of existence. His crackdowns led to protests. Invited to one large demonstration, not only did he accept, but he delighted in the insults and lampoons directed at him, and earned goodwill.

[ 70 ] Roosevelt chose to defer rather than split with his party.

[ 71 ] As Governor of New York State, he would later sign an act replacing the Police Commission with a Police Commissioner.

[ 72 ] Emergence as national figure Assistant Secretary of the Navy The Asiatic Squadron destroying the Spanish fleet in the Battle of Manila Bay on May 1, 1898 In the 1896 presidential election , Roosevelt backed Thomas Brackett Reed for the Republican nomination, but William McKinley won the nomination and defeated William Jennings Bryan in the general election.

[ 73 ] Roosevelt strongly opposed Bryan's free silver platform, viewing many of Bryan's followers as dangerous fanatics. He gave campaign speeches for McKinley.

[ 74 ] Urged by Senator Henry Cabot Lodge, President McKinley appointed Roosevelt as the Assistant Secretary of the Navy in 1897.

[ 75 ] Secretary of the Navy John D. Long was in poor health and left many major decisions to Roosevelt. Influenced by Alfred Thayer Mahan , Roosevelt called for a build-up in naval strength, particularly the construction of battleships .

[ 76 ] Roosevelt also began pressing his national security views regarding the Pacific and the Caribbean on McKinley and was adamant that Spain be ejected from Cuba.

[ 77 ] He explained his priorities to one of the Navy's planners in late 1897: I would regard war with Spain from two viewpoints: first, the advisability on the grounds both of humanity and self-interest of interfering on behalf of the Cubans, and of taking one more step toward the complete freeing of America from European dominion; second, the benefit done our people by giving them something to think of which is not material gain, and especially the benefit done our military forces by trying both the Navy and Army in actual practice.

[ 78 ] On February 15, 1898, the armored cruiser USS Maine exploded in the harbor of Havana, Cuba , killing hundreds of crew. While Roosevelt and many other Americans blamed Spain for the explosion, McKinley sought a diplomatic solution.

[ 79 ] Without approval from Long or McKinley, Roosevelt sent out orders to several naval vessels to prepare for war.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] George Dewey , who had received an appointment to lead the Asiatic Squadron with the backing of Roosevelt, later credited his victory at the Battle of Manila Bay to Roosevelt's orders.

[ 81 ] After giving up hope of a peaceful solution, McKinley asked Congress to declare war on Spain, beginning the Spanish–American War .

[ 82 ] War in Cuba Further information: Rough Riders Colonel Roosevelt in 1898 With the beginning of the Spanish–American War in 1898, Roosevelt resigned as Assistant Secretary of the Navy. Along with Army Colonel Leonard Wood , he formed the First U.S. Volunteer Cavalry Regiment .

[ 83 ] His wife and many friends begged Roosevelt to remain in Washington, but Roosevelt was determined to see battle. When the newspapers reported the formation of the new regiment, Roosevelt and Wood were flooded with applications.

[ 84 ] Referred to by the press as the "Rough Riders", it was one of many temporary units active only during the war.

[ 85 ] The regiment trained for several weeks in San Antonio, Texas ; in his autobiography, Roosevelt wrote that his experience with the New York National Guard enabled him to immediately begin teaching basic soldiering skills.

[ 86 ] Diversity characterized the regiment, which included Ivy Leaguers , athletes, frontiersmen, Native Americans , hunters, miners, former soldiers, tradesmen, and sheriffs. The Rough Riders were part of the cavalry division commanded by former Confederate general Joseph Wheeler . Roosevelt and his men landed in Daiquirí , Cuba, on June 23, 1898, and marched to Siboney . Wheeler sent the Rough Riders on a parallel road northwest running along a ridge up from the beach. Roosevelt took command of the regiment; he had his first experience in combat when the Rough Riders met Spanish troops in a skirmish known as the Battle of Las Guasimas . They fought their way through Spanish resistance and, together with the Regulars, forced the Spaniards to abandon their positions.

[ 87 ] Colonel Roosevelt and the Rough Riders along with members of the 3rd Volunteers and the 10th Cavalry Regiment after capturing Kettle Hill in Cuba during the Spanish-American War in July 1898 On July 1, in a combined assault with the Regulars, under Roosevelt's leadership, the Rough Riders became famous for charges up Kettle Hill and San Juan Hill. Roosevelt was the only soldier on horseback, as he rode back and forth between rifle pits at the forefront of the advance up Kettle Hill, an advance that he urged despite the absence of orders. He was forced to walk up the last part of Kettle Hill because his horse had been entangled in barbed wire . The assaults would become known as the Battle of San Juan Heights. The victories came at a cost of 200 killed and 1,000 wounded.

[ 88 ] In August, Roosevelt and other officers demanded the soldiers be returned home. Roosevelt recalled San Juan Heights as "the great day of my life". After returning to civilian life, Roosevelt preferred to be known as "Colonel Roosevelt" or "The Colonel"; "Teddy" remained much more popular with the public, though Roosevelt openly despised that moniker.

[ 89 ] [ page needed ] Governor of New York Shortly after Roosevelt's return, Republican Congressman Lemuel E. Quigg , a lieutenant of New York machine boss Thomas C. Platt , asked Roosevelt to run in the 1898 gubernatorial election . Prospering politically from the Platt machine , Roosevelt's rise to power was marked by the pragmatic decisions of Platt, who disliked Roosevelt. Platt feared Roosevelt would oppose his interests in office and was reluctant to propel Roosevelt to the forefront of national politics, but needed a strong candidate due to the unpopularity of the incumbent Republican governor, Frank S. Black . Roosevelt agreed to become the nominee and to try not to "make war" with the Republican establishment once in office. Roosevelt defeated Black in the Republican caucus, and faced Democrat Augustus Van Wyck , a well-respected judge, in the general election.

[ 90 ] Roosevelt campaigned on his war record, winning by just 1%.

[ 91 ] As governor, Roosevelt learned about economic issues and political techniques that proved valuable in his presidency. He studied the problems of trusts, monopolies, labor relations, and conservation. G. Wallace Chessman argues that Roosevelt's program "rested firmly upon the concept of the square deal by a neutral state". The rules for the Square Deal were "honesty in public affairs, an equitable sharing of privilege and responsibility, and subordination of party and local concerns to the interests of the state at large".

[ 92 ] By holding twice-daily press conferences—an innovation—Roosevelt remained connected with his middle-class base.

[ 93 ] Roosevelt successfully pushed the Ford Franchise-Tax bill, which taxed public franchises granted by the state and controlled by corporations, declaring that "a corporation which derives its powers from the State, should pay to the State a just percentage of its earnings as a return for the privileges it enjoys".

[ 94 ] He rejected Platt worries that this approached Bryanite Socialism, explaining that without it, New York voters might get angry and adopt public ownership of streetcar lines and other franchises.

[ 95 ] Power to make appointments to policy-making positions was a key role for the governor. Platt insisted he be consulted on major appointments; Roosevelt appeared to comply, but then made his own decisions. Historians marvel that Roosevelt managed to appoint so many first-rate people with Platt's approval. He even enlisted Platt's help in securing reform, such as in spring 1899, when Platt pressured state senators to vote for a civil service bill that the secretary of the Civil Service Reform Association called "superior to any civil service statute heretofore secured in America".

[ 96 ] Chessman argues that as governor, Roosevelt developed the principles that shaped his presidency, especially insistence upon the public responsibility of large corporations, publicity as a first remedy for trusts, regulation of railroad rates, mediation of the conflict of capital and labor, conservation of natural resources and protection of the poor.

[ 92 ] Roosevelt sought to position himself against the excesses of large corporations and radical movements.

[ 97 ] As chief executive of the most populous state, Roosevelt was widely considered a potential presidential candidate, and supporters such as William Allen White encouraged him to run.

[ 98 ] Roosevelt had no interest in challenging McKinley for the nomination in 1900 and was denied his preferred post of Secretary of War . As his term progressed, Roosevelt pondered a 1904 run, but was uncertain about whether he should seek re-election as governor in 1900.

[ 99 ] Vice presidency (1901) Main article: 1900 United States presidential election In November 1899, Vice President Garret Hobart died, leaving an open spot on the 1900 Republican national ticket. Though Henry Cabot Lodge and others urged him to run for vice president in 1900, Roosevelt issued a public statement saying that he would not accept the nomination.

[ 100 ] Eager to be rid of Roosevelt, Platt nonetheless began a newspaper campaign in favor of Roosevelt's nomination.

[ 101 ] Roosevelt attended the 1900 Republican National Convention as a state delegate and struck a bargain with Platt: Roosevelt would accept the nomination if the convention offered it to him but would otherwise serve another term as governor. Platt asked Pennsylvania party boss Matthew Quay to lead the campaign for Roosevelt's nomination, and Quay outmaneuvered Mark Hanna at the convention to put Roosevelt on the ticket.

[ 102 ] Roosevelt won the nomination unanimously.

[ 103 ] Roosevelt's vice-presidential campaigning proved highly energetic and a match for Democratic presidential nominee William Jennings Bryan's barnstorming style. In a whirlwind campaign that displayed his energy to the public, Roosevelt made 480 stops in 23 states. He denounced the radicalism of Bryan, contrasting it with the heroism of those who won the war against Spain. Bryan had strongly supported the war itself, but he denounced the annexation of the Philippines as imperialism . Roosevelt countered that it was best for the Filipinos to have stability and the Americans to have a proud place in the world. The voters gave McKinley an even larger victory than that which he had achieved in 1896.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] Roosevelt took office as vice president in March 1901. The office was a powerless sinecure and did not suit Roosevelt's aggressive temperament.

[ 106 ] Roosevelt's six months as vice president were uneventful and boring for a man of action. He had no power; he presided over the Senate for a mere four days before it adjourned.

[ 107 ] On September 2, 1901, Roosevelt first publicized an aphorism that thrilled his supporters: " Speak softly and carry a big stick, and you will go far." [ 108 ] Presidency (1901–1909) Main article: Presidency of Theodore Roosevelt Official White House portrait of Roosevelt by John Singer Sargent in 1903 On September 6, 1901, President McKinley was attending the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York , when he was shot by anarchist Leon Czolgosz . Roosevelt, vacationing in Isle La Motte, Vermont , [ 109 ] traveled to Buffalo to visit McKinley in the hospital. When McKinley seemed to recover, Roosevelt resumed his vacation.

[ 110 ] When McKinley's condition worsened, Roosevelt rushed back to Buffalo. He was in North Creek when he learned of McKinley's death on September 14. Roosevelt then continued to Buffalo and was sworn in as the 26th president at the Ansley Wilcox House .

[ 111 ] McKinley's supporters were uneasy about Roosevelt, with Ohio Senator Mark Hanna particularly bitter, given his strong opposition at the convention. Although Roosevelt assured party leaders that he would adhere to McKinley's policies and retained his Cabinet, he sought to establish himself as the party's leader and position himself for the 1904 election.

[ 112 ] Roosevelt’s ascension to the presidency was met with concern by conservative Republicans, with historian Doris Kearns Goodwin noting that: Conservatives, who had utterly dominated the Republican Party for three decades, feared the impulsive young president would prove a "bucking bronco," upsetting the alliance between business and government that had delivered unparalled prosperity at the turn of the century. Reformers hoped Roosevelt’s vigorous leadership would refashion the Republican Party into the progressive force it had been under Abraham Lincoln, endeavoring to spread prosperity beyond the wealthy few to the common man.

[ 113 ] Adding to this point, Kearns has noted that Throughout his career, Roosevelt had struggled to reconcile party allegiance with the drive to address social problems, a balancing act that became more difficult as the troubling aspects of industrialization intensified. While he considered himself conservative in relation to the Populists, he believed that his party was in thrall to reactionaries who so "dreaded radicalism" that they "distrusted anything that was progressive." Precisely such men dominated both chambers of Congress, Roosevelt lamented. He would work to "push" them forward but recognized that genuine progress would require a direct appeal to the people, "the masters of both of us." To reach the general public, he would enlist the new breed of independent journalists, without whose "active support," he later acknowledged, he "would have been powerless." [ 114 ] Shortly after taking office, Roosevelt invited Booker T. Washington to dinner at the White House , sparking a bitter reaction across the heavily segregated South.

[ 115 ] While Roosevelt initially planned more dinners with Washington, he later avoided further invitations in favor of business appointments to retain political support in the white South.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] Domestic policies: The Square Deal Further information: Square Deal Trust busting and regulation Roosevelt was hailed as the "trust-buster" for his aggressive use of the 1890 Sherman Antitrust Act , compared to his predecessors.

[ 118 ] He viewed big business as essential to the American economy, prosecuting only "bad trusts" that restrained trade and charged unfair prices.

[ 119 ] Roosevelt brought 44 antitrust suits, breaking up the Northern Securities Company , the largest railroad monopoly, and regulating Standard Oil , the largest oil company.

[ 118 ] His predecessors, Benjamin Harrison, Grover Cleveland, and William McKinley, had together prosecuted only 18 antitrust violations.

[ 118 ] After winning large majorities in the 1902 elections , Roosevelt proposed creating the United States Department of Commerce and Labor , which included the Bureau of Corporations . Congress was receptive to the department but skeptical of the antitrust powers Roosevelt wanted within the Bureau. Roosevelt appealed to the public, pressuring Congress, which overwhelmingly passed his version of the bill.

[ 120 ] House Speaker Joseph Gurney Cannon commented on Roosevelt's desire for executive branch control: "That fellow at the other end of the avenue wants everything from the birth of Christ to the death of the devil." Biographer Brands notes, "Even his friends occasionally wondered whether there wasn't any custom or practice too minor for him to try to regulate, update or otherwise improve." [ 121 ] Roosevelt's willingness to exercise power extended to attempted rule changes in American football , forcing retention of martial arts classes at the U.S. Naval Academy , revising disciplinary rules, altering the design of a disliked coin, and ordering simplified spellings for 300 words, though he rescinded the latter after ridicule from the press and a House protest.

[ 122 ] Coal strike Main article: Coal strike of 1902 In May 1902, anthracite coal miners went on strike, threatening a national energy shortage. After threatening the coal operators with federal troops, Roosevelt won their agreement to dispute arbitration by a commission, stopping the strike. The accord with J. P. Morgan resulted in miners getting more pay for fewer hours but no union recognition.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] Roosevelt said, "My action on labor should always be considered in connection with my action as regards capital, and both are reducible to my favorite formula—a square deal for every man." [ 125 ] He was the first president to help settle a labor dispute.

[ 126 ] Prosecuted misconduct During Roosevelt's second year in office, corruption was uncovered in the Indian Service , the United States General Land Office , and the Post Office Department . He prosecuted corrupt Indian agents who had cheated Native American tribes out of land parcels. Land fraud and speculation involving Oregon timberlands, led to him and Ethan A. Hitchcock forcing General Land Office Commissioner Binger Hermann from office, in November 1902. Special prosecutor Francis J. Heney obtained 146 indictments in the Oregon Land Office bribery ring.

[ 127 ] Roosevelt also prosecuted 44 postal employees on charges of bribery and fraud.

[ 128 ] Historians agree he moved "quickly and decisively" to address misconduct in his administration.

[ 129 ] Railroads Main article: Hepburn Act Merchants complained that some railroad rates were too high. In the 1906 Hepburn Act , Roosevelt sought to give the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) the power to regulate rates, but the Senate, led by conservative Nelson Aldrich , resisted. Roosevelt worked with Democratic Senator Benjamin Tillman to pass the bill. They ultimately reached a compromise that gave the ICC the power to replace existing rates with "just-and-reasonable" maximum rates, allowing railroads to appeal to federal courts on what was "reasonable".

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] The Hepburn Act also granted the ICC regulatory power over pipeline fees, storage contracts, and other aspects of railroad operations.

[ 132 ] Pure food and drugs Roosevelt responded to public outrage over abuses in the food packing industry by pushing Congress to pass the Meat Inspection Act of 1906 and the Pure Food and Drug Act . Conservatives initially opposed the bill, but Upton Sinclair 's The Jungle , published in 1906, galvanized support for reform.

[ 133 ] The Meat Inspection Act banned misleading labels and preservatives with harmful chemicals. The Pure Food and Drug Act banned impure or falsely labeled food and drugs from being made, sold, and shipped. Roosevelt served as honorary president of the American School Hygiene Association from 1907 to 1908 and convened the first White House Conference on the Care of Dependent Children in 1909.

[ 134 ] Conservation Main article: Presidency of Theodore Roosevelt § Conservation Roosevelt driving through a sequoia tree tunnel Roosevelt was proudest of his work in conserving natural resources and extending federal protection to land and wildlife.

[ 135 ] He worked closely with Interior Secretary James Rudolph Garfield and Chief of the United States Forest Service Gifford Pinchot to enact a series of conservation programs that met resistance from Western Congress members, such as Charles William Fulton .

[ 136 ] Nonetheless, Roosevelt established the United States Forest Service , signed the creation of five National Parks , and signed the 1906 Antiquities Act , under which he proclaimed 18 new U.S. National Monuments . He also established the first 51 bird reserves , four game preserves , and 150 National Forests . The area of the United States he placed under public protection totals approximately 230 million acres (930,000 square kilometers).

[ 137 ] Roosevelt was the first honorary member of the Camp-Fire Club of America .

[ 138 ] Roosevelt extensively used executive orders to protect forest and wildlife lands during his presidency.

[ 139 ] By the end of his second term, Roosevelt used executive orders to reserve 150 million acres (600,000 square kilometers) of forestry land.

[ 140 ] Roosevelt was unapologetic about his use of executive orders to protect the environment, despite Congress's perception that he was encroaching on too many lands.

[ 140 ] Eventually, Senator Charles Fulton attached an amendment to an agricultural appropriations bill preventing the president from reserving further land.

[ 140 ] Before signing the bill, Roosevelt established an additional 21 forest reserves , waiting until the last minute to sign it into law.

[ 141 ] In total, Roosevelt established 121 forest reserves in 31 states through executive orders.

[ 141 ] Roosevelt issued 1,081 executive orders, more than any previous president except Grover Cleveland (253). The first 25 presidents issued a total of 1,262 executive orders.

[ 142 ] Business panic of 1907 Further information: Panic of 1907 A 1907 portrait of Roosevelt by Harris & Ewing In 1907, Roosevelt faced the greatest domestic economic crisis since the Panic of 1893 . Wall Street's stock market entered a slump in early 1907, and many investors blamed Roosevelt's regulatory policies for the decline in stock prices.

[ 143 ] Roosevelt ultimately helped calm the crisis by meeting with the leaders of U.S. Steel on November 4, 1907, and approving their plan to purchase a Tennessee steel company near bankruptcy—its failure would ruin a major New York bank.

[ 144 ] However, in August, Roosevelt had exploded in anger at the super-rich for their economic malfeasance, calling them "malefactors of great wealth" in a major speech, "The Puritan Spirit and the Regulation of Corporations". Trying to restore confidence, he blamed the crisis primarily on Europe, but then, after saluting the unbending rectitude of the Puritans, he went on: It may well be that the determination of the government...to punish certain malefactors of great wealth, has been responsible for something of the trouble; at least to the extent of having caused these men to combine to bring about as much financial stress as possible, in order to discredit the policy of the government and thereby secure a reversal of that policy, so that they may enjoy unmolested the fruits of their own evil-doing.

[ 145 ] Regarding the very wealthy, Roosevelt privately scorned, "their entire unfitness to govern the country, and ... the lasting damage they do by much of what they think are the legitimate big business operations of the day".

[ 146 ] Foreign policy Main article: Foreign policy of the Theodore Roosevelt administration Japan The American annexation of Hawaii in 1898 was stimulated in part by fear that Japan would dominate or seize the Hawaiian Republic.

[ 147 ] Similarly, Germany was the alternative to American takeover of the Philippines in 1900, and Tokyo strongly preferred the U.S. to take over. As the U.S. became a naval world power, it needed to find a way to avoid a military confrontation in the Pacific with Japan.

[ 148 ] In the 1890s, Roosevelt had been an ardent imperialist and vigorously defended the permanent acquisition of the Philippines in the 1900 campaign. After the local insurrection ended in 1902, Roosevelt wished to have a strong U.S. presence in the region as a symbol of democratic values, but he did not envision any new acquisitions. One of Roosevelt's priorities was the maintenance of friendly relations with Japan.

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] From 1904 to 1905 Japan and Russia were at war . Both sides asked Roosevelt to mediate a peace conference, held successfully in Portsmouth, New Hampshire . Roosevelt won the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts.

[ 151 ] Though he proclaimed that the United States would be neutral during the Russo-Japanese War , Roosevelt secretly favored Imperial Japan to emerge victorious against the Russian Empire.

[ 152 ] In California, anti-Japanese hostility was growing , and Tokyo protested. Roosevelt negotiated a "Gentleman's Agreement" in 1907 . It ended explicit discrimination against the Japanese, and Japan agreed not to allow unskilled immigrants into the United States.

[ 153 ] The Great White Fleet of American battleships visited Japan in 1908. Roosevelt intended to emphasize the superiority of the American fleet over the smaller Japanese navy, but instead of resentment, the visitors arrived to a joyous welcome. This goodwill facilitated the Root–Takahira Agreement of November 1908 which reaffirmed the status quo of Japanese control of Korea and American control of the Philippines.

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] China Following the Boxer Rebellion , foreign powers, including the United States, required China to pay indemnities as part of the Boxer protocol . In 1908, Roosevelt appropriated these indemnities for the Boxer Indemnity Scholarships , which funded tens of thousands of Chinese students to study in the U.S. over the next 40 years.

[ 156 ] : 91 Europe Success in the war against Spain and the new empire, plus having the largest economy in the world, meant that the United States had emerged as a world power.

[ 157 ] Roosevelt searched for ways to win recognition for the position abroad.

[ 158 ] He also played a major role in mediating the First Moroccan Crisis by calling the Algeciras Conference , which averted war between France and Germany.

[ 159 ] Roosevelt's presidency saw the strengthening of ties with Great Britain.

The Great Rapprochement had begun with British support of the United States during the Spanish–American War, and it continued as Britain withdrew its fleet from the Caribbean in favor of directing most of its attention to the rising German naval threat .

[ 160 ] In 1901, Britain and the U.S. signed the Hay–Pauncefote Treaty , abrogating the Clayton–Bulwer Treaty , which had prevented the U.S. from constructing a canal connecting the Pacific and the Atlantic Ocean.

[ 161 ] The long-standing Alaska boundary dispute was settled on terms favorable to the U.S.; as Roosevelt later put it, this "settled the last serious trouble between the British Empire and ourselves." [ 162 ] Latin America and the Panama Canal As president, Roosevelt primarily directed the nation's overseas ambitions towards the Caribbean, especially locations that had a bearing on the defense of his pet project, the Panama Canal .

[ 163 ] Roosevelt also increased the size of the navy, and by the end of his second term, the U.S. had more battleships than any country other than Britain. The Panama Canal, when it opened in 1914, allowed the U.S. Navy to rapidly move back and forth from the Pacific to the Caribbean to European waters.

[ 164 ] In December 1902, the Germans, British, and Italians blockaded the ports of Venezuela to force the repayment of delinquent loans. Roosevelt was particularly concerned about the motives of German Emperor Wilhelm II . He succeeded in getting the three nations to agree to arbitration by tribunal at The Hague , and successfully defused the crisis .

[ 165 ] The latitude granted to the Europeans by the arbiters was in part responsible for the " Roosevelt Corollary " to the Monroe Doctrine , which the President issued in 1904: Chronic wrongdoing or an impotence which results in a general loosening of the ties of civilized society, may in America, as elsewhere, ultimately require intervention by some civilized nation, and in the Western Hemisphere, the adherence of the United States to the Monroe doctrine may force the United States, however reluctantly, in flagrant cases of such wrongdoing or impotence, to the exercise of an international police power.

[ 166 ] Roosevelt felt American dominance of the region was essential to building the Panama Canal . He used military dominance to ensure Panama successfully revolted and achieved independence in 1903.

Two possible routes for an isthmus canal in Central America were under consideration: through Nicaragua and through Panama, which was then a rebellious district within Colombia . Roosevelt persuaded Congress to approve the Panamanian alternative, and a treaty was approved, only to be rejected by the Colombian government. When the Panamanians learned of this, a rebellion followed, was supported by Roosevelt, and succeeded. A treaty with the new Panama government for construction of the canal was reached in 1903.

[ 167 ] Roosevelt received criticism for paying the bankrupt Panama Canal Company and the New Panama Canal Company $40 million (equivalent to $1.09 billion in 2023) for the rights and equipment to build the canal.

[ 129 ] Critics charged that an American investor syndicate divided the large payment among themselves. There was also controversy over whether a French company engineer influenced Roosevelt in choosing the Panama route for the canal over the Nicaragua route. Roosevelt denied charges of corruption. In January 1909, Roosevelt, in an unprecedented move, brought criminal libel charges against the New York World and the Indianapolis News known as the "Roosevelt-Panama Libel Cases".

[ 168 ] Both cases were dismissed by U.S. District Courts, and on January 3, 1911, the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the lower courts' rulings.

[ 169 ] Historians are sharply critical of Roosevelt's criminal prosecutions of the newspapers but are divided on whether actual corruption took place.

[ 170 ] In 1906, following a disputed election, an insurrection ensued in Cuba; Roosevelt sent Taft, the Secretary of War, to monitor the situation; he was convinced that he had the authority to unilaterally authorize Taft to deploy Marines, if necessary, without congressional approval.

[ 171 ] Examining the work of numerous scholars, Ricard reports that: The most striking evolution in the twenty-first-century historiography of Theodore Roosevelt is the switch from a partial arraignment of the imperialist to a quasi-unanimous celebration of the master diplomatist.... [Recent works] have underlined cogently Roosevelt's exceptional statesmanship in the construction of the nascent twentieth-century "special relationship". ...The twenty-sixth president's reputation as a brilliant diplomatist and real politician has undeniably reached new heights in the twenty-first century...yet, his Philippine policy still prompts criticism.

[ 172 ] On November 6, 1906, Roosevelt was the first president to depart the continental United States on an official diplomatic trip. Roosevelt made a 17-day trip to Panama and Puerto Rico.

[ 173 ] [ 174 ] [ 175 ] He visited the Panama Canal worksite and attended diplomatic receptions in both Panama and Puerto Rico.

[ 173 ] Media A 1903 cartoon, "Go Away, Little Man, and Don't Bother Me", depicting Roosevelt intimidating Colombia to acquire the Panama Canal Zone Building on McKinley's effective use of the press, Roosevelt made the White House the center of news every day, providing interviews and photo opportunities. After noticing the reporters huddled outside the White House in the rain one day, he gave them their own room inside, effectively inventing the presidential press briefing . The grateful press, with unprecedented access to the White House, rewarded Roosevelt with ample coverage.

[ 176 ] Aside from the Roosevelt-Panama Libel Cases, Roosevelt normally enjoyed very close relationships with the press. While out of office, he made a living as a writer and magazine editor. He loved talking with intellectuals, authors, and writers. He drew the line, however, at exposé-oriented scandal-mongering journalists who, during his term, sent magazine subscriptions soaring by their attacks on corrupt politicians, mayors, and corporations. Roosevelt himself was not usually a target, but a speech of his from 1906 coined the term " muckraker " for unscrupulous journalists making wild charges.

[ 177 ] Election of 1904 Main article: 1904 United States presidential election Electoral College results of the 1904 election With the waning of Thomas Platt's power, Roosevelt faced little effective opposition for the 1904 nomination.

[ 178 ] In deference to Mark Hanna 's conservative loyalists, Roosevelt at first offered the party chairmanship to Cornelius Bliss , but he declined. Roosevelt turned to his own man, George B. Cortelyou of New York, the first Secretary of Commerce and Labor. To buttress his hold on the party's nomination, Roosevelt made it clear that anyone opposing Cortelyou would be considered opposing the President.

[ 179 ] The President secured his own nomination, but his preferred vice-presidential running mate, Robert R. Hitt , was not nominated.

[ 180 ] Senator Charles Warren Fairbanks of Indiana, a favorite of conservatives, gained the nomination.

[ 178 ] While Roosevelt followed the tradition of incumbents in not actively campaigning on the stump, he sought to control the campaign's message through specific instructions to Cortelyou. He also attempted to manage the press's release of White House statements by forming the Ananias Club . Any journalist who repeated a statement made by the president without approval was penalized by restriction of further access.

[ 181 ] The Democratic Party's nominee in 1904 was Alton Brooks Parker . Democratic newspapers charged that Republicans were extorting large campaign contributions from corporations, putting ultimate responsibility on Roosevelt himself.

[ 182 ] Roosevelt denied corruption while at the same time ordering Cortelyou to return $100,000 (equivalent to $2.65 million in 2023) of a campaign contribution from Standard Oil .

[ 183 ] Parker said that Roosevelt was accepting corporate donations to keep damaging information from the Bureau of Corporations from going public.

[ 183 ] Roosevelt strongly denied Parker's charge and responded that he would "go into the Presidency unhampered by any pledge, promise, or understanding of any kind, sort, or description...".

[ 184 ] Allegations from Parker and the Democrats, however, had little impact on the election, as Roosevelt promised to give every American a " square deal ".

[ 184 ] Roosevelt won 56% of the popular vote to Parker's 38%, and won the Electoral College vote 336 to 140. Before his inauguration ceremony , Roosevelt declared that he would not serve another term.

[ 185 ] Democrats would continue to charge Roosevelt and the Republicans of being influenced by corporate donations.

[ 186 ] Second term As his second term progressed, Roosevelt moved to the left of his Republican Party base and called for a series of reforms, most of which Congress failed to pass.

[ 187 ] [ failed verification – see discussion ] Roosevelt's influence waned as he approached the end of his second term, as his promise to forego a third term made him a lame duck and his concentration of power provoked a backlash from many Congressmen.

[ 188 ] He sought a national incorporation law, called for a federal income tax (despite the Supreme Court's ruling in Pollock v. Farmers' Loan & Trust Co.

), and an inheritance tax . Roosevelt called for limits on the use of court injunctions against labor unions during strikes; injunctions were a powerful weapon that mostly helped business. He wanted an employee liability law for industrial injuries (pre-empting state laws) and an eight-hour work day for federal employees. In other areas, he also sought a postal savings system (to provide competition for local banks), and he asked for campaign reform laws.

[ 189 ] The election of 1904 continued to be a source of contention between Republicans and Democrats. A Congressional investigation in 1905 revealed that corporate executives donated tens of thousands of dollars in 1904 to the Republican National Committee . In 1908, a month before the general presidential election, Governor Charles N. Haskell of Oklahoma, former Democratic Treasurer, said that Senators beholden to Standard Oil lobbied Roosevelt, in the summer of 1904, to authorize the leasing of Indian oil lands by Standard Oil subsidiaries. He said Roosevelt overruled his Secretary of the Interior Ethan A. Hitchcock and granted a pipeline franchise to run through the Osage lands to the Prairie Oil and Gas Company. The New York Sun made a similar accusation and said that Standard Oil, a refinery that financially benefited from the pipeline, had contributed $150,000 to the Republicans in 1904 (equivalent to $4 million in 2023) after Roosevelt's alleged reversal allowing the pipeline franchise. Roosevelt branded Haskell's allegation as "a lie, pure and simple".

[ 190 ] Rhetoric of righteousness Roosevelt's rhetoric was characterized by an intense moralism of personal righteousness.

[ 191 ] [ 192 ] [ 193 ] The tone was typified by his denunciation of "predatory wealth" in a message he sent Congress in January 1908 calling for passage of new labor laws: Predatory wealth--of the wealth accumulated on a giant scale by all forms of iniquity, ranging from the oppression of wageworkers to unfair and unwholesome methods of crushing out competition, and to defrauding the public by stock jobbing and the manipulation of securities. Certain wealthy men of this stamp, whose conduct should be abhorrent to every man of ordinarily decent conscience, and who commit the hideous wrong of teaching our young men that phenomenal business success must ordinarily be based on dishonesty, have during the last few months made it apparent that they have banded together to work for a reaction. Their endeavor is to overthrow and discredit all who honestly administer the law, to prevent any additional legislation which would check and restrain them, and to secure if possible a freedom from all restraint which will permit every unscrupulous wrongdoer to do what he wishes unchecked provided he has enough money....The methods by which the Standard Oil people and those engaged in the other combinations of which I have spoken above have achieved great fortunes can only be justified by the advocacy of a system of morality which would also justify every form of criminality on the part of a labor union, and every form of violence, corruption, and fraud, from murder to bribery and ballot box stuffing in politics.

[ 194 ] Post-presidency (1909–1919) Election of 1908 Main article: 1908 United States presidential election Roosevelt enjoyed being president but believed limited terms provided a check against dictatorship. He decided to honor his 1904 pledge not to run for a third term. Though he favored Secretary of State Elihu Root as his successor, Root's ill health made him unsuitable. New York Governor Charles Evans Hughes was a strong candidate and shared Roosevelt's progressivism, but Roosevelt considered him too independent. He settled on his Secretary of War, William Howard Taft , who had been his friend since 1890 and consistently supported Roosevelt's policies.

[ 195 ] Roosevelt was determined to install the successor of his choice, and wrote to Taft: "Dear Will: Do you want any action about those federal officials? I will break their necks with the utmost cheerfulness if you say the word!" Just weeks later, he branded as "false and malicious" the charge he was using the offices at his disposal to favor Taft.

[ 196 ] At the 1908 Republican convention, many chanted "four years more" of a Roosevelt presidency, but Taft won the nomination after Henry Cabot Lodge made it clear Roosevelt was not interested.

[ 197 ] In the 1908 election, Taft easily defeated Democratic nominee William Jennings Bryan . Taft promoted progressivism emphasizing the rule of law; he preferred that judges, rather than politicians, make decisions about fairness. However, Taft proved to be a less adroit politician than Roosevelt, lacking the energy, personal magnetism, and public support that made Roosevelt so formidable. When Roosevelt realized lowering the tariff would create severe tensions inside the Republican Party, he stopped talking about it. Taft, ignoring the risks, tackled the tariff boldly, resulting in the Payne-Aldrich Tariff of 1909, which alienated reformers on all sides. While the crisis was building inside the Party, Roosevelt was touring Africa and Europe, allowing Taft space.

[ 198 ] Africa and Europe (1909–1910) Roosevelt standing next to the elephant he shot on a safari in Africa In March 1909, the ex-president left for the Smithsonian-Roosevelt African Expedition .

[ 199 ] Roosevelt's party landed in Mombasa in East Africa and traveled to the Belgian Congo before following the Nile River to Khartoum in modern Sudan . Well-financed by Andrew Carnegie and by his own writings, Roosevelt's party hunted for specimens for the Smithsonian Institution and American Museum of Natural History .

[ 200 ] The group, led by hunter-tracker R.J. Cunninghame, included scientists from the Smithsonian, and was joined by Frederick Selous , famous big game hunter and explorer. Participants included Kermit Roosevelt , Edgar Alexander Mearns , Edmund Heller , and John Alden Loring .

[ 201 ] The team killed or trapped 11,400 animals, [ 200 ] from insects and moles to hippopotamuses and elephants. The 1,000 large animals included 512 big game animals, including six rare white rhinos . Tons of salted carcasses and skins were shipped to Washington; it took years to mount them all. Regarding the large number taken, Roosevelt said, "I can be condemned only if the existence of the National Museum , the American Museum of Natural History, and all similar zoological institutions are to be condemned".

[ 202 ] He wrote a detailed account of the trip in African Game Trails .

[ 203 ] After his safari, Roosevelt traveled north to embark on a tour of Europe. Stopping first in Egypt, he commented favorably on British rule, stating Egypt was not yet ready for independence.

[ 204 ] He refused a meeting with the Pope due to a dispute over a group of Methodists active in Rome. He met with Emperor Franz Joseph of Austria-Hungary , Kaiser Wilhelm II of Germany, King George V of Great Britain, and other leaders. In Oslo, Roosevelt delivered a speech calling for limitations on naval armaments, a strengthening of the Permanent Court of Arbitration , and the creation of a "League of Peace" among the world powers.

[ 205 ] He delivered the Romanes Lecture at Oxford, where he denounced those who sought parallels between the evolution of animal life and the development of society.

[ 206 ] Though Roosevelt attempted to avoid domestic politics, he quietly met with Gifford Pinchot , who related his disappointment with the Taft Administration .

[ 207 ] Pinchot had been forced to resign as head of the forest service after clashing with Taft's Interior Secretary, Richard Ballinger . Roosevelt returned to the U.S. in June 1910.

[ 208 ] Four months later, Roosevelt became the first U.S. president to fly in a plane, staying aloft for 4 minutes in a Wright brothers -designed craft.

[ 209 ] Roosevelt relied on Andrew Carnegie for financing his expedition. In return, Carnegie asked the ex-president to mediate the growing conflict between the cousins who ruled Britain and Germany. Roosevelt started to, but the scheme collapsed when King Edward VII suddenly died.

David Nasaw argues Roosevelt systematically deceived and manipulated Carnegie and held the elderly man in contempt.

[ 210 ] [ 211 ] The Great Rapprochement with Great Britain The Great Rapprochement was the convergence of diplomatic, political, military, and economic objectives of the United States and Great Britain from 1895 to 1915. Roosevelt played a central role through his close contacts with British intellectuals and politicians and in his diplomatic work regarding the Panama Canal.

[ 212 ] [ 213 ] The British welcomed Roosevelt, as seen in the Alaska boundary dispute . The British diplomats voted with the Roosevelt's diplomats to deny Canada's claim to an ocean port that would allow access to the gold mines in the Canadian Yukon.  The Canadians felt betrayed by the British control of Canadian foreign policy in order to appease the United States.

[ 214 ] In 1915–1917 Roosevelt was the leading proponent of American entering the war on the side of Great Britain. In October 1916, campaigning for the Republican ticket to defeat President Woodrow Wilson's reelection, Roosevelt lashed out: President Wilson's ignoble shirking of responsibility has been clothed in an utterly misleading phrase, the phrase of a coward, He kept us out of war.

In actual reality, war has been creeping nearer and nearer... and we face it without policy, plan, purpose or preparation.

[ 215 ] Roosevelt argued that the United States had a moral obligation to support the Allies and that neutrality, as President Wilson promised, was both cowardly and dangerous.

[ 216 ] [ 217 ] Republican Party schism Part of a series on Progressivism Movements 50501 movement BLM Conservation movement ECG Ethical movement Environmental movement Indivisible movement Labour LGBTQ movements #MeToo Occupy Wall Street Reform Social hygiene " The Resistance " Taiwan independence YIMBY Ideas Direct democracy Economic development Environmentalism Broad measures of economic progress Gender equality Green politics Human enhancement Indigenous rights Intersectionality Liberation theology Metaphysics Minority rights LGBTQ rights Multiculturalism Modernism Post Moral universalism Progress Philosophy of progress Progressive education In Latin America Progressive stack Progressive nationalism Progressive taxation Religious liberalism Reparations for slavery In the US Scientific management Scientific progress Social change Social constructivism Social justice Social justice warrior Social organization Social progress List of countries Solidarity unionism Strategic essentialism Sustainable design Ecological engineering Sustainable development Techno-progressivism Welfare state Women's suffrage Workplace democracy Youth rights Variants Christian Confucian Conservative Economic Islamic Neoliberal Techno Ideologies Ecevitism Kirchnerism Lulism Roosevelt Republican Activists Abbott (Edith) Abbott (Grace) Addams Armstrong Ahmed Ajamu X Alexander Alinsky Archer Belmont Bond Brandeis Breckinridge Cambell Cloward Dees Gilman Hammer Hanna Hassan Heumann Huang Jackson (Esther) Jackson (George) Jackson (Jesse) Kahane King (Shaun) King (Jr.) Lennon Ludmer Markey McIlrath Mckesson Page Pearson Roosevelt (Eleanor) Rothblatt Seligmann Smeeth Soros (Alexander) Soros (George) Su Walia Windsor Wong (Alice) Wong (Joshua) Woodhull Commentators Bedborough Brewis Cohen Conover Criado Perez Danskin Duberman Ellis Faust Favreau Fiorentini Glaude Goldberg Hartmann Hasan Jennings Klippenstein Kochinski Krugman Kulinski Levy Lovett Marshall McKay Miller (Stephanie) Moore Morgan Nagle Oliver Pakman Pfeiffer Piker Rather Reich (Robert) Reid Seder Sharpton Smith Stewart Thorn Vietor Withers Wise Wynn Welles Zuckerberg Intellectuals Addams Allen Anderson Benedict Benjamin Ben-Moshe Beveridge Black Blackwell Bornstein Brand Brandeis Butler Carpenter de Condorcet Cornell Davis (Mike) Dewey DiAngelo Douglas (Kelly) Douglas (William) Du Bois Dyson Ellis Fredrickson Friedan Gilmore Hammonds Helms Hirschfeld hooks Jeffries Karenga Keller Kendi McIntosh Merriam Meyers Mills Money Moore Oastler Ostrowski Painter Patterson Peled-Elhanan Rawls Reich (Wilhelm) Roberts Rothstein Saini Sanger Seuss Shaw Stanley Stein TallBear Wachowskis (Lana/Lilly) Wells Welsing West Whedon Wilderson III Zuboff Politicians Albanese Ardern Attlee Boric Brandt Bryan Casar Crockett da Silva Debs Drees Frost Gorbachev Harris Hawkins Hessel Hunter Jackson Jayapal Johnson Kennedy (John F.) Kennedy (Ted) Khanna La Follette La Guardia Lai Layton Lee (Barbara) Lee (Summer) Lewis Lyuh Mamdani Manley Markey McGovern Merkley Mottley Murayama Murphy (Emily) Murphy (Chris) Nader Nehru Norris Norton Obrador Ocasio-Cortez Omar Petro Pocan Pressley Raskin Roosevelt (Franklin) Roosevelt (Theodore) Sánchez Sanders Tlaib Trudeau Tsai Turner Wallace Walz Warren Weaver Wilson (Harold) Yamamoto Yavlinsky Zapatero Literature Looking Backward (1888) Equality (1897) Better-World Philosophy (1899) Man and Superman (1903) The Universal Kinship (1906) The Open Conspiracy (1928) The Mass Psychology of Fascism (1933) Sexuality in the Cultural Struggle (1936) Beveridge Report (1942) Rules for Radicals (1971) Humanist Manifesto II (1973) Woman Hating (1974) The Handmaid's Tale (1985) Black Athena (1987–2006) The Racial Contract (1997) War Against the Weak (2003) The Audacity of Hope (2006) The Invention of the Jewish People (2008) The New Jim Crow (2010) The Speech (2011) Our Revolution (2016) White Rage (2016) The Color of Law (2017) Inferior (2017) Not All Dead White Men (2018) White Fragility (2018) Invisible Women (2019) How to Be an Antiracist (2019) Race After Technology (2019) Superior (2019) Nice Racism (2021) Organizations Amadeu Antonio Foundation ACLU ASHA BLMGNF CGS Brennan Center for Justice Color of Change Democracy Alliance Ella Baker Center for Human Rights Equality and Human Rights Commission ENAR Fabian Society " Coefficients " FIRM Ford Foundation ILGA InCAR IPPA MacArthur Foundation Movement for Black Lives No one is illegal NWRO New SDS OSF Our Revolution PFAW Progressive Alliance Progressive International Progressive League Progressive Majority ProgressNow Red Flare RWJF SftP Tides Foundation Media CTXT HuffPost Jacobin Jezebel Lucifer Mother Jones MSNBC The Nation New Statesman The Progressive Salon Searchlight The Young Turks Rational Wiki By region Japan South Korea Taiwan United States Related Accelerationism Communitarianism Counterculture of the 1960s Critical theory Democratic capitalism Democratic socialism Red–green alliance Social democracy Left-libertarianism Libertarian socialism Left-wing populism Liberalism Classical radicalism Social liberalism In United States New Left Pink tide Progress Studies Progressive Era Technocracy Unitarian Universalism Woke Politics portal v t e Roosevelt had attempted to refashion Taft into a copy of himself, but recoiled as Taft began to display his individuality. He was offended on election night when Taft indicated his success had been possible not just through Roosevelt, but also Taft's half-brother Charles P. Taft . Roosevelt was further alienated when Taft did not consult him about cabinet appointments.

[ 218 ] Roosevelt and other progressives were ideologically dissatisfied over Taft's conservation policies and his handling of the tariff, when he concentrated power with conservative party leaders in Congress.

[ 219 ] Others have argued that Taft abided by the goals and procedures of the " Square Deal " promoted by Roosevelt in his first term. The problem was Roosevelt and the more radical progressives had moved on to more aggressive goals, such as curbing the judiciary, which Taft rejected.

[ 220 ] Roosevelt urged progressives to take control of the Republican Party, and to avoid splitting it in a way that would hand the presidency to the Democrats in 1912. To that end, Roosevelt publicly expressed optimism about the Taft Administration after meeting with the president in June 1910.

[ 221 ] Dispute over court power Roosevelt gave speeches in the West in the late summer and early fall of 1910 in which he severely criticized the nation's judiciary. Roosevelt not only attacked the Supreme Court's 1905 decision in Lochner v. New York , he accused federal courts of undermining democracy, branding the suspect jurists "fossilized judges", and compared their tendency to strike down progressive reform legislation, to Justice Roger B. Taney 's ruling in Dred Scott v. Sandford (1857). To ensure the constitution served the public interests, Roosevelt joined other progressives in calling for the "judicial recall", which would enable popular majorities to remove judges from office and reverse unpopular judicial decisions. This attack horrified Taft, who, though he privately agreed that Lochner and other decisions had been poorly decided, was an adamant believer in judicial authority preserving constitutional government. His horror was shared with other prominent members of the elite legal community, and solidified in Taft's mind that Roosevelt must not be permitted to regain the presidency.

[ 222 ] Roosevelt's "New Nationalism" Roosevelt after leaving office in October 1910 Roosevelt and pilot Archibald Hoxsey in St. Louis in October 1910 In August 1910, Roosevelt escalated the rivalry with a speech at Osawatomie, Kansas , which was the most radical of his career. It marked his public break with Taft and conservative Republicans. Advocating a program he called the " New Nationalism ", Roosevelt emphasized the priority of labor over capital interests and the need to control corporate creation and combination. He called for a ban on corporate political contributions.

[ 223 ] Returning to New York, Roosevelt began a battle to take control of the state Republican party from William Barnes Jr.

. Taft had pledged his support to Roosevelt in this endeavor, and Roosevelt was outraged when Taft's support failed to materialize at the 1910 state convention.

[ 224 ] Roosevelt campaigned for the Republicans in the 1910 elections , in which the Democrats gained control of the House for the first time since 1892. Among the newly elected Democrats was New York State senator Franklin D. Roosevelt , who argued he represented his distant cousin's policies better than his Republican opponent.

[ 225 ] The Republican progressives interpreted the defeats as a compelling argument for reorganization of the party in 1911.

[ 226 ] Senator Robert M. La Follette joined with Pinchot, William White, and California Governor Hiram Johnson to create the National Progressive Republican League; their objectives were to defeat the power of political bossism at the state level and replace Taft at the national level.

[ 227 ] Despite his skepticism of the league, Roosevelt expressed general support for progressive principles. Between January and April 1911, Roosevelt wrote articles for The Outlook , defending what he called "the great movement of our day, the progressive nationalist movement against special privilege, and in favor of an honest and efficient political and industrial democracy ".

[ 228 ] With Roosevelt apparently uninterested in running in 1912, La Follette declared his own candidacy in June 1911.

[ 227 ] Roosevelt continually criticized Taft after the 1910 elections, and the break between them became final after the Justice Department filed an antitrust lawsuit against US Steel in September 1911; Roosevelt was humiliated because he had personally approved an acquisition the Justice Department was now challenging. However, Roosevelt was still unwilling to run against Taft in 1912; he hoped to run in 1916 against whichever Democrat beat Taft in 1912.

[ 229 ] Battling Taft over arbitration treaties Taft was world leader for arbitration as a guarantee of world peace. In 1911 he and Secretary of State Philander C. Knox negotiated treaties with Britain and France providing that differences be arbitrated. Disputes had to be submitted to the Hague Court or another tribunal. These were signed in August 1911, but had to be ratified by a two-thirds vote of the Senate. Neither Taft nor Knox consulted with Senate leaders during negotiations. By then many Republicans were opposed to Taft, and the president felt lobbying too hard for the treaties might cause their defeat. He made speeches supporting the treaties in October, but the Senate added amendments Taft could not accept, killing them.

[ 230 ] Arbitration revealed a dispute among American progressives. One faction, led by Taft looked to it as the best alternative to warfare. Taft was a constitutional lawyer, understanding the legal issues.

[ 231 ] Taft's base was the conservative business community that supported peace movements before 1914. However, he failed to mobilize them. The businessmen believed economic rivalries were the cause of war, and that trade led to an interdependent world that would make war expensive and useless.

[ 232 ] However, an opposing faction, led by Roosevelt, ridiculed arbitration as foolhardy idealism, and insisted on the realism of war as the only solution to serious international disputes. Roosevelt worked with close friend Senator Henry Cabot Lodge to impose those amendments that ruined the treaties. Roosevelt was acting to sabotage Taft's campaign promises.

[ 233 ] At a deeper level, Roosevelt truly believed arbitration was a naïve solution and great issues had to be decided by war. The Rooseveltian approach incorporated a near-mystical faith of the ennobling nature of war. It endorsed jingoistic nationalism as opposed to the businessmen's calculation of profit and national interest.

[ 234 ] [ 235 ] Election of 1912 Main article: 1912 United States presidential election Republican primaries and convention Punch in May 1912, depicting no-holds-barred fight between Howard Taft and Roosevelt In November 1911, a group of Ohio Republicans endorsed Roosevelt for the party's nomination for president. Roosevelt conspicuously declined to refuse a nomination. Soon thereafter, Roosevelt said, "I am really sorry for Taft... I am sure he means well, but he means well feebly, and he does not know how! He is utterly unfit for leadership and this is a time when we need leadership." In January 1912, Roosevelt declared "if the people make a draft on me I shall not decline to serve".

[ 236 ] Roosevelt spoke before the Constitutional Convention in Ohio, identifying as a progressive and endorsing progressive reforms—even endorsing popular review of state judicial decisions.

[ 237 ] In reaction to Roosevelt's proposals Taft said, "Such extremists are not progressives—they are political emotionalists or neurotics".

[ 238 ] Roosevelt began to envision himself as the savior of the party from defeat in the upcoming election. In February 1912 in Boston , Roosevelt said, "I will accept the nomination for president if it is tendered to me".

[ 239 ] [ 240 ] Elihu Root and Henry Cabot Lodge thought division would lead to defeat in the election, while Taft believed he would be defeated either in the primary or general election.

[ 241 ] The 1912 primaries represented the first extensive use of the presidential primary , a reform achievement of the progressive movement.

[ 242 ] The Republican primaries in the South, where party regulars dominated, went for Taft, as did New York, Indiana, Michigan, Kentucky, and Massachusetts. Meanwhile, Roosevelt won in Illinois, Minnesota, Nebraska, South Dakota, California, Maryland, Ohio, and Pennsylvania.

[ 243 ] At the 1912 Republican National Convention in Chicago, Taft won the nomination on the first ballot.

[ 244 ] According to Lewis L. Gould , in 1912 Roosevelt saw Taft as the agent of "the forces of reaction and of political crookedness".... Roosevelt had become the most dangerous man in American history, said Taft, "because of his hold upon the less intelligent voters and the discontented." The Republican National Committee, dominated by the Taft forces, awarded 235 delegates to the president and 19 to Roosevelt...Roosevelt believed himself entitled to 72 delegates from Arizona, California, Texas and Washington that had been given to Taft. Firm in his conviction that the nomination was being stolen from him, Roosevelt ....told cheering supporters that there was "a great moral issue" at stake and he should have "sixty to eighty lawfully elected delegates" added to his total....Roosevelt ended his speech declaring: "Fearless of the future; unheeding of our individual fates; with unflinching hearts and undimmed eyes; we stand at Armageddon, and we battle for the Lord!" [ 245 ] Progressive Party See also: New Nationalism (Theodore Roosevelt) and Bull Moose Party A 1912 cartoon depicting George Perkins (left, with checkbook symbolizing control of money) and Amos Pinchot (wielding an endorsement from Roosevelt campaign manager, Senator Joseph M. Dixon ) in battle for Progressive Party control Once his defeat appeared probable, Roosevelt announced he would "accept the progressive nomination on a progressive platform and I shall fight to the end, win or lose". Roosevelt prophetically said, "My feeling is that the Democrats will probably win if they nominate a progressive".

[ 246 ] Roosevelt left the Republican Party and created the Progressive Party.

[ 247 ] [ 248 ] Leadership of the new party included a range of reformers.

Jane Addams campaigned vigorously for the party as a breakthrough in social reform.

[ 249 ] Gifford Pinchot represented environmentalists and anti-trust crusaders. Publisher Frank Munsey provided cash [ 250 ] and George W. Perkins , a Wall Street financier came from the efficiency movement . He handled the new party's finances efficiently but was distrusted by many reformers.

[ 251 ] Governor Hiram Johnson controlled the California party, forcing out the Taft supporters. He was nominated as Roosevelt's running mate.

[ 252 ] Roosevelt's platform echoed his radical 1907–1908 proposals, calling for vigorous government intervention to protect the people from selfish interests: To destroy this invisible Government, to dissolve the unholy alliance between corrupt business and corrupt politics is the first task of the statesmanship of the day.

[ 253 ] [ 254 ] This country belongs to the people. Its resources, its business, its laws, its institutions, should be utilized, maintained, or altered in whatever manner will best promote the general interest. This assertion is explicit... Mr. Wilson must know that every monopoly in the United States opposes the Progressive party... I challenge him... to name the monopoly that did support the Progressive party, whether... the Sugar Trust, the US Steel Trust, the Harvester Trust, the Standard Oil Trust, the Tobacco Trust, or any other... Ours was the only program to which they objected, and they supported either Mr. Wilson or Mr. Taft.

[ 255 ] Though many Progressive party activists in the North opposed the steady loss of civil rights for blacks, Roosevelt ran a " lily-white " campaign in the South. Rival all-white and all-black delegations from southern states arrived at the Progressive national convention, and Roosevelt decided to seat the all-white delegations.

[ 256 ] [ 257 ] [ 258 ] Nevertheless, he won few votes outside traditional Republican strongholds. Out of 1,100 counties in the South, Roosevelt won two counties in Alabama, one in Arkansas, seven in North Carolina, three in Georgia, 17 in Tennessee, two in Texas, one in Virginia, and none in Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, or South Carolina.

[ 259 ] Attempted assassination Main article: Attempted assassination of Theodore Roosevelt On October 14, 1912, while arriving at a campaign event in Milwaukee , Roosevelt was shot by delusional saloonkeeper John Schrank , who believed the ghost of assassinated president William McKinley had directed him to kill Roosevelt.

[ 260 ] [ 261 ] The bullet lodged in Roosevelt's chest after penetrating his eyeglass case and passing through a 50-page folded copy of the speech titled " Progressive Cause Greater Than Any Individual ".

[ 262 ] Schrank was disarmed and captured by Roosevelt's stenographer , Elbert E. Martin as he attempted to fire a second time, and might have been lynched had Roosevelt not shouted for Schrank to remain unharmed.

[ 263 ] Roosevelt assured the crowd he was all right, then ordered police to take Schrank and make sure no violence was done to him.

[ 264 ] As an experienced hunter and anatomist, Roosevelt correctly concluded that since he was not coughing blood, the bullet had not reached his lung. He declined to go to hospital immediately and instead delivered a 90-minute speech with blood seeping into his shirt.

[ 265 ] [ unreliable source?

] Only afterwards did he accept medical attention. Probes and an x-ray showed the bullet had lodged in Roosevelt's chest muscle, but did not penetrate the pleura . Doctors concluded it would be less dangerous to leave it than attempt to remove it, and Roosevelt carried the bullet in him for the rest of his life.

[ 266 ] [ 267 ] Taft and Democratic nominee Woodrow Wilson suspended their campaigning until Roosevelt resumed his. When asked if the shooting would affect his election campaign, he said to the reporter "I'm fit as a bull moose." The bull moose became a symbol of Roosevelt and the Progressive Party, and it often was referred to as the Bull Moose Party . He spent two weeks recuperating before returning to campaign. He wrote a friend about the bullet, "I do not mind it any more than if it were in my waistcoat-pocket." [ 268 ] Democratic victory After the Democrats nominated Governor Woodrow Wilson, Roosevelt did not expect to win the election, as Wilson had compiled a record attractive to progressive Democrats who might have considered voting for Roosevelt.

[ 269 ] Roosevelt still campaigned vigorously, and the election developed into a two-person contest despite Taft's quiet presence. Roosevelt respected Wilson, but they differed on various issues; Wilson opposed federal intervention regarding women's suffrage or child labor , and attacked Roosevelt's tolerance of large businesses.

[ 270 ] Roosevelt won 4.1 million votes (27%), compared to Taft's 3.5 million (23%) and Wilson's 6.3 million (42%). Wilson scored a landslide in the Electoral College with 435 electoral votes; Roosevelt 88, and Taft 8. Pennsylvania was the only eastern state won by Roosevelt; in the Midwest, he carried Michigan, Minnesota, and South Dakota; in the West, California, and Washington.

[ 271 ] Roosevelt garnered a higher share of the popular vote than any other third-party presidential candidate in history and won the most states of any third-party candidate after the Civil War.

[ 272 ] South American expedition (1913–1914) Main article: Roosevelt–Rondon Scientific Expedition Left to right (seated): Father John Augustine Zahm, Cândido Rondon, Kermit Roosevelt, Cherrie, Miller, four Brazilians, Roosevelt, Fiala. Only Roosevelt, Kermit, Cherrie, Rondon, and the Brazilians traveled down the River of Doubt.

In 1907 a friend of Roosevelt's, John Augustine Zahm , invited Roosevelt to help plan a research expedition to South America. To finance it, Roosevelt obtained support from the American Museum of Natural History in return for promising to bring back new animal specimens. Roosevelt's popular book, Through the Brazilian Wilderness [ 273 ] describes his expedition into the Brazilian jungle in 1913 as a member of the Roosevelt-Rondon Scientific Expedition, co-named after its leader, Brazilian Cândido Rondon .

Once in South America, a more ambitious goal was added: to find the headwaters of the river Duvida and trace it north to the Madeira and thence to the Amazon River . Duvida was later renamed Roosevelt River . Roosevelt's crew consisted of his son Kermit , Colonel Rondon, naturalist George Kruck Cherrie , Brazilian Lieutenant João Lira, team physician José Antonio Cajazeira, and 16 skilled paddlers and porters.

[ 274 ] The initial expedition started tenuously on December 9, 1913, at the height of rainy season. The trip down Duvida started on February 27, 1914.

[ 275 ] Roosevelt suffered a minor leg wound after he jumped in to try to prevent canoes from smashing against the rocks. The flesh wound he received, however, soon gave him tropical fever that resembled the malaria he had contracted while in Cuba.

[ 276 ] The infection weakened Roosevelt so greatly that six weeks in, he had to be attended to constantly by the expedition's physician and Kermit. By then, he could not walk because of the infection and an infirmity in the other leg, due to a traffic accident a decade earlier. Roosevelt had chest pains and a fever that soared to 103 °F (39 °C) and made him delirious. Regarding his condition as a threat to others' survival, Roosevelt insisted he be left behind to allow the poorly provisioned expedition to proceed, preparing to commit suicide with morphine . Only an appeal by his son persuaded him to continue.

[ 275 ] Despite Roosevelt's continued decline and loss of 50 pounds (23 kg), Rondon reduced the pace for map-making, which required regular stops to fix their position by sun-based survey. Upon Roosevelt's return to New York, friends and family were startled by his physical appearance and fatigue. Roosevelt wrote, perhaps prophetically, to a friend that it had cut his life short by ten years. For the rest of his few remaining years, he would be plagued by flare-ups of malaria and leg inflammations so severe as to require surgery.

[ 277 ] Before Roosevelt had even completed his sea voyage home, critics raised doubts over his claims of exploring and navigating a completely uncharted river over 625 miles (1,006 km) long. When he had recovered sufficiently, he addressed a standing-room-only convention organized in Washington, by the National Geographic Society and satisfactorily defended his claims.

[ 275 ] Final years See also: Roosevelt's World War I volunteers Roosevelt c.

1914–1918 Roosevelt returned to the U.S. in May 1914. Though he was outraged by the Wilson Administration 's conclusion of a treaty that expressed "sincere regret" for the way in which the U.S. had acquired the Panama Canal Zone , he was impressed by many reforms passed. Roosevelt made campaign appearances for the Progressives, but the 1914 elections were a disaster for the fledgling third party.

[ 278 ] Roosevelt began to envision another campaign for president, this time with himself at the head of the Republican Party, but conservative party leaders remained opposed to Roosevelt.

[ 279 ] In hopes of engineering a joint nomination, the Progressives scheduled the 1916 Progressive National Convention at the same time as the 1916 Republican National Convention . When the Republicans nominated Charles Evans Hughes, Roosevelt declined the Progressive nomination and urged his Progressive followers to support the Republican candidate.

[ 280 ] Though Roosevelt had long disliked Hughes, he disliked Wilson even more, and campaigned energetically for the Republican nominee. However, Wilson won the 1916 election by a narrow margin.

[ 281 ] The Progressives disappeared as a party, and Roosevelt and many of his followers re-joined the Republican Party.

[ 282 ] World War I When the First World War began in 1914, Roosevelt strongly supported the Allies and demanded a harsher policy against Germany, especially regarding submarine warfare. Roosevelt angrily denounced the foreign policy of Wilson, calling it a failure regarding the atrocities in Belgium and the violations of American rights.

[ 283 ] In 1916, while campaigning for Hughes, Roosevelt repeatedly denounced Irish Americans and German Americans whom he described as unpatriotic; he insisted that one had to be 100% American, not a " hyphenated American " who juggled multiple loyalties. In March 1917, Congress gave Roosevelt the authority to raise a maximum of four divisions similar to the Rough Riders .

[ 284 ] [ 285 ] However, President Wilson announced to the press that he would not send Roosevelt and his volunteers to France, but instead an American Expeditionary Force under the command of General John J. Pershing .

[ 286 ] Roosevelt never forgave Wilson, and published The Foes of Our Own Household , an indictment of the sitting president.

[ 287 ] [ 288 ] [ 289 ] Roosevelt's youngest son, Quentin, a pilot with the American forces in France, was killed when shot down behind German lines on July 14, 1918, aged 20. Roosevelt never recovered from his loss.

[ 290 ] League of Nations Further information: League to Enforce Peace Roosevelt was an early supporter of the modern view that there needs to be a global order. In his Nobel prize address of 1910, he said, "it would be a master stroke if those great Powers honestly bent on peace would form a League of Peace, not only to keep the peace among themselves, but to prevent, by force if necessary, its being broken by others." [ 291 ] It would have executive power such as the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907 lacked. He called for American participation.

When World War I broke out, Roosevelt proposed "a World League for the Peace of Righteousness", in September 1914, which would preserve sovereignty but limit armaments and require arbitration. He added it should be "solemnly covenanted that if any nations refused to abide by the decisions of such a court, then others draw the sword in behalf of peace and justice." [ 292 ] [ 293 ] In 1915 he outlined this plan more specifically, urging nations guarantee their entire military force, if necessary, against any nation that refused to carry out arbitration decrees or violated rights of other nations. Though Roosevelt had some concerns about the impact on United States sovereignty, he insisted that such a league would only work if the United States participated as one of the "joint guarantors".

[ 294 ] Roosevelt referred to this plan in a 1918 speech as "the most feasible for...a league of nations".

[ 295 ] [ 296 ] By this time Wilson was strongly hostile to Roosevelt and Lodge and developed his own plans for a different League of Nations. It became reality along Wilson's lines at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919. Roosevelt denounced Wilson's approach but died before it was adopted at Paris. However, Lodge was willing to accept it with serious reservations. In the end, on March 19, 1920, Wilson had Democratic Senators vote against the League with the Lodge Reservations and the United States never joined the League of Nations .

[ 297 ] Final political activities Former President Theodore Roosevelt in Allentown, Pennsylvania in 1914 Roosevelt's attacks on Wilson helped the Republicans win control of Congress in the midterm elections of 1918. He declined a request from New York Republicans to run for another gubernatorial term, but attacked Wilson's Fourteen Points , calling instead for the unconditional surrender of Germany. Though his health was uncertain, he was seen as a leading contender for the 1920 Republican nomination, but insisted that, "If they take me, they'll have to take me without a single modification of the things that I have always stood for!" [ 298 ] He wrote William Allen White , "I wish to do everything in my power to make the Republican Party the Party of sane, constructive radicalism, just as it was under Lincoln." Accordingly, he told the 1918 state convention of the Maine Republican Party that he stood for old-age pensions, insurance for sickness and unemployment, construction of public housing for low-income families, the reduction of working hours, aid to farmers, and more regulation of large corporations.

[ 298 ] While his political profile remained high, Roosevelt's physical condition deteriorated throughout 1918 due to the long-term effects of jungle diseases. He was hospitalized for seven weeks and never fully recovered.

[ 299 ] Death Theodore and Edith Roosevelt 's Grave at Youngs Memorial Cemetery On the night of January 5, 1919, Roosevelt suffered breathing problems. After receiving treatment from his physician, George W. Faller, he felt better and went to bed. Roosevelt's last words were either "Please put out that light, James" [ 300 ] or "James, will you please put out the light.", [ 301 ] [ 302 ] said to his family servant James E. Amos . Between 4:00 and 4:15 the next morning, Roosevelt died at the age of 60 in his sleep at Sagamore Hill of a pulmonary embolism .

[ 300 ] Upon receiving word of his death, his son Archibald telegraphed his siblings: "The old lion is dead." [ 290 ] Woodrow Wilson's vice president, Thomas R. Marshall , said that "Death had to take Roosevelt sleeping, for if he had been awake, there would have been a fight." [ 303 ] Following a private farewell service in the North Room at Sagamore Hill, a simple funeral was held at Christ Episcopal Church in Oyster Bay on January 8.

[ 304 ] Vice President Thomas R. Marshall, former New York Governor Charles Evans Hughes , Senators Warren G. Harding and Henry Cabot Lodge , and former President William Howard Taft were among the mourners.

[ 304 ] The procession route to Youngs Memorial Cemetery was lined with spectators and a squad of mounted policemen who had ridden from New York City.

[ 305 ] Roosevelt was buried on a hillside overlooking Oyster Bay.

[ 306 ] Writer Main article: Theodore Roosevelt bibliography Address to the Boys Progressive League A speech by Roosevelt as a former President Problems playing this file? See media help .

Roosevelt was a prolific author, writing with passion on subjects ranging from foreign policy to the importance of the national park system. Roosevelt was also an avid reader of poetry. Poet Robert Frost said that Roosevelt "was our kind. He quoted poetry to me. He knew poetry." [ 307 ] As an editor of The Outlook , Roosevelt had weekly access to a large, educated national audience. In all, Roosevelt wrote about 18 books (each in several editions), including his autobiography, [ 308 ] The Rough Riders , [ 309 ] History of the Naval War of 1812 , [ 310 ] and others on subjects such as ranching, explorations, and wildlife. His most ambitious book was the four-volume narrative The Winning of the West , focused on the American frontier in the 18th and early 19th centuries. Roosevelt said that the American character—indeed a new "American race"—had emerged from the heroic wilderness hunters and Indian fighters, acting on the frontier with little government help.

[ 311 ] In 1905, Roosevelt became embroiled in a widely publicized literary debate known as the nature fakers controversy . A few years earlier, naturalist John Burroughs had published an article entitled "Real and Sham Natural History" in the Atlantic Monthly , attacking popular writers of the day such as Ernest Thompson Seton , Charles G. D. Roberts , and William J. Long for their fantastical representations of wildlife. Roosevelt agreed with Burroughs's criticisms and published several essays denouncing the booming genre of "naturalistic" animal stories as "yellow journalism of the woods". It was the President himself who popularized the negative term "nature faker" to describe writers who depicted their animal characters with excessive anthropomorphism.

[ 312 ] Character and beliefs Sagamore Hill , Roosevelt's estate on Long Island British scholar Marcus Cunliffe evaluates the liberal argument that Roosevelt was an opportunist, exhibitionist, and imperialist. Cunliffe praises Roosevelt's versatility, his respect for law, and his sincerity. He argues that Roosevelt's foreign policy was better than his detractors allege. Cunliffe calls him "a big man in several respects".

[ 313 ] Roosevelt was a Freemason [ 314 ] and member of the Sons of the American Revolution .

[ 315 ] He was also a member of The Explorers Club .

[ 316 ] Roosevelt had a lifelong interest in pursuing what he called, in an 1899 speech, " The Strenuous Life ". To this end, he exercised regularly and took up boxing, tennis, hiking, rowing, polo, and horseback riding.

[ 317 ] As governor of New York, he boxed with sparring partners several times each week, a practice he regularly continued as president until being hit so hard in the face he became blind in his left eye (a fact not made public until many years later). Roosevelt began to believe in the utility of jiu-jitsu training after training with Yoshitsugu Yamashita . Concerned that the U.S. would lose its military supremacy to rising powers like Japan, Roosevelt began to advocate for jiu-jitsu training for American soldiers.

[ 318 ] Roosevelt was an enthusiastic singlestick player and, according to Harper's Weekly , showed up at a White House reception with his arm bandaged after a bout with General Leonard Wood in 1905.

[ 319 ] "The Man of the Hour", depicting Roosevelt as warrior in 1898 and peacemaker in 1905, settling war between Russia and Japan Historians have often emphasized Roosevelt's warrior persona.

[ 320 ] Richard D. White Jr states, "Roosevelt's warrior spirit framed his views of national politics, [and] international relations." [ 321 ] He took aggressive positions regarding war with Spain in 1898, Colombia in 1903 , [ 322 ] and especially with Germany, from 1915 to 1917. As a demonstration of American naval might, he sent the Great White Fleet around the world in 1907–1909.

[ 323 ] He boasted in his autobiography: When I left the Presidency I finished seven and a half years of administration, during which not one shot had been fired against a foreign foe. We were at absolute peace, and there was no nation in the world with whom a war cloud threatened, no nation in the world whom we had wronged, or from whom we had anything to fear. The cruise of the battle fleet was not the least of the causes which ensured so peaceful an outlook.

[ 324 ] Historian Howard K. Beale has argued: He and his associates came close to seeking war for its own sake. Ignorant of modern war, Roosevelt romanticized war. ... Like many young men tamed by civilization into law-abiding but adventurous living, he needed an outlet for the pent-up primordial man in him and found it in fighting and killing, vicariously or directly, in hunting or in war. Indeed he had a fairly good time in war when war came. ... There was something dull and effeminate about peace. ... He gloried in war, was thrilled by military history, and placed warlike qualities high in his scale of values. Without consciously desiring it, he thought a little war now and then stimulated admirable qualities in men. Certainly preparedness for war did.

[ 325 ] Roosevelt often praised moral behavior but apparently never made a spiritual confession of his own faith. After the 1884 death of his wife, he almost never mentioned Jesus in public or private. His rejection of dogma and spirituality, says biographer William Harbaugh, led to a broad tolerance.

[ 326 ] Roosevelt publicly encouraged church attendance and was a conscientious churchgoer himself, a lifelong adherent of the Dutch Reformed church . When gas rationing was introduced during the First World War, he walked the three miles from his home to the local church and back, even after a serious operation.

[ 327 ] According to Christian Reisner, "Religion was as natural to Mr. Roosevelt as breathing", [ 328 ] and when the travel library for Roosevelt's famous Smithsonian-sponsored African expedition was being assembled, the Bible was, according to his sister, "the first book selected".

[ 329 ] In an address delivered to the Long Island Bible Society in 1901, Roosevelt declared that: Every thinking man, when he thinks, realizes what a very large number of people tend to forget, that the teachings of the Bible are so interwoven and entwined with our whole civic and social life that it would be literally—I do not mean figuratively, I mean literally—impossible for us to figure to ourselves what that life would be if these teachings were removed. We would lose almost all the standards by which we now judge both public and private morals; all the standards toward which we, with more or less of resolution, strive to raise ourselves. Almost every man who has by his lifework added to the sum of human achievement of which the race is proud, has based his lifework largely upon the teachings of the Bible ... Among the greatest men a disproportionately large number have been diligent and close students of the Bible at first hand.

[ 329 ] Political positions Main article: Political positions of Theodore Roosevelt When he assumed the presidency, Roosevelt reassured many conservatives, stating that "the mechanism of modern business is so delicate that extreme care must be taken not to interfere with it in a spirit of rashness or ignorance." [ 330 ] The following year, Roosevelt asserted the president's independence from business interests by opposing the merger which created the Northern Securities Company , and many were surprised that any president, much less an unelected one, would challenge powerful banker J.P. Morgan .

[ 331 ] In his last two years as president, Roosevelt became increasingly distrustful of big business , despite its close ties to the Republican Party.

[ 332 ] Roosevelt sought to replace the 19th-century laissez-faire economic environment with a new economic model which included a larger regulatory role for the federal government. He believed that 19th-century entrepreneurs had risked their fortunes on innovations and new businesses, and that these capitalists had been rightly rewarded. By contrast, he believed that 20th-century capitalists risked little but nonetheless reaped huge and, given the lack of risk, unjust, economic rewards. Without a redistribution of wealth away from the upper class, Roosevelt feared that the country would turn to radicals or fall to revolution.

[ 333 ] His Square Deal domestic program had three main goals: conservation of natural resources, control of corporations, and consumer protection. The Square Deal evolved into his program of " New Nationalism ", which emphasized the priority of labor over capital interests and a need to more effectively control corporate creation and combination, and proposed a ban on corporate political contributions.

[ 223 ] Foreign policy beliefs In the analysis by Henry Kissinger , Roosevelt was the first president to develop the guideline that it was the duty of the United States to make its enormous power and potential influence felt globally. The idea of being a passive "city on the hill" model that others could look up to, he rejected. Roosevelt, trained in biology, was a social Darwinist who believed in survival of the fittest. The international world in his view was a realm of violence and conflict. The United States had all the economic and geographical potential to be the fittest nation on the globe.

[ 334 ] The United States had a duty to act decisively. For example, in terms of the Monroe Doctrine , the United States had to prevent European incursions in the Western Hemisphere. But there was more, as he expressed in his Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine: the U.S. had to be the policeman of the region because unruly, corrupt smaller nations had to be controlled, and if United States did not do it, European powers would in fact intervene and develop their own base of power in the hemisphere in contravention to the Monroe Doctrine .

[ 335 ] Roosevelt was a realist and a conservative.

[ 336 ] He deplored many of the increasingly popular idealistic liberal themes, such as were promoted by William Jennings Bryan , the anti-imperialists, and Woodrow Wilson . Kissinger says he rejected the efficacy of international law. Roosevelt argued that if a country could not protect its own interests, the international community could not help very much. He ridiculed disarmament proposals that were increasingly common. He saw no likelihood of an international power capable of checking wrongdoing on a major scale. As for world government: I regard the Wilson–Bryan attitude of trusting to fantastic peace treaties, too impossible promises, to all kinds of scraps of paper without any backing in efficient force, as abhorrent. It is infinitely better for a nation and for the world to have the Frederick the Great and Bismarck tradition as regards foreign policy than to have the Bryan or Bryan–Wilson attitude as a permanent national attitude.... A milk-and-water righteousness unbacked by force is...as wicked as and even more mischievous than force divorced from righteousness.

[ 337 ] On his international outlook, Roosevelt favored spheres of influence , whereby one great power would generally prevail, such as the United States in the Western Hemisphere or Great Britain in the Indian subcontinent. Japan fit that role and he approved. However, he had deep distrust of both Germany and Russia.

[ 338 ] Legacy Historians credit Roosevelt for changing the nation's political system by placing the " bully pulpit " of the presidency at center stage and emphasizing character as much as issues. His accomplishments include trust busting and conservationism. He is a hero to liberals and progressives for his early proposals that foreshadowed the modern welfare state, including federal taxation , labor reforms , and more direct democracy .

Conservationists admire Roosevelt for prioritizing the environment and selflessness towards future generations.

Conservatives and nationalists respect his commitment to law and order , civic duty , and military values . Dalton states, "Today he is heralded as the architect of the modern presidency, as a world leader who boldly reshaped the office to meet the needs of the new century." [ 339 ] Liberals and socialists criticize his interventionist and imperialist approach, while libertarians reject his vision of the welfare state.

Historians typically rank Roosevelt among the top five presidents.

[ 340 ] [ 341 ] Persona and masculinity A 1910 cartoon depicting Roosevelt's many roles from 1899 to 1910 Dalton says Roosevelt is remembered as "one of the most picturesque personalities who has ever enlivened the landscape".

[ 342 ] His friend, historian Henry Adams , proclaimed: "Roosevelt, more than any other man... showed the singular primitive quality that belongs to ultimate matter—the quality that medieval theology assigned to God—he was pure act".

[ 343 ] Cooper compared him with Woodrow Wilson, highlighting their roles as warrior and priest.

[ 344 ] Dalton stressed Roosevelt's strenuous life.

[ 345 ] Brands calls Roosevelt "the last romantic ", viewing his romantic notion of life as emerging from his belief in physical bravery as the highest virtue.

[ 346 ] Henry F. Pringle , who won the Pulitzer Prize for Theodore Roosevelt (1931), stated the "Roosevelt of later years was the most adolescent of men." [ 347 ] Roosevelt as the exemplar of American masculinity has become a major theme.

[ 348 ] [ 349 ] He often warned that men were becoming too complacent, failing in their duties to propagate the race and exhibit masculine vigor.

[ 350 ] Historian Serge Ricard noted that Roosevelt's advocacy of the "Strenuous Life" made him an ideal subject for psycho-historical analysis of aggressive manhood in his era.

[ 351 ] He promoted competitive sports for physically strengthening American men [ 318 ] and supported organizations like the Boy Scouts , to mold and strengthen the character of American boys.

[ 352 ] Brands shows that heroic displays of bravery were central to Roosevelt's image: What makes the hero a hero is the romantic notion that he stands above the tawdry give and take of everyday politics, occupying an ethereal realm where partisanship gives way to patriotism, and division to unity, and where the nation regains its lost innocence...

[ 353 ] In 1902, Théobald Chartran was commissioned to paint Roosevelt's presidential portrait.

[ 354 ] [ 355 ] Roosevelt hid it in a closet before having it destroyed because it made him look like a "meek kitten".

[ 354 ] Roosevelt instead chose John Singer Sargent to paint his portrait.

[ 354 ] Memorials and cultural depictions Main articles: List of memorials to Theodore Roosevelt and Cultural depictions of Theodore Roosevelt Roosevelt, second from right, on Mount Rushmore A close up of Roosevelt's face on Mount Rushmore Roosevelt was included with Presidents George Washington , Thomas Jefferson , and Abraham Lincoln at the Mount Rushmore Memorial , designed in 1927.

[ 356 ] [ 357 ] Roosevelt's " Speak Softly and Carry a Big Stick " ideology is still quoted by politicians and columnists—not only in English, but in many translations.

[ 358 ] Another popular legacy is the teddy bear —named after him following an incident on a hunting trip in Mississippi in 1902.

[ 359 ] For his gallantry at San Juan Hill, Roosevelt's commanders recommended him for the Medal of Honor . However, the recommendation lacked any eyewitnesses, and the effort was tainted by Roosevelt's lobbying of the War Department.

[ 360 ] In the 1990s, Roosevelt's supporters again recommended the award, which was denied by the Secretary of the Army on the basis the decorations board determined "Roosevelt's bravery in battle did not rise to the level that would justify the Medal of Honor and, indeed, it did not rise to the level of men who fought in that engagement." [ 361 ] Nevertheless, politicians apparently convinced the secretary to reconsider and reverse himself, leading to the charge it was a "politically motivated award".

[ 362 ] In 2001, President Bill Clinton awarded Theodore Roosevelt the Medal of Honor for his charge.

[ 363 ] He is the only president to have received it.

[ 364 ] The United States Navy named two ships for Roosevelt: the USS Theodore Roosevelt (SSBN-600) , a submarine in commission from 1961 to 1982, and the USS Theodore Roosevelt (CVN-71) , an aircraft carrier on active duty in the Atlantic Fleet since 1986. Roosevelt has appeared on five U.S. Postage stamps, the first being issued in 1922.

[ 365 ] In 1956, the United States Postal Service released a 6¢ Liberty Issue postage stamp honoring Roosevelt. A 32¢ stamp was issued in 1998, as part of the Celebrate the Century series.

[ 366 ] Theodore Roosevelt National Park in North Dakota is named after him.

[ 367 ] The America the Beautiful Quarters series features Roosevelt riding a horse on the national park's quarter. Asteroid 188693 Roosevelt , discovered in 2005, was named after him.

[ 368 ] The official naming citation was published by the Minor Planet Center on November 8, 2019 ( M.P.C.

118221 ).

[ 369 ] Robert Peary named the Roosevelt Range and Roosevelt Land after him.

[ 370 ] Roosevelt has also been portrayed in films and television series such as Brighty of the Grand Canyon , The Wind and the Lion , Rough Riders , My Friend Flicka , [ 371 ] and Law of the Plainsman .

Robin Williams portrayed Roosevelt in the form of a wax mannequin that comes to life in Night at the Museum and its sequels.

[ 372 ] [ 373 ] [ 374 ] Roosevelt is the leader of the American civilization in the video game Civilization VI .

[ 375 ] For 80 years, an equestrian statue of Roosevelt, sitting above a Native American and an African American , stood in front of New York's American Museum of Natural History . In 2022, after years of lobbying by activists, the statue was removed. Museum president Ellen V. Futter said the decision did not reflect a judgment about Roosevelt but the sculpture's "hierarchical composition".

[ 376 ] [ 377 ] Audiovisual media Roosevelt was one of the first presidents whose voice was recorded for posterity. Several of his recorded speeches survive.

[ 378 ] A 1912 voice recording of The Right of the People to Rule , [ 379 ] which preserves Roosevelt's lower timbre ranges particularly well for its time, is available from the Michigan State University libraries. The audio clip sponsored by the Authentic History Center includes his defense [ 380 ] of the Progressive Party in 1912, wherein he proclaims it the "party of the people" – in contrast with the other major parties.

Parade for the school children down Van Ness Avenue in San Francisco Collection of film clips of Roosevelt See also Electoral history of Theodore Roosevelt List of famous big game hunters List of presidents of the United States List of presidents of the United States by previous experience Presidents of the United States on U.S. postage stamps SS Roosevelt (1905) SS President Roosevelt (1921) SS President Roosevelt (1944) Teddy bear Theodore Roosevelt Digital Library Notes ^ Roosevelt was vice president under McKinley and became president after McKinley's assassination in 1901. This was prior to the adoption of the Twenty-fifth Amendment in 1967, and a vacancy in the office of vice president was not filled until the next election and inauguration.

^ Pronounced / ˈ r oʊ z ə v ɛ l t / ROH -zə-velt References ^ Morris 1979 , p. 3.

^ "Anna Roosevelt – Theodore Roosevelt Birthplace National Historic Site (U.S. National Park Service)" . National Park Service. Archived from the original on May 17, 2021 . Retrieved April 4, 2021 .

^ McCullough 1981 , pp.

93–108 .

^ Putnam 1958 , pp. 23–27.

^ "TR's Legacy — The Environment" . PBS. Archived from the original on December 24, 2008 . Retrieved March 6, 2006 .

^ Roosevelt 1913 , p. 13.

^ Putnam 1958 , pp. 63–70.

^ Testi 1995 , pp. 1516–1517.

^ Roosevelt 1913 , pp. 32–33.

^ Brands 1997 , p. 49.

^ Kohn, Edward P. (2013).

Heir to the Empire City: New York and the Making of Theodore Roosevelt . Basic Books. p. 26.

ISBN 978-0-465-06975-0 .

Archived from the original on April 15, 2017 . Retrieved April 15, 2017 .

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 80–82.

^ Bulik, Mark (July 18, 2014).

"First Glimpses: 1878: Theodore Roosevelt Inherits a Fortune" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on December 22, 2020 . Retrieved December 22, 2020 .

^ McCullough, David (1982).

Mornings on Horseback : The Story of an Extraordinary Family, a Vanished Way of Life and the Unique Child Who Became Theodore Roosevelt . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-6714-4754-0 .

^ Brands 1997 , p. 62.

^ Pringle 1931 , p. 27.

^ a b Brands 1997 , pp. 110–112, 123–133. quote p. 126.

^ Roosevelt 1913 , p. 35.

^ Morris 1979 , p. 565.

^ Crawford, Michael J. (April 2002).

"The Lasting Influence of Theodore Roosevelt's Naval War of 1812" (PDF) .

International Journal of Naval History .

1 (1). Archived from the original (PDF) on July 13, 2018 . Retrieved October 6, 2017 .

^ Karsten, Peter (1971). "The Nature of "Influence": Roosevelt, Mahan and the Concept of Sea Power".

American Quarterly .

23 (4): 585– 600.

doi : 10.2307/2711707 .

ISSN 0003-0678 .

JSTOR 2711707 .

^ Richard W. Turk, The Ambiguous Relationship: Theodore Roosevelt and Alfred Thayer Mahan (1987) online Archived June 11, 2016, at the Wayback Machine ^ Danby, Nicholas (February 2021).

"The Roots of Roosevelt's Navalism" .

Naval History .

^ Miller 1992 , p. 104.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 154–158.

^ Brands 1997 , p. 166.

^ Morris 1979 , p. 232.

^ Brands 1997 , pp. 134–140.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 138–139.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 140–142.

^ "Mr Sheard to be Speaker" (PDF) .

The New York Times . January 1, 1884.

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 25, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2018 .

^ Miller 1992 , p. 153.

^ Kohn, Edward P. (2009). " 'A Most Revolting State of Affairs': Theodore Roosevelt's Aldermanic Bill and the New York Assembly City Investigating Committee of 1884".

American Nineteenth Century History .

10 (1): 71– 92.

doi : 10.1080/14664650802299909 .

hdl : 11693/48381 .

^ Putnam 1958 , pp. 413–424.

^ Brands 1997 , p. 171.

^ Putnam 1958 , pp. 445–450.

^ Pringle 1956 , p. 61.

^ Putnam 1958 , p. 445.

^ Putnam 1958 , p. 467.

^ Miller 1992 , p. 161.

^ "Theodore Roosevelt the Rancher" .

National Park Service .

Archived from the original on September 2, 2019 . Retrieved November 27, 2019 .

^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1902) [1888].

Ranch Life and the Hunting Trail . Illustrated by Frederic Remington . New York: Century. pp.

55– 56.

Archived from the original on April 7, 2015 . Retrieved October 17, 2015 .

^ Morrisey, Will (2009).

The Dilemma of Progressivism: How Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson Reshaped the American Regime of Self-Government . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 41.

ISBN 978-0-7425-6618-7 .

Archived from the original on April 6, 2015 . Retrieved October 17, 2015 .

^ Brands 1997 , p. 191.

^ Brands 1997 , p. 189.

^ Theodore Roosevelt National Park .

"Roosevelt Pursues the Boat Thieves" .

^ Morris 1979 , p. 376.

^ "Theodore Roosevelt the Rancher" .

nps.gov .

National Park Service .

Archived from the original on February 8, 2015 . Retrieved January 13, 2015 .

The blow proved disastrous for Roosevelt, who lost over half of his $80,000 investment, the equivalent of approximately $1.7 million today.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 163–164.

^ Forslund, Catherine. "Edith Kermit Carow Roosevelt: The Victorian Modern First Lady".

2016 . pp.

298– 319.

^ Gwynn, Stephen, ed. (1929).

The Letters and Friendships of Sir Cecil Spring Rice . Constable & Co. p. 121.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 181–182.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 193–194.

^ Kohn 2006 .

^ Sharp, Arthur G. (2011).

The Everything Theodore Roosevelt Book: The Extraordinary Life of an American Icon . Adams Media. pp.

78– 79.

ISBN 978-1-4405-2729-6 .

Archived from the original on April 7, 2015 . Retrieved October 17, 2015 .

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 183–185.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 197–200.

^ a b Miller 1992 , p. 201.

^ Miller 1992 , p. 203.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 206–207.

^ Thayer 1919 , pp. 1–2, ch. VI.

^ a b Bishop 2007 , p.

51 .

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 216–221.

^ Bishop 2007 , p.

53 .

^ Brands 1997 , pp. 265–268.

^ "A Chronology".

Theodore Roosevelt Association online Archived March 4, 2019, at the Wayback Machine Accessed December 2, 2018 ^ Jay Stuart Berman, Police administration and progressive reform: Theodore Roosevelt as police commissioner of New York (1987) ^ Riis, Jacob A. "XIII".

The Making of an American . Bartleby. p. 3.

^ Brands 1997 , p. 277.

^ Goodwin, Doris Kearns (2013).

The Bully Pulpit: Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, and the Golden Age of Journalism (First Simon & Schuster hardcover ed.). Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-1-4165-4787-7 .

^ Brands 1997 , p. 293.

^ Kennedy, Robert C (September 6, 1902).

"Cartoon of the Day" .

Harper's Weekly . Archived from the original on August 2, 2007.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 242–243.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 243–246.

^ Lemelin, David (2011). "Theodore Roosevelt as Assistant Secretary of the Navy: Preparing America for the World Stage".

History Matters : 13– 34.

^ Miller 1992 , p. 253.

^ Brands 1997 , pp. 310–212.

^ Roosevelt 2001 , pp. 157–158.

^ a b Miller 1992 , pp. 267–268.

^ Brands 1997 , pp. 325–326.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 261, 268.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 271–272.

^ "The World of 1989: The Spanish–American War; Rough Riders" . Library of Congress.

Archived from the original on February 7, 2015 . Retrieved February 7, 2015 .

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 272–274.

^ Samuels 1997 , p. 148.

^ Roosevelt, Theodore (2014).

Theodore Roosevelt: An Autobiography . The Floating Press. p. 244.

ISBN 978-1-77653-337-4 .

Archived from the original on November 19, 2016 . Retrieved February 9, 2015 .

^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1898).

"III" .

The Rough Riders . Bartleby. p. 2.

Archived from the original on July 23, 2008 . Retrieved August 8, 2008 .

^ Brands 1997 , p. 356.

^ Matuz, Roger (2004).

The Handy Presidents Answer Book . Visible Ink Press.

ISBN 978-0-7808-0773-0 .

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 309–311, 318.

^ Morris 1979 , pp. 674–687.

^ a b Chessman 1965 , p. 6.

^ Morris 1979 , p. 693.

^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1908).

The Roosevelt Policy: Speeches, Letters and State Papers, Relating to Corporate Wealth and Closely Allied Topics, of Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States . p. 2.

Archived from the original on April 6, 2015 . Retrieved October 17, 2015 .

^ Brands 1997 , pp. 378–379.

^ Chessman 1965 , p. 79.

^ Miller 1992 , p. 322.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 331–333.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 333–334.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 333–334, 338.

^ Miller 1992 , p. 338.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 340–341.

^ Miller 1992 , p. 342.

^ Brands 1997 , pp. 388–405.

^ John M. Hilpert, American Cyclone: Theodore Roosevelt and His 1900 Whistle-Stop Campaign (U Press of Mississippi, 2015).

^ Chessman, G Wallace (1952). "Theodore Roosevelt's Campaign Against the Vice-Presidency".

Historian .

14 (2): 173– 190.

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-6563.1952.tb00132.x .

^ Miller 1992 , p. 346.

^ Woltman, Nick (August 31, 2015).

"Roosevelt's 'big stick' line at State Fair stuck...later" .

Twin Cities Pioneer Press .

Archived from the original on June 10, 2020 . Retrieved June 9, 2020 .

^ "Theodore Roosevelt's Visit to Isle la Motte Historical Marker" .

Archived from the original on February 22, 2022 . Retrieved February 22, 2022 .

^ "The Inauguration" .

Archived from the original on February 22, 2022 . Retrieved February 22, 2022 .

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 348–352.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 354–356.

^ Goodwin 2013 , p.

279–280 .

^ Goodwin 2013 , p.

281 .

^ Dewey W. Grantham, "Dinner at the White House: Theodore Roosevelt, Booker T. Washington, and the South." Tennessee Historical Quarterly (1958) 17.2: 112–130 online Archived October 23, 2021, at the Wayback Machine ^ Brands 1997 , pp. 422–423.

^ Morris 2001 , p. 58.

^ a b c Ruddy 2016 .

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 365–366.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 378–381.

^ Brands 1997 , pp. 552–553.

^ Brands 1997 , pp. 553–556.

^ Harbaugh 1963 , pp. 165–179.

^ Brands 1997 , pp. 450–483.

^ Brands 1997 , p. 509.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 376–377.

^ Chambers 1974 , p. 207.

^ Chambers 1974 , p. 208.

^ a b Chambers 1974 , p. 209.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 453–459.

^ Blum 1977 , pp. 89–117.

^ Morris 2001 , pp. 445–448.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 459–460.

^ Engs, Ruth C. (2003).

The progressive era's health reform movement: a historical dictionary . Praeger. pp.

20– 22.

ISBN 0-275-97932-6 .

Archived from the original on April 7, 2015 . Retrieved October 17, 2015 .

^ Bakari 2016 .

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 469–471.

^ Brinkley 2009 .

^ Hornaday, William.

"Membership Nominations" .

Wildlife Conservation Society . Retrieved February 27, 2023 .

^ Executing the Constitution: Putting the President Back Into the Constitution . State University of New York Press. 2006. p. 53.

ISBN 978-0-7914-8190-5 .

Archived from the original on November 19, 2016 . Retrieved August 17, 2016 .

^ a b c Dodds, Graham (2013).

Take up Your Pen . University of Pennsylvania. p. 144.

ISBN 978-0-8122-4511-0 .

^ a b Dodds, Graham (2013).

Take up Your Pen . University of Pennsylvania. p. 146.

ISBN 978-0-8122-4511-0 .

^ "Executive Orders" . UCSB.

Archived from the original on August 20, 2016 . Retrieved August 17, 2016 .

^ Morris 2001 , pp. 495–496.

^ Gould 2011 , p. 239.

^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1925).

"13 - The Puritan Spirit and the Regulation of Corporations" (speech of August 20, 1907)" . In Hagedorn, Hermann (ed.).

The Works of Theodore Roosevelt . Vol. 18 - American Problems.

Scribner & Sons . p. 99 . Retrieved January 19, 2024 .

^ Roosevelt to William Henry Moody , September 21, 1907, in Morison 1952 , 5:802 ^ Morgan, William Michael (1982). "The anti-Japanese origins of the Hawaiian Annexation treaty of 1897".

Diplomatic History .

6 (1): 23– 44.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-7709.1982.tb00362.x .

^ Eyre, James K. Jr. (1942). "Japan and the American Annexation of the Philippines".

Pacific Historical Review .

11 (1): 55– 71.

doi : 10.2307/3632998 .

JSTOR 3632998 .

^ Green, Michael J.

(2019).

By More Than Providence: Grand Strategy and American Power in the Asia Pacific Since 1783 . pp.

78– 113.

^ Neu, Charles E. (1967).

An Uncertain Friendship: Theodore Roosevelt and Japan, 1906–1909 . pp.

310– 319.

^ Masayoshi, Matsumura (2008). "Theodore Roosevelt and the Portsmouth Peace Conference: The Riddle and Ripple of his Forbearance".

Rethinking the Russo-Japanese War, 1904–5 . Global Oriental. pp.

50– 60.

^ Kissinger 1994 , pp. 41–42.

^ Neu 1967 , pp. 263–280.

^ Bailey, Thomas A.

(1940). "The Root-Takahira Agreement of 1908".

Pacific Historical Review .

9 (1): 19– 35.

doi : 10.2307/3634124 .

JSTOR 3634124 .

^ Brands 1997 , pp. 614–616.

^ Minami, Kazushi (2024).

People's Diplomacy: How Americans and Chinese Transformed US-China Relations during the Cold War . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press .

ISBN 9781501774157 .

^ Walter LaFeber, "The 'Lion in the Path': The US Emergence as a World Power." Political Science Quarterly 101.5 (1986): 705-718 online Archived October 23, 2021, at the Wayback Machine ^ Miller 1992 , pp. 382–383.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 450–451.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 387–388.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 399–400.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 397–398.

^ Brands 1997 , pp. 615–616.

^ Miller 1992 , p. 384.

^ Brands 1997 , p. 464.

^ Brands 1997 , p. 527.

^ Brands 1997 , pp. 482–486.

^ Chambers 1974 , pp. 209–210.

^ Chambers 1974 , pp. 213–214.

^ Chambers 1974 , p. 215.

^ Brands 1997 , p. 570.

^ Ricard 2014 .

^ a b Forslund, Catherine (2010).

" "Off for the Ditch" - Theodore and Edith Roosevelt Visit Panama in 1906" .

White House Historical Association . Retrieved January 14, 2024 .

^ "Presidential and Secretaries Travels Abroad - Theodore Roosevelt" . Office of the Historian, Foreign Service Institute, United States Department of State . Retrieved January 14, 2024 .

^ Thomas, Heather (June 4, 2020).

"Theodore Roosevelt: A President of "Firsts" " . Retrieved January 14, 2024 .

The first president to leave the country during his time in office—On November 9, 1906, Roosevelt embarks from the Chesapeake Bay aboard the U.S.S. Louisiana to inspect the construction of the Panama Canal, ^ Rouse, Robert (March 15, 2006).

"Happy Anniversary to the first scheduled presidential press conference—93 years young!" . American Chronicle. Archived from the original on September 13, 2008.

^ Weinberg, Arthur; Weinberg, Lila Shaffer (1961).

The Muckrakers . University of Illinois Press. pp.

58– 66.

ISBN 978-0-252-06986-4 .

Archived from the original on April 27, 2016 . Retrieved October 17, 2015 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b Miller 1992 , pp. 437–438.

^ Brands 1997 , pp. 501–503.

^ Brands 1997 , p. 504.

^ Brands 1997 , p. 507.

^ Chambers 1974 , pp. 215–216.

^ a b Chambers 1974 , p. 216.

^ a b Chambers 1974 , pp. 216–217.

^ Brands 1997 , pp. 513–514.

^ Chambers 1974 , pp. 217–218.

^ Gould 2012 , p. 2.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 463–464.

^ Ricard 2011 , pp. 160–166.

^ Chambers 1974 , p. 219.

^ Dorsey, Leroy G. (2003). "Preaching Morality in Modern America: Theodore Roosevelt's Rhetorical Progressivism". In Hogan, J. Michael (ed.).

-Rhetoric and Reform in the Progressive Era, A Rhetorical History of the United States: Significant Moments in American Public Discourse . Vol. 6. Michigan State University Press. pp.

49– 83.

^ Hawley, Joshua D.

(2008).

Theodore Roosevelt: Preacher of Righteousness . p. xvii.

^ See also The Independent (February 6, 1908) p. 274 online ^ Roosevelt, Theodore (January 31, 1908).

Special message to Congress (Speech). The American Presidency Project.

in ( Morison 1952 , vol 5 pp. 1580, 1587) ^ Miller 1992 , pp. 483–485.

^ Brands 1997 , p. 626.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 488–489.

^ Solvick, Stanley D. (1963). "William Howard Taft and the Payne-Aldrich Tariff".

The Mississippi Valley Historical Review .

50 (3): 424– 442.

doi : 10.2307/1902605 .

JSTOR 1902605 .

^ "President Roosevelt's African Trip".

Science .

28 (729): 876– 877. December 18, 1908.

Bibcode : 1908Sci....28..876.

.

doi : 10.1126/science.28.729.876 .

JSTOR 1635075 .

PMID 17743798 .

^ a b "Roosevelt African Expedition Collects for SI" .

Smithsonian Institution Archives .

Archived from the original on December 10, 2012 . Retrieved April 10, 2012 .

^ Cevasco, George A. & Harmond, Richard P. (2009).

Modern American Environmentalists: A Biographical Encyclopedia . JHU Press. p. 444.

ISBN 978-0-8018-9524-1 .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2015 . Retrieved October 17, 2015 .

^ O'Toole 2005 , p. 67.

^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1910).

African Game Trails . New York, C. Scribner's sons.

^ Miller 1992 , p. 505.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 505–509.

^ Miller 1992 , p. 511.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 506–507.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 503, 511.

^ "Theodore Roosevelt – First Presidential Flight, 1910" .

National Air and Space Museum . November 3, 2016.

Archived from the original on May 24, 2021 . Retrieved June 17, 2022 .

^ David Nasaw, Carnegie (2006) pp. 650–652, 729–738.

^ Ernsberger, Richard Jr. (October 2018). "A Fool for Peace".

American History .

53 (4) ; an interview with Nasaw.

^ Howard K. Beale, "Roosevelt and the cementing of an Anglo American Entente", in Beale, Theodore Roosevelt and the Rise of America to World Power . (Johns Hopkins University Press. 1956) pp. 81–171.

online ^ Bradford Perkins, The great rapprochement, England and the United States, 1895 to 1914 (1968).

^ Thomas A. Bailey,  "Theodore Roosevelt and the Alaska Boundary Settlement", Canadian Historical Review (1937) 18#2 pp. 123-130.

^ Edmund Morris, Colonel Roosevelt (2010) p. 469.

^ D.H. Burton, "Theodore Roosevelt and the Special Relationship with Britain: Roosevelt was one of the chief architects of an Anglo-American understanding that survived many diplomatic crises." History Today 23#8 ( August 1973) online ^ John Milton Cooper, The Warrior and the Priest: Woodrow Wilson and Theodore Roosevelt (Harvard UP, 1983). pp. 303–323.

^ Brands 1997 , pp. 665–666.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 502–503.

^ Stanley D. Solvick, "The Conservative as Progressive: William Howard Taft and the Politics of the Square Deal" Northwest Ohio Quarterly (1967) 39#3 pp. 38–48.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 512–513.

^ Istre, Logan Stagg (2021).

"Bench over Ballot: The Fight for Judicial Supremacy and the New Constitutional Politics, 1910–1916" .

The Journal of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era .

20 (1): 2– 23.

doi : 10.1017/S1537781420000079 .

ISSN 1537-7814 .

^ a b Brands 1997 , p. 675.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 515–516.

^ Miller 1992 , p. 517.

^ Brands 1997 , p. 683.

^ a b Miller 1992 , p. 518.

^ Brands 1997 , p. 684.

^ Miller 1992 , p. 519.

^ David H. Burton , William Howard Taft: Confident Peacemaker (2004) pp. 82–83.

^ John E. Noyes, "William Howard Taft and the Taft Arbitration Treaties." Villanova Law Review 56 (2011): 535+ online Archived July 26, 2020, at the Wayback Machine ^ Campbell, John P. (1966). "Taft, Roosevelt, and the Arbitration Treaties of 1911".

The Journal of American History .

53 (2): 279– 298.

doi : 10.2307/1894200 .

JSTOR 1894200 .

^ E. James Hindman, "The General Arbitration Treaties of William Howard Taft." Historian 36.1 (1973): 52–65.

online Archived March 8, 2021, at the Wayback Machine ^ Urofsky, Melvin I. (2004).

The American Presidents: Critical Essays . Routledge. p. 323.

ISBN 978-1-135-58137-4 .

Archived from the original on August 14, 2021 . Retrieved May 26, 2019 .

^ Campbell, 1996 ^ Brands 1997 , p. 698.

^ Brands 1997 , p. 703.

^ Brands 1997 , p. 709.

^ Brands 1997 , p. 705.

^ Lorant, Stefan (1968).

The Glorious Burden: The American Presidency . Harper & Row. p.

512 .

ISBN 0-06-012686-8 .

^ Brands 1997 , p. 706.

^ Norrander, Barbara (2015).

The Imperfect Primary: Oddities, Biases, and Strengths of U.S. Presidential Nomination Politics . Routledge. p. 14.

ISBN 978-1-317-55332-8 .

Archived from the original on August 14, 2021 . Retrieved October 6, 2017 .

^ Norman M. Wilensky, Conservatives in the Progressive Era: The Taft Republicans of 1912 (1965) pp. 61–62.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 524–526.

^ Gould, Lewis L. (August 2008).

"1912 Republican Convention: Return of the Rough Rider" .

Smithsonian Magazine' .

^ Brands 1997 , p. 717.

^ Miller 1992 , p. 526.

^ Gould 2008a , pp. 127–128.

^ Allen F. Davis, American Heroine: The Life and Legend of Jane Addams (1973) pp. 185–197.

^ Marena Cole, "A Progressive Conservative": The Roles of George Perkins and Frank Munsey in the Progressive Party Campaign of 1912" (PhD dissertation, Tufts University ProQuest Dissertations Publishing,  2017. 10273522).

^ John A. Garraty, Right-Hand Man: The Life of George W. Perkins (1960) pp. 264–284.

^ Lincoln, A. (1959). "Theodore Roosevelt, Hiram Johnson, and the Vice-Presidential Nomination of 1912".

Pacific Historical Review .

28 (3): 267– 283.

doi : 10.2307/3636471 .

JSTOR 3636471 .

^ O'Toole, Patricia (June 25, 2006).

"The War of 1912" .

Time Magazine . Archived from the original on July 3, 2006 . Retrieved August 8, 2008 .

^ Roosevelt 1913 , XV. The Peace of Righteousness, Appendix B .

^ Thayer 1919 , pp. 25–31, Chapter XXII.

^ Mowry, George E. (1940). "The South and the Progressive Lily White Party of 1912".

The Journal of Southern History .

6 (2): 237– 247.

doi : 10.2307/2191208 .

JSTOR 2191208 .

^ Link, Arthur S. (1947). "The Negro as a Factor in the Campaign of 1912".

The Journal of Negro History .

32 (1): 81– 99.

doi : 10.2307/2715292 .

JSTOR 2715292 .

S2CID 150222134 .

^ Link, Arthur S. (1946). "Theodore Roosevelt and the South in 1912".

The North Carolina Historical Review .

23 (3): 313– 324.

JSTOR 23515317 .

^ Edgar Eugene Robinson, The Presidential Vote 1896–1932 (1947), pp. 65–127.

^ "Schrank, Who Shot T. Roosevelt, Dies" .

The New York Times . September 17, 1943. p. 23.

Archived from the original on May 6, 2021 . Retrieved May 6, 2021 .

^ Stan Gores, "The attempted assassination of Teddy Roosevelt." Wisconsin Magazine of History (1970) 53#4: 269–277 online Archived January 26, 2021, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Artifacts" .

Museum . Wisconsin Historical Society.

Archived from the original on November 5, 2010 . Retrieved September 14, 2010 .

^ Congress, United States (1951).

Congressional Record: Proceedings and Debates of the ... Congress . U.S. Government Printing Office.

Archived from the original on August 14, 2021 . Retrieved October 31, 2020 .

^ Remey, Oliver E.; Cochems, Henry F.; Bloodgood, Wheeler P. (1912).

The Attempted Assassination of Ex-President Theodore Roosevelt . The Progressive Publishing Company. p. 192.

Archived from the original on June 21, 2018 . Retrieved March 20, 2018 .

^ "Medical History of American Presidents" . Doctor Zebra.

Archived from the original on October 20, 2010 . Retrieved September 14, 2010 .

^ "Roosevelt Timeline" . Theodore Roosevelt.

Archived from the original on May 29, 2010 . Retrieved September 14, 2010 .

^ Gerard Helferich, Theodore Roosevelt and the Assassin: Madness, Vengeance, and the Campaign of 1912 (2013) ^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1926). Bishop, Joseph Bucklin (ed.).

The Works of Theodore Roosevelt, Volume 24 - Theodore Roosevelt and His Times Shown in His Own Letters .

C. Scribner's Sons . p. 405 . Retrieved January 20, 2024 .

^ Miller 1992 , p. 529.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 529–530.

^ Gould 2008a , p. 132.

^ Dexter, Jim (March 10, 2010).

"How third-party candidates affect elections" . CNN. Archived from the original on November 13, 2016 . Retrieved November 7, 2016 .

^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1914).

Through the Brazilian Wilderness (facsimile) (1st ed.). S4u languages.

hdl : 2027/nyp.33433081694915 .

Archived from the original on February 28, 2010 . Retrieved February 25, 2010 .

^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1914).

"The Start" .

Through the Brazilian Wilderness – via Wikisource .

^ a b c Millard 2009 , pp. 267–270.

^ Marx, Rudolph (October 31, 2011).

The Health of The President: Theodore Roosevelt . Health guidance.

^ Thayer 1919 , pp. 4–7.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 539–540.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 548–549.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 550–551.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 552–553.

^ McGeary, M. Nelson (July 1959). "Gifford Pinchot's Years of Frustration, 1917–1920".

The Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography .

83 (3): 327– 342.

JSTOR 20089210 .

^ Brands 1997 , pp. 749–751, 806–809.

^ Roosevelt 1917 , p. 347.

^ "Enroll Westerners for Service in War; Movement to Register Men of That Region Begun at the Rocky Mountain Club. Headed by Major Burnham. John Hays Hammond and Others of Prominence Reported to be Supporting Plan" (PDF) .

New York Times . March 13, 1917. p. 11.

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 25, 2021 . Retrieved June 30, 2013 .

^ "Will Not Send Roosevelt; Wilson Not to Avail Himself of Volunteer Authority at Present".

New York Times . May 19, 1917.

ISSN 0362-4331 .

^ Roosevelt 1917 .

^ Brands 1997 , pp. 781–784.

^ Cramer, CH (1961).

Newton D. Baker . pp.

110– 113.

^ a b Dalton 2002 , p. 507.

^ Pringle 1931 , p. 519.

^ J. Lee Thompson (2014).

Never Call Retreat: Theodore Roosevelt and the Great War . Springer. pp.

32– 34.

ISBN 978-1-137-30653-1 .

Archived from the original on August 15, 2021 . Retrieved January 30, 2019 .

^ Gamble, Richard M. (2014).

The War for Righteousness: Progressive Christianity, the Great War, and the Rise of the Messianic Nation . Open Road Media. pp.

97– 98.

ISBN 978-1-4976-4679-7 .

Archived from the original on August 13, 2021 . Retrieved January 31, 2019 .

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 562–564.

^ William Clinton Olson, " Theodore Roosevelt's Conception of an International League" World Affairs Quarterly (1959) 29#3 pp. 329–353.

^ Stephen Wertheim, "The league that wasn't: American designs for a legalist-sanctionist league of nations and the intellectual origins of international organization, 1914–1920." Diplomatic History 35.5 (2011): 797–836.

^ David Mervin, " Henry Cabot Lodge and the League of Nations." Journal of American Studies 4#2 (1971): 201–214.

online Archived January 30, 2019, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Miller 1992 , p. 559.

^ Miller 1992 , pp. 564–566.

^ a b "Theodore Roosevelt Dies Suddenly at Oyster Bay Home; Nation Shocked, Pays Tribute to Former President; Our Flag on All Seas and in All Lands at Half Mast" .

The New York Times . January 1919.

Archived from the original on February 18, 2017 . Retrieved February 28, 2017 .

^ Bleyer, Bill (October 3, 2016).

Sagamore Hill: Theodore Roosevelt's Summer White House . Arcadia Publishing. p. 8.

ISBN 978-1-62585-707-1 .

^ "Roosevelt's "Please Put Out the Light" His Last Words, Says Witness of His End" .

The New York Times . August 3, 1926. p. 9 . Retrieved September 10, 2024 .

^ Manners, William (1969).

TR and Will: A Friendship that Split the Republican Party . Harcourt, Brace & World.

^ a b Morris 2010 , p. 556.

^ Morris 2010 , pp. 554, 556–557.

^ Morris 2010 , pp. 554, 557.

^ " "Light gone out" – TR at the Library of Congress – Jefferson's Legacy: The Library of Congress Review" . IgoUgo.

Archived from the original on April 6, 2012 . Retrieved October 31, 2011 .

^ Roosevelt, Theodore (2006).

An Autobiography . Echo Library.

ISBN 978-1-4068-0155-2 .

Archived from the original on January 28, 2021 . Retrieved September 5, 2020 .

^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1904).

The Rough Riders . The Review of Reviews Company.

^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1900).

The Naval War of 1812 . G.P. Putnam's Sons.

Archived from the original on August 14, 2021 . Retrieved September 5, 2020 .

^ Richard Slotkin, "Nostalgia and progress: Theodore Roosevelt's myth of the frontier".

American Quarterly (1981) 33#5 pp: 608–637.

online Archived September 8, 2014, at the Wayback Machine ^ Carson, Gerald (February 1971).

"Roosevelt and the 'nature fakers' " .

American Heritage Magazine . Vol. 22, no. 2.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2013 . Retrieved January 5, 2013 .

^ Cunliffe 1955 .

^ "Theodore Roosevelt" .

mdmasons.org . The Grand Lodge of Maryland.

Archived from the original on November 16, 2020 . Retrieved February 15, 2021 .

^ "The Origins of the SAR" . SAR.

Archived from the original on July 3, 2016 . Retrieved January 15, 2011 .

^ MacEacheran, Mike (January 17, 2019).

"The secret travel club that's been everywhere" . BBC . Retrieved July 3, 2023 .

^ Thayer 1919 , pp. 22–24, Chapter XVII.

^ a b Rouse, Wendy (November 1, 2015).

"Jiu-Jitsuing Uncle SamThe Unmanly Art of Jiu-Jitsu and the Yellow Peril Threat in the Progressive Era United States" .

Pacific Historical Review .

84 (4): 448– 477.

doi : 10.1525/phr.2015.84.4.448 .

ISSN 0030-8684 .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved February 9, 2021 .

^ Amberger, J Christoph (1998).

Secret History of the Sword Adventures in Ancient Martial Arts . Multi-Media Books.

ISBN 1-892515-04-0 .

^ Kathleen Dalton notes that historians have preferred retelling the "oft-repeated accounts of warmongering." Dalton 2002 , p. 522 ^ Richard D. White Jr (2003).

Roosevelt the Reformer: Theodore Roosevelt as Civil Service Commissioner, 1889–1895 . U of Alabama Press. p. 146.

ISBN 978-0-8173-1361-6 .

Archived from the original on December 13, 2020 . Retrieved July 18, 2019 .

^ Richard W. Turk, "The United States Navy and the 'Taking' of Panama, 1901–1903." Journal of Military History 38.3 (1974): 92+.

^ Holmes, James R. (2008).

" 'A Striking Thing': Leadership, Strategic Communications, and Roosevelt's Great White Fleet" (PDF) .

Naval War College Review .

61 (1): 50– 67.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 17, 2022.

^ Roosevelt 1913 , p. 602.

^ Beale 1956 , p. 48.

^ Harbaugh 1963 , pp. 214–217.

^ Reisner 1922 , p. 355.

^ Reisner 1922 , p. 324.

^ a b Reisner 1922 , p. 306.

^ Leuchtenburg 2015 , pp. 30–31.

^ Leuchtenburg 2015 , pp. 32–33.

^ Gary Murphy in "Theodore Roosevelt, Presidential Power and the Regulation of the Market" in Ricard 2011 , pp. 154–172 ^ Morris 2001 , pp. 430–431, 436.

^ Kissinger 1994 , pp. 38–40.

^ Kissinger 1994 , pp. 38–39.

^ Walker, Stephen G.; Schafer, Mark (2007). "Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson as cultural icons of US foreign policy".

Political Psychology .

28 (6): 747– 776.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9221.2007.00602.x .

^ Kissinger 1994 , p. 40.

^ Kissinger 1994 , pp. 40–42.

^ Dalton 2002 , pp. 4–5.

^ "Theodore Roosevelt Biography: Impact and Legacy" .

American President .

Miller Center of Public Affairs . 2003. Archived from the original on April 18, 2005.

^ "Legacy: Theodore Roosevelt" . PBS. Archived from the original on April 17, 2004.

^ Dalton 2002 , p. 5.

^ Adams, Henry (1918).

The Education of Henry Adams: An Autobiography . Houghton Mifflin Company. p.

417 .

^ Cooper 1983 .

^ Dalton 2002 .

^ Brands 1997 , p. x.

^ Pringle 1931 , p. 4.

^ Testi 1995 , p. 1513.

^ D. G. Daniels, "Theodore Roosevelt and Gender Roles" Presidential Studies Quarterly (1996) 26#3 pp. 648–665 ^ Dorsey, Leroy G (2013). "Managing Women's Equality: Theodore Roosevelt, the Frontier Myth, and the Modern Woman".

Rhetoric & Public Affairs .

16 (3): 425.

doi : 10.1353/rap.2013.0037 .

S2CID 144278936 .

^ Ricard, Serge (2005). "Review".

The Journal of Military History .

69 (2): 536– 537.

doi : 10.1353/jmh.2005.0123 .

S2CID 153729793 .

^ Boy Scouts Handbook (original ed.). Boy Scouts of America. 1911. pp.

374– 376.

ISBN 978-1-62636-639-8 .

Archived from the original on October 16, 2015 . Retrieved October 17, 2015 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Brands 1997 , p. 372.

^ a b c "The presidents who hated their presidential portraits" .

The Washington Post . September 8, 2022.

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved August 4, 2023 .

^ "A Tale of Two Painters: Theodore Roosevelt's Portraits" . Boundary Stones. June 21, 2019 . Retrieved August 4, 2023 .

^ Domek, Tom; Hayes, Robert E. (2006).

Mt. Rushmore and Keystone . Arcadia Publishing.

^ Fite, Gibert C. (2003).

Mount Rushmore . Mount Rushmore History Association.

ISBN 0-9646798-5-X .

^ Fung, Brian (September 24, 2012).

"What Does Teddy Roosevelt's 'Big Stick' Line Really Mean, Anyway?" .

The Atlantic . Emerson Collective.

Archived from the original on July 26, 2020 . Retrieved June 10, 2020 .

^ Leuchtenburg 2015 , p. 30.

^ Mears 2018 , pp. 153–154.

^ Mears 2018 , p. 154.

^ Mears 2018 , p. 155.

^ Woodall, James R. (2010).

Williams-Ford Texas A and M University Military History: Texas Aggie Medals of Honor: Seven Heroes of World War II . Texas A&M University Press. p. 18.

ISBN 978-1-60344-253-4 .

Archived from the original on April 7, 2015 . Retrieved October 17, 2015 .

^ Dorr, Robert F. (July 1, 2015).

"Theodore Roosevelt's Medal of Honor" . Defense Media Network.

Archived from the original on February 13, 2018 . Retrieved February 12, 2018 .

^ Scott Specialized Catalogue of US Stamps , pp. 79, 108, 137, 667, 668 ^ "Up 1900s Celebrate The Century Issues" . Smithsonian National Postal Museum. January 1, 1998. Archived from the original on June 18, 2015 . Retrieved June 18, 2015 .

^ "Theodore Roosevelt National Park" . Travel.

National Geographic . November 5, 2009. Archived from the original on August 17, 2018 . Retrieved August 17, 2018 .

^ "(188693) Roosevelt" .

Minor Planet Center .

Archived from the original on March 8, 2021 . Retrieved November 21, 2019 .

^ "MPC/MPO/MPS Archive" .

Minor Planet Center .

Archived from the original on October 7, 2010 . Retrieved November 21, 2019 .

^ Bart, Sheldon.

Race to the Top of the World: Richard Byrd and the First Flight to the North Pole – via www.scribd.com.

^ "My Friend Flicka" . Classic Television Archives.

Archived from the original on January 21, 2011 . Retrieved March 18, 2009 .

^ Cullinane 2017 .

^ Chi, Paul (December 12, 2014).

"Ben Stiller, 'Night at the Museum' Cast Honor Robin Williams at Premiere" .

Variety . Retrieved October 24, 2022 .

^ "24 of Hollywood's Best Presidents in Movies and TV" .

The Hollywood Reporter . February 21, 2022 . Retrieved October 24, 2022 .

^ Gurwin, Gabe (June 20, 2016).

"Teddy Roosevelt will kill you with culture in 'Civilization VI' " .

Digital Trends .

Archived from the original on March 8, 2022 . Retrieved March 8, 2022 .

^ Sutton, Benjamin (January 20, 2022).

"Controversial statue of Theodore Roosevelt removed from American Museum of Natural History" .

The Art Newspaper .

Archived from the original on January 21, 2022 . Retrieved January 25, 2022 .

^ Pogrebin, Robin (June 21, 2020).

"Roosevelt Statue to Be Removed From Museum of Natural History" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on June 21, 2020 . Retrieved June 21, 2020 .

^ "Vincent Voice Library" .

Michigan State University . Archived from the original (audio clips) on June 3, 2013 . Retrieved July 17, 2012 .

^ "MSU" . Retrieved September 14, 2010 .

^ Roosevelt, Theodore (1913a). Youngman, Elmer H (ed.).

Progressive Principles . Progressive National Service. p. 215.

Archived from the original on December 22, 2020 . Retrieved April 14, 2009 .

Sources Main articles: Bibliography of Theodore Roosevelt and Books Written by Theodore Roosevelt Bakari, Mohamed El-Kamel (2016). "Mapping the 'Anthropocentric-ecocentric'Dualism in the History of American Presidency: The Good, the Bad, and the Ambivalent".

Journal of Studies in Social Sciences .

14 (2).

Beale, Howard K. (1956).

Theodore Roosevelt and the Rise of America to World Power . Johns Hopkins Press.

Bishop, Joseph Bucklin (2007).

Theodore Roosevelt's Letters to His Children . Wildside Press.

ISBN 978-1-434-48394-2 .

Blum, John Morton (1977).

The Republican Roosevelt (2nd ed.). Harvard University Press.

Brands, Henry William (1997).

TR: The Last Romantic . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0-465-06958-3 .

Brinkley, Douglas (2009).

The Wilderness Warrior: Theodore Roosevelt and the Crusade for America . HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0-06-056528-2 .

Chambers, John W. (1974). Woodward, C. Vann (ed.).

Responses of the Presidents to Charges of Misconduct . Delacorte Press. pp.

207– 237.

ISBN 0-440-05923-2 .

Chessman, G. Wallace (1965).

Governor Theodore Roosevelt: The Albany Apprenticeship, 1898–1900 .

Cooper, John Milton (1983).

The Warrior and the Priest: Woodrow Wilson and Theodore Roosevelt . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-94751-1 .

Cullinane, Michael Patrick (2017).

Theodore Roosevelt's Ghost: The History and Memory of an American Icon . LSU Press.

ISBN 978-0-8071-6672-7 .

Cunliffe, Marcus (1955). "Theodore Roosevelt, President of the United States 1901–1908".

History Today .

4 (9): 592– 601.

Dalton, Kathleen (2002).

Theodore Roosevelt: A Strenuous Life . Knopf Doubleday Publishing.

ISBN 0-679-76733-9 .

Gould, Lewis L. (2008a).

Four Hats in the Ring: The 1912 Election and the Birth of Modern American Politics . University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 978-0-7006-1564-3 .

Gould, Lewis L. (2011).

The Presidency of Theodore Roosevelt (2nd ed.).

Gould, Lewis L.

(2012).

Theodore Roosevelt . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-979701-1 .

Harbaugh, William Henry (1963).

The Life and Times of Theodore Roosevelt . Farrar, Straus And Cudahy.

Kissinger, Henry (1994).

Diplomacy . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 0-671-51099-1 .

Kohn, Edward P. (2006).

"A Necessary Defeat: Theodore Roosevelt and the New York Mayoral Election of 1886" .

New York History .

87 (2): 205– 227.

JSTOR 23183358 .

Leuchtenburg, William E. (2015).

The American President: From Teddy Roosevelt to Bill Clinton . Oxford University Press.

McCullough, David (1981).

Mornings on Horseback: The Story of an Extraordinary Family, a Vanished Way of Life and the Unique Child Who Became Theodore Roosevelt . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-7432-1830-6 .

Archived from the original on April 7, 2015 . Retrieved October 17, 2015 .

Mears, Dwight S. (2018).

The Medal of Honor: The Evolution of America's Highest Military Decoration . University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 978-0-7006-2665-6 .

Millard, C (2009).

The river of doubt: Theodore Roosevelt's darkest journey .

Miller, Nathan (1992).

Theodore Roosevelt: A Life . William Morrow & Co.

ISBN 978-0-688-06784-7 .

Morison, Elting E, ed. (1952).

The letters of Theodore Roosevelt . Harvard University Press.

Morris, Edmund (1979).

The Rise of Theodore Roosevelt . Vol. 1. To 1901. Coward, McCann & Geoghegan.

ISBN 978-0-698-10783-0 .

Morris, Edmund (2001).

Theodore Rex . Vol. 2. To 1909.

Morris, Edmund (2010).

Colonel Roosevelt . Vol. 3. Random House.

ISBN 978-0-679-60415-0 .

Archived from the original on March 13, 2022 . Retrieved December 12, 2016 .

O'Toole, Patricia (2005).

When Trumpets Call: Theodore Roosevelt after the White House . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 0-684-86477-0 .

Pringle, Henry F.

(1931).

Theodore Roosevelt .

Pringle, Henry F. (1956).

Theodore Roosevelt (2nd ed.). Harcourt, Brace.

Putnam, Carleton (1958).

Theodore Roosevelt . Vol. I: The Formative Years.

Reisner, Christian F. (1922).

Roosevelt's Religion . The Abingdon Press.

Ricard, Serge, ed. (2011).

A Companion to Theodore Roosevelt . Wiley.

ISBN 978-1-4443-3140-0 .

Ricard, Serge (2014).

"H-Diplo Essay No. 116 - The State of Theodore Roosevelt Studies" (PDF) . H-Diplo - H-Net network on Diplomatic History and International Affairs, Michigan State University Department of History. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 27, 2014.

Roosevelt, Theodore (1913).

Autobiography .

Macmillan .

——— (1917).

The Foes of Our Own Household . George H. Doran.

LCCN 17025965 .

Roosevelt, Theodore (1926).

The Works of Theodore Roosevelt, Volumes 1-24 (Memorial ed.).

C. Scribner's Sons .

Roosevelt, Theodore (1989) [1941]. Hart, Albert Bushnell; Ferleger, Herbert Ronald (eds.).

"Theodore Roosevelt Association Cyclopedia" (Revised 2nd ed.).

Roosevelt, Theodore (2001). Brands, HW (ed.).

The Selected Letters . Cooper Square Press.

ISBN 978-0-8154-1126-0 .

Ruddy, Daniel (2016).

Theodore the Great: Conservative Crusader . Regnery History.

ISBN 978-1-62157-441-5 .

Samuels, Peggy (1997).

Teddy Roosevelt at San Juan: The Making of a President . Texas A&M UP.

ISBN 978-0-89096-771-3 .

Archived from the original on April 7, 2015 . Retrieved October 17, 2015 .

Testi, Arnaldo (1995).

"The gender of reform politics: Theodore Roosevelt and the culture of masculinity" .

Journal of American History .

81 (4): 1509– 1533.

doi : 10.2307/2081647 .

JSTOR 2081647 . Archived from the original on October 25, 2019.

Thayer, William Roscoe (1919).

Theodore Roosevelt: an intimate biography . Houghton Mifflin.

Watts, Sarah (2003).

Rough Rider in the White House: Theodore Roosevelt and the Politics of Desire .

External links Theodore Roosevelt at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Theodore Roosevelt Association Libraries and collections Theodore Roosevelt Presidential Library Medora, North Dakota.

Theodore Roosevelt Center at Dickinson State University Theodore Roosevelt Collection , at the Houghton Library , Harvard University Theodore Roosevelt Hunting Library at the Library of Congress , Washington, DC.

Theodore Roosevelt's journalism at The Archive of American Journalism Theodore Roosevelt American Museum of Natural History Works by Theodore Roosevelt at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Theodore Roosevelt at the Internet Archive Works by Theodore Roosevelt at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Media Theodore Roosevelt Speech Edison Recordings Campaign - 1912 , audio recording Theodore Roosevelt collected news and commentary at The New York Times "Life Portrait of Theodore Roosevelt" , from C-SPAN 's American Presidents: Life Portraits , September 3, 1999 "Writings of Theodore Roosevelt" from C-SPAN 's American Writers: A Journey Through History "The Abyssinian treatment administered to Standard Oil" , in which Roosevelt can be heard pronouncing his last name Other Almanac of Theodore Roosevelt Archived May 1, 2021, at the Wayback Machine Theodore Roosevelt: A Resource Guide – Library of Congress Theodore Roosevelt on Nobelprize.org v t e Theodore Roosevelt 26th President of the United States (1901–1909) 25th Vice President of the United States (1901) 33rd Governor of New York (1899–1900) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (1897–1898) New York City Police Commissioner (1895–1897) Presidency ( timeline ) First inauguration historic site Second inauguration Foreign policy " Square Deal " Booker T. Washington dinner Conservation Newlands Reclamation Act Transfer Act of 1905 Antiquities Act Pelican Island Devils Tower National Monument Muir Woods National Monument United States Forest Service , United States Reclamation Service National Wildlife Refuge System Roosevelt Arch Conference of Governors Northern Securities Company breakup court case Anthracite coal strike of 1902 Pure Food and Drug Act Food and Drug Administration Meat Inspection Act Expediting Act Elkins Act Hepburn Act Aldrich–Vreeland Act Tillman Act of 1907 Federal Employers Liability Act Kinkaid Act Big stick ideology Hay–Bunau-Varilla Treaty Panama Canal Zone Panama Canal Venezuelan crisis Roosevelt Corollary Occupation of Cuba Russo-Japanese War Treaty of Portsmouth 1906 Nobel Peace Prize Gentlemen's Agreement of 1907 Army War College Roosevelt Hall College football meetings Bureau of Investigation Department of Commerce and Labor Bureau of Corporations Keep Commission Inland Waterways Commission Bureau of the Census Great White Fleet Perdicaris affair Cabinet White House West Wing State of the Union Address, 1901 1906 1908 White House desk Federal judiciary appointments Other events Spanish–American War Rough Riders Battle of Las Guasimas Battle of San Juan Hill Great Rapprochement "Bull Moose" Progressive Party New Nationalism Assassination attempt Boone and Crockett Club Smithsonian–Roosevelt African expedition "River of Doubt" Amazonian expedition Roosevelt's World War I volunteers Life and homes Birthplace, boyhood home replica Sagamore Hill Home and Museum Maltese Cross Cabin Elkhorn Ranch Pine Knot cabin New York State Executive Mansion Gravesite Writings and speeches Theodore Roosevelt bibliography The Naval War of 1812 (1882 book) "The Strenuous Life" (1899 speech) League to Enforce Peace "Citizenship in a Republic" (1910 speech) "Progressive Cause Greater Than Any Individual" (1912 post-assassination-attempt speech) Theodore Roosevelt: An Autobiography (1913 book) The Forum magazine articles Theodore Roosevelt Cyclopedia Archival collections Elections 1898 New York state election Republican National Convention: 1900 1904 1912 1916 United States presidential elections: 1900 1904 1912 Legacy Bibliography Mount Rushmore Mount Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Center and Digital Library White House Roosevelt Room Theodore Roosevelt National Park Theodore Roosevelt Wilderness Theodore Roosevelt Island Roosevelt National Forest Roosevelt Park (San Antonio) Roosevelt Study Center Theodore Roosevelt Association Mount Rushmore Anniversary coins Statues New York City Portland, Oregon Theodore Roosevelt Memorial Park Monument Assemblage Theodore Roosevelt Monument Roosevelt Memorial, Portland, Oregon Proposed presidential library Theodore Roosevelt United States Courthouse Roosevelt River Theodore Roosevelt Bridge Theodore Roosevelt Memorial Bridge Theodore Roosevelt Award SS President Roosevelt USS Theodore Roosevelt (1906 , 1961 , 1984 ) Roosevelt Road U.S. postage stamps Popular culture Teddy bear "Speak softly, and carry a big stick" Books Films Terrible Teddy, the Grizzly King , 1901 film The 'Teddy' Bears , 1907 film Roosevelt in Africa , 1910 documentary The Rough Riders , 1927 film Teddy, the Rough Rider , 1940 film Rough Riders , 1997 miniseries The Roosevelts , 2014 documentary Theodore Roosevelt , 2022 miniseries Elkhorn , 2024 series Related Political positions " Bully pulpit " Ananias Club " Nature fakers " League to Enforce Peace A Guest of Honor " Muckraker " " Roosevelt Republican " Barnes vs. Roosevelt libel trial Family Alice Hathaway Lee (first wife) Edith Kermit Carow (second wife) Alice Lee Roosevelt (daughter) Theodore Roosevelt III (son) Kermit Roosevelt (son) Ethel Carow Roosevelt (daughter) Archibald Roosevelt (son) Quentin Roosevelt (son) Theodore Roosevelt IV (grandson) Cornelius V. S. Roosevelt III (grandson) Quentin Roosevelt II (grandson) Kermit Roosevelt Jr.

(grandson) Joseph Willard Roosevelt (grandson) Edith Roosevelt Derby (granddaughter) Theodora Roosevelt (granddaughter) Theodore Roosevelt Sr.

(father) Martha Bulloch Roosevelt (mother) Anna "Bamie" Roosevelt (sister) Elliott Bulloch Roosevelt (brother) Corinne Roosevelt (sister) Cornelius Roosevelt (grandfather) James Stephens Bulloch (grandfather) James Alfred Roosevelt (uncle) Robert Barnhill Roosevelt Anna Eleanor Roosevelt (niece) Gracie Hall Roosevelt (nephew) Pete (dog) ← William McKinley William Howard Taft → ← Garret Hobart Category Offices and distinctions New York State Assembly Preceded by William J. Trimble Member of the New York Assembly from the 21st district 1882–1884 Succeeded by Henry A. Barnum Preceded by Thomas G. Alvord Minority Leader of the New York Assembly 1883 Succeeded by Frank Rice Civic offices Unknown Last known title holder: William Farrar Smith Superintendent of the New York City Police Department 1895–1897 Succeeded by John McCullagh Government offices Preceded by William McAdoo Assistant Secretary of the Navy 1897–1898 Succeeded by Charles Herbert Allen Party political offices Preceded by Frank S. Black Republican nominee for Governor of New York 1898 Succeeded by Benjamin Odell Preceded by Garret Hobart Republican nominee for Vice President of the United States 1900 Succeeded by Charles W. Fairbanks Preceded by William McKinley Republican nominee for President of the United States 1904 Succeeded by William Howard Taft New political party Progressive nominee for President of the United States 1912 Party dissolved Political offices Preceded by Frank S. Black Governor of New York 1899–1900 Succeeded by Benjamin Barker Odell Jr.

Preceded by Garret Hobart Vice President of the United States 1901 Succeeded by Charles W. Fairbanks Preceded by William McKinley President of the United States 1901–1909 Succeeded by William Howard Taft Awards and achievements Preceded by Bertha von Suttner Laureate of the Nobel Peace Prize 1906 Succeeded by Ernesto Teodoro Moneta Louis Renault Articles related to Theodore Roosevelt v t e Presidents of the United States Presidents and presidencies George Washington ( 1789–1797 ) John Adams ( 1797–1801 ) Thomas Jefferson ( 1801–1809 ) James Madison ( 1809–1817 ) James Monroe ( 1817–1825 ) John Quincy Adams ( 1825–1829 ) Andrew Jackson ( 1829–1837 ) Martin Van Buren ( 1837–1841 ) William Henry Harrison ( 1841 ) John Tyler ( 1841–1845 ) James K. Polk ( 1845–1849 ) Zachary Taylor ( 1849–1850 ) Millard Fillmore ( 1850–1853 ) Franklin Pierce ( 1853–1857 ) James Buchanan ( 1857–1861 ) Abraham Lincoln ( 1861–1865 ) Andrew Johnson ( 1865–1869 ) Ulysses S. Grant ( 1869–1877 ) Rutherford B. Hayes ( 1877–1881 ) James A. Garfield ( 1881 ) Chester A. Arthur ( 1881–1885 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1885–1889 ) Benjamin Harrison ( 1889–1893 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1893–1897 ) William McKinley ( 1897–1901 ) Theodore Roosevelt ( 1901–1909 ) William Howard Taft ( 1909–1913 ) Woodrow Wilson ( 1913–1921 ) Warren G. Harding ( 1921–1923 ) Calvin Coolidge ( 1923–1929 ) Herbert Hoover ( 1929–1933 ) Franklin D. Roosevelt ( 1933–1945 ) Harry S. Truman ( 1945–1953 ) Dwight D. Eisenhower ( 1953–1961 ) John F. Kennedy ( 1961–1963 ) Lyndon B. Johnson ( 1963–1969 ) Richard Nixon ( 1969–1974 ) Gerald Ford ( 1974–1977 ) Jimmy Carter ( 1977–1981 ) Ronald Reagan ( 1981–1989 ) George H. W. Bush ( 1989–1993 ) Bill Clinton ( 1993–2001 ) George W. Bush ( 2001–2009 ) Barack Obama ( 2009–2017 ) Donald Trump ( 2017–2021 ) Joe Biden ( 2021–2025 ) Donald Trump ( 2025–present ) Presidency timelines Washington J. Adams McKinley T. Roosevelt Taft Wilson Harding Coolidge Hoover F. D. Roosevelt Truman Eisenhower Kennedy L. B. Johnson Nixon Ford Carter Reagan G. H. W. Bush Clinton G. W. Bush Obama Trump Biden Category List v t e Vice Presidents of the United States John Adams ( 1789–1797 ) Thomas Jefferson ( 1797–1801 ) Aaron Burr ( 1801–1805 ) George Clinton ( 1805–1812 ) Elbridge Gerry (1813–1814) Daniel D. Tompkins (1817–1825) John C. Calhoun (1825–1832) Martin Van Buren (1833–1837) Richard M. Johnson (1837–1841) John Tyler (1841) George M. Dallas (1845–1849) Millard Fillmore (1849–1850) William R. King (1853) John C. Breckinridge (1857–1861) Hannibal Hamlin (1861–1865) Andrew Johnson (1865) Schuyler Colfax (1869–1873) Henry Wilson (1873–1875) William A. Wheeler (1877–1881) Chester A. Arthur (1881) Thomas A. Hendricks (1885) Levi P. Morton (1889–1893) Adlai Stevenson (1893–1897) Garret Hobart (1897–1899) Theodore Roosevelt (1901) Charles W. Fairbanks (1905–1909) James S. Sherman (1909–1912) Thomas R. Marshall (1913–1921) Calvin Coolidge (1921–1923) Charles G. Dawes (1925–1929) Charles Curtis (1929–1933) John N. Garner (1933–1941) Henry A. Wallace (1941–1945) Harry S. Truman (1945) Alben W. Barkley (1949–1953) Richard Nixon (1953–1961) Lyndon B. Johnson (1961–1963) Hubert Humphrey (1965–1969) Spiro Agnew (1969–1973) Gerald Ford (1973–1974) Nelson Rockefeller (1974–1977) Walter Mondale (1977–1981) George H. W. Bush (1981–1989) Dan Quayle ( 1989–1993 ) Al Gore ( 1993–2001 ) Dick Cheney ( 2001–2009 ) Joe Biden ( 2009–2017 ) Mike Pence ( 2017–2021 ) Kamala Harris ( 2021–2025 ) JD Vance ( 2025–present ) Category List v t e Governors and lieutenant governors of New York Governors G. Clinton Jay G. Clinton Lewis Tompkins Tayler D. Clinton Yates D. Clinton Pitcher Van Buren Throop Marcy Seward Bouck Wright Young Fish Hunt Seymour Clark King Morgan Seymour Fenton Hoffman J. Adams Dix Tilden Robinson Cornell Cleveland Hill Flower Morton Black T. Roosevelt Odell Higgins Hughes White J. Alden Dix Sulzer Glynn Whitman Smith Miller Smith F. Roosevelt Lehman Poletti Dewey Harriman Rockefeller Wilson Carey M. Cuomo Pataki Spitzer Paterson A. Cuomo Hochul Lieutenant governors Van Cortlandt S. Van Rensselaer J. Van Rensselaer Broome Tayler Clinton Tayler Swift Tayler Root Tallmadge Pitcher P. Livingston Dayan Throop Stebbins Oliver E. Livingston Tracy Bradish Dickinson Gardiner Lester Fish Patterson Church Raymond Selden Campbell Floyd-Jones Alvord Woodford Beach Robinson Dorsheimer Hoskins Hill McCarthy Jones Sheehan Saxton Woodruff Higgins Bruce Raines Chanler White Cobb Conway Glynn Wagner Schoeneck Walker Wood Lusk Lunn Lowman Corning Lehman Bray Poletti Hanley Wallace Hanley Moore Wicks Mahoney DeLuca Wilson Anderson Krupsak M. Cuomo DelBello Anderson Lundine McCaughey Donohue Paterson Bruno Skelos Smith Espada Ravitch Duffy Hochul Stewart-Cousins Benjamin Stewart-Cousins Delgado Italics indicate acting officeholders v t e United States secretaries of the navy Secretaries Cabinet-level Stoddert Smith Hamilton Jones Crowninshield S Thompson Southard Branch L. Woodbury Dickerson Paulding Badger Upshur Henshaw Gilmer Mason Bancroft Mason Preston Graham Kennedy Dobbin Toucey Welles Borie Robeson R Thompson Goff Hunt Chandler Whitney Tracy Herbert Long Moody Morton Bonaparte Metcalf Newberry Meyer Daniels Denby Wilbur Adams Swanson Edison Knox Forrestal Dept. of Defense Sullivan Matthews Kimball Anderson Thomas T. Gates Franke Connally Korth Nitze Ignatius Chafee Warner Middendorf Claytor Hidalgo Lehman Webb Ball Garrett O'Keefe Dalton Danzig England Winter Mabus Spencer Braithwaite Del Toro Phelan Under secretaries Forrestal Bard A. Gates Sullivan Kenney Kimball Whitehair Thomas T. Gates Franke Bantz Fay BeLieu Baldwin Baird Warner Sanders Middendorf Potter Macdonald Woolsey Murray Goodrich Garrett Howard Danzig Hultin Pirie Livingstone Aviles Work Davidson Modly Raven Assistant secretaries Pre–1954 Fox Faxon Soley McAdoo T. Roosevelt Sr.

Allen Hackett Darling Newberry Satterlee Winthrop F. Roosevelt G. Woodbury T. Roosevelt Jr.

Robinson Jahncke H. Roosevelt Edison Compton Bard Hensel Kenney Andrews Koehler Askins Fogler Post–1954 Financial Management and Comptroller Energy, Installations and Environment Manpower and Reserve Affairs Research, Development and Acquisitions General Counsel of the Navy defunct: Air Installations and Logistics Material Research and Development Research, Engineering and Systems Shipbuilding and Logistics v t e Republican Party History National Union Party Third Party System Fourth Party System Fifth Party System Sixth Party System Presidential tickets , national conventions , and presidential primaries 1856 (Philadelphia) : Frémont / Dayton 1860 (Chicago) : Lincoln / Hamlin 1864 (Baltimore) : Lincoln / Johnson 1868 (Chicago) : Grant / Colfax 1872 (Philadelphia) : Grant / Wilson 1876 (Cincinnati) : Hayes / Wheeler 1880 (Chicago) : Garfield / Arthur 1884 (Chicago) : Blaine / Logan 1888 (Chicago) : Harrison / Morton 1892 (Minneapolis) : Harrison / Reid 1896 (Saint Louis) : McKinley / Hobart 1900 (Philadelphia) : McKinley / Roosevelt 1904 (Chicago) : Roosevelt / Fairbanks 1908 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman 1912 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman / Butler primaries 1916 (Chicago) : Hughes / Fairbanks primaries 1920 (Chicago) : Harding / Coolidge primaries 1924 (Cleveland) : Coolidge / Dawes primaries 1928 (Kansas City) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1932 (Chicago) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1936 (Cleveland) : Landon / Knox primaries 1940 (Philadelphia) : Willkie / McNary primaries 1944 (Chicago) : Dewey / Bricker primaries 1948 (Philadelphia) : Dewey / Warren primaries 1952 (Chicago) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1956 (San Francisco) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1960 (Chicago) : Nixon / Lodge primaries 1964 (San Francisco) : Goldwater / Miller primaries 1968 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1972 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1976 (Kansas City) : Ford / Dole primaries 1980 (Detroit) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1984 (Dallas) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1988 (New Orleans) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1992 (Houston) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1996 (San Diego) : Dole / Kemp primaries 2000 (Philadelphia) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2004 (New York) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2008 (St. Paul) : McCain / Palin primaries 2012 (Tampa) : Romney / Ryan primaries 2016 (Cleveland) : Trump / Pence primaries 2020 (Charlotte/other locations) : Trump / Pence primaries 2024 (Milwaukee) : Trump / Vance primaries 2028 (Houston) Presidential administrations Lincoln (1861–1865) Johnson (1865–1868) Grant (1869–1877) Hayes (1877–1881) Garfield (1881) Arthur (1881–1885) Harrison (1889–1893) McKinley (1897–1901) Roosevelt (1901–1909) Taft (1909–1913) Harding (1921–1923) Coolidge (1923–1929) Hoover (1929–1933) Eisenhower (1953–1961) Nixon (1969–1974) Ford (1974–1977) Reagan (1981–1989) G. H. W. Bush (1989–1993) G. W. Bush (2001–2009) Trump ( 2017–2021 ; 2025–present ) U.S. Senate leaders and Conference chairs J. P. Hale (1859–1862) Anthony (1862–1884) Sherman (1884–1885) Edmunds (1885–1891) Sherman (1891–1897) Allison (1897–1908) E. Hale (1908–1911) Cullom (1911–1913) Gallinger (1913–1918) Lodge (1918–1924) Curtis (1924–1929) Watson (1929–1933) McNary (1933–1940) Austin (1940–1941) McNary (1941–1944) White (1944–1949) Wherry (1949–1952) Bridges (1952–1953) Taft (1953) Knowland (1953–1959) Dirksen (1959–1969) Scott (1969–1977) Baker (1977–1979) Stevens (1979–1980) Baker (1980–1985) Dole (1985–1996) Lott (1996–2003) Frist (2003–2007) McConnell (2007–2025) Thune (2025–present) U.S. House leaders , Speakers , and Conference chairs Pennington (1860–1861) Grow (1861–1863) Colfax (1863–1869) Pomeroy (1869) Blaine (1869–1875) McCrary (1875–1877) Hale (1877–1879) Frye (1879–1881) Keifer (1881–1883) Cannon (1883–1889) Reed (1889–1891) T. J. Henderson (1891–1895) Reed (1895–1899) D. B. Henderson (1899–1903) Cannon (1903–1911) Mann (1911–1919) Gillett (1919–1925) Longworth (1925–1931) Snell (1931–1939) Martin (1939–1959) Halleck (1959–1965) Ford (1965–1973) Rhodes (1973–1981) Michel (1981–1995) Gingrich (1995–1999) Hastert (1999–2007) Boehner (2007–2015) Ryan (2015–2019) McCarthy (2019–2023) Johnson (2023–present) RNC Chairs Morgan Raymond Ward Claflin Morgan Chandler Cameron Jewell Sabin Jones Quay Clarkson Campbell Carter Hanna Payne Cortelyou New Hitchcock Hill Rosewater Hilles Wilcox Hays Adams Butler Work Huston Fess Sanders Fletcher Hamilton Martin Walsh Spangler Brownell Reece Scott Gabrielson Summerfield Roberts Hall Alcorn T. Morton Miller Burch Bliss R. Morton Dole Bush Smith Brock Richards Laxalt / Fahrenkopf Fahrenkopf Atwater Yeutter Bond Barbour Nicholson Gilmore Racicot Gillespie Mehlman Martínez / Duncan Duncan Steele Priebus McDaniel Whatley Chair elections 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2024 Parties by state and territory State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Territory American Samoa District of Columbia Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Affiliated organizations Congress House Conference Legislative Digest Steering and Policy Committees Senate Conference Policy Committee Factions Freedom Caucus Problem Solvers Caucus Republican Governance Group Republican Study Committee Campaign committees National Republican Congressional Committee National Republican Redistricting Trust National Republican Senatorial Committee Republican Attorneys General Association Republican Governors Association Constituency groups College Republicans Chairmen Congressional Hispanic Conference Log Cabin Republicans National Black Republican Association Republican Hindu Coalition Republican Jewish Coalition Republican Muslim Coalition Republican National Hispanic Assembly Republicans Abroad Teen Age Republicans Young Republicans Republicans Overseas Factional groups Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Majority for Choice Republican Liberty Caucus Republican National Coalition for Life ConservAmerica Liberty Caucus Ripon Society The Wish List Related Primaries Debates Bibliography International Democracy Union Three Legged Stool Timeline of modern American conservatism Trumpism v t e Historical left-wing third-party U.S. presidential tickets This group includes only pre-1996 parties that fielded a candidate that won greater 0.1% of the popular vote in at least one presidential election Presidential tickets that won at least one percent of the national popular vote (candidate(s) / running mate(s)) Greenback Peter Cooper / Samuel F. Cary ( 1876 ) James B. Weaver / Barzillai J. Chambers ( 1880 ) Benjamin Butler / Absolom M. West ( 1884 ) Union Labor Alson Streeter / Charles E. Cunningham ( 1888 ) Populist James B. Weaver / James G. Field ( 1892 ) William Jennings Bryan / Thomas E. Watson ( 1896 ) Socialist Eugene V. Debs / Ben Hanford ( 1904 and 1908 ) Eugene V. Debs / Emil Seidel ( 1912 ) Allan L. Benson / George R. Kirkpatrick ( 1916 ) Eugene V. Debs / Seymour Stedman ( 1920 ) Norman Thomas / James H. Maurer ( 1932 ) Bull Moose Theodore Roosevelt / Hiram Johnson ( 1912 ) Progressive (1924) Robert M. La Follette / Burton K. Wheeler ( 1924 ) Progressive (1948) Henry A. Wallace / Glen H. Taylor ( 1948 ) Other notable left-wing parties Socialist Labor Party of America Social Democratic Party of America Independence Party Farmer–Labor Party Communist Party USA Socialist Workers Party Liberty Party People's Party Citizens Party New Alliance Party Third-party performances in presidential elections Labor history of the United States Liberalism in the United States Progressivism in the United States Socialism in the United States v t e Cabinet of President Theodore Roosevelt (1901–1909) Secretary of State John Hay (1901–1905) Elihu Root (1905–1909) Robert Bacon (1909) Secretary of the Treasury Lyman J. Gage (1901–1902) L. M. Shaw (1902–1907) George B. Cortelyou (1907–1909) Secretary of War Elihu Root (1901–1904) William Howard Taft (1904–1908) Luke Edward Wright (1908–1909) Attorney General Philander C. Knox (1901–1904) William Henry Moody (1904–1906) Charles Joseph Bonaparte (1906–1909) Postmaster General Charles Emory Smith (1901–1902) Henry Clay Payne (1902–1904) Robert Wynne (1904–1905) George B. Cortelyou (1905–1907) George von Lengerke Meyer (1907–1909) Secretary of the Navy John Davis Long (1901–1902) William Henry Moody (1902–1904) Paul Morton (1904–1905) Charles Joseph Bonaparte (1905–1906) Victor H. Metcalf (1906–1908) Truman H. Newberry (1908–1909) Secretary of the Interior Ethan A. Hitchcock (1901–1907) James Rudolph Garfield (1907–1909) Secretary of Agriculture James Wilson (1901–1909) Secretary of Commerce and Labor George B. Cortelyou (1903–1904) Victor H. Metcalf (1904–1906) Oscar Straus (1906–1909) v t e Laureates of the Nobel Peace Prize 1901–1925 1901 : Henry Dunant / Frédéric Passy 1902: Élie Ducommun / Charles Gobat 1903: Randal Cremer 1904: Institut de Droit International 1905: Bertha von Suttner 1906: Theodore Roosevelt 1907: Ernesto Moneta / Louis Renault 1908: Klas Arnoldson / Fredrik Bajer 1909: A. M. F. Beernaert / Paul Estournelles de Constant 1910: International Peace Bureau 1911: Tobias Asser / Alfred Fried 1912: Elihu Root 1913: Henri La Fontaine 1914 1915 1916 1917: International Committee of the Red Cross 1918 1919: Woodrow Wilson 1920: Léon Bourgeois 1921: Hjalmar Branting / Christian Lange 1922: Fridtjof Nansen 1923 1924 1925: Austen Chamberlain / Charles Dawes 1926–1950 1926: Aristide Briand / Gustav Stresemann 1927: Ferdinand Buisson / Ludwig Quidde 1928 1929: Frank B. Kellogg 1930: Nathan Söderblom 1931: Jane Addams / Nicholas Butler 1932 1933: Norman Angell 1934: Arthur Henderson 1935: Carl von Ossietzky 1936: Carlos Saavedra Lamas 1937: Robert Cecil 1938: Nansen International Office for Refugees 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944: International Committee of the Red Cross 1945: Cordell Hull 1946: Emily Balch / John Mott 1947: Friends Service Council / American Friends Service Committee 1948 1949: John Boyd Orr 1950: Ralph Bunche 1951–1975 1951: Léon Jouhaux 1952: Albert Schweitzer 1953: George C. Marshall 1954: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 1955 1956 1957: Lester B. Pearson 1958: Georges Pire 1959: Philip Noel-Baker 1960: Albert Luthuli 1961: Dag Hammarskjöld 1962: Linus Pauling 1963: International Committee of the Red Cross / League of Red Cross Societies 1964 : Martin Luther King Jr.

1965 : UNICEF 1966 1967 1968 : René Cassin 1969 : International Labour Organization 1970 : Norman Borlaug 1971 : Willy Brandt 1972 1973 : Lê Đức Thọ (declined award) / Henry Kissinger 1974: Seán MacBride / Eisaku Satō 1975: Andrei Sakharov 1976–2000 1976: Betty Williams / Mairead Corrigan 1977: Amnesty International 1978: Anwar Sadat / Menachem Begin 1979: Mother Teresa 1980: Adolfo Pérez Esquivel 1981: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 1982: Alva Myrdal / Alfonso García Robles 1983: Lech Wałęsa 1984: Desmond Tutu 1985: International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War 1986: Elie Wiesel 1987: Óscar Arias 1988: UN Peacekeeping Forces 1989: Tenzin Gyatso (14th Dalai Lama) 1990: Mikhail Gorbachev 1991: Aung San Suu Kyi 1992: Rigoberta Menchú 1993: Nelson Mandela / F. W. de Klerk 1994: Shimon Peres / Yitzhak Rabin / Yasser Arafat 1995: Pugwash Conferences / Joseph Rotblat 1996: Carlos Belo / José Ramos-Horta 1997: International Campaign to Ban Landmines / Jody Williams 1998: John Hume / David Trimble 1999: Médecins Sans Frontières 2000: Kim Dae-jung 2001–present 2001 : United Nations / Kofi Annan 2002 : Jimmy Carter 2003 : Shirin Ebadi 2004 : Wangari Maathai 2005 : International Atomic Energy Agency / Mohamed ElBaradei 2006 : Grameen Bank / Muhammad Yunus 2007 : Al Gore / Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 2008 : Martti Ahtisaari 2009 : Barack Obama 2010 : Liu Xiaobo 2011 : Ellen Johnson Sirleaf / Leymah Gbowee / Tawakkol Karman 2012 : European Union 2013 : Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 2014 : Kailash Satyarthi / Malala Yousafzai 2015 : Tunisian National Dialogue Quartet 2016 : Juan Manuel Santos 2017 : International Campaign to Abolish Nuclear Weapons 2018 : Denis Mukwege / Nadia Murad 2019 : Abiy Ahmed 2020 : World Food Programme 2021 : Maria Ressa / Dmitry Muratov 2022 : Ales Bialiatski / Memorial / Center for Civil Liberties 2023 : Narges Mohammadi 2024 : Nihon Hidankyo v t e 1906 Nobel Prize laureates Chemistry Henri Moissan (France) Literature ( 1906 ) Giosuè Carducci (Italy) Peace Theodore Roosevelt (United States) Physics J. J. Thomson (Great Britain) Physiology or Medicine Camillo Golgi (Italy) Santiago Ramón y Cajal (Spain) Nobel Prize recipients 1901 1902 1903 1904 1905 1906 1907 1908 1909 1910 1911 v t e Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees John Adams John Quincy Adams Jane Addams Louis Agassiz Susan B. Anthony John James Audubon George Bancroft Clara Barton Henry Ward Beecher Alexander Graham Bell Daniel Boone Edwin Booth Louis Brandeis Phillips Brooks William Cullen Bryant Luther Burbank Andrew Carnegie George Washington Carver William Ellery Channing Rufus Choate Henry Clay Grover Cleveland James Fenimore Cooper Peter Cooper Charlotte Cushman James Buchanan Eads Thomas Alva Edison Jonathan Edwards Ralph Waldo Emerson David Farragut Stephen Foster Benjamin Franklin Robert Fulton Josiah W. Gibbs William C. Gorgas Ulysses S. Grant Asa Gray Alexander Hamilton Nathaniel Hawthorne Joseph Henry Patrick Henry Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.

Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

Mark Hopkins Elias Howe Washington Irving Andrew Jackson Thomas J. Jackson Thomas Jefferson John Paul Jones James Kent Sidney Lanier Robert E. Lee Abraham Lincoln Henry Wadsworth Longfellow James Russell Lowell Mary Lyon Edward MacDowell James Madison Horace Mann John Marshall Matthew Fontaine Maury Albert A. Michelson Maria Mitchell James Monroe Samuel F. B. Morse William T. G. Morton John Lothrop Motley Simon Newcomb Thomas Paine Alice Freeman Palmer Francis Parkman George Peabody William Penn Edgar Allan Poe Walter Reed Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Augustus Saint-Gaudens William Tecumseh Sherman John Philip Sousa Joseph Story Harriet Beecher Stowe Gilbert Stuart Sylvanus Thayer Henry David Thoreau Mark Twain Lillian Wald Booker T. Washington George Washington Daniel Webster George Westinghouse James McNeill Whistler Walt Whitman Eli Whitney John Greenleaf Whittier Emma Willard Frances Willard Roger Williams Woodrow Wilson Orville Wright Wilbur Wright v t e Mount Rushmore Shrine of Democracy Construction Gutzon Borglum (sculptor) Lincoln Borglum (assistant sculptor) Luigi Del Bianco (chief carver) Walter K. Long (assisted) Doane Robinson (conceived idea) Peter Norbeck (political promoter, Norbeck-Williamson Act of 1929 ) Subjects George Washington Thomas Jefferson Theodore Roosevelt Abraham Lincoln Museum Lincoln Borglum Museum Location Black Hills of South Dakota Legacy In popular culture Mount Rushmore Anniversary coins National symbols of the United States Related Charles E. Rushmore (namesake) 2020 fireworks celebration Mount Rushmore Syndrome USS Rushmore (LSD-14) USS Rushmore (LSD-47) v t e Presidents of the American Historical Association 1884–1900 Andrew Dickson White (1884–1885) George Bancroft (1886) Justin Winsor (1887) William Frederick Poole (1888) Charles Kendall Adams (1889) John Jay (1890) William Wirt Henry (1891) James Burrill Angell (1892–1893) Henry Adams (1893–1894) George F. Hoar (1895) Richard Salter Storrs (1896) James Schouler (1897) George Park Fisher (1898) James Ford Rhodes (1899) Edward Eggleston (1900) 1901–1925 Charles Francis Adams Jr.

(1901) Alfred Thayer Mahan (1902) Henry Charles Lea (1903) Goldwin Smith (1904) John Bach McMaster (1905) Simeon E. Baldwin (1906) J. Franklin Jameson (1907) George Burton Adams (1908) Albert Bushnell Hart (1909) Frederick Jackson Turner (1910) William Milligan Sloane (1911) Theodore Roosevelt (1912) William Archibald Dunning (1913) Andrew C. McLaughlin (1914) H. Morse Stephens (1915) George Lincoln Burr (1916) Worthington C. Ford (1917) William Roscoe Thayer (1918–1919) Edward Channing (1920) Jean Jules Jusserand (1921) Charles Homer Haskins (1922) Edward Potts Cheyney (1923) Woodrow Wilson (1924) Charles McLean Andrews (1924–1925) 1926–1950 Dana Carleton Munro (1926) Henry Osborn Taylor (1927) James Henry Breasted (1928) James Harvey Robinson (1929) Evarts Boutell Greene (1930) Carl L. Becker (1931) Herbert Eugene Bolton (1932) Charles A. Beard (1933) William Dodd (1934) Michael Rostovtzeff (1935) Charles Howard McIlwain (1936) Guy Stanton Ford (1937) Laurence M. Larson (1938) William Scott Ferguson (1939) Max Farrand (1940) James Westfall Thompson (1941) Arthur M. Schlesinger Sr.

(1942) Nellie Neilson (1943) William Linn Westermann (1944) Carlton J. H. Hayes (1945) Sidney Bradshaw Fay (1946) Thomas J. Wertenbaker (1947) Kenneth Scott Latourette (1948) Conyers Read (1949) Samuel Eliot Morison (1950) 1951–1975 Robert Livingston Schuyler (1951) James G. Randall (1952) Louis R. Gottschalk (1953) Merle Curti (1954) Lynn Thorndike (1955) Dexter Perkins (1956) William L. Langer (1957) Walter Prescott Webb (1958) Allan Nevins (1959) Bernadotte Everly Schmitt (1960) Samuel Flagg Bemis (1961) Carl Bridenbaugh (1962) Crane Brinton (1963) Julian P. Boyd (1964) Frederic C. Lane (1965) Roy Franklin Nichols (1966) Hajo Holborn (1967) John King Fairbank (1968) C. Vann Woodward (1969) Robert Roswell Palmer (1970) David M. Potter (1971) Joseph Strayer (1971) Thomas C. Cochran (1972) Lynn Townsend White Jr.

(1973) Lewis Hanke (1974) Gordon Wright (1975) 1976–2000 Richard B. Morris (1976) Charles Gibson (1977) William J. Bouwsma (1978) John Hope Franklin (1979) David H. Pinkney (1980) Bernard Bailyn (1981) Gordon A. Craig (1982) Philip D. Curtin (1983) Arthur S. Link (1984) William H. McNeill (1985) Carl N. Degler (1986) Natalie Zemon Davis (1987) Akira Iriye (1988) Louis R. Harlan (1989) David Herlihy (1990) William Leuchtenburg (1991) Frederic Wakeman (1992) Louise A. Tilly (1993) Thomas C. Holt (1994) John Henry Coatsworth (1995) Caroline Walker Bynum (1996) Joyce Appleby (1997) Joseph C. Miller (1998) Robert Darnton (1999) Eric Foner (2000) 2001–present Wm. Roger Louis (2001) Lynn Hunt (2002) James M. McPherson (2003) Jonathan D. Spence (2004) James J. Sheehan (2005) Linda K. Kerber (2006) Barbara Weinstein (2007) Gabrielle M. Spiegel (2008) Laurel Thatcher Ulrich (2009) Barbara D. Metcalf (2010) Anthony Grafton (2011) William Cronon (2012) Kenneth Pomeranz (2013) Jan E. Goldstein (2014) Vicki L. Ruiz (2015) Patrick Manning (2016) Tyler E. Stovall (2017) Mary Beth Norton (2018) J. R. McNeill (2019) Mary Lindemann (2020) Jacqueline Jones (2021) James H. Sweet (2022) Edward Muir (2023) Thavolia Glymph (2024) Rough Riders Officers Leonard Wood Theodore Roosevelt Alexander Oswald Brodie James H. McClintock Buckey O'Neill Seth Bullock John Campbell Greenway John Avery McIlhenny Allyn K. Capron Jr.

Allyn K. Capron Sr.

George Curry Woodbury Kane Thomas H. Rynning Enlisted men George G. McMurtry Chris Madsen Hamilton Fish Thomas Grindell Henry Barrett Billy McGinty Juan Alamia Frank Frantz Craig Wadsworth Henry Nash Ben Daniels Frank Knox Robert Wrenn Engagements Spanish–American War Battle of Las Guasimas Battle of San Juan Hill Siege of Santiago Memorials Rough Riders Memorial Buckey O'Neill Cabin Bucky O'Neill Monument The Bronco Buster Theodore Roosevelt Monument Assemblage Film The Rough Riders (1927 film) Teddy, the Rough Rider (1940 film) Rough Riders (1997 mini-series) See also Buckhorn Saloon Arizona Rangers Three Guardsmen Canyon Diablo Train Robbery Tiburón Island Tragedy Roosevelt's World War I volunteers The Lost Battalion v t e Teddy bears Manufacturers Applause (defunct) Build-A-Bear Workshop Chad Valley Dakin (defunct) J. K. Farnell (defunct) Gund Ideal Toy Company Margarete Steiff GmbH Merrythought Teddy Atelier Stursberg Teddy-Hermann Ty Inc.

Vermont Teddy Bear Company Types AG Bear Beanie Babies Boyds Bears Care Bears Coffee Bean Bears Forever Friends Furskin Bears Gund Snuffles Holiday Beanie Babies Me to You Bears Punkinhead WereBears Museums Dorset Teddy Bear Museum Teddy bear museum Teddy Bear Museum of Naples Fictional teddies Aloysius Archibald Ormsby-Gore Baloo Bamse Banjo Benjamin Bear Berlino Big Ted & Little Ted Bobo ( The Simpsons ) Boog Corduroy Costco bear Duffy the Disney Bear Fozzie Bear Freddy Fazbear Grizzly Teddy Gummibär Harrods Christmas Bears Humphrey the Bear Hyde Lotso Microsoft Bear Misha Uszatek Monokuma Mr Whoppit Nassur Nev Norm Paddington Bear Pink teddy bear ( Breaking Bad ) Po Pooky Pudsey Bear Rasmus Roger (Guilty Gear) Rilakkuma Rupert Rupert ( Family Guy ) Sebastian Star Bear Smokey Snuggle Bear Sooty SuperTed Teddy ( The Forgotten Toys ) Teddy ( Mr. Bean ) Teddy Ruxpin Winnie-the-Pooh Disney version Film and television A.I. Artificial Intelligence The Adventures of Teddy Ruxpin Adventures of the Gummi Bears Bananas in Pyjamas Bear Behaving Badly Becky and Barnaby Bear Boonie Bears C Bear and Jamal Charley and Mimmo Corduroy Colargol Gooby Hey Mister, Let's Play!

Imaginary Issi Noho Kissyfur Kooky Little Bear movie Misery Bear Old Bear Stories Paddington (TV series) Paddington ( Paddington 2 and Paddington in Peru ) The Pit Rilakkuma and Kaoru "Rosebud" (The Simpsons) The Secret World of Benjamin Bear Special Agent Oso SuperTed The Tangerine Bear Ted ( Ted 2 and Ted (TV series) ) Teddy Teddy Bear Teddybears The Teddy Bear Master The 'Teddy' Bears Teddy Edward Teddy Trucks Unicorn Wars The Upstairs Downstairs Bears The Yogi Bear Show Books A Pocket for Corduroy Corduroy Hyde & Closer Little Bear Old Bear and Friends The Berenstain Bears Polar the Titanic Bear The Sharpie of the Culebra Cut Supertoys Last All Summer Long The Toyminator Undertown Uppo-Nalle Winkie Winnie-the-Pooh Music " (Let Me Be Your) Teddy Bear " " Psycho Teddy " " Teddy Bears' Picnic " " The Teddy Bear Song " " Itsumademo... Teddy Bear " Video games Ah Diddums Among the Sleep Bear with Me Big Huggin' Build-A-Bear Workshop Fatty Bear's Birthday Surprise Hubert the Teddy Bear: Winter Games Opération Teddy Bear Teddy Together Naughty Bear Snacks Gummy bears Teddy Grahams Tiny Teddy Related Billy Possum Peter Bull Round and Round the Garden Richard Steiff Stuffed toys Sudanese blasphemy case Teddybear Airdrop Minsk 2012 Teddy bear hospital Teddy bear parachuting Teddy Bear Review Teddy bear toss Teddy bears of the Gobelins Theodore Roosevelt v t e Eleanor Roosevelt Chairwoman, Presidential Commission on the Status of Women (1961–1962) 34th First Lady of the United States (1933–1945) United Nations United States delegate, United Nations General Assembly (1946–1952) United Nations Commission on Human Rights (1947–1953, Chairperson 1946–1951) Universal Declaration of Human Rights Drafting committee Human Rights Day First Lady of the United States "My Day" daily newspaper column, 1935–1962 Co-Chair, Office of Civilian Defense Marian Anderson Lincoln Memorial Concert Tuskegee Airmen flight Arthurdale and Eleanor, West Virginia American Youth Congress National Youth Administration Black Cabinet 1940 Democratic National Convention speech Women in Defense Freedom House Other events First Lady of New York Presidential Commission on the Status of Women National Organization for Women Encampment for Citizenship Life and homes Val-Kill National Historic Site Val-Kill Industries Campobello home Franklin D. Roosevelt's paralytic illness New York State Executive Mansion Hyde Park home and gravesite Legacy Roosevelt Institute Roosevelt Institute Campus Network Roosevelt Study Center Eleanor Roosevelt Monument Eleanor Roosevelt Award for Human Rights Statue at the Franklin Roosevelt Memorial Eleanor Roosevelt College USS Roosevelt Marian Anderson: the Lincoln Memorial Concert (1939 film) Sunrise at Campobello (1958 play, 1960 film) The Eleanor Roosevelt Story (1965 film) Eleanor and Franklin (1971 biography) Eleanor: The Years Alone (1972 biography) Eleanor and Franklin (1976 film) Eleanor and Franklin: The White House Years (1977 film) Backstairs at the White House (1979 miniseries) The Roosevelts (2014 documentary) The First Lady (2022 TV series) FDR (2023 miniseries) The Six Triple Eight (2024 film) Related United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights International Bill of Human Rights International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Morgenthau Plan Lorena Hickok Roosevelt family Franklin D. Roosevelt (husband presidency 1933–1941 presidency 1941–1945 ) Anna Eleanor Roosevelt (daughter) James Roosevelt II (son) Elliott Roosevelt (son) Franklin D. Roosevelt Jr.

(son) John Roosevelt II (son) Eleanor Roosevelt Seagraves (granddaughter) Curtis Roosevelt (grandson) Sara Delano Roosevelt (granddaughter) Franklin Delano Roosevelt III (grandson) John Roosevelt Boettiger (grandson) James Roosevelt III (grandson) Elliott Bulloch Roosevelt (father) Anna Hall Roosevelt (mother) Hall Roosevelt (brother) Theodore Roosevelt Sr.

(grandfather) Martha Stewart Bulloch (grandmother) Theodore Roosevelt (uncle presidency ) Bamie Roosevelt (aunt) Fala (family dog) v t e ( ← 1896 ) 1900 United States presidential election ( → 1904 ) Republican Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: William McKinley (incumbent) Vice President: Theodore Roosevelt Democratic Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: William Jennings Bryan Vice President: Adlai Stevenson I Other candidates George Dewey Third-party and independent candidates Prohibition Party Nominee: John G. Woolley VP nominee: Henry B. Metcalf Social Democratic Party Nominee: Eugene V. Debs VP nominee: Job Harriman Populist Party Nominee: Wharton Barker VP nominee: Ignatius L. Donnelly Socialist Labor Party Nominee: Joseph F. Malloney VP nominee: Valentine Remmel Other 1900 elections : House Senate v t e ( ← 1900 ) 1904 United States presidential election ( → 1908 ) Republican Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Theodore Roosevelt (incumbent) Vice President: Charles W. Fairbanks Other candidates Mark Hanna Democratic Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Alton B. Parker Vice President: Henry G. Davis Other candidates William Randolph Hearst Third-party and independent candidates Socialist Party Nominee: Eugene V. Debs VP nominee: Ben Hanford Prohibition Party Nominee: Silas C. Swallow VP nominee: George Washington Carroll Populist Party Nominee: Thomas E. Watson VP nominee: Thomas Tibbles Socialist Labor Party Nominee: Charles Hunter Corregan VP nominee: William Wesley Cox Other 1904 elections : House Senate v t e ( ← 1908 ) 1912 United States presidential election ( → 1916 ) Democratic Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Woodrow Wilson Vice President: Thomas R. Marshall Other candidates Champ Clark Judson Harmon Oscar Underwood Thomas R. Marshall Eugene Foss Republican Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: William Howard Taft (incumbent) Vice President: James S. Sherman (incumbent; nominated but died before election) Nicholas Murray Butler Other candidates Theodore Roosevelt Robert M. La Follette Progressive Party ( Convention ) Nominees President: Theodore Roosevelt Vice President: Hiram Johnson Socialist Party Nominees President: Eugene V. Debs Vice President: Emil Seidel Third-party and independent candidates Prohibition Party Nominee: Eugene W. Chafin VP nominee: Aaron S. Watkins Socialist Labor Party Nominee: Arthur E. Reimer VP nominee: August Gillhaus Other 1912 elections : House Senate Portals : Biography Environment History New York City New York (state) Politics United States Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii 2 3 Artists ULAN MusicBrainz KulturNav Discography of American Historical Recordings FID People US Congress Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC 2 Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theodore_Roosevelt&oldid=1306490959 " Categories : Theodore Roosevelt 1858 births 1919 deaths 19th-century American diarists 19th-century American historians 19th-century American male writers 19th-century American politicians 19th-century members of the New York State Legislature 20th-century American diarists 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century presidents of the United States 20th-century vice presidents of the United States 1900 United States vice-presidential candidates 1900s in the United States American autobiographers American bibliophiles American conservationists American essayists American explorers American fishermen American hunters American male judoka American male non-fiction writers American nationalists American naval historians American Nobel laureates American people of Dutch descent American political party founders American political writers Aphorists Bulloch family Candidates in the 1904 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1912 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1916 United States presidential election Deaths from pulmonary embolism English-language spelling reform advocates Explorers of Amazonia Governors of New York (state) Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees Harvard Advocate alumni Harvard College alumni Liberalism in the United States Members of the American Academy of Arts and Letters Members of the American Philosophical Society Members of the Sons of the American Revolution Military personnel from New York City New York (state) Progressives (1912) New York City police commissioners Nobel Peace Prize laureates Panama Canal People associated with the American Museum of Natural History People from Oyster Bay (town), New York Politicians from New York City Presidents of the American Historical Association Presidents of the United States who were Freemasons Presidents of the United States Progressive conservatism Progressive Era in the United States Progressivism in the United States Ranchers from North Dakota Republican Party (United States) presidential nominees Republican Party (United States) vice presidential nominees Republican Party governors of New York (state) Republican Party members of the New York State Assembly Republican Party presidents of the United States Republican Party vice presidents of the United States Roosevelt family Rough Riders Schuyler family Spanish–American War recipients of the Medal of Honor United States Army Medal of Honor recipients United States Army officers United States Assistant Secretaries of the Navy Vice presidents of the United States Writers from New York (state) 1912 in American politics Franklin D. Roosevelt Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use American English from February 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from July 2025 Articles with hAudio microformats Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2021 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from August 2024 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from September 2021 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Nobelprize template using Wikidata property P8024 Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 01:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Theodore Roosevelt 143 languages Add topic

