Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Musical training 3 Theatre 4 Literature 5 Social service 6 Students 7 Death 8 Literary works Toggle Literary works subsection 8.1 Books on music 8.2 Books in Kannada 8.3 Books in Sanskrit 8.4 Books in Hindi 8.5 Theatre and drama in Kannada 8.6 Books in Braille 9 Awards and recognitions 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Puttaraj Gawai 4 languages ಕನ್ನಡ ਪੰਜਾਬੀ संस्कृतम् தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian musician (1914–2010) Pandit Puttaraj Gawayigalu Background information Birth name Puttayya Also known as Ubhaya Gayana Visharada, Ganayogi, Shivayogi, Kavishiromani, and Thribhasha KaviRathna Born ( 1914-03-03 ) 3 March 1914 Devagiri, Karnataka Origin Devagiri , Hanagal , Karnataka Died 17 September 2010 (2010-09-17) (aged 96) Gadag , Karnataka , Genres Hindustani classical music , Carnatic music etc.

Occupation(s) singer, instrumentalist Years active 1933–2010 Website PuttarajGavaiji.com Musical artist Pandit Puttaraj Gawayigalu (3 March 1914 – 17 September 2010) was an Indian musician in the Hindustani classical tradition, a scholar who authored more than 80 books in Kannada, Sanskrit and Hindi, a music teacher and a social servant. A member of the Gwalior Gharana (school), [ 1 ] he is renowned for his ability to play many instruments such as the veena, the tabla, mridangam, violin etc., as well as for his popular renditions of devotional music ( bhajans ) vachanas .A famous vocalist both in Hindustani and Carnatic Music. He is the recipient of the Padma Bhushan , India's third highest civilian honour, awarded in 2010.

[ 2 ] Early life [ edit ] He was born into a poor Kannada Veerashaiva Jangam family in Devagiri in Haveri taluk of Dharwad district (now in Haveri district) of Karnataka .

[ 3 ] His parents were Revaiah Venkatapurmath and Siddamma.

[ 4 ] He lost his eyesight at the age of 6 months.

[ 5 ] He lost his father when he was 10 months old. His maternal uncle Chandrashekharaiah took him under his wings and raised him.

Musical training [ edit ] Seeing Gawai's interest in music, when he was playing a harmonium of his uncle his uncle took him to Veereshwara Punyashrama, run by Ganayogi Panchakshara Gawai . Under the guidance of Panchakshara Gawai, he mastered Hindustani. He mastered carnatic music under the guidance of Mundarigi Raghavendrachar (belonging to Vishesha Parampara). He had mastered many instruments harmonium, tabla, violin and 10 other music instruments.

[ 6 ] Theatre [ edit ] Puttaraj Gawai set up a theater company which would not only to help in raising funds to provide free food, shelter, education to disabled orphans but also to contribute to the theater culture. Thus,"SriGuru Kumareshwara Krupa Poshita Natya Company "was established. His first play 'Sri Sivayogi Sidharama' written and directed by him brought in profit and was applauded. This was followed by many other successful productions.

[ 7 ] Literature [ edit ] Puttaraj Gawai has authored over 80 books on spirituality, religion, history as well as biographies of many 'sharanas' of the Bhakti movement of the 12th century. He has authored books in Kannada , Hindi and Sanskrit . He re-wrote the Bhagavad Gita in Braille script.

Social service [ edit ] Puttaraja Gawai is one of the pioneers of Veereshwara Punyashrama, a music school dedicated to imparting musical knowledge to people who are differentially able-d. Disabled people, especially blind from all castes, religions and sections of the society are taught music in the ashram.
Pt. Dr. Puttaraj Kavi Gavai has been the pontiff of Shree Veereshwara Punyashrama Since 1944, after the demise of Pt. Panchakshara Gavai who founded this Ashrama for the upliftment of the born-blind children and orphans. Since its inception in 1942, Shree Veereshwar Punyashrama has been feeding and educating the born-blind and the orphans and the poor children free of cost, without discrimination on the basis of caste and creed. The Ashrama is solely run on the strength of voluntary donations by its devotees.
The mission of the Ashrama is selfless service to the community, especially and poorest and the blind. The disciples trained and educated in Music. and Fine Arts have become music teachers, stage-artists, radio-artists, musicians and professionals in the field of arts in thousands.
"Pt. Panchakshari Gavai Drama Theatre" organized and founded by Pt.
Puttaraj Gavai has given innumerable performances and has been considered one of the pioneering feats of Theatre Movement in the North Karnataka. Being solely dedicated to furthering the art of stage drama, this dramatic company has produced thousands of stage artists who have earned national and international fame.
Punyashrama has produced thousands of "Kirtanakaras" who are busy delivering Puranas and Pravachanas and Keertanas all over the state. Thus, Shree Veereshwara Punyashrama is rendering valuable services in the field of literature, music, religion, literacy and social service. It is dedicated to the cause of the welfare of the blind and down-trodden for over seventy years in its own humble way. The very secular credentials of this institution has made this Ashrama typical and a class by itself.
The Pontiff of Shree Veereshwara Punyashrama, Gadag is viewed by the devotees as a "Walking God on the Earth".
Shree Veereshwara Punyashrama of Gadag is a very popular and influential Ashrama in Karnataka. It is a charity institution solely dedicated to the upliftment of the blind, orphans and poor children. More than 1000 children reside in the Ashrama and are fed free of cost. The Ashrama runs Thirteen institutions comprising musical as well as general education.

Shree Veereshwara Punyashrama is run on its own strength without any aid from the Government. It has been contributing to the society the talented musicians, radioartists, music teachers, stage - artists and the professionals in the field of music and fine arts.
Shree Veereshwara Punyashrama is thoroughly a secular institution and admits students from all sections of society without discrimination on the basis of caste and creed.

The pontiff, Pt. Puttaraj Kavi Gavai has been serving out society in different capacities and is a catalyst of social and communal harmony. He richly deserves any coveted prize and honour like "Padma Vibhushan Award".

Students [ edit ] Gawai has taught many students which presently runs to a count of more than 1000 visually impaired.

[ 8 ] he was a great singer
Some of his well-known students are: Chandrashekhar Puranikmath.

[ 9 ] S. Ballesh [ 10 ] Veerashwar Madri [ 11 ] Rajguru Guruswami Kalikeri , [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Venkatesh Kumar Death [ edit ] Antima Yatre of Puttaraj Gawai in Gadag, c.

18 September 2010 He died 17 September 2010, at Veereshwara Punyashrama, Gadag , Karnataka. He was buried at the ashram as per the veerashaiva traditions with respectful government honours. More than 1 million devotees attended his funeral ceremony in Gadag on 18 September 2010. The Karnataka state government declared state mourning on Saturday and holiday for government offices as a mark of respect to the multi-faceted personality.

[ 15 ] Literary works [ edit ] Some of his important works are listed below.

[ 16 ] Books on music [ edit ] Sangeet Shastra Jnana Tabla Shikshaka GuruSudha Part 1 & 2 Taala Panchakshara Books in Kannada [ edit ] Akkamahadevi Purana Haveri Shivabasava Purana Ankalagi Adavi Siddeswara Purana Huchala Guru Siddeshwara Purana Purathanara Purana Veerabhadreshwara Purana Kalikeri Guru Mahima Purana Sharana Basaveshwara Purana Sri Ankalagi Adiveshwara Puraana Sri Haveri Shivabasava Swami Puraana Guleda Gadilingeshwara Puraana Sri Veerabhadreshwara Puraana Shivasharane Hemareddi Mallamma Puraana Chikkenakoppada Sri Channaveera Sharanara Puraana Sri Naalatwaada Veereshwara Puraana Sri Annadaaneshwara Puraana Guddaapura Daanamma Devi Puraana Sri Chikkeshwara Puraana Sri Kalakeri Gurumahimaa Puraana Books in Sanskrit [ edit ] Shrimat Kumara Geetha Kumareshwara Kavya Shri Linga Sooktha Tatparya Sahit Sri Rudra Panchakshara Suprabhata Books in Hindi [ edit ] Basava Purana (President Award winner) Siddha Linga Vijaya Sidhantha Shikamani etc.

Theatre and drama in Kannada [ edit ] Sri Kotturu Basaveshwara Nelloora Numbiyaaka Shivasharana Chennayya Bhagavaan Basaveshwara Sri Gurudarhsana Hanagalla Kumareshwara Mahatme Sri Shivayogi Siddharaameshwara Shivayogi Moligi Maarayya Shirahatti Sri Phakeereshwara Mahatme Shivasharane Uditadi Akkamahadevi Sati Sukanya Daanaveera Shirasangi Lingarajaru Maharati Bheeshma Magana Prema Devara Duddu Books in Braille [ edit ] Bhagavad Geeta Upanishad Sri Rudra and Music Awards and recognitions [ edit ] Pt Gawai has been bestowed with many awards for his contributions to music, literature and social service. Some important awards are listed below.

1961 - President award for " Basava Purana " in Hindi [ 17 ] 1962 - Kannada Kavi Kulottama by Kannada Sahitya Parishat, Bangalore 1970 - Karnataka Rajyotsava Prashasti 1975 - Honorary doctorate by Karnatak University 1998 - Nadoja Prashasti 1998 - Kanaka Purandara Prashasti 1998 - Jnaanayogi by Kannada Sahitya Parishat, Gadag.

1998 - Kendra Sangeet Natak Akademi Award 1999 - Rajya Sangeeta Vidwan by Government of Karnataka 2000 - National Award (for the betterment of disabilities) by Govt of India 2001 - "Nadoja Award" from Kannada University 2002 - Basavashree award 2007 - Kalidas Samman by Government of Madhya Pradesh 2007 - "Siddhashri Award" by Mugalkhod Jidaga Math (Add Arun S. Mathapati) 2009 - N Vajrakumar Abhinandana Puraskar Samiti Award 2009 - Tirumakudalu Chowdiah award by Government of Karnataka 2010 - Padma Bhushan References [ edit ] ^ "Puttaraj Gavai in critical condition, taken back to hometown Gadag" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. 14 September 2010. Archived from the original on 19 September 2010.

^ "Puttaraj Gawai dedicates Padma Bhushan to students" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. 26 January 2010. Archived from the original on 3 February 2010 . Retrieved 15 September 2010 .

^ Basava Journal . Basava Samiti. 1997.

^ "Puttaraja Kavi Gavai is no more" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. 18 September 2010. Archived from the original on 18 September 2010 . Retrieved 18 September 2010 .

^ "Pandit Puttaraj Gawai The leading light of music passed away" . Archived from the original on 19 September 2010 . Retrieved 18 September 2010 .

^ Kattimani, Basavaraj F (18 September 2010).

"Torch-bearer who guided many a musician" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 18 September 2010 .

^ "Pandit Puttaraj Gavai: A beacon for thousands" . Press Trust of India. 17 September 2010 . Retrieved 18 September 2010 .

^ "Hindustani music doyen Puttaraj Gavai is dead" . Archived from the original on 19 September 2010.

^ "Puranikmath dead" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. 25 July 2010. Archived from the original on 30 July 2010.

^ Lalithaa Krishnan (20 August 2009).

"Clear and sparkling-Advanced training under grand maestro Pt. Bismillah Khan and being a member of the Panchakshara Gavai brotherhood" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 13 January 2014 .

^ Lalithaa Krishnan (27 July 2007).

"Melodic meet in a serene milieu-Veereshwar Madri, managing trustee, Sri Guru Ganayogi Panchakshara Sangeet Yogashram Trust" .

The Hindu . Retrieved 25 October 2014 .

^ "Winners of Shishunala Sharief, Venkatappa awards announced" . 20 May 2015.

^ "Santa Shishunala Sharif award" .

The Hindu . 21 May 2015.

^ [1] [ dead link ] ^ "Bangalore Thousands Bid Tearful Farewell to Hindustani Music Doyen Gavai" .

www.daijiworld.com . Archived from the original on 11 October 2012.

^ "S a N G e E T y O G a S H R a M T R U S T" . Archived from the original on 3 September 2010 . Retrieved 16 September 2010 .

^ "Puttaraj Gawai dedicates Padma Bhushan to students" .

The Hindu . Chennai, India. 26 January 2010. Archived from the original on 3 February 2010.

External links [ edit ] Official Web Site: PuttarajGavaiji, Veereshwar Punyashrama Gadag Puttraj Gawai [2] [ usurped ] [3] v t e Padma Bhushan award recipients (2010–2019) 2010 Satya Paul Agarwal Mohammad Amin Sailesh Kumar Bandopadhyay M. S. Banga Anil Bordia Bipan Chandra B. K. Chaturvedi Sant Singh Chatwal G. P. Chopra Tan Chung Madhusudan Dhaky P. R. Dubhashi Puttaraj Gawai Belle Monappa Hegde Ilaiyaraaja Jagdish Chandra Kapur Shrinivas Khale Aamir Khan Sultan Khan Ram Kumar Kumudini Lakhia Kuzhur Narayana Marar Chhannulal Mishra Eledath Thaikkattu Narayanan Mooss C. P. Krishnan Nair S. P. Oswal Akbar Padamsee Ramakanta Panda Balasaheb Vikhe Patil Arogyaswami Paulraj A. R. Rahman Moosa Raza Mallika Sarabhai Nookala Chinna Satyanarayana Abhijit Sen Satya Vrat Shastri Noshir M. Shroff Kushal Pal Singh Bikash Sinha Balagangadharanatha Swamiji Narayanan Vaghul P. K. Warrier Fareed Zakaria 2011 S. P. Balasubrahmanyam Rajashree Birla M. N. Buch C. V. Chandrasekhar Ajai Chowdhry Yogesh Chander Deveshwar Satyadev Dubey T. J. S. George Shankha Ghosh Kris Gopalakrishnan Keki Byramjee Grant Shashi Kapoor Krishen Khanna Khayyam Chanda Kochhar Dwijen Mukhopadhyay Madavoor Vasudevan Nair Ramdas Pai Dashrath Patel Rajendra Singh Pawar Suryanarayanan Ramachandran Shobhana Ranade Gunupati Venkata Krishna Reddy Kallam Anji Reddy Waheeda Rehman Shyam Saran Analjit Singh Arpita Singh Surendra Singh R. K. Srikantan Raghavan Thirumulpad 2012 Suresh H. Advani Shabana Azmi Homi K. Bhabha Shashikumar Chitre Khaled Choudhury Jatin Das Vidya Dehejia Dharmendra S. N. Goenka M. S. Gopalakrishnan T. V. Gopalakrishnan Buddhadev Das Gupta Sunil Janah Anish Kapoor S. B. Mujumdar B. Muthuraman Mira Nair Arvind Panagariya José Pereira Mata Prasad M. S. Raghunathan P. Chandrasekhara Rao Ronen Sen Devi Shetty M. V. Subbiah N. Vittal N. H. Wadia George Yeo 2013 Satya N. Atluri Maharaj Kishan Bhan Jaspal Bhatti Rahul Dravid Adi Godrej Abdul Rashid Khan Rajesh Khanna Mary Kom Nandkishore Shamrao Laud Mangesh Padgaonkar Hemendra Singh Panwar Jogesh Pati Shivajirao Girdhar Patil A. Sivathanu Pillai D. Ramanaidu Kanak Rele V. K. Saraswat Ashoke Sen Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak B. N. Suresh Sharmila Tagore Ramamurthy Thyagarajan Saroja Vaidyanathan 2014 Anisuzzaman Mrityunjay Athreya Padmanabhan Balaram Dalveer Bhandari Ruskin Bond Anita Desai Pullela Gopichand Kamal Haasan Jyeshtharaj Joshi V. N. Kaul Neelam Kler M. Mahadevappa Leander Paes Koppillil Radhakrishnan Anumolu Ramakrishna Thirumalachari Ramasami Lloyd Rudolph Susanne Hoeber Rudolph Vinod Prakash Sharma Gulam Mohammed Sheikh Parween Sultana Dhirubhai Thaker Vairamuthu J. S. Verma T. H. Vinayakram 2015 Jahnu Barua Manjul Bhargava Vijay P. Bhatkar Swapan Dasgupta David Frawley Bill Gates Melinda French Gates Swami Satyamitranand N. Gopalaswami Subhash C. Kashyap Gokulotsavji Maharaj Saichiro Misumi Ambrish Mithal Sudha Ragunathan Harish Salve Ashok Seth Rajat Sharma Satpal Singh Shivakumara Swami Khadg Singh Valdiya 2016 Ravindra Chandra Bhargava Robert D. Blackwill Hafeez Contractor Indu Jain Heisnam Kanhailal Anupam Kher Sania Mirza Pallonji Mistry Udit Narayan Saina Nehwal Yarlagadda Lakshmi Prasad Vinod Rai N. S. Ramanuja Tatacharya A. V. Rama Rao D. Nageshwara Reddy Dayananda Saraswati Barjinder Singh Hamdard Ram V. Sutar Tejomayananda 2017 Vishwa Mohan Bhatt Deviprasad Dwivedi Ratnasundarsuri Niranjanananda Saraswati Cho Ramaswamy Maha Chakri Sirindhorn Tehemton Erach Udwadia 2018 Pankaj Advani Philipose Mar Chrysostom Mahendra Singh Dhoni Alexander Kadakin Ramachandran Nagaswamy Laxman Pai Arvind Parikh Sharda Sinha 2019 John T. Chambers Sukhdev Singh Dhindsa Pravin Gordhan Dharampal Gulati Darshan Lal Jain Ashok Laxmanrao Kukade Kariya Munda Budhaditya Mukherjee Mohanlal Nambi Narayanan Kuldip Nayar Bachendri Pal V. K. Shunglu Hukmdev Narayan Yadav # Posthumous conferral 1954–1959 1960–1969 1970–1979 1980–1989 1990–1999 2000–2009 2010–2019 2020–2029 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Puttaraj_Gawai&oldid=1304770779 " Categories : 1914 births 2010 deaths Blind classical musicians Blind folk musicians Indian blind singers Hindustani singers Kannada-language writers Lingayatism People from Gadag-Betageri Recipients of the Padma Bhushan in arts Recipients of the Padma Shri in arts Recipients of the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award Gwalior gharana 20th-century Indian musicians Musicians from Karnataka Writers from Karnataka Hindi-language writers Sanskrit writers Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2021 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2020 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 02:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Puttaraj Gawai 4 languages Add topic

