Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Occurrence Toggle Occurrence subsection 2.1 Altitude 2.2 Forms 2.3 Colours and wavelengths of auroral light 2.4 Changes with time 2.5 Other auroral radiation 2.6 Noise 2.7 Abnormal types 2.7.1 STEVE 2.7.2 Picket-fence aurora 2.7.3 Dune aurora 2.7.4 Horse-collar aurora 2.7.5 Conjugate auroras 3 Causes Toggle Causes subsection 3.1 Auroral particles 3.2 Atmosphere 3.3 Ionosphere 4 Interaction of the solar wind with Earth Toggle Interaction of the solar wind with Earth subsection 4.1 Magnetosphere 5 Auroral particle acceleration 6 Historically significant events 7 Historical views and folklore 8 Extraterrestrial auroras 9 See also 10 Explanatory notes 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle External links subsection 13.1 Multimedia Toggle the table of contents Aurora 102 languages Afrikaans Anarâškielâ العربية Արեւմտահայերէն অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Võro 文言 Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikiversity Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Aurora (astronomy) ) Atmospheric effect caused by the solar wind Several terms  redirect here. For other uses, see Aurora (disambiguation) , Aurora Borealis (disambiguation) , Aurora Australis (disambiguation) , Northern Lights (disambiguation) , and Southern Lights (disambiguation) .

Images of auroras from across the world, including those with rarer red and blue lights An aurora [ a ] is a natural light display in Earth 's sky, predominantly observed in high-latitude regions around the Arctic and Antarctic . The plural form is pl.

aurorae or auroras , [ b ] and they are commonly known as the northern lights ( aurora borealis ) or southern lights ( aurora australis ).

[ c ] Auroras display dynamic patterns of radiant lights that appear as curtains, rays, spirals or dynamic flickers covering the entire sky.

[ 3 ] Auroras are the result of disturbances in the Earth's magnetosphere caused by enhanced speeds of solar wind from coronal holes and coronal mass ejections . These disturbances alter the trajectories of charged particles in the magnetospheric plasma . These particles, mainly electrons and protons , precipitate into the upper atmosphere ( thermosphere / exosphere ). The resulting ionization and excitation of atmospheric constituents emit light of varying color and complexity. The form of the aurora, occurring within bands around both polar regions, is also dependent on the amount of acceleration imparted to the precipitating particles.

Other planets in the Solar System , brown dwarfs , comets , and some natural satellites also host auroras.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Etymology The term aurora borealis has been attributed to two sources: Galileo Galilei in 1619, and Pierre Gassendi in 1621.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] The term entered the English language in 1828.

[ 6 ] The word aurora is derived from the name of the Roman goddess of the dawn, Aurora , who travelled from east to west announcing the coming of the Sun .

[ 6 ] Aurora was first used in English in the 14th century.

[ 6 ] The words borealis and australis are derived from the names of the ancient gods of the north wind ( Boreas ) and the south wind ( Auster or australis ) in Greco-Roman mythology .

[ 6 ] Occurrence Earth's night-side upper atmosphere appears from the bottom as bands of afterglow illuminating the troposphere in orange with silhouettes of clouds at the top, and the stratosphere in white and blue at the top of the middle. Next, the mesosphere (pink area) extends to the orange and faintly green line of the lowest airglow , at about one hundred kilometres at the edge of space and the lower edge of the thermosphere (invisible). Continuing with green and red bands of auroras stretching over several hundred kilometres.

Auroras are most commonly observed in the "auroral zone", [ 9 ] a band approximately 6° (~660 km) wide in latitude centered on 67° north and south.

[ 10 ] The region that currently displays an aurora is called the "auroral oval". The oval is displaced by the solar wind, pushing it about 15° away from the geomagnetic pole (not the geographic pole) in the noon direction and 23° away in the midnight direction.

[ 10 ] The peak equatorward extent of the oval is displaced slightly from geographic midnight. It is centered about 3–5° nightward of the magnetic pole so that auroral arcs reach furthest toward the equator when the magnetic pole in question is in between the observer and the Sun , which is called magnetic midnight .

Early evidence for a geomagnetic connection comes from the statistics of auroral observations.

Elias Loomis (1860), [ 11 ] and later Hermann Fritz (1881) [ 12 ] and Sophus Tromholt (1881) [ 13 ] in more detail, established that the aurora appeared mainly in the auroral zone.

In northern latitudes , the effect is known as the aurora borealis or the northern lights. The southern counterpart, the aurora australis or the southern lights, has features almost identical to the aurora borealis and changes simultaneously with changes in the northern auroral zone.

[ 14 ] The aurora australis is visible from high southern latitudes in Antarctica , the Southern Cone , South Africa , Australasia , the Falkland Islands , and under exceptional circumstances as far north as Uruguay .

[ 15 ] The aurora borealis is visible from areas around the Arctic such as Alaska , Canada , Iceland , Greenland , the Faroe Islands , Scandinavia , Finland , Scotland , and Russia . A geomagnetic storm causes the auroral ovals (north and south) to expand, bringing the aurora to lower latitudes or higher in the south. On rare occasions, the aurora borealis can be seen as far south as the Mediterranean and the southern states of the US while the aurora australis can be seen as far north as New Caledonia and the Pilbara region in Western Australia . During the Carrington Event , the greatest geomagnetic storm ever observed, auroras were seen even in the tropics .

Auroras seen within the auroral oval may be directly overhead. From farther away, they illuminate the poleward horizon as a greenish glow, or sometimes a faint red, as if the Sun were rising from an unusual direction. Auroras also occur poleward of the auroral zone as either diffuse patches or arcs, [ 16 ] which can be subvisual.

Videos of the aurora australis taken by the crew of Expedition 28 on board the International Space Station This sequence of shots was taken on 17 September 2011 from 17:22:27 to 17:45:12 GMT, on an ascending pass from south of Madagascar to just north of Australia over the Indian Ocean .

This sequence of shots was taken on 7 September 2011 from 17:38:03 to 17:49:15 GMT, from the French Southern and Antarctic Lands in the South Indian Ocean to southern Australia.

This sequence of shots was taken on 11 September 2011 from 13:45:06 to 14:01:51 GMT, from a descending pass near eastern Australia, rounding about to an ascending pass to the east of New Zealand .

NOAA maps of North America and Eurasia North America Eurasia These maps show the local midnight equatorward boundary of the aurora at different levels of geomagnetic activity as of 28 October 2011 – these maps change as the location of the geomagnetic poles change. A K -index of K p = 3 corresponds to relatively low levels of geomagnetic activity, while K p = 9 represents high levels.

Auroras are occasionally seen in latitudes below the auroral zone when a geomagnetic storm temporarily enlarges the auroral oval. Large geomagnetic storms are most common during the peak of the 11-year sunspot cycle or during the three years after the peak.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] An electron spirals (gyrates) about a field line at an angle that is determined by its velocity vectors, parallel and perpendicular, respectively, to the local geomagnetic field vector B. This angle is known as the "pitch angle" of the particle. The distance, or radius, of the electron from the field line at any time is known as its Larmor radius . The pitch angle increases as the electron travels to a region of greater field strength nearer to the atmosphere. Thus, it is possible for some particles to return, or mirror, if the angle becomes 90° before entering the atmosphere to collide with the denser molecules there. Other particles that do not mirror enter the atmosphere and contribute to the auroral display over a range of altitudes. Other types of auroras have been observed from space; for example, "poleward arcs" stretching sunward across the polar cap, the related "theta aurora", [ 19 ] and "dayside arcs" near noon. These are relatively infrequent and poorly understood. Other interesting effects occur such as pulsating aurora, "black aurora" and their rarer companion "anti-black aurora" and subvisual red arcs. In addition to all these, a weak glow (often deep red) is observed around the two polar cusps, the field lines separating the ones that close through Earth from those that are swept into the tail and close remotely.

Altitude Video of the complete aurora australis by IMAGE , superimposed over a digital image of Earth Starting in 1911, Carl Størmer and his colleagues used cameras to triangulate more than 12,000 auroras. They found no auroras below 70 km (43 mi) and only 6.5% above 150 km (93 mi), with a maximum in the height distribution around 100 km (62 mi).

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] : 322 Forms According to Clark (2007), there are five main forms that can be seen from the ground, from least to most visible: [ 22 ] Different forms Divergence point of a coronal aurora A mild glow , near the horizon. These can be close to the limit of visibility, [ 23 ] but can be distinguished from moonlit clouds because stars can be seen undiminished through the glow.

Patches or surfaces that look like clouds.

Arcs curve across the sky.

Rays are light and dark stripes across arcs, reaching upwards by various amounts.

Coronas cover much of the sky and diverge from one point on it.

Brekke (1994) also described some auroras as "curtains".

[ 24 ] The similarity to curtains is often enhanced by folds within the arcs. Arcs can fragment or break up into separate, at times rapidly changing, often rayed features that may fill the whole sky. These are also known as discrete auroras , which are at times bright enough to read a newspaper at night.

[ 25 ] These forms are consistent with auroras being shaped by Earth's magnetic field. The appearances of arcs, rays, curtains, and coronas are determined by the shapes of the luminous parts of the atmosphere and a viewer's position .

[ 26 ] Colours and wavelengths of auroral light Red: At its highest altitudes, excited atomic oxygen emits at 630 nm (red); low concentration of atoms and lower sensitivity of eyes at this wavelength make this colour visible only under more intense solar activity. The low number of oxygen atoms and their gradually diminishing concentration is responsible for the faint appearance of the top parts of the "curtains". Scarlet, crimson, and carmine are the most often seen hues of red for the auroras.

[ 27 ] Green: At lower altitudes, the more frequent collisions suppress the 630 nm (red) mode: rather the 557.7 nm emission (green) dominates. A fairly high concentration of atomic oxygen and higher eye sensitivity in green make green auroras the most common. The excited molecular nitrogen (atomic nitrogen being rare due to the high stability of the N 2 molecule) plays a role here, as it can transfer energy by collision with an oxygen atom, which then radiates it away at the green wavelength. (Red and green can also mix together to produce pink or yellow hues.) The rapid decrease in concentration of atomic oxygen below about 100 km is responsible for the abrupt-looking end of the lower edges of the curtains. Both the 557.7 and 630.0 nm wavelengths correspond to forbidden transitions of atomic oxygen, a slow mechanism responsible for the graduality (0.7 s and 107 s respectively) of flaring and fading.

[ 28 ] 2024 appearance seen in England radiating blue through red aurora Blue: At yet lower altitudes, atomic oxygen is uncommon, and molecular nitrogen and ionized molecular nitrogen take over in producing visible light emission, radiating at a large number of wavelengths in both red and blue parts of the spectrum, with 428 nm (blue) being dominant. Blue and purple emissions, typically at the lower edges of the "curtains", show up at the highest levels of solar activity.

[ 29 ] The molecular nitrogen transitions are much faster than the atomic oxygen ones.

Ultraviolet: Ultraviolet radiation from auroras (within the optical window but not visible to the human eye) has been observed with the requisite equipment. Ultraviolet auroras have also been seen on Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn.

[ 30 ] Infrared: Infrared radiation, in wavelengths that are within the optical window, is also part of many auroras.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Yellow and pink are a mix of red and green or blue. Yellow and pink auroras are relatively rare and are associated with high solar activity.

[ 32 ] Other shades of red, as well as orange and gold, also may be seen on rare occasions. As red, green, and blue are linearly independent colours, additive synthesis could, in theory, produce most human-perceived colours, but the ones mentioned in this article comprise a virtually exhaustive list.

Changes with time Construction of a keogram from one night's recording by an all-sky camera, 6/7 September 2021. Keograms are commonly used to visualize changes in auroras over time.

Auroras change with time. Over the night they begin with glows and progress toward coronas, although they may not reach them. They tend to fade in the opposite order.

[ 24 ] Until about 1963, it was thought that these changes were due to the rotation of the Earth under a pattern fixed with respect to the Sun. Later, it was found by comparing all-sky films of auroras from different places (collected during the International Geophysical Year ) that they often undergo global changes in a process called auroral substorm . They change in a few minutes from quiet arcs all along the auroral oval to active displays along the dark side and after 1–3 hours they gradually change back.

[ 33 ] Changes in auroras over time are commonly visualized using keograms .

[ 34 ] At shorter time scales, auroras can change their appearances and intensity, sometimes so slowly as to be difficult to notice, and at other times rapidly down to the sub-second scale.

[ 25 ] The phenomenon of pulsating auroras is an example of intensity variations over short timescales, typically with periods of 2–20 seconds. This type of aurora is generally accompanied by decreasing peak emission heights of about 8 km for blue and green emissions and above-average solar wind speeds ( c.

500 km/s ).

[ 35 ] Other auroral radiation In addition, the aurora and associated currents produce a strong radio emission around 150 kHz known as auroral kilometric radiation (AKR), discovered in 1972.

[ 36 ] Ionospheric absorption makes AKR only observable from space. X-ray emissions, originating from the particles associated with auroras, have also been detected.

[ 37 ] Noise Aurora noise , similar to a crackling noise, begins about 70 m (230 ft) above Earth's surface and is caused by charged particles in an inversion layer of the atmosphere formed during a cold night. The charged particles discharge when particles from the Sun hit the inversion layer, creating the noise.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Abnormal types STEVE In 2016, more than fifty citizen science observations described what was to them an unknown type of aurora which they named " STEVE ", for "Strong Thermal Emission Velocity Enhancement". STEVE is not an aurora but is caused by a 25 km (16 mi) wide ribbon of hot plasma at an altitude of 450 km (280 mi), with a temperature of 3,000 °C (3,270 K; 5,430 °F) and flowing at a speed of 6 km/s (3.7 mi/s) (compared to 10 m/s (33 ft/s) outside the ribbon).

[ 40 ] Picket-fence aurora The processes that cause STEVE are also associated with a picket-fence aurora, although the latter can be seen without STEVE.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] It is an aurora because it is caused by the precipitation of electrons in the atmosphere but it appears outside the auroral oval, [ 43 ] closer to the equator than typical auroras.

[ 44 ] When the picket-fence aurora appears with STEVE, it is below.

[ 42 ] Dune aurora First reported in 2020, [ 45 ] [ 46 ] and confirmed in 2021, [ 47 ] [ 48 ] the dune aurora phenomenon was discovered [ 49 ] by Finnish citizen scientists . It consists of regularly spaced, parallel stripes of brighter emission in the green diffuse aurora which gives the impression of sand dunes.

[ 50 ] The phenomenon is believed to be caused by the modulation of atomic oxygen density by a large-scale atmospheric wave travelling horizontally in a waveguide through an inversion layer in the mesosphere in presence of electron precipitation .

[ 47 ] Horse-collar aurora Horse-collar auroras (HCA) are auroral features in which the auroral ellipse shifts poleward during the dawn and dusk portions and the polar cap becomes teardrop-shaped. They form during periods when the interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) is permanently northward, when the IMF clock angle is small. Their formation is associated with the closure of the magnetic flux at the top of the dayside magnetosphere by the double lobe reconnection (DLR). There are approximately 8 HCA events per month, with no seasonal dependence, and that the IMF must be within 30 degrees of northwards.

[ 51 ] Conjugate auroras Conjugate auroras are nearly exact mirror-image auroras found at conjugate points in the northern and southern hemispheres on the same geomagnetic field lines. These generally happen at the time of the equinoxes , when there is little difference in the orientation of the north and south geomagnetic poles to the Sun. Attempts were made to image conjugate auroras by aircraft from Alaska and New Zealand in 1967, 1968, 1970, and 1971, with some success.

[ 52 ] Causes A full understanding of the physical processes that lead to different types of auroras is still incomplete, but the basic cause involves the interaction of the solar wind with Earth's magnetosphere . The varying intensity of the solar wind produces effects of different magnitudes but includes one or more of the following physical scenarios.

A quiescent solar wind flowing past Earth's magnetosphere steadily interacts with it and can inject solar wind particles directly onto the geomagnetic field lines that are 'open', as opposed to being 'closed' in the opposite hemisphere and provide diffusion through the bow shock . It can also cause particles already trapped in the radiation belts to precipitate into the atmosphere. Once particles are lost to the atmosphere from the radiation belts, under quiet conditions, new ones replace them only slowly, and the loss cone becomes depleted. In the magnetotail, however, particle trajectories seem constantly to reshuffle, probably when the particles cross the very weak magnetic field near the equator. As a result, the flow of electrons in that region is nearly the same in all directions ("isotropic") and assures a steady supply of leaking electrons. The leakage of electrons does not leave the tail positively charged, because each leaked electron lost to the atmosphere is replaced by a low-energy electron drawn upward from the ionosphere . Such replacement of "hot" electrons by "cold" ones is in complete accord with the second law of thermodynamics . The complete process, which also generates an electric ring current around Earth, is uncertain.

Geomagnetic disturbance from an enhanced solar wind causes distortions of the magnetotail ("magnetic substorms"). These 'substorms' tend to occur after prolonged spells (on the order of hours) during which the interplanetary magnetic field has had an appreciable southward component. This leads to a higher rate of interconnection between its field lines and those of Earth. As a result, the solar wind moves magnetic flux (tubes of magnetic field lines, 'locked' together with their resident plasma) from the day side of Earth to the magnetotail, widening the obstacle it presents to the solar wind flow and constricting the tail on the night-side. Ultimately some tail plasma can separate (" magnetic reconnection "); some blobs (" plasmoids ") are squeezed downstream and are carried away with the solar wind; others are squeezed toward Earth where their motion feeds strong outbursts of auroras, mainly around midnight ("unloading process"). A geomagnetic storm resulting from greater interaction adds many more particles to the plasma trapped around Earth, also producing enhancement of the "ring current". Occasionally the resulting modification of Earth's magnetic field can be so strong that it produces auroras visible at middle latitudes, on field lines much closer to the equator than those of the auroral zone.

Moon and aurora Acceleration of auroral charged particles invariably accompanies a magnetospheric disturbance that causes an aurora. This mechanism, which is believed to predominantly arise from strong electric fields along the magnetic field or wave-particle interactions, raises the velocity of a particle in the direction of the guiding magnetic field. The pitch angle is thereby decreased and increases the chance of it being precipitated into the atmosphere. Both electromagnetic and electrostatic waves, produced at the time of greater geomagnetic disturbances, make a significant contribution to the energizing processes that sustain an aurora. Particle acceleration provides a complex intermediate process for transferring energy from the solar wind indirectly into the atmosphere.

Aurora australis (11 September 2005) as captured by NASA's IMAGE satellite, digitally overlaid onto The Blue Marble composite image.

An animation created using the same satellite data is also available.

The details of these phenomena are not fully understood. However, it is clear that the prime source of auroral particles is the solar wind feeding the magnetosphere, the reservoir containing the radiation zones and temporarily magnetically trapped particles confined by the geomagnetic field, coupled with particle acceleration processes.

[ 53 ] Auroral particles The immediate cause of the ionization and excitation of atmospheric constituents leading to auroral emissions was discovered in 1960, when a pioneering rocket flight from Fort Churchill in Canada revealed a flux of electrons entering the atmosphere from above.

[ 54 ] Since then an extensive collection of measurements has been acquired painstakingly and with steadily improving resolution since the 1960s by many research teams using rockets and satellites to traverse the auroral zone. The main findings have been that auroral arcs and other bright forms are due to electrons that have been accelerated during the final few 10,000 km or so of their plunge into the atmosphere.

[ 55 ] These electrons often, but not always, exhibit a peak in their energy distribution, and are preferentially aligned along the local direction of the magnetic field.

Electrons are mainly responsible for diffuse and pulsating auroras have, in contrast, a smoothly falling energy distribution, and an angular (pitch-angle) distribution favouring directions perpendicular to the local magnetic field. Pulsations were discovered to originate at or close to the equatorial crossing point of auroral zone magnetic field lines.

[ 56 ] Protons are also associated with auroras, both discrete and diffuse.

Atmosphere Auroras result from emissions of photons in Earth's upper atmosphere , above 80 km (50 mi), from ionized nitrogen atoms regaining an electron, and oxygen atoms and nitrogen -based molecules returning from an excited state to the ground state .

[ 57 ] They are ionized or excited by the collision of particles precipitated into the atmosphere. Both incoming electrons and protons may be involved. Excitation energy is lost within the atmosphere by the emission of a photon, or by collision with another atom or molecule: Oxygen emissions green or orange-red, depending on the amount of energy absorbed.

Nitrogen emissions blue, purple, or red; blue and purple if the molecule regains an electron after it has been ionized, red if returning to ground state from an excited state.

Oxygen is unusual in terms of its return to ground state: it can take 0.7 seconds to emit the 557.7 nm green light and up to two minutes for the red 630.0 nm emission. Collisions with other atoms or molecules absorb the excitation energy and prevent emission; this process is called collisional quenching . Because the highest parts of the atmosphere contain a higher percentage of oxygen and lower particle densities, such collisions are rare enough to allow time for oxygen to emit red light. Collisions become more frequent progressing down into the atmosphere due to increasing density, so red emissions do not have time to happen, and eventually, even green light emissions are prevented.

The change in auroral colour with altitude is therefore explained—oxygen red is predominant at high altitudes, followed by oxygen green and nitrogen blue/purple/red, then finally other hues of nitrogen blue/purple/red where particle collisions prevent oxygen from emissions. Green is the most common colour. Then comes pink, a mixture of light green and red, followed by pure red, then yellow (a mixture of red and green), and finally, pure blue.

Precipitating protons generally produce optical emissions as incident hydrogen atoms after gaining electrons from the atmosphere. Proton auroras are usually observed at lower latitudes.

[ 58 ] Ionosphere Bright auroras are generally associated with Birkeland currents (Schield et al., 1969; [ 59 ] Zmuda and Armstrong, 1973 [ 60 ] ), which flow down into the ionosphere on one side of the pole and out on the other. In between, some of the current connects directly through the ionospheric E layer (125 km); the rest ("region 2") detours, leaving again through field lines closer to the equator and closing through the "partial ring current" carried by magnetically trapped plasma. The ionosphere is an ohmic conductor , so some consider that such currents require a driving voltage, which an, as yet unspecified, dynamo mechanism can supply. Electric field probes in orbit above the polar cap suggest voltages of the order of 40,000 volts, rising up to more than 200,000 volts during intense magnetic storms. In another interpretation, the currents are the direct result of electron acceleration into the atmosphere by wave/particle interactions.

Ionospheric resistance has a complex nature and leads to a secondary Hall current flow. Due to physics, the magnetic disturbance on the ground due to the main current almost cancels out, so most of the observed effect of auroras is due to a secondary current, the auroral electrojet . An auroral electrojet index (measured in nanotesla) is regularly derived from ground data and serves as a general measure of auroral activity.

Kristian Birkeland [ 61 ] deduced that the currents flowed in the east–west directions along the auroral arc, and such currents, flowing from the dayside toward (approximately) midnight were later named "auroral electrojets" (see also Birkeland currents ). The ionosphere can contribute to the formation of auroral arcs via the feedback instability under high ionospheric resistance conditions, observed at night time and in the dark Winter hemisphere.

[ 62 ] Interaction of the solar wind with Earth Earth is constantly immersed in the solar wind , a flow of magnetized hot plasma (a gas of free electrons and positive ions) emitted by the Sun in all directions, a result of the two-million-degree temperature of the Sun's outermost layer, the corona . The solar wind reaches Earth with a velocity typically around 400 km/s, a density of around 5 ions/cm 3 , and a magnetic field intensity of around 2–5 nT (for comparison, Earth's surface field is typically 30,000–50,000 nT). During magnetic storms , in particular, flows can be several times faster; the interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) may also be much stronger.

Joan Feynman deduced in the 1970s that the long-term averages of solar wind speed correlated with geomagnetic activity.

[ 63 ] Her work resulted from data collected by the Explorer 33 spacecraft.

The solar wind and magnetosphere consist of plasma (ionized gas), which conducts electricity. It is well known (since Michael Faraday 's work around 1830) that when an electrical conductor is placed within a magnetic field while relative motion occurs in a direction that the conductor cuts across (or is cut by ), rather than along , the lines of the magnetic field, an electric current is induced within the conductor. The strength of the current depends on a) the rate of relative motion, b) the strength of the magnetic field, c) the number of conductors ganged together, and d) the distance between the conductor and the magnetic field, while the direction of flow is dependent upon the direction of relative motion.

Dynamos make use of this basic process ("the dynamo effect "), any and all conductors, solid or otherwise are so affected, including plasmas and other fluids.

The IMF originates on the Sun, linked to the sunspots , and its field lines (lines of force) are dragged out by the solar wind. That alone would tend to line them up in the Sun-Earth direction, but the rotation of the Sun angles them at Earth by about 45 degrees forming a spiral in the ecliptic plane, known as the Parker spiral . The field lines passing Earth are therefore usually linked to those near the western edge ("limb") of the visible Sun at any time.

[ 64 ] The solar wind and the magnetosphere, being two electrically conducting fluids in relative motion, should be able in principle to generate electric currents by dynamo action and impart energy from the flow of the solar wind. However, this process is hampered by the fact that plasmas conduct readily along magnetic field lines, but less readily perpendicular to them. Energy is more effectively transferred by the temporary magnetic connection between the field lines of the solar wind and those of the magnetosphere. Unsurprisingly this process is known as magnetic reconnection . As already mentioned, it happens most readily when the interplanetary field is directed southward, in a similar direction to the geomagnetic field in the inner regions of both the north magnetic pole and south magnetic pole .

Auroras are more frequent and brighter during the intense phase of the solar cycle when coronal mass ejections increase the intensity of the solar wind.

[ 65 ] Magnetosphere Schematic of Earth's magnetosphere Earth's magnetosphere is shaped by the impact of the solar wind on Earth's magnetic field. This forms an obstacle to the flow, diverting it, at an average distance of about 70,000 km (11 Earth radii or R e ), [ 66 ] producing a bow shock 12,000 km to 15,000 km (1.9 to 2.4 R e ) further upstream. The width of the magnetosphere abreast of Earth is typically 190,000 km (30 R e ), and on the night side, a long "magnetotail" of stretched field lines extends to great distances (> 200 R e ).

The high-latitude magnetosphere is filled with plasma as the solar wind passes Earth. The flow of plasma into the magnetosphere increases with additional turbulence, density, and speed in the solar wind. This flow is favoured by a southward component of the IMF, which can then directly connect to the high latitude geomagnetic field lines.

[ 67 ] The flow pattern of magnetospheric plasma is mainly from the magnetotail toward Earth, around Earth and back into the solar wind through the magnetopause on the day-side. In addition to moving perpendicular to Earth's magnetic field, some magnetospheric plasma travels down along Earth's magnetic field lines, gains additional energy and loses it to the atmosphere in the auroral zones. The cusps of the magnetosphere, separating geomagnetic field lines that close through Earth from those that close remotely allow a small amount of solar wind to directly reach the top of the atmosphere, producing an auroral glow.

On 26 February 2008, THEMIS probes were able to determine, for the first time, the triggering event for the onset of magnetospheric substorms .

[ 68 ] Two of the five probes, positioned approximately one-third the distance to the Moon, measured events suggesting a magnetic reconnection event 96 seconds prior to auroral intensification.

[ 69 ] Geomagnetic storms that ignite auroras may occur more often during the months around the equinoxes . It is not well understood, but geomagnetic storms may vary with Earth's seasons. Two factors to consider are the tilt of both the solar and Earth's axis to the ecliptic plane. As Earth orbits throughout the year, it experiences an interplanetary magnetic field (IMF) from different latitudes of the Sun, which is tilted at 8 degrees. Similarly, the 23-degree tilt of Earth's axis about which the geomagnetic pole rotates with a diurnal variation changes the daily average angle that the geomagnetic field presents to the incident IMF throughout the year. These factors combined can lead to minor cyclical changes in the detailed way that the IMF links to the magnetosphere. In turn, this affects which energy from the solar wind can reach Earth's inner magnetosphere and thereby enhance auroras. Recent evidence in 2021 has shown that individual separate substorms may in fact be correlated networked communities.

[ 70 ] Auroral particle acceleration Just as there are many types of aurora, there are many different mechanisms that accelerate auroral particles into the atmosphere. Electron aurora in Earth's auroral zone (i.e. commonly visible aurora) can be split into two main categories with different immediate causes: diffuse and discrete aurora. Diffuse aurora appear relatively structureless to an observer on the ground, with indistinct edges and amorphous forms. Discrete aurora are structured into distinct features with well-defined edges such as arcs, rays, and coronas; they also tend to be much brighter than diffuse aurora.

In both cases, the electrons that eventually cause the aurora start out as electrons trapped by the magnetic field in Earth's magnetosphere . These trapped particles bounce back and forth along magnetic field lines and are prevented from hitting the atmosphere by the magnetic mirror formed by the increasing magnetic field strength closer to Earth. The magnetic mirror's ability to trap a particle depends on the particle's pitch angle : the angle between its direction of motion and the local magnetic field. An aurora is created by processes that decrease the pitch angle of many individual electrons, freeing them from the magnetic trap and causing them to hit the atmosphere.

In the case of diffuse auroras, the electron pitch angles are altered by their interaction with various plasma waves . Each interaction is essentially wave-particle scattering ; the electron energy after interacting with the wave is similar to its energy before interaction, but the direction of motion is altered. If the final direction of motion after scattering is close to the field line (specifically, if it falls within the loss cone ) then the electron will hit the atmosphere. Diffuse auroras are caused by the collective effect of many such scattered electrons hitting the atmosphere. The process is mediated by the plasma waves, which become stronger during periods of high geomagnetic activity , leading to increased diffuse aurora at those times.

In the case of discrete auroras, the trapped electrons are accelerated toward Earth by electric fields that form at an altitude of about 4000–12000 km in the "auroral acceleration region". The electric fields point away from Earth (i.e. upward) along the magnetic field line.

[ 71 ] Electrons moving downward through these fields gain a substantial amount of energy (on the order of a few keV ) in the direction along the magnetic field line toward Earth. This field-aligned acceleration decreases the pitch angle for all of the electrons passing through the region, causing many of them to hit the upper atmosphere. In contrast to the scattering process leading to diffuse auroras, the electric field increases the kinetic energy of all of the electrons transiting downward through the acceleration region by the same amount. This accelerates electrons starting from the magnetosphere with initially low energies (tens of eV or less) to energies required to create an aurora (100s of eV or greater), allowing that large source of particles to contribute to creating auroral light.

The accelerated electrons carry an electric current along the magnetic field lines (a Birkeland current ). Since the electric field points in the same direction as the current, there is a net conversion of electromagnetic energy into particle energy in the auroral acceleration region (an electric load ). The energy to power this load is eventually supplied by the magnetized solar wind flowing around the obstacle of Earth's magnetic field, although exactly how that power flows through the magnetosphere is still an active area of research.

[ 72 ] While the energy to power the aurora is ultimately derived from the solar wind, the electrons themselves do not travel directly from the solar wind into Earth's auroral zone; magnetic field lines from these regions do not connect to the solar wind, so there is no direct access for solar wind electrons.

Some auroral features are also created by electrons accelerated by dispersive Alfvén waves . At small wavelengths, transverse to the background magnetic field (comparable to the electron inertial length or ion gyroradius ), Alfvén waves develop a significant electric field parallel to the background magnetic field. This electric field can accelerate electrons to keV energies, sufficient to produce auroral arcs.

[ 73 ] If the electrons have a speed close to that of the wave's phase velocity, they are accelerated in a manner analogous to a surfer catching an ocean wave.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] This constantly changing wave electric field can accelerate electrons along the field line, causing some of them to hit the atmosphere. Electrons accelerated by this mechanism tend to have a broad energy spectrum, in contrast to the sharply peaked energy spectrum typical of electrons accelerated by quasi-static electric fields.

In addition to the discrete and diffuse electron aurora, proton aurora is caused when magnetospheric protons collide with the upper atmosphere. The proton gains an electron in the interaction, and the resulting neutral hydrogen atom emits photons. The resulting light is too dim to be seen with the naked eye. Other aurora not covered by the above discussion include transpolar arcs (formed poleward of the auroral zone), cusp aurora (formed in two small high-latitude areas on the dayside), and some non-terrestrial auroras.

Historically significant events The discovery of a 1770 Japanese diary in 2017 depicting auroras above the ancient Japanese capital of Kyoto suggested that the storm may have been 7% larger than the Carrington event , which affected telegraph networks.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] The auroras that resulted from the Carrington event on both 28 August and 2 September 1859, are thought to be the most spectacular in recent history. In a paper to the Royal Society on 21 November 1861, Balfour Stewart described both auroral events as documented by a self-recording magnetograph at the Kew Observatory and established the connection between the 2 September 1859 auroral storm and the Carrington –Hodgson flare event when he observed that "It is not impossible to suppose that in this case our luminary was taken in the act ." [ 78 ] The second auroral event, which occurred on 2 September 1859, was a result of the (unseen) coronal mass ejection associated with the exceptionally intense Carrington–Hodgson white light solar flare on 1 September 1859. This event produced auroras so widespread and extraordinarily bright that they were seen and reported in published scientific measurements, ship logs, and newspapers throughout the United States, Europe, Japan, and Australia. It was reported by The New York Times that in Boston on Friday 2 September 1859, the aurora was "so brilliant that at about one o'clock ordinary print could be read by the light".

[ 79 ] One o'clock EST time on Friday 2 September would have been 6:00 GMT; the self-recording magnetograph at the Kew Observatory was recording the geomagnetic storm , which was then one hour old, at its full intensity. Between 1859 and 1862, Elias Loomis published a series of nine papers on the Great Auroral Exhibition of 1859 in the American Journal of Science where he collected worldwide reports of the auroral event.

[ 11 ] That aurora is thought to have been produced by one of the most intense coronal mass ejections in history. It is also notable for the fact that it is the first time that the phenomena of auroral activity and electricity were unambiguously linked. This insight was made possible not only due to scientific magnetometer measurements of the era but also as a result of a significant portion of the 125,000 miles (201,000 km) of telegraph lines then in service being significantly disrupted for many hours throughout the storm. Some telegraph lines, however, seem to have been of the appropriate length and orientation to produce a sufficient geomagnetically induced current from the electromagnetic field to allow for continued communication with the telegraph operator power supplies switched off.

[ 80 ] The following conversation occurred between two operators of the American Telegraph Line between Boston and Portland, Maine , on the night of 2 September 1859 and reported in the Boston Traveller : Boston operator (to Portland operator): "Please cut off your battery [power source] entirely for fifteen minutes." Portland operator: "Will do so. It is now disconnected." Boston: "Mine is disconnected, and we are working with the auroral current. How do you receive my writing?" Portland: "Better than with our batteries on. – Current comes and goes gradually." Boston: "My current is very strong at times, and we can work better without the batteries, as the aurora seems to neutralize and augment our batteries alternately, making current too strong at times for our relay magnets. Suppose we work without batteries while we are affected by this trouble." Portland: "Very well. Shall I go ahead with business?" Boston: "Yes. Go ahead." The conversation was carried on for around two hours using no battery power at all and working solely with the current induced by the aurora, and it was said that this was the first time on record that more than a word or two was transmitted in such manner.

[ 79 ] Such events led to the general conclusion that The effect of the Aurora on the electric telegraph is generally to increase or diminish the electric current generated in working the wires. Sometimes it entirely neutralizes them, so that, in effect, no fluid [current] is discoverable in them. The aurora borealis seems to be composed of a mass of electric matter, resembling in every respect, that generated by the electric galvanic battery. The currents from it change coming on the wires, and then disappear: the mass of the aurora rolls from the horizon to the zenith.

[ 81 ] In May 2024, a series of solar storms caused the aurora borealis to be observed from as far south as Ferdows , Iran .

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] Historical views and folklore The earliest datable record of an aurora was recorded in the Bamboo Annals , a historical chronicle of the history of ancient China, in 977 or 957 BC.

[ 85 ] An aurora was described by the Greek explorer Pytheas in the 4th century BC.

[ 86 ] Seneca wrote about auroras in the first book of his Naturales Quaestiones , classifying them, for instance, as pithaei ('barrel-like'); chasmata ('chasm'); pogoniae ('bearded'); cyparissae ('like cypress trees'); and describing their manifold colours. He wrote about whether they were above or below the clouds and recalled that under Tiberius , an aurora formed above the port city of Ostia that was so intense and red that a cohort of the army, stationed nearby for fire duty, galloped to the rescue.

[ 87 ] It has been suggested that Pliny the Elder depicted the aurora borealis in his Natural History when he refers to trabes , chasma , "falling red flames", and "daylight in the night".

[ 88 ] The earliest depiction of the aurora may have been in Cro-Magnon cave paintings of northern Spain dating to 30,000 BC.

[ 89 ] The oldest known written record of the wintertime aurora was in a Chinese legend written around 2600 BC; an autumnal aurora is recorded centuries later, around 2000 BC.

[ 90 ] In Japanese folklore , pheasants were considered messengers from heaven. However, researchers from Japan's Graduate University for Advanced Studies and the National Institute of Polar Research claimed in March 2020 that "red pheasant tails" witnessed across the nightsky over Japan in 620 A.D. might have been instead a red aurora produced during a magnetic storm.

[ 91 ] The Aboriginal Australians associated auroras (which are mainly low on the horizon and predominantly red) with fire.

In the traditions of Aboriginal Australians , the aurora australis is commonly associated with fire. For example, the Gunditjmara people of western Victoria called auroras puae buae ('ashes'), while the Gunai people of eastern Victoria perceived auroras as bushfires in the spirit world. The Dieri people of South Australia say that an auroral display is kootchee , an evil spirit creating a large fire. Similarly, the Ngarrindjeri people of South Australia refer to auroras seen over Kangaroo Island as the campfires of spirits in the 'Land of the Dead'.  The Dieri and Ngarrindjeri communities  in southwest Queensland believe the auroras to be the fires of the Oola Pikka , ghostly spirits who spoke to the people through auroras. Sacred law forbade anyone except male elders from watching or interpreting the messages of ancestors they believed were transmitted through an aurora.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Among the Māori people of New Zealand , aurora australis or Tahunui-a-rangi ("great torches in the sky") were lit by ancestors who sailed south to a "land of ice" (or their descendants); [ 94 ] [ 95 ] these people were said to be Ui-te-Rangiora 's expedition party who had reached the Southern Ocean .

[ 94 ] around the 7th century.

[ 96 ] Aurora is pictured as a wreath of rays in the coat of arms of Utsjoki In Scandinavia, the first mention of norðrljós (the northern lights) is found in the Norwegian chronicle Konungs Skuggsjá from AD 1230. The chronicler has heard about this phenomenon from compatriots returning from Greenland , and he gives three possible explanations: that the ocean was surrounded by vast fires; that the sun flares could reach around the world to its night side; or that glaciers could store energy so that they eventually became fluorescent .

[ 97 ] Walter William Bryant wrote in his book Kepler (1920) that Tycho Brahe "seems to have been something of a homeopathist , for he recommends sulfur to cure infectious diseases 'brought on by the sulfurous vapours of the Aurora Borealis ' ".

[ 98 ] In 1778, Benjamin Franklin theorized in his paper Aurora Borealis, Suppositions and Conjectures towards forming a Hypothesis for its Explanation that an aurora was caused by a concentration of electrical charge in the polar regions intensified by the snow and moisture in the air: [ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] May not then the great quantity of electricity brought into the polar regions by the clouds, which are condensed there, and fall in the snow, which electricity would enter the earth, but cannot penetrate the ice; may it not, I say (as a bottle overcharged) break thro' that low atmosphere and run along in the vacuum over the air towards the equator, diverging as the degrees of longitude enlarge, strongly visible where densest, and becoming less visible as it more diverges; till it finds a passage to the earth in more temperate climates, or is mingled with the upper air?

Observations of the rhythmic movement of compass needles due to the influence of an aurora were confirmed in the Swedish city of Uppsala by Anders Celsius and Olof Hiorter . In 1741, Hiorter was able to link large magnetic fluctuation to the observation of an aurora overhead. This evidence helped to support their theory that 'magnetic storms' are responsible for such compass fluctuations.

[ 102 ] Frederic Edwin Church 's 1865 painting Aurora Borealis A variety of Native American myths surround the spectacle. The European explorer Samuel Hearne travelled with Chipewyan Dene in 1771 and recorded their views on the ed-thin ('caribou'). According to Hearne, the Dene people saw the resemblance between an aurora and the sparks produced when caribou fur is stroked. They believed that the lights were the spirits of their departed friends dancing in the sky, and when they shone brightly it meant that their deceased friends were very happy.

[ 103 ] During the night after the Battle of Fredericksburg , an aurora was seen from the battlefield. The Confederate Army took this as a sign that God was on their side, as the lights were rarely seen so far south. The painting Aurora Borealis by Frederic Edwin Church is widely interpreted to represent the conflict of the American Civil War .

[ 104 ] A mid-19th-century British source says auroras were a rare occurrence before the 18th century.

[ 105 ] It quotes Halley as saying that before the aurora of 1716, no such phenomenon had been recorded for more than 80 years, and none of any consequence since 1574. It says no appearance is recorded in the Transactions of the French Academy of Sciences between 1666 and 1716; and that one aurora recorded in Berlin Miscellany for 1797 was called a very rare event. One observed in 1723 at Bologna was stated to be the first ever seen there.

Celsius (1733) states the oldest residents of Uppsala thought the phenomenon a great rarity before 1716. The period between approximately 1645 and 1715 corresponds to the Maunder minimum in sunspot activity.

In Robert W. Service 's satirical poem " The Ballad of the Northern Lights " (1908), a Yukon prospector discovers that the aurora is the glow from a radium mine. He stakes his claim, then goes to town looking for investors.

In the early 1900s, the Norwegian scientist Kristian Birkeland developed a theory foundational to the current understanding of geomagnetism and polar auroras.

In Sami mythology, the northern lights are caused by the deceased who bled to death cutting themselves, their blood spilling on the sky. Many aboriginal peoples of northern Eurasia and North America share similar beliefs of northern lights being the blood of the deceased, some believing they are caused by dead warriors' blood spraying on the sky as they engage in playing games, riding horses, or having fun in some other way.

[ 106 ] Extraterrestrial auroras See also: Magnetosphere of Jupiter § Aurorae Jupiter aurora; the far left bright spot connects magnetically to Io ; the spots at the bottom of the image lead to Ganymede and Europa .

An aurora high above the northern part of Saturn; image taken by the Cassini spacecraft .

A movie shows images from 81 hours of observations of Saturn's aurora.

Both Jupiter and Saturn have magnetic fields that are stronger than Earth's (Jupiter's equatorial field strength is 4.3 gauss , compared to 0.3 gauss for Earth), and both have extensive radiation belts. Auroras have been observed on both gas planets, most clearly using the Hubble Space Telescope , and the Cassini and Galileo spacecraft, as well as on Uranus and Neptune .

[ 107 ] The auroras on Saturn seem, like Earth's, to be powered by the solar wind. However, Jupiter's auroras are more complex. Jupiter's main auroral oval is associated with the plasma produced by the volcanic moon Io , and the transport of this plasma within the planet's magnetosphere . An uncertain fraction of Jupiter's auroras are powered by the solar wind. In addition, the moons, especially Io, are also powerful sources of aurora. These arise from electric currents along field lines ("field aligned currents"), generated by a dynamo mechanism due to the relative motion between the rotating planet and the moving moon. Io, which has active volcanism and an ionosphere, is a particularly strong source, and its currents also generate radio emissions, which have been studied since 1955. Using the Hubble Space Telescope, auroras over Io, Europa, and Ganymede have all been observed.

Auroras have also been observed on Venus and Mars . Venus has no magnetic field so Venusian auroras appear as bright and diffuse patches of varying shape and intensity, sometimes distributed over the full disc of the planet.

[ 108 ] A Venusian aurora originates when electrons from the solar wind collide with the night-side atmosphere.

An aurora was detected on Mars, on 14 August 2004, by the SPICAM instrument aboard Mars Express . The aurora was located at Terra Cimmeria , in the region of 177° east, 52° south. The total size of the emission region was about 30 km across, and possibly about 8 km high. By analysing a map of crustal magnetic anomalies compiled with data from the Mars Global Surveyor , scientists observed that the region of the emissions corresponded to an area where the strongest magnetic field is localized. This correlation indicated that the origin of the light emission was a flux of electrons moving along the crust magnetic lines and exciting the upper atmosphere of Mars.

[ 107 ] [ 109 ] Between 2014 and 2016, cometary auroras were observed on comet 67P/Churyumov–Gerasimenko by multiple instruments on the Rosetta spacecraft.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] The auroras were observed at far-ultraviolet wavelengths.

Coma observations revealed atomic emissions of hydrogen and oxygen caused by the photodissociation (not photoionization , like in terrestrial auroras) of water molecules in the comet's coma.

[ 111 ] The interaction of accelerated electrons from the solar wind with gas particles in the coma is responsible for the aurora.

[ 111 ] Since comet 67P has no magnetic field, the aurora is diffusely spread around the comet.

[ 111 ] Exoplanets , such as hot Jupiters , have been suggested to experience ionization in their upper atmospheres and generate an aurora modified by weather in their turbulent tropospheres .

[ 112 ] However, there is no current detection of an exoplanet aurora.

The first ever extra-solar auroras were discovered in July 2015 over the brown dwarf star LSR J1835+3259 .

[ 113 ] The mainly red aurora was found to be a million times brighter than the northern lights, a result of the charged particles interacting with hydrogen in the atmosphere. It has been speculated that stellar winds may be stripping off material from the surface of the brown dwarf to produce their own electrons. Another possible explanation for the auroras is that an as-yet-undetected body around the dwarf star is throwing off material, as is the case with Jupiter and its moon Io.

[ 114 ] See also Airglow Aurora (heraldry) Heliophysics List of solar storms Paschen's law Space tornado Space weather Explanatory notes ^ Modern style guides recommend that the names of meteorological phenomena , such as aurora borealis, be uncapitalized.

[ 1 ] ^ The name "auroras" is now the more common plural in the US; [ 2 ] however, aurorae is the original Latin plural and is often used by scientists. In some contexts, aurora is an uncountable noun, multiple sightings being referred to as "the aurora".

^ The auroras seen in northern latitudes, around the Arctic, can be referred to as the northern lights or aurora borealis , while those seen in southern latitudes, around the Antarctic, are known as the southern lights or aurora australis .

Polar lights and aurora polaris are the more general equivalents of these terms.

References ^ "University of Minnesota Style Manual" . .umn.edu. 18 July 2007. Archived from the original on 22 July 2010 . Retrieved 5 August 2010 .

^ "aurora" .

^ Lui, A., 2019. Imaging global auroras in space. Light: Science & Applications, 8(1).

^ "Hubble Captures Vivid Auroras in Jupiter's Atmosphere - NASA Science" . 30 June 2016 . Retrieved 23 April 2025 .

^ WPGenius, Team.

"AURORA" .

Chanakya Mandal Online . Retrieved 23 April 2025 .

^ a b c d e Harper, Douglas, ed. (2025).

"Aurora" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved 5 January 2025 .

^ Siscoe, G. L.

(1986). "An historical footnote on the origin of 'aurora borealis' ".

History of Geophysics . Vol. 2. pp.

11– 14.

Bibcode : 1986HGeo....2...11S .

doi : 10.1029/HG002p0011 .

ISBN 978-0-87590-276-0 .

ISSN 8755-1217 .

^ Guiducci, Mario; Galilei, Galileo (1619).

Discorso delle Comete [ Discourse on Comets ] (in Italian). Firenze (Florence), Italy: Pietro Cecconcelli. p. 39.

Archived from the original on 12 May 2024 . Retrieved 31 July 2019 .

On p. 39, Galileo explains that auroras are due to sunlight reflecting from thin, high clouds. From p. 39: "... molti di voi avranno più d'una volta veduto 'l Cielo nell' ore notturne, nelle parti verso Settentrione, illuminato in modo, che di lucidità non-cede alla piu candida Aurora, ne lontana allo spuntar del Sole; effetto, che per mio credere, non-ha origine altrode, che dall' essersi parte dell' aria vaporosa, che circonda la terra, per qualche cagione in modo più del consueto assottigliata, che sublimandosi assai più del suo consueto, abbia sormontato il cono dell' ombra terrestre, si che essendo la sua parte superiore ferita dal Sole abbia potuto rifletterci il suo splendore, e formarci questa boreale aurora." ("... many of you will have seen, more than once, the sky in the night hours, in parts towards the north, illuminated in a way that the clear [sky] does not yield to the brighter aurora, far from the rising of the sun; an effect that, by my thinking, has no other origin than being part of the vaporous air that surrounds the Earth, for some reason thinner than usual, which, being sublimated far more than expected, has risen above the cone of the Earth's shadow, so that its upper part, being struck by the sun['s light], has been able to reflect its splendor and to form this aurora borealis.") ^ Feldstein, Y. I. (2011). "A Quarter Century with the Auroral Oval".

EOS .

67 (40): 761.

Bibcode : 1986EOSTr..67..761F .

doi : 10.1029/EO067i040p00761-02 .

^ a b Bruzek, A.; Durrant, C. J. (2012).

Illustrated Glossary for Solar and Solar-Terrestrial Physics . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 190.

ISBN 978-94-010-1245-4 .

Archived from the original on 12 May 2024 . Retrieved 30 August 2017 .

^ a b See: Loomis, Elias (November 1859).

"The great auroral exhibition of August 28 to September, 1859" .

The American Journal of Science . 2nd series.

28 : 385– 408.

Archived from the original on 13 May 2021 . Retrieved 30 July 2019 .

Loomis, Elias (January 1860).

"The great auroral exhibition of August 28 to September 4, 1859 – 2nd article" .

The American Journal of Science . 2nd series.

29 : 92– 97.

Archived from the original on 14 May 2021 . Retrieved 30 July 2019 .

Loomis, Elias (February 1860).

"The great auroral exhibition of August 28 to September 4, 1859 – 3rd article" .

The American Journal of Science . 2nd series.

29 : 249– 266.

Archived from the original on 15 May 2021 . Retrieved 30 July 2019 .

Loomis, Elias (May 1860).

"The great auroral exhibition of August 28 to September 4, 1859 – 4th article" .

The American Journal of Science . 2nd series.

29 : 386– 399.

Archived from the original on 13 May 2021 . Retrieved 30 July 2019 .

Loomis, Elias (July 1860).

"The great auroral exhibition of August 28 to September 4, 1859, and the geographical distribution of auroras and thunder storms – 5th article" .

The American Journal of Science . 2nd series.

30 : 79– 100.

Archived from the original on 14 May 2021 . Retrieved 30 July 2019 .

Loomis, Elias (November 1860).

"The great auroral exhibition of August 28 to September 4, 1859 – 6th article" .

The American Journal of Science . 2nd series.

30 : 339– 361.

Archived from the original on 13 May 2021 . Retrieved 30 July 2019 .

Loomis, Elias (July 1861).

"The great auroral exhibition of August 28 to September 4, 1859 – 7th article" .

The American Journal of Science . 2nd series.

32 : 71– 84.

Archived from the original on 14 May 2021 . Retrieved 30 July 2019 .

Loomis, Elias (September 1861).

"On the great auroral exhibition of August 28 to September 4, 1859, and auroras generally – 8th article" .

The American Journal of Science . 2nd series.

32 : 318– 335.

Archived from the original on 14 May 2021 . Retrieved 30 July 2019 .

Loomis, Elias (July 1862).

"On electrical currents circulating near the earth's surface and their connection with the phenomena of the aurora polaris – 9th article" .

The American Journal of Science . 2nd series.

34 : 34– 45.

Archived from the original on 14 May 2021 . Retrieved 30 July 2019 .

^ Fritz, Hermann (1881).

Das Polarlicht [ The Aurora ]. Internationale wissenschaftliche Bibliothek (in German). Vol. 49. Leipzig, Germany: F. A. Brockhaus.

Archived from the original on 28 August 2021 . Retrieved 31 July 2019 .

^ Tromholt, Sophus (1881). "Om Nordlysets Perioder / Sur les périodes de l'aurore boréale [On the periods of the aurora borealis]".

Meteorologisk Aarbog for 1880. Part 1 (in Danish and French). Copenhagen, Denmark: Danske Meteorologiske Institut. pp.

I– LX.

^ Østgaard, N.; Mende, S. B.; Frey, H. U.; Sigwarth, J. B.; Åsnes, A.; Weygand, J. M. (2007). "Auroral conjugacy studies based on global imaging".

Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics .

69 (3): 249.

Bibcode : 2007JASTP..69..249O .

doi : 10.1016/j.jastp.2006.05.026 .

^ "Aurora austral en Uruguay: fotógrafos registran un hecho "histórico" y astrónomos explican por qué pasó" .

El Observador (Uruguay) . Retrieved 13 May 2024 .

^ Frey, H. U. (2007).

"Localized aurora beyond the auroral oval" .

Reviews of Geophysics .

45 (1): RG1003.

Bibcode : 2007RvGeo..45.1003F .

doi : 10.1029/2005RG000174 .

^ Stamper, J.; Lockwood, M.; Wild, M. N. (December 1999).

"Solar causes of the long-term increase in geomagnetic activity" (PDF) .

Journal of Geophysical Research .

104 (A12): 28, 325– 28, 342.

Bibcode : 1999JGR...10428325S .

doi : 10.1029/1999JA900311 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 April 2019 . Retrieved 7 December 2019 .

^ Papitashvili, V. O.; Papitashva, N. E.; King, J. H. (September 2000).

"Solar cycle effects in planetary geomagnetic activity: Analysis of 36-year long OMNI dataset" (PDF) .

Geophysical Research Letters .

27 (17): 2797– 2800.

Bibcode : 2000GeoRL..27.2797P .

doi : 10.1029/2000GL000064 .

hdl : 2027.42/94796 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 May 2024 . Retrieved 20 April 2018 .

^ Østgaard, N. (2003).

"Observations of non-conjugate theta aurora" .

Geophysical Research Letters .

30 (21): 2125.

Bibcode : 2003GeoRL..30.2125O .

doi : 10.1029/2003GL017914 .

^ Størmer, Carl (1946). "Frequency of 12,330 measured heights of aurora from southern Norway in the years 1911–1944".

Terrestrial Magnetism and Atmospheric Electricity .

51 (4): 501– 504.

Bibcode : 1946TeMAE..51..501S .

doi : 10.1029/te051i004p00501 .

^ Brekke, Asgeir (2013).

Physics of the Upper Polar Atmosphere . Springer Atmospheric Sciences. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-27401-5 .

ISBN 978-3-642-27400-8 .

^ Clark, Stuart (2007). "Astronomical fire: Richard Carrington and the solar flare of 1859".

Endeavour .

31 (3): 104– 109.

doi : 10.1016/j.endeavour.2007.07.004 .

PMID 17764743 .

^ Zhu, L.; Schunk, R. W.; Sojka, J. J. (1997). "Polar cap arcs: A review".

Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics .

59 (10): 1087.

Bibcode : 1997JASTP..59.1087Z .

doi : 10.1016/S1364-6826(96)00113-7 .

^ a b A, Brekke; A, Egeland (1994).

The Northern Lights . Grøndahl and Dreyer, Oslo. p. 137.

ISBN 978-82-504-2105-9 .

^ a b Yahnin, A. G.; Sergeev, V. A.; Gvozdevsky, B. B.; Vennerstrøm, S. (1997).

"Magnetospheric source region of discrete auroras inferred from their relationship with isotropy boundaries of energetic particles" .

Annales Geophysicae .

15 (8): 943.

Bibcode : 1997AnGeo..15..943Y .

doi : 10.1007/s00585-997-0943-z .

^ Thomson, E. (1917).

"Inferences concerning auroras" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

3 (1): 1– 7.

Bibcode : 1917PNAS....3....1T .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.3.1.1 .

PMC 1091158 .

PMID 16586674 .

^ "The Colors of the Aurora (U.S. National Park Service)" .

www.nps.gov . Retrieved 19 May 2025 .

^ "The Colors of the Aurora (U.S. National Park Service)" .

www.nps.gov . Retrieved 19 May 2025 .

^ "Auroral colors and spectra" .

Windows to the Universe .

Archived from the original on 19 December 2014 . Retrieved 13 January 2014 .

^ a b "NASA's MAVEN Orbiter Detects Ultraviolet Aurora on Mars | Space Exploration" . Sci-News.com.

Archived from the original on 25 July 2015 . Retrieved 16 August 2015 .

^ "Aurora Borealis" . dapep.org. Archived from the original on 19 April 2015 . Retrieved 16 August 2015 .

[ clarification needed ] ^ updated, Daisy Dobrijevic last (23 June 2023).

"Aurora colors: What causes them and why do they vary?" .

Space.com . Retrieved 31 March 2025 .

^ T., Potemra; S.-I., Akasofu (1991).

Magnetospheric Substorms . Washington, D.C.: American Geophysical Union. p. 5.

ISBN 0-87590-030-5 .

^ "Eyes on the Aurora, Part 2: What is a Keogram?" .

Aurorasaurus . 9 September 2020.

Archived from the original on 24 February 2022 . Retrieved 26 February 2022 .

^ Partamies, N.; Whiter, D.; Kadokura, A.; Kauristie, K.; Tyssøy, H. Nesse; Massetti, S.; Stauning, P.; Raita, T. (2017).

"Occurrence and average behavior of pulsating aurora" .

Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics .

122 (5): 5606– 5618.

Bibcode : 2017JGRA..122.5606P .

doi : 10.1002/2017JA024039 .

ISSN 2169-9402 .

S2CID 38394431 .

Archived from the original on 12 May 2024 . Retrieved 7 December 2019 .

^ Gurnett, D.A. (1974). "The Earth as a radio source".

Journal of Geophysical Research .

79 (28): 4227.

Bibcode : 1974JGR....79.4227G .

doi : 10.1029/JA079i028p04227 .

^ Anderson, K. A. (1960). "Balloon observations of X-rays in the auroral zone".

Journal of Geophysical Research .

65 (2): 551– 564.

Bibcode : 1960JGR....65..551A .

doi : 10.1029/jz065i002p00551 .

^ "Auroras Make Weird Noises, and Now We Know Why" . 27 June 2016. Archived from the original on 27 June 2016 . Retrieved 28 June 2016 .

^ "News: Acoustics researcher finds explanation for auroral sounds" . 21 June 2016.

Archived from the original on 1 July 2016 . Retrieved 28 June 2016 .

^ American Geophysical Union (20 August 2018).

"New kind of aurora is not an aurora at all" .

Phys.org .

Archived from the original on 30 March 2022 . Retrieved 21 August 2018 .

^ Andrews, Robin George (3 May 2019).

"Steve the odd 'aurora' revealed to be two sky shows in one" .

National Geographic . Archived from the original on 4 May 2019 . Retrieved 4 May 2019 .

^ a b Nishimura, Y.; Gallardo-Lacourt, B.; Zou, Y.; Mishin, E.; Knudsen, D. J.; Donovan, E. F.; Angelopoulos, V.; Raybell, R. (16 April 2019).

"Magnetospheric signatures of STEVE: Implication for the magnetospheric energy source and inter-hemispheric conjugacy" .

Geophysical Research Letters .

46 (11): 5637– 5644.

Bibcode : 2019GeoRL..46.5637N .

doi : 10.1029/2019GL082460 .

^ Lipuma, Lauren.

"Scientists discover what powers celestial phenomenon STEVE" .

AGU News . American Geophysical Union.

Archived from the original on 4 May 2019 . Retrieved 4 May 2019 .

^ Saner, Emine (19 March 2018).

" 'Steve': the mystery purple aurora that rivals the northern lights" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2018 . Retrieved 22 March 2018 .

^ Palmroth, M.; Grandin, M.; Helin, M.; Koski, P.; Oksanen, A.; Glad, M. A.; Valonen, R.; Saari, K.; Bruus, E.; Norberg, J.; Viljanen, A.; Kauristie, K.; Verronen, P. T. (2020).

"Citizen Scientists Discover a New Auroral Form: Dunes Provide Insight Into the Upper Atmosphere" .

AGU Advances .

1 .

doi : 10.1029/2019AV000133 .

hdl : 10138/322003 .

S2CID 213839228 .

Archived from the original on 22 May 2021 . Retrieved 22 May 2021 .

^ "Citizen scientists discover a new form of the Northern Lights" .

phys.org .

Archived from the original on 22 May 2021 . Retrieved 22 May 2021 .

^ a b Grandin, Maxime; Palmroth, Minna; Whipps, Graeme; Kalliokoski, Milla; Ferrier, Mark; Paxton, Larry J.; Mlynczak, Martin G.; Hilska, Jukka; Holmseth, Knut; Vinorum, Kjetil; Whenman, Barry (2021).

"Large-Scale Dune Aurora Event Investigation Combining Citizen Scientists' Photographs and Spacecraft Observations" .

AGU Advances .

2 (2): EGU21-5986.

Bibcode : 2021EGUGA..23.5986G .

doi : 10.1029/2020AV000338 .

hdl : 10138/332747 .

^ "Confirmation of an auroral phenomenon" .

phys.org .

Archived from the original on 22 May 2021 . Retrieved 22 May 2021 .

^ "The discovery of the auroral dunes: How one thing led to another" .

Aurorasaurus .

Archived from the original on 13 May 2021 . Retrieved 22 May 2021 .

^ "Revontulien 'dyynit', uusia löydöksiä – Aurora 'dunes' revisited" .

YouTube . 4 May 2021.

Archived from the original on 11 December 2021.

^ Bower, G. E.; Milan, S. E.; Paxton, L. J.; Anderson, B. J. (May 2022).

"Occurrence Statistics of Horse Collar Aurora" .

Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics .

127 (5).

Bibcode : 2022JGRA..12730385B .

doi : 10.1029/2022JA030385 .

hdl : 11250/3055028 .

ISSN 2169-9380 .

S2CID 248842161 .

Archived from the original on 12 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 December 2022 .

^ Davis, Neil (1992).

The Aurora Watcher's Handbook . University of Alaska Press. pp.

117– 124.

ISBN 0-912006-60-9 .

^ Burch, J L (1987). Akasofu S–I and Y Kamide (ed.).

The solar wind and the Earth . D. Reidel. p. 103.

ISBN 978-90-277-2471-7 .

^ McIlwain, C E (1960). "Direct Measurement of Particles Producing Visible Auroras".

Journal of Geophysical Research .

65 (9): 2727.

Bibcode : 1960JGR....65.2727M .

doi : 10.1029/JZ065i009p02727 .

^ Reiff, P. H.; Collin, H. L.; Craven, J. D.; Burch, J. L.; Winningham, J. D.; Shelley, E. G.; Frank, L. A.; Friedman, M. A. (1988). "Determination of auroral electrostatic potentials using high- and low-altitude particle distributions".

Journal of Geophysical Research .

93 (A7): 7441.

Bibcode : 1988JGR....93.7441R .

doi : 10.1029/JA093iA07p07441 .

^ Bryant, D. A.; Collin, H. L.; Courtier, G. M.; Johnstone, A. D. (1967). "Evidence for Velocity Dispersion in Auroral Electrons".

Nature .

215 (5096): 45.

Bibcode : 1967Natur.215...45B .

doi : 10.1038/215045a0 .

S2CID 4173665 .

^ "Ultraviolet Waves" . Archived from the original on 27 January 2011.

^ "Simultaneous ground and satellite observations of an isolated proton arc at sub-auroral latitudes" . Journal of Geophysical Research. 2007.

Archived from the original on 5 August 2015 . Retrieved 5 August 2015 .

^ Schield, M. A.; Freeman, J. W.; Dessler, A. J. (1969). "A Source for Field-Aligned Currents at Auroral Latitudes".

Journal of Geophysical Research .

74 (1): 247– 256.

Bibcode : 1969JGR....74..247S .

doi : 10.1029/JA074i001p00247 .

^ Armstrong, J. C.; Zmuda, A. J. (1973). "Triaxial magnetic measurements of field-aligned currents at 800 kilometers in the auroral region: Initial results".

Journal of Geophysical Research .

78 (28): 6802– 6807.

Bibcode : 1973JGR....78.6802A .

doi : 10.1029/JA078i028p06802 .

^ Birkeland, Kristian (1908).

The Norwegian Aurora Polaris Expedition 1902–1903 . New York: Christiania (Oslo): H. Aschehoug & Co. p. 720.

out-of-print, full text online ^ Pokhotelov, D.; Lotko, W.; Streltsov, A.V. (2002).

"Effects of the seasonal asymmetry in ionospheric Pedersen conductance on the appearance of discrete aurora" .

Geophys. Res. Lett .

29 (10): 79-1 – 79-4 .

Bibcode : 2002GeoRL..29.1437P .

doi : 10.1029/2001GL014010 .

S2CID 123637108 .

^ Crooker, N. U.; Feynman, J.; Gosling, J. T. (1 May 1977).

"On the high correlation between long-term averages of solar wind speed and geomagnetic activity" .

Journal of Geophysical Research .

82 (13): 1933.

Bibcode : 1977JGR....82.1933C .

doi : 10.1029/JA082i013p01933 .

Archived from the original on 4 November 2016 . Retrieved 10 November 2017 .

^ Alaska.edu Archived 20 December 2006 at the Wayback Machine , Solar wind forecast from a University of Alaska website ^ "NASA – NASA and World Book" . Nasa.gov. 7 February 2011. Archived from the original on 5 September 2005 . Retrieved 26 July 2011 .

^ Shue, J.-H; Chao, J. K.; Fu, H. C.; Russell, C. T.; Song, P.; Khurana, K. K.; Singer, H. J. (May 1997). "A new functional form to study the solar wind control of the magnetopause size and shape".

J. Geophys. Res .

102 (A5): 9497– 9511.

Bibcode : 1997JGR...102.9497S .

doi : 10.1029/97JA00196 .

^ Lyons, L. R.; Kim, H.-J.; Xing, X.; Zou, S.; Lee, D.-Y.; Heinselman, C.; Nicolls, M. J.; Angelopoulos, V.; Larson, D.; McFadden, J.; Runov, A.; Fornacon, K.-H. (2009).

"Evidence that solar wind fluctuations substantially affect global convection and substorm occurrence" .

J. Geophys. Res .

114 (A11306): 1– 14.

Bibcode : 2009JGRA..11411306L .

doi : 10.1029/2009JA014281 .

^ "NASA – THEMIS Satellites Discover What Triggers Eruptions of the Northern Lights" . Nasa.gov.

Archived from the original on 29 June 2011 . Retrieved 26 July 2011 .

^ Angelopoulos, V.; McFadden, J. P.; Larson, D.; Carlson, C. W.; Mende, S. B.; Frey, H.; Phan, T.; Sibeck, D. G.; Glassmeier, K.-H.; Auster, U.; Donovan, E.; Mann, I. R.; Rae, I. J.; Russell, C. T.; Runov, A.; Zhou, X.-Z.; Kepko, L. (2008).

"Tail Reconnection Triggering Substorm Onset" .

Science .

321 (5891): 931– 5.

Bibcode : 2008Sci...321..931A .

doi : 10.1126/science.1160495 .

PMID 18653845 .

S2CID 206514133 .

^ Orr, L.; Chapman, S. C.; Gjerloev, J. W.; Guo, W. (23 March 2021).

"Network community structure of substorms using SuperMAG magnetometers, L. Orr, S. C. Chapman, J. W. Gjerloev & W. Guo" .

Nature Communications .

12 (1): 1842.

doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-22112-4 .

PMC 7988152 .

PMID 33758181 .

^ The theory of acceleration by parallel electric fields is reviewed in detail by Lysak R, Echim M, Karlsson T, Marghitu O, Rankin R, Song Y, Watanabe TH (2020).

"Quiet, Discrete Auroral Arcs: Acceleration Mechanisms" (PDF) .

Space Science Reviews .

216 (92): 92.

Bibcode : 2020SSRv..216...92L .

doi : 10.1007/s11214-020-00715-5 .

S2CID 220509575 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2021 .

^ A discussion of 8 theories in use in 2020 as well as several no longer in common use can be found in: Borovsky JE, Birn J, Echim MM, Fujita S, Lysak RL, Knudsen DJ, Marghitu O, Otto A, Watanabe TH, Tanaka T (2020).

"Quiescent Discrete Auroral Arcs: A Review of Magnetospheric Generator Mechanisms" (PDF) .

Space Science Reviews .

216 (92).

doi : 10.1007/s11214-019-0619-5 .

S2CID 214002762 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 May 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2021 .

^ Pokhotelov, D. (2002).

Effects of the active auroral ionosphere on magnetosphere-ionosphere coupling (PhD Thesis). Dartmouth College.

doi : 10.1349/ddlp.3332 .

^ Richard Lewis (7 June 2021).

"Physicists determine how auroras are created" .

IOWA university .

Archived from the original on 8 June 2021 . Retrieved 8 June 2021 .

^ Schroeder JW, Howes GG, Kletzing CA, et al. (7 June 2021).

"Laboratory measurements of the physics of auroral electron acceleration by Alfvén waves" .

Nature Communications .

12 (1): 3103.

Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.3103S .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-23377-5 .

PMC 8184961 .

PMID 34099653 .

^ Frost, Natasha (4 October 2017).

"1770 Kyoto Diary" .

Atlas Obscura .

Archived from the original on 13 October 2017 . Retrieved 13 October 2017 .

^ Kataoka, Ryuho; Iwahashi, Kiyomi (17 September 2017).

"Inclined zenith aurora over Kyoto on 17 September 1770: Graphical evidence of extreme magnetic storm" .

Space Weather .

15 (10): 1314– 1320.

Bibcode : 2017SpWea..15.1314K .

doi : 10.1002/2017SW001690 .

^ Stewart, Balfour (1861).

"On the Great Magnetic Disturbance of 28 August to 7 September 1859, as Recorded by Photography at the Kew Observatory" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London .

151 : 423–430 [428].

doi : 10.1098/rstl.1861.0023 .

Archived from the original on 28 August 2021 . Retrieved 30 July 2019 .

^ a b Green, J; Boardsen, S; Odenwald, S; Humble, J; Pazamickas, K (2006). "Eyewitness reports of the great auroral storm of 1859".

Advances in Space Research .

38 (2): 145– 154.

Bibcode : 2006AdSpR..38..145G .

doi : 10.1016/j.asr.2005.12.021 .

hdl : 2060/20050210157 .

^ Loomis, Elias (January 1860).

"The great auroral exhibition of August 28 to September 4, 1859 – 2nd article" .

The American Journal of Science . 2nd series.

29 : 92– 97.

Archived from the original on 14 May 2021 . Retrieved 30 July 2019 .

^ "Aurora Borealis and the Telegraph" .

The British Colonist . Vol. 2, no. 56. Victoria, V.I. [Vancouver Island, B.C.]: Amor De Cosmos. 19 October 1859. p. 1, col. 2.

ISSN 0839-4229 .

OCLC 1115103262 – via Internet Archive.

^ "وقتی طوفان خورشیدی، آسمان ایران و جهان را رنگ‌آمیزی کرد" .

زومیت (in Persian). 13 May 2024 . Retrieved 20 July 2024 .

^ "چطور شد که شفق قطبی در ایران هم دیده شد؟ +عکس" .

fa (in Persian) . Retrieved 20 July 2024 .

^ "شفق قطبی در آسمان کویر ایران" .

BBC News فارسی (in Persian). 12 May 2024 . Retrieved 20 July 2024 .

^ "Earliest Known Report of Aurora Found in Ancient Chinese Chronicle" .

SCI News . 12 April 2022.

Archived from the original on 5 June 2022 . Retrieved 5 June 2022 .

^ Macleod, Explorers: Great Tales of Adventure and Endurance , p. 21.

^ Clarke, J. (1910), Physical Science in the time of Nero , pp. 39–41, London: Macmillan, accessed 1 January 2017.

^ Bostock, J. and Riley, H. T. (1855), The Natural History of Pliny , Vol. II, London: Bohn, accessed 1 January 2017.

^ Peratt, Anthony L. (2014).

Physics of the Plasma Universe (2nd ed.). New York: Springer. p. 357.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4614-7819-5 .

ISBN 978-1-4614-7819-5 .

Archived from the original on 12 May 2024 . Retrieved 18 March 2024 .

^ Administrator, NASA (7 June 2013).

"The History of Auroras" .

NASA . Archived from the original on 29 March 2023 . Retrieved 22 May 2022 .

^ "Modern science reveals ancient secret in Japanese literature" .

phys.org . 30 March 2020.

Archived from the original on 1 April 2020 . Retrieved 3 April 2020 .

^ Hamacher, D. W. (2013).

"Aurorae in Australian Aboriginal Traditions" (PDF) .

Journal of Astronomical History and Heritage .

16 (2): 207– 219.

arXiv : 1309.3367 .

Bibcode : 2013JAHH...16..207H .

doi : 10.3724/SP.J.1440-2807.2013.02.05 .

S2CID 118102443 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 October 2013 . Retrieved 19 October 2013 .

^ updated, Daisy Dobrijevic last (20 June 2023).

"Aurora myths, legends and misconceptions" .

Space . Retrieved 19 May 2025 .

^ a b Steel, Frances; Anderson, Atholl ; Ballantyne, Tony; Benjamin, Julie; Booth, Douglas; Brickell, Chris; Gilderdale, Peter; Haines, David; Liebich, Susan (2018).

New Zealand and the Sea: Historical Perspectives . Bridget Williams Books. p. 46.

ISBN 978-0-947518-71-4 .

Archived from the original on 18 April 2024 . Retrieved 1 June 2022 .

^ Best, Elsdon (1922).

The Astronomical Knowledge of the Maori, Genuine and Empirical . Wellington: Dominion Museum. p. 58.

Archived from the original on 13 September 2021 . Retrieved 13 September 2021 – via Victoria University of Wellington.

^ Wehi, Priscilla M.

; Scott, Nigel J.; Beckwith, Jacinta; Pryor Rodgers, Rata; Gillies, Tasman; Van Uitregt, Vincent; Krushil, Watene (2021).

"A short scan of Māori journeys to Antarctica" .

Journal of the Royal Society of New Zealand .

52 (5): 587– 598.

doi : 10.1080/03036758.2021.1917633 .

PMC 11485871 .

PMID 39440197 .

^ "Norrsken history" . Irf.se. 12 November 2003. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011 . Retrieved 26 July 2011 .

^ Walter William Bryant, Kepler . Macmillan Co. (1920) p. 23 .

^ The original English text of Benjamin Franklin's article on the cause of auroras is available at: U.S. National Archives: Founders Online Archived 31 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine ^ A translation into French of Franklin's article was read to the French Royal Academy of Sciences and an excerpt of it was published in: Francklin (June 1779).

"Extrait des suppositions et des conjectures sur la cause des Aurores Boréales" [Extract of Suppositions and conjectures on the cause of auroras borealis].

Journal de Physique (in French).

13 : 409– 412.

Archived from the original on 27 April 2021 . Retrieved 31 July 2019 .

^ Goodman, N., ed. (2011).

The Ingenious Dr. Franklin: Selected Scientific Letters of Benjamin Franklin . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 3.

ISBN 978-0-8122-0561-9 .

^ J. Oschman (2016), Energy Medicine: The Scientific Basis (Elsevier, Edinburgh), p. 275.

^ Hearne, Samuel (1958).

A Journey to the Northern Ocean: A journey from Prince of Wales' Fort in Hudson's Bay to the Northern Ocean in the years 1769, 1770, 1771, 1772 . Richard Glover (ed.). Toronto: The MacMillan Company of Canada. pp. 221–222.

^ "Aurora Borealis | Smithsonian American Art Museum" .

americanart.si.edu .

Archived from the original on 27 February 2024 . Retrieved 18 April 2024 .

^ The National Cyclopaedia of Useful Knowledge, Vol. II (1847), London: Charles Knight, p. 496 ^ "What the Sami traditionally thought of the Northern Lights" .

aurora-nights.co.uk . 2 December 2023 . Retrieved 19 May 2025 .

^ a b "ESA Portal – Mars Express discovers auroras on Mars" . European Space Agency. 11 August 2004.

Archived from the original on 19 October 2012 . Retrieved 5 August 2010 .

^ Phillips, J. L.; Stewart, A. I. F.; Luhmann, J. G. (1986).

"The Venus ultraviolet aurora: Observations at 130.4 nm" .

Geophysical Research Letters .

13 (10): 1047– 1050.

Bibcode : 1986GeoRL..13.1047P .

doi : 10.1029/GL013i010p01047 .

ISSN 1944-8007 .

Archived from the original on 22 January 2021 . Retrieved 17 January 2021 .

^ "Mars Express Finds Auroras on Mars" .

Universe Today . 18 February 2006.

Archived from the original on 10 February 2007 . Retrieved 5 August 2010 .

^ "Comet Chury's ultraviolet aurora" .

Portal . 21 September 2020.

Archived from the original on 16 January 2021 . Retrieved 17 January 2021 .

^ a b c d Galand, M.; Feldman, P. D.; Bockelée-Morvan, D.

; Biver, N.; Cheng, Y.-C.; Rinaldi, G.; Rubin, M.; Altwegg, K.

; Deca, J.; Beth, A.; Stephenson, P. (21 September 2020).

"Far-ultraviolet aurora identified at comet 67P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko" .

Nature Astronomy .

4 (11): 1084– 1091.

Bibcode : 2020NatAs...4.1084G .

doi : 10.1038/s41550-020-1171-7 .

hdl : 10044/1/82183 .

ISSN 2397-3366 .

S2CID 221884342 .

Archived from the original on 9 April 2022 . Retrieved 17 January 2021 .

^ Helling, Christiane; Rimmer, Paul B. (23 September 2019).

"Lightning and charge processes in brown dwarf and exoplanet atmospheres" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences .

377 (2154): 20180398.

arXiv : 1903.04565 .

Bibcode : 2019RSPTA.37780398H .

doi : 10.1098/rsta.2018.0398 .

PMC 6710897 .

PMID 31378171 .

^ O'Neill, Ian (29 July 2015).

"Monstrous Aurora Detected Beyond our Solar System" . Discovery. Archived from the original on 31 July 2015 . Retrieved 29 July 2015 .

^ Q. Choi, Charles (29 July 2015).

"First Alien Auroras Found, Are 1 Million Times Brighter Than Any on Earth" . space.com.

Archived from the original on 30 July 2015 . Retrieved 29 July 2015 .

Further reading Procter, Henry Richardson (1878).

"Aurora Polaris" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. III (9th ed.). pp.

90– 99.

Chree, Charles (1911).

"Aurora Polaris" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 2 (11th ed.). pp.

927– 934.

These two both include detailed descriptions of historical observations and descriptions.

Stern, David P. (1996).

"A Brief History of Magnetospheric Physics During the Space Age" .

Reviews of Geophysics .

34 (1): 1– 31.

Bibcode : 1996RvGeo..34....1S .

doi : 10.1029/95rg03508 .

Stern, David P.; Peredo, Mauricio.

"The Exploration of the Earth's Magnetosphere" .

phy6.org .

Eather, Robert H. (1980).

Majestic Lights: The Aurora in Science, History, and The Arts . Washington, DC: American Geophysical Union.

ISBN 978-0-87590-215-9 .

Akasofu, Syun-Ichi (April 2002). "Secrets of the Aurora Borealis".

Alaska Geographic Series .

29 (1).

Daglis, Ioannis; Akasofu, Syun-Ichi (November 2004).

"Aurora – The magnificent northern lights" (PDF) .

Recorder .

29 (9): 45– 48. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2020.

Alt URL Savage, Candace Sherk (1994).

Aurora: The Mysterious Northern Lights . San Francisco: Sierra Club Books / Firefly Books.

ISBN 978-0-87156-419-1 .

Hultqvist, Bengt (2007). "The Aurora". In Kamide, Y.; Chian, A (eds.).

Handbook of the Solar-Terrestrial Environment . Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag. pp.

331– 354.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-540-46315-3_13 .

ISBN 978-3-540-46314-6 .

Sandholt, Even; Carlson, Herbert C.; Egeland, Alv (2002). "Optical Aurora".

Dayside and Polar Cap Aurora . Netherlands: Springer Netherlands. pp.

33– 51.

doi : 10.1007/0-306-47969-9_3 .

ISBN 978-0-306-47969-4 .

Phillips, Tony (21 October 2001).

" 'tis the Season for Auroras" . NASA. Archived from the original on 11 April 2006 . Retrieved 15 May 2006 .

Davis, Neil (1992).

The Aurora Watcher's Handbook . University of Alaska Press.

ISBN 0-912006-60-9 .

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Aurora .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Aurora .

Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Northern Lights .

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Aurora Current global map showing the probability of visible aurora Aurora – Forecasting (archived 24 November 2016) Official MET aurora forecasting in Iceland Aurora Borealis – Predicting Archived 25 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine Solar Terrestrial Data – Online Converter – Northern Lights Latitude Aurora Service Europe – Aurora forecasts for Europe (archived 11 March 2019) Live Northern Lights webstream World's Best Aurora – The Northwest Territories is the world's Northern Lights mecca.

Multimedia Amazing time-lapse video of Aurora Borealis – Shot in Iceland over the winter of 2013/2014 Popular video of Aurora Borealis – Taken in Norway in 2011 Aurora Photo Gallery – Views taken 2009–2011 (archived 4 October 2011) Aurora Photo Gallery – "Full-Sky Aurora" over Eastern Norway . December 2011 Videos and Photos – Auroras at Night (archived 2 September 2010) Video (47:40) Archived 4 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine – Northern Lights – Documentary Video (5:00) – Northern lights video in real time Video (01:42) – Northern Light – Story of Geomagnetic Storm ( Terschelling Island – 6/7 April 2000) (archived 17 August 2011) Video (1:55) (time-lapse) − Auroras – Ground-Level View from Finnish Lapland 2011 Video (2:43) (time-lapse) − Auroras – Ground-Level View from Tromsø , Norway , 24 November 2010 Video (0:45) ISS Timelapse: Aurora Australis v t e Magnetospherics Submagnetosphere Atmospheric circulation Aurora Earth's magnetic field Geosphere Jet stream Polar wind Earth's magnetosphere Birkeland current Bow shock Ionosphere Magnetopause Magnetosheath Magnetosphere Magnetosphere chronology Magnetosphere particle motion Plasmasphere Ring current Van Allen radiation belt Solar wind Magnetic cloud Coronal mass ejection Solar flare Geomagnetic storm Heliosphere Interplanetary magnetic field Heliospheric current sheet Heliopause Solar particle event Space climate Space weather Satellites Full list Arase (2016) Cluster II Double Star Geotail IMAGE MMS (2015) Polar THEMIS Van Allen Probes Wind Research projects EISCAT HAARP SHARE Unwin Radar SuperDARN Sura Ionospheric Heating Facility Other magnetospheres Hermian Venusian Lunar Martian Jovian Ganymedian Saturnian Uranian Neptunian Related topics Flux tube Gas torus Lunar swirls Ring systems Jupiter Saturn Uranus Neptune Portals : Weather Astronomy Stars Spaceflight Outer space Solar System Science Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐d8t27
Cached time: 20250814214951
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, vary‐revision, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.752 seconds
Real time usage: 1.993 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9996/1000000
Revision size: 118541/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 333229/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6681/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 492057/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.206/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21918754/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1734.191      1 -total
 55.49%  962.321      2 Template:Reflist
 23.98%  415.884     55 Template:Cite_journal
 16.44%  285.018     40 Template:Cite_web
  8.24%  142.938     20 Template:Cite_book
  6.70%  116.181     13 Template:Lang
  6.30%  109.321      4 Template:Sister_project
  6.20%  107.497      4 Template:Side_box
  4.49%   77.814      1 Template:Magnetospherics
  4.37%   75.700      1 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:49658:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814214951 and revision id 1304232888. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aurora&oldid=1304232888 " Categories : Terrestrial plasmas Space plasmas Polar regions of the Earth Atmospheric optical phenomena Earth phenomena Electrical phenomena Light sources Planetary science Sources of electromagnetic interference Space weather Geomagnetism Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles containing Italian-language text CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Danish-language sources (da) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2023 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Persian-language sources (fa) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia semi-protected pages Use Canadian English from April 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in Canadian English Use dmy dates from April 2025 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Dieri-language text Articles containing Māori-language text Articles containing Old Norse-language text Articles containing Chipewyan-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Commons link from Wikidata Wikisource templates with missing id Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 20:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aurora 102 languages Add topic

