Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 The "Vidalian" program 4 Criticism of Vidalian geography 5 References Toggle the table of contents Paul Vidal de La Blache 35 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Paul Vidal de la Blache ) French geographer You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French .

(January 2025) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at [[:fr:Paul Vidal de La Blache]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|fr|Paul Vidal de La Blache}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Paul Vidal de La Blache Paul Vidal de La Blache ( French pronunciation: [pɔl vidal də la blaʃ] , Pézenas , Hérault , 22 January 1845 – Tamaris-sur-Mer, Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur , 5 April 1918) was a French geographer . He is considered to be the founder of modern French geography and also the founder of the French School of Geopolitics . He conceived the idea of genre de vie , which is the belief that the lifestyle of a particular region reflects the economic, social, ideological and psychological identities imprinted on the landscape.

[ 1 ] Life [ edit ] Paul Vidal de la Blache was the son of a teacher at the Collège de Pézenas who subsequently became an academic administrator .

[ 2 ] He was sent to school at the Institution Favard at the Lycée Charlemagne in Paris . Afterward, he attended the École Normale Supérieure . He entered the École Normale Supérieure in 1863 at the age of eighteen and received the agrégation (certification) in history and geography in 1866. He was appointed to the École française d’Athens, taking advantage of the opportunity to travel in Italy, Palestine, and Egypt (in the latter, being present at the inauguration of the Suez Canal). There he studied Greek archeology for three years.

The Sorbonne. Professor Vidal de La Blache – Geography ( Bibliothèque de La Sorbonne , NuBIS) Upon returning to France, in 1870 he married Laure Marie Elizabeth Mondont, with whom he had five children. He held several teaching positions, notably at the Lycée d'Angers and at the École Préparatoire de l'Enseignment Supérieur des Lettres et des Sciences. La Blache received his doctorate at the Sorbonne in 1872 with a dissertation in ancient history, afterwards published as Hérode Atticus: étude critique sur sa vie . He began working at the Nancy-Université . Vidal de la Blache returned to the École Normale Supérieure in 1877 as a full Professor of Geography and taught there for the next 21 years. He transferred to the Université de Paris , where he continued teaching until he retired in 1909, at the age of 64.

Vidal de la Blache founded the French school of geography and, together with Marcel Dubois [ 3 ] and Lucien Gallois , the Annales de Géographie (1893), of which he was the editor until his death. The Annales de Géographie became an influential academic journal that promoted the concept of human geography as the study of man and his relationship to his environment.

[ 4 ] Vidal de la Blache's pupil Albert Demangeon was deeply influenced by his emphasis on the importance of historical influences in the study of geography, and went on to become France's leading French academic in the field of human geography.

[ 5 ] During World War I (1914–18) in January 1915 the Geographical Commission was established in close liaison with the 2nd Bureau of the Army Staff with six geographers, Albert Demangeon, Lucien Gallois , Emmanuel de Martonne, Emmanuel de Margerie , Louis Raveneau and Paul Vidal de la Blache.

Antoine Vacher contributed intermittently to the work of the Commission.

[ 6 ] Works [ edit ] Vidal de la Blache produced a large number of publications; including 17 books, 107 articles, and 240 reports and reviews.

[ 2 ] Only some of these have been translated into English. His most influential works included an elementary textbook Collection de Cartes Murales Accompagnées de Notices along with Histoire et Géographie: Atlas General and La France de l'Est . Two of his best-known writings are Tableau de la Géographie de la France (1903) and Principles of Human Geography (1918).

The "Vidalian" program [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( December 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Tableau de la Geographie de la France was a summary of Vidal's methods, a manifesto whose production required a dozen years of work.  It surveyed the entire country, taking note of everything he had observed in his innumerable notebooks. He took an interest in human and political aspects, geology (an infant discipline at the time, little connected with geography), transportation, and history. He was the first to tie together all those domains in a somewhat quantitative approach, using numbers sparingly, essentially narrative, even descriptive—not far removed, in some ways from a guidebook or a manual for landscape painting.

Influenced by German thought, especially by Friedrich Ratzel whom he had met in Germany, Vidal has been linked to the term " possibilism ", which he never used but which summed up conveniently his opposition to the determinism of the sort that was defended by some nineteenth century geographers. The concept of possibilism has been used by historians to evoke the epistemological fuzziness that, according to them, characterized the approach of Vidal's school. Described as " idiographic ", this approach was seen as blocking the evolution of the discipline in a " nomothetic " direction that would be the result of experimentation, making it possible to unlock laws or make scientific demonstrations.

Vidal published a visionary article on the regions of France in 1910. He had been requested by the Prime Minister, Aristide Briand , to create some regional groupings with representative organs. Vidal proposed to cut France into regions organized around a metropolis. The economic realities of the modern world, with worldwide competition and the shrinking of the planet due to accelerated communications, made him think that less centralized, less static modes of organization ought to be promoted.

"Vidalian" geography is based on varied forms of cartography, on monographs, and on several notable concepts, including "landscapes" ( paysages ), "settings" ( milieux ), "regions", "lifeways" ( genres de vie ), and "density". Many of the master's students, particularly in their dissertations, [ 7 ] produced regional geographies that were both physical and human (even economic). The context chosen for these descriptions was a region, whose contours were not always very firmly fixed scientifically. Undoubtedly because this approach was more structured, many of Vidal's successors, and still more those of Martonne, specialized in a geomorphology that became gradually stronger, but that also, by its narrowness, weakened French geography.

Between the two world wars, "classical geography" stayed in the mold established by the Vidalian tradition. It was defended by an establishment that marginalized all attempts at epistemological renewal, to such an extent that after World War II the discipline was at the same stage where it had been left at Vidal's death. Arguably, his disciples were bound to a particular aspect of the master's thought and did not know how to deal with complexity and growth, and as a consequence the field of the discipline shrank. An immutable triad imposed itself on research and university studies: physical geography (Martonne, Baulig), regional geography (Blanchard, Cholley), and human geography (Brunhes, Demangeon, Sorre); in descending order of frequency and importance geomorphology, then rural geography, regional geography, and finally tropical geography.

This classical geography—naturalistic, monographic, morphological, literary, and didactic—would experience a rapid renewal and a radical transformation into a social science with the revolution of the 1960s and 1970s and the rise of urban and industrial studies.

Criticism of Vidalian geography [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( December 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Some adherents to modern geography as the science of the social dimension of space have criticized Vidal's geography as the natural science of lifeways. According to this view, Vidal's ideas made nature the external force that drove societies. They served to validate the equation of nation, territory, and sovereignty, and the fundamental idea of the French Third Republic that patriotism was the supreme value. The reasoning that made nature the driving force for societies was only tenable in regard to rural and seemingly static societies. Vidal avoided looking at industrialization, colonialism, and urbanization. He called those concepts "historical winds", like gusts on the surface of a pond. As he himself wrote at the end of his Tableau de la géographie de la France, "Close study of what is fixed and permanent in the geographical conditions of France ought to be or to become more than ever our guide." Why was Vidalian geography so triumphant in France up to 1950? A notable explanation is that French thought during the Third Republic was dominated by nationalism, which was, arguably, a means of controlling the populations. History saw itself as being given the role of showing the emergence of the nation, and geography's role was not to refer to politics. A nearly static society could be explained by a static nature. Vidal's ideas formed the main paradigm for the geographical science of the epoch, controlling the universities, the research centers, and the granting of degrees. Urban thinkers had no place in France until 1950, which explains why geographers such as Jean Gottmann left France to make their careers in the United States.

References [ edit ] ^ Preston E. James & Geoffrey J. Martin.

All Possible Worlds: A History of Geographical Ideas , Second Edition, p.194.

^ a b "Paul Vidal de la Blache – A biographical sketch by Jason Hilkovitch & Max Fulkerson" . Archived from the original on 2006-09-09 . Retrieved 2006-09-23 .

^ Nicolas Ginsburger, « Des îles grecques à la géographie coloniale : Marcel Dubois à la conquête de la Sorbonne (1876–1895) », Cybergeo : European Journal of Geography [En ligne], Epistémologie, Histoire de la Géographie, Didactique, document 822, mis en ligne le 15 juin 2017, consulté le 22 mai 2018. URL : http://journals.openedition.org/cybergeo/28368 ; Nicolas Ginsburger, « La Belle Époque d’un géographe colonial : Marcel Dubois, universitaire et figure publique, entre Affaire Dreyfus et Entente cordiale (1894–1905) », Cybergeo : European Journal of Geography [En ligne], Epistémologie, Histoire de la Géographie, Didactique, document 855, mis en ligne le 16 mai 2018, consulté le 22 mai 2018. URL : http://journals.openedition.org/cybergeo/29138 ^ Paul L. Knox & Sallie A. Marston.

Human Geography , Third Edition, p. 181.

^ Wolff, Denis (5 July 2014), "Albert Demangeon" , Hypergeo , retrieved 2017-06-30 ^ Ginsburger, Nicolas (30 November 2010), " La guerre, la plus terrible des érosions " Cultures de guerre et géographes universitaires Allemagne-France-Etats-Unis (1914–1921) (PDF) (thesis) (in French), Université Paris Ouest Nanterre-La Défense, p. 293 , retrieved 2017-07-26 ^ Each of these eminent professors would present a dissertation on regional geography. Thus Demangeon, La plaine picarde : Picardie. Artois. Cambrésis. Beauvaisis. Étude de géographie sur les plaines de craie de la France du Nord de la France (1905); Blanchard, La Flandre. Étude géographique de la plaine flamande en France. Belgique. Hollande (1906); Cholley, Les préalpes de Savoie (Genevois/Bauges) et leur avant-pays : étude de géographie régionale (1925); Baulig, Le plateau central et sa bordure méditerranéenne : étude morphologique (1928); Martonne, La Valachie : essai de monographie géographique (1902).

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal 2 Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐7wvvz
Cached time: 20250814222255
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.356 seconds
Real time usage: 0.716 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1415/1000000
Revision size: 12926/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 50975/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2926/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 25250/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.253/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20620916/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  411.367      1 -total
 23.81%   97.948      1 Template:IPA
 21.83%   89.788      1 Template:Authority_control
 19.76%   81.273      1 Template:Reflist
 16.03%   65.953      1 Template:Expand_French
 15.65%   64.397      1 Template:Short_description
 15.11%   62.168      1 Template:Expand_language
 14.59%   60.031      1 Template:Cite_web
 14.53%   59.765      3 Template:Ambox
  9.57%   39.371      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3149338:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814222255 and revision id 1301813773. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paul_Vidal_de_La_Blache&oldid=1301813773 " Categories : 1845 births 1918 deaths Academic staff of the University of Paris People from Pézenas Geopoliticians French geographers École Normale Supérieure alumni Academic staff of the École Normale Supérieure Members of the Académie des sciences morales et politiques Members of the French School at Athens Burials at Montparnasse Cemetery Human geographers Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Biography articles needing translation from French Wikipedia Pages with French IPA Articles needing additional references from December 2016 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 21:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paul Vidal de La Blache 35 languages Add topic

