Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mixing models Toggle Mixing models subsection 1.1 Additive model 1.2 Subtractive model 1.3 Average model 2 Pigment mixing 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Color mixing 9 languages العربية বাংলা Deutsch Hrvatski Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokmål Simple English Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Producing colors by combining the primary or secondary colors in different amounts There are three types of color mixing models, depending on the relative brightness of the resultant mixture: additive , subtractive , and average .

[ 1 ] In these models, mixing black and white will yield white, black and gray, respectively. Physical mixing processes, e.g. mixing light beams or oil paints , will follow one or a hybrid of these 3 models.

[ 1 ] Each mixing model is associated with several color models , depending on the approximate primary colors used. The most common color models are optimized to human trichromatic color vision , therefore comprising three primary colors.

[ 1 ] : 4.2 Mixing models [ edit ] Additive model [ edit ] Main article: Additive colour A simulated example of additive colour mixing in the RGB model. The primaries red, green, and blue combine pairwise to produce the additive secondaries cyan, magenta, and yellow. Combining all three primaries (centre) produces white.

Additive mixing combines two or more colours into a mixture with brightness equal to the sum of the components' brightnesses.

[ 1 ] : 4.4 An ideal physical model to demonstrate the additive model comprises two superimposed coloured lights aimed at the observer. The additive model is usually demonstrated by reflecting two beams of coloured light off a white, matte surface (e.g.

projectors ) or by analysing the sub-pixels of a colour display , both of which follow the additive model closely.

The most common additive colour model is the RGB colour model , which uses three primary colours: red , green , and blue . This model is the basis of most colour displays. Some modern displays are multi-primary colour displays , which have 4-6 primaries (RGB, plus cyan, yellow and/or magenta) in order to increase the size of the colour gamut . For all additive colour models, the absence of all primaries results in black. For practical additive colour models, an equal superposition of all primaries results in neutral (grey or white). In the RGB model, an equal mixture of red and green is yellow , an equal mixture of green and blue is cyan and an equal mixture of blue and red is magenta .

[ 1 ] : 4.2 Yellow, cyan and magenta are the secondary colors of the RGB model.

Subtractive model [ edit ] Main article: Subtractive colour A simulated example of (idealised) subtractive colour mixing in the CMY model. The primaries cyan, magenta and yellow combine pairwise to produce subtractive secondaries red, green, and blue. Combining all three primaries (centre) absorbs all light and produces black. In practical CMY colour models, the centre is usually dark grey and a separate black pigment is required to produce black (CMYK model).

Subtractive mixing combines two or more colours into a mixture with brightness lower than either of the two components' brightnesses. An ideal physical model to demonstrate the subtractive model comprises a white light transmitting through two coloured filters, each of which subtract a portion of the white light, transmitting a light of the combined colour.

[ 1 ] : 5.2 However, the subtractive model is usually demonstrated with dyes or pigments , such as paint or ink , which often do not closely follow the subtractive model, instead requiring a more complex model such as Kubelka–Munk theory . How well they follow the model depends mostly on the opacity of the pigment or dye.

[ 1 ] : 6.1 The most common subtractive colour models are the CMYK colour model , CMY colour model and RYB colour model .

[ 1 ] : 6.2 The CMYK model used in colour printing uses cyan , magenta , yellow , and black primaries. For all subtractive colour models, the absence of all colour primaries results in white. For ideal subtractive colour models, an equal superposition of all primaries results in a neutral (dark grey or black). The CMYK model adds a black primary to improve the darkness of blacks, where the CMY model can only mix to dark grey or only achieves black inefficiently, i.e. by using lots of the primary pigments. In the CMY model, an equal mixture of cyan and magenta is blue , an equal mixture of magenta and yellow is red and an equal mixture of yellow and cyan is green . These mixtures are the secondary colours of the CMY model, which are the same as the primaries of the additive RGB model and vice versa.

Average model [ edit ] Average mixing (sometimes additive-average) combines two colours into a mixture with brightness equal to the average of the two components' brightnesses.

[ 1 ] : 4.4 This model is often demonstrated with a Newton disc , where a wheel comprising several colour wedges along the circumference is rotated at high speed, such that the human eye cannot temporally differentiate the colours, and they combine to a colour with the average brightness (weighted to the angle each colour takes up). Another physical model mimics pointillism or halftone printing , where the spatial acuity of the human eye is not sufficient to spatially differentiate the colours, and they combine to a mixture with the average brightness.

[ 1 ] : 4.4 There are no common colour models that explicitly use the average model, though many additive or subtractive models can be described in part by the average model.

Pigment mixing [ edit ] In the practical mixing of pigments, the subtractive model is usually not closely followed. How the pigment mixing behaves depends strongly on the opacity of the pigments.

[ 1 ] : 6.1 Ideally transparent pigments transmit and absorb light, but do not reflect or scatter it and mix according to the subtractive model. Ideally opaque pigments reflect or absorb light, but do not transmit it and mix according to the average model. Most real paints reflect, transmit and scatter light, so mix according to a hybrid between the subtractive and average models.

[ 1 ] : 6.1 Paint color mixer is also affected by the media used as wetting, deagglomeration, and dispersing agents for the pigments. These agents all have their own transparency/opacity and color properties and can also alter the transparency and color of pigments.

[ citation needed ] Red and yellow paints being mixed on a palette For example, mixing red and yellow can result in a shade of orange, generally with a lower chroma or reduced saturation than at least one of the component colors. In some combinations, a mix of blue and yellow paint produces green. This occurs when there is sufficient transparency in the pigments, allowing light to penetrate into the mixed paint, where the two colors together absorb light except wavelengths in the green range. Alternately, if the pigments are highly opaque, a combination of blue and yellow paint appears more grayish. In this case, pigment particles simply reflect whatever light hits the outer paint surface, where both blue and yellow light gets reflected and averaged together.

Halftone printing uses non-opaque inks, such that the light transmits once through the ink, reflects off the white substrate (e.g. paper) and transmits a second time through the ink. Increasing the ink printed on the page decreases the brightness of light, and halftone printing follows the subtractive model well.

See also [ edit ] Additive color Color theory Impossible colors Subtractive color References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Briggs, David.

"The Dimensions of Colour" . Retrieved 2 January 2024 .

v t e Color topics Color science Color physics Electromagnetic spectrum Light Rainbow Visible Spectral colors Chromophore Structural coloration Animal coloration Color of chemicals Water Spectral power distribution Colorimetry Color perception Chromesthesia Sonochromatism Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Color calibration Color constancy Color task Color code Color temperature Color vision test Evolution of color vision Impossible colors Metamerism Opponent process Afterimage Unique hues Tetrachromacy The dress Color psychology Color symbolism Color preferences Lüscher color test Kruithof curve Political color National colors Chromophobia Chromotherapy Color reproduction Color photography Color balance Color cast Digital image processing Color management Color printing Multi-primary color display Quattron Color model additive RGB subtractive CMYK Color space Color mapping Color philosophy Color scheme Color tool Monochromatic colors Black-and-white Grisaille Complementary colors Analogous colors Achromatic colors (Neutral) Polychromatic colors Light-on-dark Web colors Tinctures in heraldry Color theory Color mixing Primary color Secondary color Chromaticity Color solid Color wheel Color triangle Color analysis (fashion) Color realism (art style) On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer) Theory of Colours (Goethe) Color terms Basic English terms Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Purple Pink Brown White Gray Black Cultural differences Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate Blue–green distinction in language Color history Black-and-white dualism Blue in culture Color in Chinese culture Traditional colors of Japan Human skin color Color dimensions Hue Dichromatism Colorfulness Pastel colors Luminance Lightness Darkness Brightness Iridescence Fluorescence Grayscale Tint, shade and tone Color organizations Pantone Color Marketing Group Color Association of the United States International Colour Authority International Commission on Illumination (CIE) International Color Consortium International Colour Association Names Lists List of colors: A–F List of colors: G–M List of colors: N–Z List of colors (compact) List of colors by shade List of color palettes List of color spaces List of Crayola crayon colors history Color chart List of RAL colors List of web colors Shades of: Red Orange Yellow Green Cyan Blue Violet Purple Magenta Pink Brown White Gray Black Related Vision Contrast Qualia Lighting Category Index Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐kspwm
Cached time: 20250812021609
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.341 seconds
Real time usage: 0.438 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4829/1000000
Revision size: 8064/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 53499/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2134/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 20372/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.190/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5143764/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  374.779      1 -total
 26.14%   97.972      5 Template:Navbox
 25.08%   93.980      1 Template:Color_topics
 20.08%   75.273     10 Template:R
 19.17%   71.836      1 Template:Reflist
 18.52%   69.428     10 Template:R/ref
 16.58%   62.152      1 Template:Cite_web
 16.52%   61.905      1 Template:Short_description
 11.65%   43.676     10 Template:R/superscript
  9.12%   34.174      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:19110121:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812021609 and revision id 1300824944. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Color_mixing&oldid=1300824944 " Categories : Color Light Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 16:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Color mixing 9 languages Add topic

