Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 About 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 1970s 2.2 1980s 2.3 1990s 2.4 2000s 2.5 2010s 2.6 2020s 3 Board of Directors Toggle Board of Directors subsection 3.1 Current Members 3.2 Former Members 4 International Council Toggle International Council subsection 4.1 Former Members 5 Controversies 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs 2 languages Deutsch فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Arms control and foreign policy research organization in the Kennedy School at Harvard Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs The Belfer Center Named after Robert A. Belfer Formation 1973 Type Think tank Headquarters 79 John F. Kennedy Street Location Cambridge, Massachusetts , U.S.

Director Meghan O'Sullivan Parent organization Harvard Kennedy School Website belfercenter .org The Robert and Renée Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs , also known as the Belfer Center , is a research center located at the Harvard Kennedy School at Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts , in the United States.

From 2017 until his death in October 2022, the center was led by director Ash Carter , former U.S. Secretary of Defense and co-director Eric Rosenbach , a former U.S. Assistant Secretary of Defense.

[ 1 ] Its current executive director is Natalie Colbert.

[ 2 ] The current director is Meghan O'Sullivan .

[ 3 ] About [ edit ] The Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs is the hub of Harvard Kennedy School's research, teaching, and training in international security and diplomacy, environmental and resource issues, and science and technology policy.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] 1970s [ edit ] During the Cold War, Harvard biochemist Paul M. Doty was deeply concerned about the tense relations between the United States and the Soviet Union. Doty collaborated with Soviet scientists who shared his worries about the potential for nuclear escalation. In the early 1970s, Doty recognized a significant gap in academic offerings—universities were not providing courses on arms control and international security, crucial for preparing future experts in these fields. Motivated by this, Doty envisioned a program at Harvard dedicated to research and education in arms control and related issues at the intersection of science and international affairs.

[ 5 ] In 1973, Doty subsequently founded the Belfer Center [ 6 ] as the Program for Science and International Affairs within Harvard's Faculty of Arts and Sciences .

[ 7 ] Following a grant from the Ford Foundation soon after, the program was re-established as the Center for Science and International Affairs, becoming the first permanent research center at the newly formed School of Government.

1980s [ edit ] Throughout the early 1980s, the Belfer Center intensified its focus on arms control and disarmament, with a growing emphasis on the militarization of space. Its researchers also delved into the security implications of competition over energy resources, highlighted by a U.S. Department of Energy-sponsored workshop on energy and security. Additionally, they began exploring the challenges and opportunities presented by technological advancements.

1990s [ edit ] The Belfer Center played a pivotal role in efforts to dismantle and secure the hazardous nuclear, chemical, and biological remnants of the Soviet Union. The Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction Act, a direct result of its work, became one of the most significant national security initiatives since World War II. Belfer supported the transition to a cooperative security order in the post-Cold War era, strengthened institutions within newly independent states, and worked to prevent nuclear terrorism.

In 1997, following further endowment, the center was renamed as the Robert and Renée Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs in honor of Robert A. Belfer , founder of Belco Oil & Gas Corporation.

[ 8 ] 2000s [ edit ] Following the September 11th attacks, they became an immediate resource for terrorism-related information and analysis for policymakers and journalists. Belfer Center experts were appointed to high-level security positions in the U.S. government and played leading roles on the 9/11 Commission.

2010s [ edit ] In 2015, President Barack Obama appointed Ash Carter the 25th U.S. Secretary of Defense. A leading voice in national and international security, Secretary Carter spent his career at the Belfer Center and in public service, where he leveraged his expertise at the intersection of science and technology, global strategy, and policy. His appointment underscored the center's significant influence on U.S. defense and security policy.

2020s [ edit ] Drawing on their historical focus on mitigating global security threats through rigorous research and policy recommendations, the Belfer Center emerged as a necessary voice in shaping the understanding of the war in Ukraine. In October 2022, they hosted President Volodymyr Zelenskyy , marking one of his first U.S. engagements following the Russian invasion , further underscoring its pivotal role in global affairs.

In 2023, the Belfer Center celebrated its 50th anniversary.

[ 9 ] Board of Directors [ edit ] The Belfer Center Board of Directors benefits from the experience of Harvard-affiliated scholars and senior-level staff, who guide their activities and mission to advance research, ideas, and leadership for a more secure, peaceful world.

Current Members [ edit ] Graham Allison , Former Director, Belfer Center, Douglas Dillon Professor of Government, Harvard Kennedy School Senem Aydın-Düzgit , Pierre Keller Visiting Professor, Harvard Kennedy School Lotem Bassan-Nygate , Assistant Professor of Public Policy Linda Bilmes , Daniel Patrick Moynihan Senior Lecturer in Public Policy, Harvard Kennedy School Matthew Bunn , James R. Schlesinger Professor of the Practice of Energy, National Security, and Foreign Policy, Harvard Kennedy School Nicholas Burns , Roy and Barbara Goodman Family Professor of the Practice of Diplomacy and International Relations, Harvard Kennedy School ( on leave ) Albert Carnesale , Chancellor Emeritus, UCLA and former Harvard University Provost Erica Chenoweth , Frank Stanton Professor of the First Amendment, Harvard Kennedy School William Clark , Harvey Brooks Professor of International Science, Public Policy, and Human Development, Harvard Kennedy School Dara Cohen , Professor of Public Policy, Harvard Kennedy School John M. Deutch , Emeritus Institute Professor, MIT and former Director of Central Intelligence Karen Dynan , Professor of Practice, Department of Economics, Harvard University Jason Furman , Aetna Professor of the Practice of Economic Policy, Harvard Kennedy School and Harvard University Jeffrey Frankel , James W. Harpel Professor of Capital Formation and Growth, Harvard Kennedy School Kelly Gallagher , Professor of Energy and Environmental Policy, Fletcher School, Tufts University Nancy Gibbs , Lombard Director, Shorenstein Center and Visiting Edward R. Murrow Professor of the Practice of Press, Politics and Public Policy, Harvard Kennedy School Susan Hockfield , Professor of Neuroscience and President Emerita, MIT John P. Holdren , Teresa and John Heinz Professor of Environmental Policy, Harvard Kennedy School Juliette Kayyem , Belfer Senior Lecturer in International Security, Harvard Kennedy School Robert Lawrence , Albert L. Williams Professor of International Trade and Investment, Harvard Kennedy School Henry Lee , Senior Lecturer in Public Policy, Harvard Kennedy School Jennifer Lerner , Thornton F. Bradshaw Professor of Public Policy and Management, Harvard Kennedy School Fredrick Logevall , Laurence D. Belfer Professor of International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School Zoe Marks , Lecturer in Public Policy, Harvard Kennedy School Tarek Masoud , Sultan of Oman Professor of International Relations, Harvard Kennedy School J. Michael McQuade , Director of the Program on Emerging Technology, Scientific Advancement & Global Policy Steven Miller , Director, International Security Program, Harvard Kennedy School; Editor-in-Chief, International Security Rana Mitter , S.T. Lee Professor of U.S.-Asia Relations, Harvard Kennedy School Venkatesh Narayanamurti , Benjamin Peirce Research Professor of Technology and Public Policy, Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences and Harvard Kennedy School Meghan O'Sullivan , Director, Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs; Jeane Kirkpatrick Professor of the Practice of International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School Samantha Power , Anna Lindh Professor of the Practice of Global Leadership and Public Policy, Harvard Kennedy School and Professor of Practice, Harvard Law School ( on leave ) Carmen Reinhart , Minos A. Zombanakis Professor of the International Financial System, Harvard Kennedy School ( on leave ) Meg Rithmire , F. Warren McFarlan Associate Professor in the Business, Government, and International Economy, Harvard Business School Eric Rosenbach , Senior Lecturer in Public Policy, Harvard Kennedy School Anthony Saich , Daewoo Professor of International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School Dan Schrag , Sturgis Hooper Professor of Geology and Professor of Environmental Science and Engineering, Harvard University Robert Stavins , A.J. Meyer Professor of Energy & Economic Development, Harvard Kennedy School Lawrence Summers , Charles W. Eliot University Professor, Harvard Kennedy School; President Emeritus, Harvard University Roya Talibova , Sultan Qaboos bin Said of Oman Assistant Professor of International Relations Stephen Walt , Robert and Renée Belfer Professor of International Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School [ 10 ] Former Members [ edit ] Lewis M. Branscomb , Professor Emeritus of Public Policy and Corporate Management Ashton B. Carter , Chair of International Relations, Security & Science faculty, physicist, who served as the 25th United States Secretary of Defense (until his death in October 2022) Joseph Nye , University Distinguished Service Professor, Harvard University International Council [ edit ] The Belfer Center has an international advisory board of prestigious senior business leaders and former government officials who care deeply about - and financially support - its mission to advance research, ideas, and leadership for a more secure, peaceful world.

Former Members [ edit ] Michael Chertoff , Former U.S. Secretary of Homeland Security Gregory C. Carr , Boston Technology Founder Tim Collins , Ripplewood Holdings Founder Chuck Robbins , CEO of Cisco Systems Nathaniel Rothschild , 5th Baron Rothschild, Atticus Capital Co-chairman Stephen Biddle , theorist setting U.S. counterinsurgency policy Pierpaolo Barbieri , Author, Founder of Ualá Paul Volcker , Former United States Chairman of the Federal Reserve [ 11 ] Controversies [ edit ] In 2012, the Stanton Foundation provided funds for a paid Wikipedian in residence at the Belfer Center. This became controversial due to links between the Belfer Center and the Stanton Foundation (the directors of each are a married couple) and public concerns about conflict-of-interest editing on Wikipedia .

[ 12 ] The center is organized into subgroups with specific areas of focus.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] A 2021 investigative report by student group Fossil Fuel Divest Harvard found that many of the center's climate initiatives were funded in part by fossil fuel companies, and that the center had allegedly taken several steps to cover up that fact.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] References [ edit ] ^ "About" .

Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs .

^ "Natalie Colbert" .

Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs . Retrieved 2023-06-08 .

^ "Belfer Center - About" .

Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs . Harvard . Retrieved 18 January 2024 .

^ "About Us | The Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs" .

www.belfercenter.org . 2024-09-12 . Retrieved 2024-09-13 .

^ "About: History | The Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs" .

www.belfercenter.org . Retrieved 2024-09-13 .

^ Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs (BCSIA) , International Relations and Security Network (ISN), Zurich ^ Bryan Marquard & staff, Obituary: "Paul Doty, 91, presidential adviser on nuclear arms control" , Boston Globe , 6 December 2011 ^ "History" .

Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs . Retrieved 2023-06-08 .

^ "About: History | The Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs" .

www.belfercenter.org . Retrieved 2024-09-13 .

^ "About: Our People: Board | The Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs" .

www.belfercenter.org . Retrieved 2024-09-13 .

^ "International Council" .

Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs .

^ Tim Sampson (14 April 2014).

"One of Wikimedia's largest donors accused in paid editing scandal" .

The Daily Dot .

^ Science News Staff (17 October 2011).

"Super Science Suggestions: House Panel Lays Out Spending Preferences" . Science Magazine . Retrieved Sep 14, 2014 .

...Laura Diaz Anadon, a chemical engineer and director of the energy technology innovation policy group at the Harvard Kennedy School of Government....

^ Jesse Jenkins (April 6, 2013).

"Energy Facts: How Much Water Does Fracking for Shale Gas Consume?" . The Energy Collective . Retrieved Sep 14, 2014 .

...how much water does shale gas consume per unit of energy produced...a 2010 paper by ...Laura Diaz Anadon... of Harvard's Belfer Center has data on exactly that question ...

^ "Student group says Harvard's financial ties to fossil fuels undermine academic integrity" .

www.wbur.org . Retrieved 2021-11-23 .

^ "Divest Activists Lambast Harvard's Remaining Ties to Fossil Fuel Industry in Research Funding, Governance | News | The Harvard Crimson" .

www.thecrimson.com . Retrieved 2021-11-23 .

^ Fossil Fuel Divest Harvard (2021).

"Beyond the Endowment" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2021-11-10.

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Czech Republic Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Belfer_Center_for_Science_and_International_Affairs&oldid=1306278045 " Categories : 1973 establishments in Massachusetts Harvard Kennedy School Realist think tanks Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 22:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs 2 languages Add topic

