Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Resistance and conductance 2 Conductor materials 3 Wire size 4 Conductor ampacity 5 Isotropy 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 8.1 Pioneering and historical books 8.2 Reference books 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Electrical conductor 82 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Bahasa Indonesia IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Piemontèis Polski Português Runa Simi Русский Seeltersk Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Object or material which allows the flow of electric charge with little energy loss Overhead conductors carry electric power from generating stations to customers.

Electromagnetism Electricity Magnetism Optics History Computational Textbooks Phenomena Electrostatics Charge density Conductor Coulomb law Electret Electric charge Electric dipole Electric field Electric flux Electric potential Electrostatic discharge Electrostatic induction Gauss's law Insulator Permittivity Polarization Potential energy Static electricity Triboelectricity Magnetostatics Ampère's law Biot–Savart law Gauss's law for magnetism Magnetic dipole Magnetic field Magnetic flux Magnetic scalar potential Magnetic vector potential Magnetization Permeability Right-hand rule Electrodynamics Bremsstrahlung Cyclotron radiation Displacement current Eddy current Electromagnetic field Electromagnetic induction Electromagnetic pulse Electromagnetic radiation Faraday's law Jefimenko equations Larmor formula Lenz's law Liénard–Wiechert potential London equations Lorentz force Maxwell's equations Maxwell tensor Poynting vector Synchrotron radiation Electrical network Alternating current Capacitance Current density Direct current Electric current Electric power Electrolysis Electromotive force Impedance Inductance Joule heating Kirchhoff's laws Network analysis Ohm's law Parallel circuit Resistance Resonant cavities Series circuit Voltage Watt Waveguides Magnetic circuit AC motor DC motor Electric machine Electric motor Gyrator–capacitor Induction motor Linear motor Magnetomotive force Permeance Reluctance (complex) Reluctance (real) Rotor Stator Transformer Covariant formulation Electromagnetic tensor Electromagnetism and special relativity Four-current Four-potential Mathematical descriptions Maxwell equations in curved spacetime Relativistic electromagnetism Stress–energy tensor Scientists Ampère Biot Coulomb Davy Einstein Faraday Fizeau Gauss Heaviside Helmholtz Henry Hertz Hopkinson Jefimenko Joule Kelvin Kirchhoff Larmor Lenz Liénard Lorentz Maxwell Neumann Ohm Ørsted Poisson Poynting Ritchie Savart Singer Steinmetz Tesla Thomson Volta Weber Wiechert v t e In physics and electrical engineering , a conductor is an object or type of material that allows the flow of charge ( electric current ) in one or more directions. Materials made of metal are common electrical conductors. The flow of negatively charged electrons generates electric current, positively charged holes , and positive or negative ions in some cases.

In order for current to flow within a closed electrical circuit , one charged particle does not need to travel from the component producing the current (the current source ) to those consuming it (the loads ). Instead, the charged particle simply needs to nudge its neighbor a finite amount, who will nudge its neighbor, and on and on until a particle is nudged into the consumer, thus powering it. Essentially what is occurring is a long chain of momentum transfer between mobile charge carriers ; the Drude model of conduction describes this process more rigorously. This momentum transfer model makes metal an ideal choice for a conductor; metals, characteristically, possess a delocalized sea of electrons which gives the electrons enough mobility to collide and thus affect a momentum transfer.

As discussed above, electrons are the primary mover in metals; however, other devices such as the cationic electrolyte (s) of a battery , or the mobile protons of the proton conductor of a fuel cell rely on positive charge carriers.

Insulators are non-conducting materials with few mobile charges that support only insignificant electric currents.

Resistance and conductance [ edit ] A piece of resistive material with electrical contacts on both ends Main article: Electrical resistance and conductance The resistance of a given conductor depends on the material it is made of, and on its dimensions. For a given material, the resistance is inversely proportional to the cross-sectional area.

[ 1 ] For example, a thick copper wire has lower resistance than an otherwise-identical thin copper wire. Also, for a given material, the resistance is proportional to the length; for example, a long copper wire has higher resistance than an otherwise-identical short copper wire. The resistance R and conductance G of a conductor of uniform cross section, therefore, can be computed as [ 1 ] R = ρ ρ ℓ ℓ A , G = σ σ A ℓ ℓ .

{\displaystyle {\begin{aligned}R&=\rho {\frac {\ell }{A}},\\[6pt]G&=\sigma {\frac {A}{\ell }}.\end{aligned}}} where ℓ ℓ {\displaystyle \ell } is the length of the conductor, measured in metres [m], A is the cross-section area of the conductor measured in square metres [m 2 ], σ ( sigma ) is the electrical conductivity measured in siemens per meter (S·m −1 ), and ρ ( rho ) is the electrical resistivity (also called specific electrical resistance ) of the material, measured in ohm-metres (Ω·m). The resistivity and conductivity are proportionality constants, and therefore depend only on the material the wire is made of, not the geometry of the wire. Resistivity and conductivity are reciprocals : ρ ρ = 1 / σ σ {\displaystyle \rho =1/\sigma } . Resistivity is a measure of the material's ability to oppose electric current.

This formula is not exact: It assumes the current density is totally uniform in the conductor, which is not always true in practical situation. However, this formula still provides a good approximation for long thin conductors such as wires.

Another situation this formula is not exact for is with alternating current (AC), because the skin effect inhibits current flow near the center of the conductor. Then, the geometrical cross-section is different from the effective cross-section in which current actually flows, so the resistance is higher than expected. Similarly, if two conductors are near each other carrying AC current, their resistances increase due to the proximity effect . At commercial power frequency , these  effects are significant for large conductors carrying large currents, such as busbars in an electrical substation , [ 2 ] or large power cables carrying more than a few hundred amperes.

Aside from the geometry of the wire, temperature also has a significant effect on the efficacy of conductors. Temperature affects conductors in two main ways, the first is that materials may expand under the application of heat. The amount that the material will expand is governed by the thermal expansion coefficient specific to the material. Such an expansion (or contraction) will change the geometry of the conductor and therefore its characteristic resistance. However, this effect is generally small, on the order of 10 −6 . An increase in temperature will also increase the number of phonons generated within the material. A phonon is essentially a lattice vibration, or rather a small, harmonic kinetic movement of the atoms of the material. Much like the shaking of a pinball machine, phonons serve to disrupt the path of electrons, causing them to scatter. This electron scattering will decrease the number of electron collisions and therefore will decrease the total amount of current transferred.

Conductor materials [ edit ] Main article: Electrical resistivity and conductivity Further information: Copper conductor and Aluminum building wiring Material ρ [Ω·m] at 20 °C σ [ ⁠ S / m ⁠ ] at 20 °C Silver, Ag 1.59 × 10 −8 6.30 × 10 7 Copper, Cu 1.68 × 10 −8 5.96 × 10 7 Aluminum, Al 2.82 × 10 −8 3.50 × 10 7 Conduction materials include metals , electrolytes , superconductors , semiconductors , plasmas and some nonmetallic conductors such as graphite and conductive polymers .

Copper has a high conductivity .

Annealed copper is the international standard to which all other electrical conductors are compared; the International Annealed Copper Standard conductivity is 58 MS/m , although ultra-pure copper can slightly exceed 101% IACS.  The main grade of copper used for electrical applications, such as building wire, motor windings, cables and busbars , is electrolytic-tough pitch (ETP) copper (CW004A or ASTM designation C100140).  If high conductivity copper must be welded or brazed or used in a reducing atmosphere, then oxygen-free high conductivity copper (CW008A or ASTM designation C10100) may be used.

[ 3 ] Because of its ease of connection by soldering or clamping, copper is still the most common choice for most light-gauge wires.

Silver is 6% more conductive than copper, but due to cost it is not practical in most cases. However, it is used in specialized equipment, such as satellites , and as a thin plating to mitigate skin effect losses at high frequencies.  Famously, 14,700 short tons (13,300 t) of silver on loan from the United States Treasury were used in the making of the calutron magnets during World War II due to wartime shortages of copper.

[ 4 ] Aluminum wire is the most common metal in electric power transmission and distribution .  Although only 61% of the conductivity of copper by cross-sectional area, its lower density makes it twice as conductive by mass.  As aluminum is roughly one-third the cost of copper by weight, the economic advantages are considerable when large conductors are required.

The disadvantages of aluminum wiring lie in its mechanical and chemical properties.  It readily forms an insulating oxide, making connections heat up.  Its larger coefficient of thermal expansion than the brass materials used for connectors causes connections to loosen.  Aluminum can also "creep", slowly deforming under load, which also loosens connections.  These effects can be mitigated with suitably designed connectors and extra care in installation, but they have made aluminum building wiring unpopular past the service drop .

Organic compounds such as octane, which has 8 carbon atoms and 18 hydrogen atoms, cannot conduct electricity. Oils are hydrocarbons, since  carbon has the property of tetracovalency and forms covalent bonds with other elements such as hydrogen, since it does not lose or gain electrons, thus does not form ions. Covalent bonds are simply the sharing of electrons. Hence, there is no separation of ions when electricity is passed through it. Liquids made of compounds with only covalent bonds cannot conduct electricity. Certain organic ionic liquids , by contrast, can conduct an electric current.

While pure water is not an electrical conductor, even a small portion of ionic impurities, such as salt , can rapidly transform it into a conductor.

Wire size [ edit ] Wires are measured by their cross sectional area. In many countries, the size is expressed in square millimetres. In North America, conductors are measured by American wire gauge for smaller ones, and circular mils for larger ones.

Conductor ampacity [ edit ] The ampacity of a conductor, that is, the amount of current it can carry, is related to its electrical resistance: a lower-resistance conductor can carry a larger value of current. The resistance, in turn, is determined by the material the conductor is made from (as described above) and the conductor's size. For a given material, conductors with a larger cross-sectional area have less resistance than conductors with a smaller cross-sectional area.

For bare conductors, the ultimate limit is the point at which power lost to resistance causes the conductor to melt. Aside from fuses , most conductors in the real world are operated far below this limit, however. For example, household wiring is usually insulated with PVC insulation that is only rated to operate to about 60 °C, therefore, the current in such wires must be limited so that it never heats the copper conductor above 60 °C, causing a risk of fire . Other, more expensive insulation such as Teflon or fiberglass may allow operation at much higher temperatures.

Isotropy [ edit ] If an electric field is applied to a material, and the resulting induced electric current is in the same direction, the material is said to be an isotropic electrical conductor .  If the resulting electric current is in a different direction from the applied electric field, the material is said to be an anisotropic electrical conductor .

See also [ edit ] Classification of materials based on permittivity ⁠ ε r ″ / ε r ′ ⁠ Current conduction Field propagation 0 perfect dielectric lossless medium ≪ ≪ 1 {\displaystyle \ll 1} low-conductivity material poor conductor low-loss medium good dielectric ≈ ≈ 1 {\displaystyle \approx 1} lossy conducting material lossy propagation medium ≫ ≫ 1 {\displaystyle \gg 1} high-conductivity material good conductor high-loss medium poor dielectric ∞ ∞ {\displaystyle \infty } perfect conductor Bundle conductor Charge transfer complex Electrical cable Electrical resistivity and conductivity Fourth rail Overhead line Stephen Gray , first to identify electrical conductors and insulators Superconductivity Third rail References [ edit ] ^ a b "Wire Sizes and Resistance" (PDF) . Retrieved 2018-01-14 .

^ Fink and Beaty, Standard Handbook for Electrical Engineers 11th Edition , pages 17–19 ^ "High conductivity coppers (electrical)" . Copper Development Association (U.K.). Archived from the original on 2013-07-20 . Retrieved 2013-06-01 .

^ "From Treasury Vault to the Manhattan Project" (PDF) . American Scientist . Retrieved 2022-10-27 .

Further reading [ edit ] Pioneering and historical books [ edit ] William Henry Preece.

On Electrical Conductors .  1883.

Oliver Heaviside.

Electrical Papers . Macmillan, 1894.

Reference books [ edit ] Annual Book of ASTM Standards: Electrical Conductors.

American Society for Testing and Materials. (every year) IET Wiring Regulations.

Institution for Engineering and Technology.

wiringregulations.net Archived 2021-04-02 at the Wayback Machine External links [ edit ] BBC: Key Stage 2 Bitesize: Electrical Conductors The discovery of conductors and insulators by Gray, Dufay and Franklin.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Electrical conductors .

Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐7gflk
Cached time: 20250811235837
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.455 seconds
Real time usage: 0.626 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1516/1000000
Revision size: 13847/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 43318/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2660/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 31357/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.295/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6312752/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  497.636      1 -total
 19.51%   97.095      1 Template:Reflist
 17.76%   88.395      1 Template:Electromagnetism
 17.33%   86.243      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 16.61%   82.642      3 Template:Cite_web
 16.27%   80.978      1 Template:Short_description
 13.31%   66.224      1 Template:Authority_control
 10.47%   52.107      1 Template:Commons_category
 10.06%   50.082      1 Template:Sister_project
  9.74%   48.489      1 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:198984:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235837 and revision id 1292724554. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Electrical_conductor&oldid=1292724554 " Categories : Electricity Electrical conductors Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 13:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Electrical conductor 82 languages Add topic

