Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Content 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Inside Higher Ed 2 languages Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia News website Inside Higher Ed Type News website Format Online newspaper Founder(s) Scott Jaschik and Doug Lederman Editor Doug Lederman Founded 2004 ; 21 years ago ( 2004 ) Headquarters Washington, D.C.

, U.S.

Circulation 3.67 million monthly, as of April 2020 [ 1 ] OCLC number 721351944 Website insidehighered .com Inside Higher Ed is an American online publication of news, opinion, resources, events and jobs in the higher education sphere. In 2022, Quad Partners, a private equity firm, sold it to Times Higher Education , itself owned by Inflexion Private Equity.

[ 2 ] It is based in Washington, D.C.

History [ edit ] Inside Higher Ed was founded in 2004 by Scott Jaschik and Doug Lederman, [ 3 ] [ 4 ] two former editors of The Chronicle of Higher Education , as well as Kathlene Collins, formerly a business manager for The Chronicle .

In 2015, Quad Partners acquired a controlling interest in the publication.

[ 5 ] As of 2022, Inside Higher Ed ' s chief executive officer is Dari Gessner.

Content [ edit ] Inside Higher Ed publishes daily and content includes news stories, opinion essays and career advice. The publication also hosts several blogs on education topics, including "Confessions of a Community College Dean", "Conditionally Accepted" and "GradHacker".

[ 6 ] It also publishes Admissions Insider , an online publication about college admissions and enrollment news. In 2018, Inside Higher Ed began publishing supplemental reports in addition to its regular news and editorial offerings.

[ 7 ] Inside Higher Ed publishes a weekly podcast, "The Key with Inside Higher Ed", in which editors and reporters discuss the challenges posed to higher education by the pandemic and recession, with a particular focus on lower-income students.

[ 8 ] Since 2012, Inside Higher Ed and Gallup have partnered to annually survey higher education professionals.

[ 9 ] In addition, Inside Higher Ed publishes the American Association of University Professors ' (AAUP) Faculty Compensation Survey data.

Inside Higher Ed' s content regularly appears in other publications such as Slate [ 10 ] and Business Insider .

[ 11 ] Inside Higher Ed has been recognized by the Association for the Study of Higher Education [ 12 ] and the National Association of Student Personnel Administrators ' Student Affairs Administrators in Higher Education.

[ 13 ] References [ edit ] ^ Marketing Solutions Lab , Inside Higher Ed , March 1, 2016 ^ "Times Higher Education acquires Inside Higher Ed" . Times Higher Education. January 10, 2022 . Retrieved January 11, 2022 .

^ Annys Shin, " Inside Higher Ed Emphasizes Online Focus ", The Washington Post , March 7, 2005; page E05.

^ Lia Miller, " New Web site for Academics Roils Education Journalism ", The New York Times , February 14, 2005.

^ Decarr, Kristin (January 22, 2015).

"Quad Partners Acquires Stake in Inside Higher Ed" .

Education News . Archived from the original on April 18, 2015.

^ " GradHacker Now Available at Inside Higher Ed ", GradHacker , September 16, 2014.

^ "Higher Education Special Reports" .

Inside Higher Ed . Archived from the original on April 7, 2023.

^ " Inside Higher Ed Podcast ", North American Interfraternity Conference .

^ Zac Auter, " What Gallup Learned About Higher Education in 2017 ", Gallup , December 27, 2017.

^ " Inside Higher Ed ", Slate , accessed April 17, 2017.

^ " Inside Higher Ed ", Business Insider , accessed April 17, 2017.

^ "ASHE Special Merit Award" .

The Association for the Study of Higher Education . Archived from the original on March 2, 2021 . Retrieved April 17, 2017 .

^ " Outstanding Contribution to Higher Education Award ", NASPA: Student Affairs Administrators in Higher Education, accessed May 7, 2020 External links [ edit ] Official website Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Inside_Higher_Ed&oldid=1239316257 " Categories : Online magazines published in the United States Higher education in the United States Works about academia Magazines established in 2004 Education magazines Magazines published in Washington, D.C.

Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2015 This page was last edited on 8 August 2024, at 16:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Inside Higher Ed 2 languages Add topic

