Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Childhood and education 1.2 Bishop of Seville 1.3 Second Synod of Seville (November 619) 1.4 Third Synod of Seville (624) 1.5 Fourth National Council of Toledo 1.6 Death 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Etymologiae 2.2 On the Catholic Faith against the Jews 2.3 Other works 3 Veneration 4 Criticisms and contemporary appraisal 5 Honours 6 See also 7 References 8 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 8.1 Primary sources 8.2 Secondary sources 8.3 Other material 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Isidore of Seville 68 languages Alemannisch العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Қазақша Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Limburgs Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Shqip Sicilianu Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hispano-Roman scholar (c. 560–636) Saint Isidore of Seville St. Isidore of Seville (1655), depicted by Bartolomé Esteban Murillo Bishop , Confessor and Doctor of the Church Born c.

560 Cartagena Died 4 April 636 Seville Venerated in Catholic Church Eastern Orthodox Church Canonized Pre-Congregation Feast 4 April Attributes Bees and apiaries Old bishop with a prince at his feet Pens Books with Saint Leander , Saint Fulgentius of Cartagena , and Saint Florentina the Etymologiae Patronage Students , Computer Programmers, Computer Users Philosophical work Era Medieval philosophy School Etymology Augustinianism [ 1 ] Main interests Theology , Grammar, rhetoric , mathematics, medicine, law, languages, cities, animals and birds, the physical world, geography Notable works Etymologiae Notable ideas Isidoran map Isidore of Seville ( Latin : Isidorus Hispalensis ; c.

560 – 4 April 636) was a Hispano-Roman scholar, theologian and archbishop of Seville . He is widely regarded, in the words of the 19th-century historian Charles Forbes René de Montalembert , as "the last scholar of the ancient world ".

[ 2 ] At a time of disintegration of classical culture, [ 3 ] aristocratic violence, and widespread illiteracy, Isidore was involved in the conversion of the Arian Visigothic kings to Chalcedonian Christianity , both assisting his brother Leander of Seville and continuing after Leander's death. He was influential in the inner circle of Sisebut , Visigothic king of Hispania . Like Leander, he played a prominent role in the Councils of Toledo and Seville.

His fame after his death was based on his Etymologiae , an etymological encyclopedia that assembled extracts of many books from classical antiquity that would otherwise have been lost. This work also helped to standardise the use of the full stop , comma and colon .

[ 4 ] Since the Early Middle Ages , Isidore has sometimes been called Isidore the Younger or Isidore Junior (Latin: Isidorus iunior ), because of the earlier history purportedly written by Isidore of Córdoba.

[ 5 ] Life [ edit ] Childhood and education [ edit ] Isidore was born in Cartagena, Spain , a former Carthaginian colony, to a notable family in Roman Hispania , of high social rank, [ 6 ] and probably of Greek descent.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] His father was named Severianus and his mother Theodora.

[ 6 ] His parents were members of an influential family who were instrumental in the political-religious manoeuvring that converted the Visigothic kings from Arianism to Chalcedonian Christianity . The Catholic and Orthodox Churches celebrate him and all his siblings as known saints: An elder brother, Leander of Seville , immediately preceded Isidore as Archbishop of Seville and, while in office, opposed King Liuvigild .

A younger brother, Fulgentius of Cartagena , served as the Bishop of Astigi at the start of the new reign of the Christian King Reccared .

His sister, Florentina of Cartagena , was a nun who allegedly ruled over forty convents and one thousand consecrated religious. This claim seems unlikely, however, given the few functioning monastic institutions in Spania during her lifetime.

[ 9 ] Isidore received his elementary education in the Cathedral school of Seville. In this institution, the first of its kind in Spania, a body of learned men including Archbishop Leander of Seville taught the trivium and quadrivium , the classic liberal arts . Isidore applied himself to study diligently enough that he quickly mastered classical Latin, [ 10 ] and acquired some Greek and Hebrew .

Two centuries of Gothic control of Iberia incrementally suppressed the ancient institutions, classical learning, and manners of the Roman Empire .

[ 11 ] The associated culture entered a period of long-term decline. The ruling Visigoths nevertheless showed some respect for the outward trappings of Roman culture. Arianism meanwhile took deep root among the Visigoths as the form of Christianity that they received.

Scholars may debate whether Isidore ever personally embraced monastic life or affiliated with any religious order, but he undoubtedly esteemed the monks highly.

Bishop of Seville [ edit ] A statue of Isidore of Seville by José Alcoverro , 1892, outside the Biblioteca Nacional de España , in Madrid Seville Cathedral . Sculpture by Lorenzo Mercadante de Bretaña After the death of Leander of Seville on 13 March 600 or 601, Isidore succeeded to the See of Seville . On his elevation to the episcopate , he immediately constituted himself as the protector of monks.

Recognising that the spiritual and material welfare of the people of his see depended on the assimilation of remnant Roman and ruling barbarian cultures, Isidore attempted to weld the peoples and subcultures of the Visigothic kingdom into a united nation. He used all available religious resources toward this end and succeeded. Isidore practically eradicated the heresy of Arianism and completely stifled the new heresy of Acephali at its outset. Archbishop Isidore strengthened religious discipline throughout his see.

Archbishop Isidore also used resources of education to counteract increasingly influential Gothic barbarism throughout his episcopal jurisdiction. His quickening spirit animated the educational movement centered on Seville. Isidore introduced his countrymen to Aristotle long before the Arabs studied Greek philosophy extensively.

In 619 Isidore of Seville pronounced anathema against any ecclesiastic who in any way should molest the monasteries.

Second Synod of Seville (November 619) [ edit ] Main article: Second Council of Seville Isidore presided over the Second Council of Seville, begun on 13 November 619 in the reign of King Sisebut , a provincial council attended by eight other bishops, all from the ecclesiastical province of Baetica in southern Spain. The Acts of the Council fully set forth the nature of Christ, countering the conceptions of Gregory, a Syrian representing the heretical Acephali.

Third Synod of Seville (624) [ edit ] Based on a few surviving canons found in the Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals , Isidore is known to have presided over an additional provincial council around 624.

The council dealt with a conflict over the See of Écija and wrongfully stripped bishop Martianus of his see, a situation that was rectified by the Fourth Council of Toledo. It also addressed a concern over Jews who had been forced to convert to Christianity.

The records of the council, unlike the First and Second Councils of Seville, were not preserved in the Hispana , a collection of canons and decretals likely edited by Isidore himself.

[ 12 ] Fourth National Council of Toledo [ edit ] Main article: Fourth Council of Toledo All bishops of Hispania attended the Fourth National Council of Toledo, begun on 5 December 633. The aged Archbishop Isidore presided over its deliberations and originated most enactments of the council.

Through Isidore's influence, this Council of Toledo promulgated a decree commanding all bishops to establish seminaries in their cathedral cities along the lines of the cathedral school at Seville, which had educated Isidore decades earlier. The decree prescribed the study of Greek, Hebrew, and the liberal arts and encouraged interest in law and medicine.

[ 13 ] The authority of the council made this education policy obligatory upon all bishops of the Kingdom of the Visigoths. The council granted remarkable position and deference to the king of the Visigoths. The independent Church bound itself in allegiance to the acknowledged king; it said nothing of allegiance to the Bishop of Rome .

Death [ edit ] Isidore of Seville died on 4 April 636 after serving more than 32 years as archbishop of Seville.

Works [ edit ] Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Isidore's Latin style in the Etymologiae and elsewhere, though simple and lucid, reveals increasing local Visigothic traditions.

Etymologiae [ edit ] Main article: Etymologiae A page of Etymologiae , Carolingian manuscript (8th century), Brussels , Royal Library of Belgium Isidori Hispalensis Opera Omnia (1797) Isidore was the first Christian writer to try to compile a summa of universal knowledge, in his most important work, the Etymologiae (taking its title from the method he uncritically used in the transcription of his era's knowledge). It is also known by classicists as the Origines (the standard abbreviation being Orig .). This encyclopedia —the first such Christian epitome —formed a huge compilation of 448 chapters in 20 volumes.

[ 14 ] In it, Isidore entered his own terse digest of Roman handbooks, miscellanies and compendia. He continued the trend towards abridgements and summaries that had characterised Roman learning in Late Antiquity . In the process, many fragments of classical learning are preserved that otherwise would have been hopelessly lost; "in fact, in the majority of his works, including the Origines , he contributes little more than the mortar which connects excerpts from other authors, as if he was aware of his deficiencies and had more confidence in the stilus maiorum than his own," his translator Katherine Nell MacFarlane remarks.

[ 14 ] Some of these fragments were lost in the first place because Isidore's work was so highly regarded— Braulio called it quaecunque fere sciri debentur , "practically everything that it is necessary to know" [ 15 ] —that it superseded the use of many individual works of the classics themselves, which were not recopied and have therefore been lost: "all secular knowledge that was of use to the Christian scholar had been winnowed out and contained in one handy volume; the scholar need search no further".

[ 16 ] Book VIII of the Etymologiae covers religion, including the Christian Church, Judaism, heretical sects, pagan philosophers, sibyls, and magi.

[ 17 ] In this section, Isidore documents pre-Christian religious and magical beliefs, preserving knowledge about ancient magical practices, even while condemning them as superstition. His writings serve as one of the few surviving records of magical thought in early medieval Europe, helping to transmit classical esoteric ideas into the Middle Ages.

[ 18 ] The fame of this work imparted a new impetus to encyclopedic writing, which bore abundant fruit in the subsequent centuries of the Middle Ages . It was the most popular compendium in medieval libraries. It was printed in at least ten editions between 1470 and 1530, showing Isidore's continued popularity in the Renaissance . Until the 12th century brought translations from Arabic sources, Isidore transmitted what western Europeans remembered of the works of Aristotle and other Greeks, although he understood only a limited amount of Greek.

[ 19 ] The Etymologiae was much copied, particularly into medieval bestiaries .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] On the Catholic Faith against the Jews [ edit ] The medieval T-O map represents the inhabited world as described by Isidore in his Etymologiae Isidore's De fide catholica contra Iudaeos furthers Augustine of Hippo 's ideas on the Jewish presence in the Christian society of the ancient world. Like Augustine, Isidore held an acceptance of the Jewish presence as necessary to society because of their expected role in the anticipated Second Coming of Christ .

But Isidore had access to Augustine's works, out of which one finds more than forced acceptance of but rather broader reasons than just an endtime role for Jews in society: [D]iversities in the manners, laws, and institutions whereby earthly peace is secured and maintained [are not scrupled in the heavenly city for which we strive, while its citizens sojourn on earth], but recognizing that, however various they are, they all tend to one and the same end of earthly peace.

[The heavenly city] is therefore so far from rescinding and abolishing these diversities, that it even preserves and adopts them, so long only as no hindrance to the worship of the one supreme and true God is thus introduced...and makes this earthly peace bear upon the peace of heaven; for this alone can be truly called and esteemed the peace of the reasonable creatures, consisting as it does in the perfectly ordered and harmonious enjoyment of God and of one another in God. ( City of God , Book 19, Chapter 17) [ 23 ] According to Jeremy Cohen, Isidore exceeds the anti-rabbinic polemics of earlier theologians by criticising Jewish practice as deliberately disingenuous in De fide catholica contra Iudaeos .

[ 24 ] But once again Isidore's same predecessor, Augustine, seems to have written of at least the possibility of Jewish rabbinical practice along that subject's content's purportedly deceptive lines in the same work cited above: They say that it is not credible that the seventy translators [of the Septuagint ] who simultaneously and unanimously produced one rendering, could have erred, or, in a case in which no interest of theirs was involved, could have falsified their translation, but that the Jews, envying us our translation of their Law and Prophets, have made alterations in their texts to undermine the authority of ours. ( City of God , Book 15, Chapter 11) [ 23 ] He contributed two decisions to the Fourth Council of Toledo : Canon 60 calling for the forced removal of children from parents practising Crypto-Judaism and their education by Christians on the basis that while their parents were concealing themselves under the guise of Christians, they had presumably allowed their children to be baptised with intent to deceive. This removal was an exception to the general rule of the treatment of Jewish children according to the 13th century Summa Theologica , "[I]t was never the custom of the Church to baptize the children of Jews against the will of their parents...." [ 25 ] He also contributed Canon 65 thought to forbid Jews and Christians of Jewish origin from holding public office.

[ 26 ] Other works [ edit ] Engraving by Manuel Salvador Carmona , 1778 Isidore's authored more than a dozen major works on various topics including mathematics, holy scripture, and monastic life, [ 27 ] all in Latin: Historia de regibus Gothorum, Vandalorum et Suevorum , a history of the Gothic, Vandal and Suebi kings. The longer edition, issued in 624, includes the Laus Spaniae and the Laus Gothorum .

Chronica Majora , a universal history De differentiis verborum , a brief theological treatise on the doctrine of the Trinity, the nature of Christ, of Paradise, angels, and men De natura rerum ( On the Nature of Things ), a book of astronomy and natural history dedicated to the Visigothic king Sisebut Questions on the Old Testament Liber numerorum qui in sanctis Scripturis occurrunt , [ 28 ] a mystical treatise on the allegorical meanings of numbers a number of brief letters Sententiae libri tres Codex Sang. 228; 9th century [ 29 ] De viris illustribus De ecclesiasticis officiis De summo bono De ortu et obitu patrum Regula Monachorum [ 30 ] Veneration [ edit ] Isidore (right) and Braulio (left) in an Ottonian illuminated manuscript from the 2nd half of the 10th century Isidore was one of the last of the ancient Christian philosophers and was contemporary with Maximus the Confessor . He has been called the most learned man of his age by some scholars, [ 31 ] [ 32 ] and he exercised a far-reaching and immeasurable influence on the educational life of the Middle Ages. His contemporary and friend Braulio of Zaragoza said of him: "After so much destruction and so many disasters, God has raised him in recent times to restore the monuments of the ancients, so that we would not fall completely into barbarism".

[ 33 ] The Eighth Council of Toledo (653) recorded its admiration of his character in these glowing terms: "The extraordinary doctor, the latest ornament of the Catholic Church, the most learned man of the latter ages, always to be named with reverence, Isidore". This tribute was endorsed by the Fifteenth Council of Toledo , held in 688. Isidore was proclaimed a Doctor of the Church in 1722 by Pope Innocent XIII .

[ 34 ] Isidore was interred in Seville . His tomb represented an important place of veneration for the Mozarabs during the centuries after the Arab conquest of Visigothic Hispania. In the middle of the 11th century, with the division of Al Andalus into taifas and the strengthening of the Christian holdings in the Iberian peninsula, Ferdinand I of León and Castile found himself in a position to extract tribute from the fractured Arab states. In addition to money, Abbad II al-Mu'tadid , the Abbadid ruler of Seville (1042–1069), agreed to turn over St. Isidore's remains to Ferdinand I.

[ 35 ] A Catholic poet described al-Mutatid placing a brocaded cover over Isidore's sarcophagus, and remarked, "Now you are leaving here, revered Isidore. You know well how much your fame was mine!" Ferdinand had Isidore's remains reinterred in the then-recently constructed Basilica of San Isidoro in León .

[ 36 ] Today, many of his bones are buried in the cathedral of Murcia , Spain.

Criticisms and contemporary appraisal [ edit ] Contemporary researchers have criticised Isidore—specifically, his work in the Etymologies.

The historian Sandro D'Onofrio has argued that "job consisted here and there of restating, recapitulating, and sometimes simply transliterating both data and theories that lacked research and originality." [ 37 ] In this view, Isidore—considering the large popularity his works enjoyed during the Middle Ages and the founding role he had in Scholasticism —would be less a brilliant thinker than a Christian gatekeeper making etymologies fit into the Christian worldview. "[H]e prescribed what they should mean," asserts D'Onofrio.

The researcher Victor Bruno has countered this argument. According to him, it was not the meaning of the Etymologies , or of Isidore's work as a whole, to give a scientific or philological account of the words, as a modern researcher would do. "It is obvious that, from a material point of view," argues Bruno, "Isidore's practical knowledge on etymology, geography, and history are considered outdated; his methods, from the current academic and scientific standpoint, are questionable, and some of his conclusions are indeed incorrect. But Isidore is less concerned about being etymologically or philologically right than being ontologically right." [ 38 ] In Bruno's view, Isidore, despite [ clarification needed ] living in the Early Middle Ages , is an archaic or "traditional" thinker. Being religiously inclined, Isidore would be concerned with the redeeming meaning of words and history, the ultimate quest of religions. The same researcher also found parallels between Isidore's interpretation of the word "year" ( annus ) and the meaning of the same words [ clarification needed ] in the Jāiminīya-Upaniṣad-Brāmaṇa .

[ 39 ] Honours [ edit ] St. Isidore Island in Antarctica is named for him.

See also [ edit ] Saint Isidore of Seville, patron saint archive Catholicism.org - Patron Saint for the Internet, Isidore of Seville References [ edit ] ^ Russell, R. P.

"Augustinianism" .

New Catholic Encyclopedia . Retrieved 4 April 2021 – via Encyclopedia.com .

^ Montalembert, Charles F.

Les Moines d'Occident depuis Saint Benoît jusqu'à Saint Bernard [The Monks of the West from Saint Benedict to Saint Bernard] . Paris: J. Lecoffre, 1860.

^ Jacques Fontaine, Isidore de Séville et la culture classique dans l'Espagne wisigothique (Paris) 1959 ^ Houston, Keith (2 September 2015).

"The mysterious origins of punctuation" .

www.bbc.com . Retrieved 13 September 2022 .

^ Bonnie J. Blackburn and Leofranc Holford-Strevens , eds., in Florentius de Faxolis , Book on Music (Harvard University Press, 2010), p. 262.

^ a b Priscilla Throop, Isidore of Seville's Etymologies: Complete English Translation . Vermont: MedievalMS, 2005, p. xi.

^ Burns, J. H. (1988).

The Cambridge History of Medieval Political Thought C.350-c.1450 . Cambridge University Press. p. 674.

ISBN 978-0-521-42388-5 .

ISIDORE OF SEVILLE, ST c .560-636. Family probably of Greek origin.

^ Wright, Roger (2013).

"Isidore of Seville, Saint" . In Emmerson, Richard K. (ed.).

Key Figures in Medieval Europe: An Encyclopedia . Routledge. p. 350.

ISBN 978-1-136-77518-5 .

Isidore's family, from Cartagena, may have been of Greek descent.

^ Roger Collins , Early Medieval Spain . New York: St Martin's Press, 1995, pp. 79–86.

^ "His literary style, though lucid, is pedestrian": Katherine Nell MacFarlane's observation, in "Isidore of Seville on the Pagan Gods (Origines VIII. 11)", Transactions of the American Philosophical Society , New Series, 70 .3 (1980):1–40, p. 4, reflects mainstream secular opinion.

^ Sack, Harald (4 April 2020).

"The Encyclopaedia of Saint Isidore of Seville | SciHi Blog" . Retrieved 8 April 2024 .

^ Rachel Stocking, "Martianus, Aventius and Isidore: provincial councils in seventh-century Spain" Early Medieval Europe 6 (1997) 169–188.

^ Isidore's own work regarding medicine is examined by Sharpe, William D. (1964). "Isidore of Seville: The Medical Writings".

Transactions of the American Philosophical Society .

54 (2).

^ a b MacFarlane 1980:4; MacFarlane translates Etymologiae viii.

^ Braulio, Elogium of Isidore appended to Isidore's De viris illustribus , heavily indebted itself to Jerome .

^ MacFarlane 1980:4.

^ Barney, Stephen A.; Lewis, W. J.; Beach, J. A.; Berghof, O. (2006).

The Etymologies of Isidore of Seville (1st ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

173– 190.

ISBN 978-0-511-21969-6 .

^ Otto, B.; Stausberg, M. (2014).

Defining Magic: A Reader . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-1317545033 .

^ "Catholic Encyclopedia: St. Isidore of Seville" .

www.newadvent.org . Retrieved 27 July 2020 .

^ Verner, Lisa (2005).

The Epistemology of the Monstrous in the Middle Ages . Routledge. pp.

94– 95.

ISBN 978-0415972437 .

^ Green, Roland, ed. (2012).

The Princeton Encyclopedia of Poetry and Poetics (4th ed.). Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0691154916 .

^ Barber, Richard W. (1992).

Bestiary : Being an English Version of the Bodleian Library, Oxford M.S. Bodley 764: With All the Original Miniatures Reproduced in Facsimile . Woodbridge, Suffolk, England: Boydell & Brewer. pp. 8, 13.

^ a b Marcus Dods, translator.

^ Cohen, Jeremy (1999).

Living Letters of the Law . Berkeley: University of California Press . p. 97.

ISBN 978-0520218703 .

^ Aquinas , St. Thomas (1274).

Summa Theologica , p. II of p. IInd, "Treatise on Faith, Hope and Charity", Question 10, Article 12, Answer.  Quote continues: "..., although in times past there have been many very powerful catholic princes like Constantine and Theodosius , who would certainly not have failed to obtain this favour from them if it had been at all reasonable." ^ Bar-Shava Albert (1990). "Isidore of Seville: His attitude towards Judaism and his impact on early Medieval Canonical law".

The Jewish Quarterly Review . XXX 3, 4 (3/4): 207– 220.

JSTOR 1454969 .

^ Christopher Lowney (2012).

A Vanished World: Medieval Spain's Golden Age of Enlightenment . Simon and Schuster. p. 17.

ISBN 978-0743282611 .

^ Migne, Patrologia , 83, 179.

^ "e-codices – Virtuelle Handschriftenbibliothek der Schweiz" .

www.e-codices.unifr.ch . Retrieved 27 July 2020 .

^ Dyer, Joseph (2000). "Observations on the Divine Office in the Rule of the Master". In Baltzer, Rebecca A.; Fassler, Margot E. (eds.).

The Divine Office in the Latin Middle Ages: Methodology and Source Studies, Regional Developments, Hagiography . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 75.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195124538.001.0001 .

ISBN 0195124537 .

^ Isidore of Seville (2008).

"Introduction" .

Isidore of Seville: De Ecclesiasticis Officiis . Translated by Knoebel, Thomas L. Paulist Press. p. 11.

ISBN 978-0-8091-0581-6 .

^ Bradford Lee Eden (2 August 2004).

"Isidore of Seville" . In Christopher Kleinhenz; John W. Barker; Gail Geiger; Richard Lansing (eds.).

Medieval Italy: An Encyclopedia . Taylor & Francis. p. 2012.

ISBN 978-1-135-94879-5 .

^ Jorge Mario Cabrera Valverde (2004).

Estampas de la Antigüedad Clásica . Editorial Universidad de Costa Rica. p. 124.

ISBN 978-9977-67-803-0 .

Un discípulo suyo, San Braulio de Zaragoza, escribe sobre él: ""Después de tantas ruinas y desastres, Dios le ha suscitado en estos últimos tiempos para restaurar los monumentos de los antiguos, a fin de que no cayésemos por completo en la barbarie." ^ Dumont, Darl J.

"St. Isidore of Seville" .

New Advent Catholic Encyclopedia . New Advent LLC . Retrieved 26 October 2022 .

^ Father Alban Butler. "Saint Isidore, Bishop of Seville". Lives of the Fathers, Martyrs, and Principal Saints, 1866. Saints.SQPN.com. 2 April 2013. Web. 9 August 2014.

Saints SQPN ^ "San Isidoro Royal Collegiate Church in León in León" .

Spain.info . Retrieved 8 April 2024 .

^ Sandro D'Onofrio, "Isidore of Seville," in Henrik Legerlund, ed., Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, 500–1500 (Dordrecht: Springer, 2011), 574.

^ Victor Bruno, "St. Isidore of Seville and Traditional Philosophy," Sacred Web 49 (2022): 99.

^ Bruno, "St. Isidore of Seville and Traditional Philosophy," 101.

Sources [ edit ] Primary sources [ edit ] Chronica minora , 1482 The Etymologiae (complete Latin text) Barney, Stephen A., Lewis, W.J., Beach, J.A. and Berghof, Oliver (translators).

The Etymologies of Isidore of Seville.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , 2006.

ISBN 0-521-83749-9 , 978-0-521-83749-1 .

Ziolkowski, Vernon P., The De Fide Catholica contra Iudaeos of Saint Isidorus, Bishop, Book 1 , Saint Louis University, PhD diss. (1982).

Castro Caridad, Eva and Peña Fernández, Francisco (translators). "Isidoro de Sevilla. Sobre la fe católica contra los judíos". Sevilla: Universidad de Sevilla , 2012.

ISBN 978-84-472-1432-7 .

Throop, Priscilla, (translator).

Isidore of Seville's Etymologies.

Charlotte, VT: MedievalMS, 2005, 2 vols.

ISBN 1-4116-6523-6 , 978-1-4116-6523-1 , 1-4116-6526-0 Throop, Priscilla, (translator).

Isidore's Synonyms and Differences.

(a translation of Synonyms or Lamentations of a Sinful Soul , Book of Differences I , and Book of Differences II ) Charlotte, VT: MedievalMS, 2012 (EPub ISBN 978-1-105-82667-2 ) Online Galleries, History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries Archived 13 November 2021 at the Wayback Machine High resolution images of works by Isidore of Seville in .jpg and .tiff format.

De natura rerum (Msc.Nat.1) (On the Nature of Things) digitized by the Staatsbibliothek Bamberg.

Lewis E 136 Carta pisana; Sententiae (Sentences) at OPenn Lewis E 137 Sententiae (Sentences) at OPenn MS 484/18 Quaestiones in josue, judicum, regum, machabeis at OPenn Secondary sources [ edit ] Barrett, Graham. "God's Librarian: Isadore of Seville and His Literary Agenda," pp. 42–100 in Fear, A. T., and Jamie Wood eds.

Isidore of Seville and His Reception in the Early Middle Ages : Transmitting and Transforming Knowledge. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2016.

Henderson, John.

The Medieval World of Isidore of Seville: Truth from Words.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.

ISBN 0-521-86740-1 .

Herren, Michael. "On the Earliest Irish Acquaintance with Isidore of Seville." Visigothic Spain: New Approaches .

James, Edward (ed). Oxford: Oxford University Press , 1980.

ISBN 0-19-822543-1 .

Englisch, Brigitte. "Die Artes liberales im frühen Mittelalter." Stuttgart, 1994.

Texts on Wikisource: " Isidorus, archbp. of Seville ".

Dictionary of Christian Biography and Literature to the End of the Sixth Century (3rd ed.). 1911.

" Isidore of Seville ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 14 (11th ed.). 1911. pp.

871– 872.

O'Connor, J.B. (1910). " St. Isidore of Seville ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 8.

Other material [ edit ] The Order of Saint Isidore of Seville , st-isidore.org Jones, Peter.

"Patron saint of the internet" , telegraph.co.uk, 27 August 2006 (Review of The Etymologies of Isidore of Seville , Cambridge University Press, 2006) Shachtman, Noah.

"Searchin' for the Surfer's Saint" , wired.com, 25 January 2002 External links [ edit ] Carolyn Embach, ResearchGate: English translation of Isidore of Seville, De Natura Rerum, ca. 560–636 AD . (Carolyn S. E. Wares aka Carolyn Embach, translator, 1969) Lloyd Dusenbury, David (2017). " Ait enim Lucretius . An affirmation of the Epicurean concept of time in Isidore of Seville's Etymologiae ".

Antiquité Tardive .

25 : 341– 351.

doi : 10.1484/J.AT.5.114866 .

ISSN 1250-7334 .

Crouch, J. T. (2003).

"Isidore of Seville, St." .

New Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 7: Hol–Jub (2 ed.). Detroit: Thomson Gale . pp.

602– 605.

Quotations related to Isidore of Seville at Wikiquote Works by or about Isidore of Seville at Wikisource Media related to Isidore of Seville at Wikimedia Commons v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal Links to related articles v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Latin Church Patriarchates (by order of precedence ) Current Rome (' Patriarch of the West '): Pope Leo XIV (with cathedra in Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran ) Jerusalem : Pierbattista Pizzaballa East Indies : Filipe Neri Ferrão Lisbon : Rui Valério Venice : Francesco Moraglia Defunct Carthage (?−1964) Alexandria (1276–1964) Antioch (1098–1964) Constantinople (1204–1964) West Indies (1524–1963) Aquileia (560–1751) Ethiopia (1555–1663) Grado (560–1451) History Apostolic succession History of the papacy Papal primacy Historical development First Martyrs Great Church Early African church Vulgate East–West Schism Scholasticism Crusades Western Schism Age of Discovery Humanism Protestant Reformation Council of Trent Counter-Reformation Vatican I Vatican II 1983 Code of Canon Law Apostolic sees Rome Peter Paul Syracuse Peter Malta Paul Milan Barnabas Santiago de Compostela James Church Fathers Tertullian Cyprian Hilary of Poitiers * Ambrose * Pope Damasus I Jerome * Augustine of Hippo * Pope Gregory I * Isidore of Seville * Language Ecclesiastical Latin Liturgical use of Latin Liturgical rites Liturgical days Current Ambrosian Rite Rite of Braga Mozarabic Rite Rite of Lyon Roman Rite Mass of Paul VI (Ordinary form) Tridentine Mass Extraordinary form Anglican Use Zaire Use Orders Benedictine Rite Carmelite Rite Carthusian Rite Cistercian Rite Dominican Rite Norbertine Rite Defunct African Rite Aquileian Rite British Celtic Rite Durham Rite Hereford Use Sarum Use York Use Gallican Rite Missa Nautica Missa sicca Missa Venatoria Pre-Tridentine Mass See also Latin cross Latin Church in the Middle East Latins Turkey Titular sees Eastern Catholic Churches Conference of the Latin Bishops of the Arab Regions Western Rite Orthodoxy * also Doctors of the Church Category Portals : Saints Biography Christianity Spain Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Chile Greece 2 Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH Artists ULAN MusicBrainz People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐56p2m
Cached time: 20250817044102
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.108 seconds
Real time usage: 1.490 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6099/1000000
Revision size: 36616/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 304228/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 50620/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 212467/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.649/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16289680/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1070.652      1 -total
 22.02%  235.719      1 Template:Reflist
 16.99%  181.861      2 Template:Infobox
 15.19%  162.676      1 Template:Infobox_saint
 12.56%  134.445      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.15%   98.002      1 Template:Catholic_philosophy
  9.06%   97.002      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
  8.90%   95.322      2 Template:Langx
  8.39%   89.799      7 Template:Navbox
  7.91%   84.667      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:15506:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044102 and revision id 1300207135. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Isidore_of_Seville&oldid=1300207135 " Categories : 560 births 636 deaths Doctors of the Church Church Fathers 6th-century writers in Latin 7th-century writers in Latin Hispano-Roman encyclopedists Etymologists 7th-century philosophers 7th-century Christian saints 7th-century archbishops 7th-century Christian theologians 7th-century people from the Visigothic Kingdom Roman Catholic archbishops of Seville Spanish philosophers Medieval Spanish saints Augustinian philosophers Catholic philosophers Spanish music theorists Spanish Christian theologians Spanish Roman Catholic writers Trope theorists Medieval Spanish theologians 7th-century astronomers 7th-century mathematicians 7th-century historians 7th-century jurists Writers about religion and science Spanish people of Greek descent Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2020 Use British English from May 2019 Articles with hCards Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2025 Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DCBL with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 22:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Isidore of Seville 68 languages Add topic

