Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure 2 Types 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Basidiocarp 9 languages Català Español Euskara Français Íslenska Bahasa Melayu Polski Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fungal structure This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( January 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Schematic representations of a typical basidiocarp (left to right): a fruiting body , hymenium and basidia In fungi , a basidiocarp , basidiome , or basidioma ( pl.

basidiomata ) is the sporocarp of a basidiomycete , the multicellular structure on which the spore -producing hymenium is borne. Basidiocarps are characteristic of the hymenomycetes ; rusts and smuts do not produce such structures. As with other sporocarps, epigeous (above-ground) basidiocarps that are visible to the naked eye (especially those with a more or less agaricoid morphology) are commonly referred to as mushrooms , while hypogeous (underground) basidiocarps are usually called false truffles .

Structure [ edit ] All basidiocarps serve as the structure on which the hymenium is produced.

Basidia are found on the surface of the hymenium, and the basidia ultimately produce spores. In its simplest form, a basidiocarp consists of an undifferentiated fruiting structure with a hymenium on the surface; such a structure is characteristic of many simple jelly and club fungi . In more complex basidiocarps, there is differentiation into a stipe , a pileus , and/or various types of hymenophores .

Types [ edit ] Basidiocarps of Ramaria rugosa , a coral fungus Basidiocarps of Craterellus tubaeformis , a cantharelloid fungus Basidiocarps of Amanita muscaria , an agaric Basidiocarps are classified into various types of growth forms based on the degree of differentiation into a stipe, pileus, and hymenophore, as well as the type of hymenophore, if present.

Growth forms include: Jelly fungus – fruiting body is jelly-like.

Club fungus and coral fungus – erect fruiting body without a distinct stalk and cap, either unbranched (club fungus) or profusely branched (coral fungus).

Polypore – underside of the fruiting body usually consists of tubes; otherwise very variable, usually wood-inhabiting tooth fungus or hydnoid fungus – underside of the fruiting body composed of spines or teeth Corticioid fungus – the underside of the fruiting body is usually smooth or with spines (vs. hydnoid fungi) but not poroid nor gilled; typically effused without caps Cantharelloid fungus – fruiting body with shallow fold-like gills running over most of the lower surface of the fruiting body and not much differentiation between the stalk and cap.

Gasteromycete or "gastroid fungus" – fruiting body has a ball-like shape and in which the hymenophore has become entirely enclosed on the inside of the fruiting body.

False truffle – like a gasteromycete, however, but with a hypogeous (underground) fruiting body.

Secotioid fungus – like a gasteromycete, but with a stalk. Thought to be an evolutionarily intermediate stage between a gasteromycete and an agaric.

Agaric or gill fungi – fruiting body with caps, gills, and (usually) a stalk.

Bolete – fleshy fruiting body with a cap, a stalk, and tubes on the underside.

Basic divisions of Agaricomycotina were formerly based entirely upon the growth form of the mushroom.

Molecular phylogenetic investigation (as well as supporting evidence from micromorphology and chemotaxonomy ) has since demonstrated that similar types of basidiomycete growth form are often examples of convergent evolution and do not always reflect a close relationship between different groups of fungi. For example, agarics have arisen independently in the Agaricales , the Boletales , the Russulales , and other groups, while secotioid fungi and false truffles have arisen independently many times just within the Agaricales.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Ascocarp Conidium References [ edit ] ^ "MykoWeb: Evolution & Morphology in the Homobasidiomycetes" .

www.mykoweb.com . Retrieved 2020-07-12 .

External links [ edit ] Evolution & Morphology in the Homobasidiomycetes: The Clade/Morphology Chart by Gary Lincoff & Michael Wood, MykoWeb , November 27, 2005.

"Mycomorphology Part 1: Why Do Mushrooms Look Like Mushrooms?" by Peter Werner, Mycena News , December 2002. (Archived at MycoWeb ) "Mycomorphology Part 2: Basidiocarp Keeps its Balance" by Peter Werner, Mycena News , March 2003. (Archived at MycoWeb ) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Basidiocarp&oldid=1305335704 " Categories : Fungal morphology and anatomy Fungal fruiting body types Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from January 2016 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 13:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Basidiocarp 9 languages Add topic

