Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Features of Pontus 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Mithridatic dynasty of Cius 2.2 Kingdom of Pontus 2.3 Mithridates VI Eupator 2.3.1 The First Mithridatic War 2.3.2 Second and Third Mithridatic wars 2.4 Roman province and client kingdoms 3 Coinage 4 Military 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 7.1 Modern sources 7.2 Ancient sources Toggle the table of contents Kingdom of Pontus 43 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar მარგალური Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 40°39′0″N 35°50′0″E ﻿ / ﻿ 40.65000°N 35.83333°E ﻿ / 40.65000; 35.83333 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 281 BC–62 AD kingdom in northern Anatolia For other uses, see Pontus .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Kingdom of Pontus" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Kingdom of Pontus 281 BC–62 AD The Pontic empire at its height: before the reign of Mithridates VI (dark purple), after his early conquests (purple), and his conquests in the first Mithridatic Wars (pink) Status Independent kingdom (281 – 63 BC) Client kingdom of the Roman Republic and Roman Empire (eastern part of the kingdom; 63 BC – 62 AD) Capital Amaseia , Sinope 40°39′0″N 35°50′0″E ﻿ / ﻿ 40.65000°N 35.83333°E ﻿ / 40.65000; 35.83333 Common languages Greek (official after 3rd century BC, [ 1 ] coastal cities) Persian , Armenian (after 115 BC) and Anatolian languages (regional and dynastic) Religion Syncretic, incorporating Greek polytheism , Iranian religion , and local Anatolian religion.

Government Monarchy Basileus • 281–266 BC Mithridates I Ktistes • 266–250 BC Ariobarzanes • c. 250–220 BC Mithridates II • c. 220–185 BC Mithridates III • c. 185 – c. 170 BC Pharnaces I • c. 170 – 150 BC Mithridates IV and Laodice • c. 150 – 120 BC Mithridates V Euergetes • 120–63 BC Mithridates VI Eupator • 63–47 BC Pharnaces II • 47–37 BC Darius • 37 BC Arsaces • 37–8 BC Polemon I • 8 BC – 38 AD Pythodorida • 38 AD – 62 AD Polemon II History • Founded by Mithridates I 281 BC • Conquered by Pompey of the Roman Republic , remained as a client state (eastern part of the kingdom).

63 BC • Annexed by the Roman Empire under Emperor Nero .

62 AD Preceded by Succeeded by Antigonid dynasty Roman Empire Pontus ( Ancient Greek : Πόντος Pontos ) was a Hellenistic kingdom centered in the historical region of Pontus in modern-day Turkey , and ruled by the Mithridatic dynasty of Persian origin, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 1 ] which may have been directly related to Darius the Great of the Achaemenid dynasty .

[ 5 ] [ 1 ] The kingdom was proclaimed by Mithridates I in 281 BC [ 6 ] and lasted until its conquest by the Roman Republic in 63 BC.

[ 7 ] The Kingdom of Pontus reached its greatest extent under Mithridates VI the Great, who conquered Colchis , Cappadocia , Bithynia , the Greek colonies of the Tauric Chersonesos , and for a brief time the Roman province of Asia . After a long struggle with Rome in the Mithridatic Wars , Pontus was defeated.

[ 8 ] The kingdom had three cultural strands, which often fused together: Greek (mostly on the coast), Persian, and Anatolian, [ 9 ] [ 1 ] with Greek becoming the official language in the 3rd century BC.

[ 2 ] Features of Pontus [ edit ] Main article: Pontus (region) Coin of Pont Amisos The Kingdom of Pontus was divided into two distinct areas: the coastal region and the Pontic interior. The coastal region bordering the Black Sea was separated from the mountainous inland area by the Pontic Alps , which run parallel to the coast. The river valleys of Pontus also ran parallel to the coast and were quite fertile, supporting cattle herds, millet , and fruit trees, including cherry , apple , and pear . ( Cherry and Cerasus are probably cognates .) The coastal region was dominated by Greek cities such as Amastris and Sinope, which became the Pontic capital after its capture. The coast was rich in timber, fishing, and olives. Pontus was also rich in iron and silver , which were mined near the coast south of Pharnacia ; steel from the Chalybian mountains became quite famous in Greece. There were also copper , lead , zinc and arsenic . The Pontic interior also had fertile river valleys such as the river Lycus and Iris. The major city of the interior was Amasia , the early Pontic capital, where the Pontic kings had their palace and royal tombs. Besides Amasia and a few other cities, the interior was dominated mainly by small villages. The kingdom of Pontus was divided into districts named Eparchies.

[ 10 ] The Pontic Alps which divided the kingdom.

The division between coast and interior was also cultural. The coast was mainly Greek and focused on sea trade. The interior was occupied by the Anatolian Cappadocians and Paphlagonians ruled by an Iranian aristocracy that went back to the Persian empire. The interior also had powerful temples with large estates. The gods of the Kingdom were mostly syncretic, with features of local gods along with Persian and Greek deities. Major gods included the Persian Ahuramazda , who was termed Zeus Stratios; the moon god Men Pharnacou; and Ma (interpreted as Cybele).

[ 11 ] Sun gods were particularly popular, with the royal house being identified with the Persian god Ahuramazda of the Achaemenid dynasty; both Apollo and Mithras were worshipped by the Kings. Indeed, the name used by the majority of the Pontic kings was Mithridates, which means "given by Mithras".

[ 12 ] Pontic culture represented a synthesis between Iranian, Anatolian and Greek elements, with the former two mostly associated with the interior parts, and the latter more so with the coastal region. By the time of Mithridates VI Eupator, Greek was the official language of the Kingdom, though Anatolian languages continued to be spoken in the interior.

[ 13 ] [ 1 ] History [ edit ] Ancient Pontic tombs on the mountains of Amasya Mithridatic dynasty of Cius [ edit ] The region of Pontus was originally part of the Persian satrapy of Cappadocia (Katpatuka).

[ 14 ] The Persian dynasty which was to found this kingdom had, during the 4th century BC, ruled the Greek city of Cius (or Kios) in Mysia , with its first known member being Mithridates of Cius.

[ 15 ] His son Ariobarzanes II became satrap of Phrygia . He became a strong ally of Athens and revolted against Artaxerxes , but was betrayed by his son Mithridates II of Cius .

[ 16 ] Mithridates II remained as ruler after Alexander's conquests and was a vassal to Antigonus I Monophthalmus , who briefly ruled Asia Minor after the Partition of Triparadisus . Mithridates was killed by Antigonus in 302 BC under suspicion that he was working with his enemy Cassander . Antigonus planned to kill Mithridates' son, also called Mithridates (later named Ktistes, 'founder') but Demetrius I warned him and he escaped to the east with six horsemen.

[ 17 ] Mithridates first went to the city of Cimiata in Paphlagonia and later to Amasya in Cappadocia. He ruled from 302 to 266 BC, fought against Seleucus I and, in 281 (or 280) BC, declared himself king ( basileus ) of a state in northern Cappadocia and eastern Paphlagonia. He further expanded his kingdom to the river Sangrius in the west. His son Ariobarzanes captured Amastris in 279, its first important Black sea port. Mithridates also allied with the newly arrived Galatians and defeated a force sent against him by Ptolemy I . Ptolemy had been expanding his territory in Asia Minor since the beginning of the First Syrian war against Antiochus in the mid-270s and was allied with Mithridates' enemy, Heraclea Pontica .

[ 18 ] Kingdom of Pontus [ edit ] Further information: List of kings of Pontus We know little of Ariobarzanes' short reign, except that when he died his son Mithridates II (c.

250—189) became king and was attacked by the Galatians. Mithridates II received aid from Heraclea Pontica , who was also at war with the Galatians at this time. Mithridates went on to support Antiochus Hierax against his brother Seleucus II Callinicus. Seleucus was defeated in Anatolia by Hierax, Mithridates, and the Galatians. Mithridates also attacked Sinope in 220 but failed to take the city. He married Seleucus II's sister and gave his daughter in marriage to Antiochus III, to obtain recognition for his new kingdom and create strong ties with the Seleucid Empire. The sources are silent on Pontus for the years following the death of Mithridates II, when his son Mithridates III ruled (c.

220–198/88).

[ 19 ] Bronze shield in the name of King Pharnakes: ΦΑΡΝΑΚΟΥ ΒΑΣΙΛΕΩΣ, Getty Villa (80.AC.60) Pharnaces I of Pontus was much more successful in his expansion of the kingdom at the expense of the Greek coastal cities. He joined in a war with Prusias I of Bithynia against Eumenes of Pergamon in 188 BC, but the two made peace in 183 after Bithynia suffered a series of reversals. He took Sinope in 182 BC and although the Rhodians complained to Rome about this, nothing was done. Pharnaces also took the coastal cities of Cotyora , Pharnacia , and Trapezus in the east, effectively gaining control of most of the northern Anatolian coastline. Despite Roman attempts to keep the peace, Pharnaces fought against Eumenes of Pergamon and Ariarathes of Cappadocia. While initially successful, it seems he was overmatched by 179 when he was forced to sign a treaty. He had to give up all lands he had obtained in Galatia , and Paphlagonia and the city of Tium, but he kept Sinope.

[ 20 ] Seeking to extend his influence to the north, Pharnaces allied with the cities in the Chersonesus and with other Black Sea cities such as Odessus on the Bulgarian coast. Pharnaces' brother, Mithridates IV Philopator Philadelphus adopted a peaceful, pro-Roman policy. He sent aid to the Roman ally Attalus II Philadelphus of Pergamon against Prusias II of Bithynia in 155.

[ 21 ] His successor, Mithridates V of Pontus Euergetes, remained a friend of Rome and in 149 BC sent ships and a small force of auxiliaries to aid Rome in the Third Punic War. He also sent troops for the war against Eumenes III (Aristonicus), who had usurped the Pergamene throne after the death of Attalus III . After Rome received the Kingdom of Pergamon in the will of Attalus III in the absence of an heir, they turned part of it into the province of Asia, while giving the rest to loyal allied kings. For his loyalty Mithridates was awarded the region of Phrygia Major. The kingdom of Cappadocia received Lycaonia . Because of this it seems reasonable to assume that Pontus had some degree of control over Galatia , since Phrygia does not border Pontus directly. It is possible that Mithridates inherited part of Paphlagonia after the death of its King, Pylaemenes. Mithridates V married his daughter Laodice to the king of Cappadocia, Ariarathes VI of Cappadocia , and he also went on to invade Cappadocia, though the details of this war are unknown. Hellenization continued under Mithridates V. He was the first king to widely recruit Greek mercenaries in the Aegean, he was honored at Delos, and he depicted himself as Apollo on his coins. Mithridates was assassinated at Sinope in 121/0, the details of which are unclear.

[ 22 ] Because both the sons of Mithridates V, Mithridates VI and Mithridates Chrestus , were still children, Pontus now came under the regency of his wife Laodice. She favored Chrestus, and Mithridates VI escaped the Pontic court. Legend would later say this was the time he traveled through Asia Minor, building his resistance to poisons and learning all of the languages of his subjects. He returned in 113 BC to depose his mother; she was thrown into prison, and he eventually had his brother killed.

[ 23 ] Mithridates VI Eupator [ edit ] Main article: Mithridates VI of Pontus Bust of Mithridates VI from the Louvre Mithridates VI Eupator, 'the Good Father', followed a decisive anti-Roman agenda, extolling Greek and Iranian culture against ever-expanding Roman influence. Rome had recently created the province of Asia in Anatolia, and it had also rescinded the region of Phrygia Major from Pontus during the reign of Laodice. Mithridates began his expansion by inheriting Lesser Armenia from King Antipater (precise date unknown, c.115–106) and by conquering the Kingdom of Colchis . Colchis was an important region in Black Sea trade – rich with gold, wax, hemp, and honey. The cities of the Tauric Chersonesus now appealed for his aid against the Scythians in the north. Mithridates sent 6,000 men under General Diophantus. After various campaigns in the north of the Crimea he controlled all of the Chersonesus. Mithridates also developed trade links with cities on the western Black Sea coast.

[ 24 ] At the time, Rome was fighting the Jugurthine and Cimbric wars. Mithridates and Nicomedes of Bithynia both invaded Paphlagonia and divided it amongst themselves. A Roman embassy was sent, but it accomplished nothing. Mithridates also took a part of Galatia that had previously been part of his father's kingdom and intervened in Cappadocia, where his sister Laodice was queen. In 116 the king of Cappadocia, Ariarathes VI, was murdered by the Cappadocian noble Gordius at the behest of Mithridates, and Laodice ruled as regent over the sons of Ariarathes until 102 BC. After Nicomedes III of Bithynia married Laodice, he tried to intervene in the region by sending troops; Mithridates swiftly invaded, placing his nephew Ariarathes VII of Cappadocia on the throne of Cappadocia. War soon broke out between the two, and Mithridates invaded with a large Pontic army, but Ariarathes VII was murdered in 101 BC before any battle was fought. Mithridates then installed his eight-year-old son, Ariarathes IX of Cappadocia as king, with Gordius as regent. In 97 Cappadocia rebelled, but the uprising was swiftly put down by Mithridates. Afterwards, Mithridates and Nicomedes III both sent embassies to Rome. The Roman Senate decreed that Mithridates had to withdraw from Cappadocia and Nicomedes from Paphlagonia. Mithridates obliged, and the Romans installed Ariobarzanes in Cappadocia. In 91/90 BC, while Rome was busy in the Social War in Italy, Mithridates encouraged his new ally and son-in-law, King Tigranes the Great of Armenia, to invade Cappadocia, which he did, and Ariobarzanes fled to Rome. Mithridates then deposed Nicomedes IV from Bithynia, placing Socrates Chrestus on the throne.

[ 25 ] The First Mithridatic War [ edit ] Main article: First Mithridatic War A Roman army under Manius Aquillius arrived in Asia Minor in 90 BC, prompting Mithridates and Tigranes to withdraw. Cappadocia and Bithynia were restored to their respective monarchs, but then faced large debts to Rome due to their bribes for the Roman senators, and Nicomedes IV was eventually convinced by Aquillius to attack Pontus in order to repay the debts. He plundered as far as Amastris , and returned with much loot. Mithridates invaded Cappadocia once again, and Rome declared war.

[ 26 ] [ pages needed ] In the summer of 89 BC, Mithridates invaded Bithynia and defeated Nicomedes and Aquillius in battle. He moved swiftly into Roman Asia and resistance crumbled; by 88 he had obtained the surrender of most of the newly created province. He was welcomed in many cities, where the residents chafed under Roman tax farming . In 88 Mithridates also ordered the massacre of at least 80,000 Romans and Italians in what became known as the ' Asiatic Vespers '. Many Greek cities in Asia Minor happily carried out the orders; this ensured that they could no longer return to an alliance with Rome. In the autumn of 88 Mithridates also placed Rhodes under siege, but he failed to take it.

[ 27 ] In Athens , anti-Roman elements were emboldened by the news and soon formed an alliance with Mithridates. A joint Pontic–Athenian naval expedition took Delos in 88 BC, and granted the city to Athens. Many Greek city-states now joined Mithridates, including Sparta , the Achaean League , and most of the Boeotian League except Thespiae . Finally, in 87 BC, Lucius Cornelius Sulla set out from Italy with five legions. He marched through Boeotia , which quickly surrendered, and began laying siege to Athens and the Piraeus (the Athenian port city, no longer connected by the Long Walls ). Athens fell in March 86 BC, and the city was sacked. After stiff resistance, Archelaus, the Pontic general in Piraeus, left by sea, and Sulla utterly destroyed the port city. Meanwhile, Mithridates had sent his son Arcathias with a large army via Thrace into Greece.

[ 28 ] Lucius Cornelius Sulla Sulla now headed north, seeking the fertile plains of Boeotia to supply his army. At the Battle of Chaeronea , Sulla inflicted severe casualties on Archelaus, who nevertheless retreated and continued to raid Greece with the Pontic fleet. Archelaus regrouped and attacked a second time at the Battle of Orchomenus in 85 BC but was once again defeated and suffered heavy losses. As a result of the losses and the unrest they stirred in Asia Minor, as well as the presence of the Roman army now campaigning in Bithynia, Mithridates was forced to accept a peace deal. Mithridates and Sulla met in 85 BC at Dardanus . Sulla decreed that Mithridates had to surrender Roman Asia and return Bithynia and Cappadocia to their former kings. He also had to pay 2,000 talents and provide ships. Mithridates would retain the rest of his holdings and become an ally of Rome.

[ 29 ] Second and Third Mithridatic wars [ edit ] Main articles: Second Mithridatic War and Third Mithridatic War The treaty agreed with Sulla was not to last. From 83 to 82 BC Mithridates fought against and defeated Licinius Murena , who had been left by Sulla to organize the province of Asia. The so-called Second Mithridatic war ended without any territorial gains by either side. The Romans now began securing the coastal region of Lycia and Pamphylia from pirates and established control over Pisidia and Lycaonia . When in 74 the consul Lucullus took over Cilicia , Mithridates faced Roman commanders on two fronts. The Cilician pirates had not been completely defeated, and Mithridates signed an alliance with them. He was also allied with the government of Quintus Sertorius in Spain and with his help reorganized some of his troops in the Roman legionary pattern with short stabbing swords.

The Third Mithridatic war broke out when Nicomedes IV of Bithynia died without heirs in 75 and left his kingdom to Rome. In 74 BC Rome mobilized its armies in Asia Minor, probably provoked by some move made by Mithridates, but our sources are not clear on this. In 73 Mithridates invaded Bithynia, and his fleet defeated the Romans off Chalcedon and laid siege to Cyzicus .

Lucullus marched from Phrygia with his five legions and forced Mithridates to retreat to Pontus.

[ 30 ] In 72 BC Lucullus invaded Pontus through Galatia and marched north following the river Halys to the north coast, he besieged Amisus , which withstood until 70 BC. In 71 he marched through the Iris and Lycus river valleys and established his base in Cabeira . Mithridates sent his cavalry to cut the Roman supply line to Cappadocia in the south, but they suffered heavy casualties. Mithridates, still unwilling to fight a decisive engagement, now began a retreat to Lesser Armenia , where he expected aid from his ally Tigranes the Great. Because of his now weakened cavalry, the retreat turned into an all-out rout, and most of the Pontic army was destroyed or captured. These events led Machares , the son of Mithridates and ruler of the Crimean Bosporus, to seek an alliance with Rome. Mithridates fled to Armenia.

[ 31 ] In the summer of 69 Lucullus invaded Armenian territory, marching with 12,000 men through Cappadocia into Sophene . His target was Tigranocerta , the new capital of Tigranes's empire. Tigranes retreated to gather his forces. Lucullus laid siege to the city, and Tigranes returned with his army, including large numbers of heavily armored cavalrymen, termed Cataphracts , vastly outnumbering Lucullus' force. Despite this, Lucullus led his men in a charge against the Armenian horses and won a great victory at the Battle of Tigranocerta . Tigranes fled north while Lucullus destroyed his new capital city and dismantled his holdings in the south by granting independence to Sophene and returning Syria to the Seleucid king Antiochus XIII Asiaticus . In 68 BC Lucullus invaded northern Armenia, ravaging the country and capturing Nisibis , but Tigranes avoided battle. Meanwhile, Mithridates invaded Pontus, and in 67 he defeated a large Roman force near Zela . Lucullus, now in command of tired and discontented troops, withdrew to Pontus, then to Galatia. He was replaced by two new consuls arriving from Italy with fresh legions, Marcius Rex and Acilius Glabrio . Mithridates now recovered Pontus while Tigranes invaded Cappadocia.

[ 32 ] In response to increasing pirate activity in the eastern Mediterranean, the senate granted Pompey extensive proconsular Imperium throughout the Mediterranean in 67 BC. Pompey eliminated the pirates, and in 66 he was assigned command in Asia Minor to deal with Pontus. Pompey organized his forces, close to 45,000 legionaries, including Lucullus' troops, and signed an alliance with the Parthians , who attacked and kept Tigranes busy in the east. Mithridates massed his army, some 30,000 men and 2,000–3,000 cavalry, in the heights of Dasteira in lesser Armenia. Pompey fought to encircle him with earthworks for six weeks, but Mithridates eventually retreated north. Pompey pursued and managed to catch his forces by surprise in the night, and the Pontic army suffered heavy casualties. After the battle, Pompey founded the city of Nicopolis. Mithridates fled to Colchis, and later to his son Machares in the Crimea in 65 BC. Pompey now headed east into Armenia, where Tigranes submitted to him, placing his royal diadem at his feet. Pompey took most of Tigranes' empire in the east but allowed him to remain as king of Armenia. Meanwhile, Mithridates was organizing a defense of the Crimea when his son Pharnaces led the army in revolt; Mithridates was forced to commit suicide or was assassinated.

[ 33 ] Roman province and client kingdoms [ edit ] Main article: Bithynia et Pontus Anatolia in the early 1st century AD with Pontus as a Roman client state The Roman client kingdom of Pontus, c.

AD 50 .

Most of the western half of Pontus and the Greek cities of the coast, including Sinope, were annexed by Rome directly as part of the Roman province of Bithynia et Pontus . The interior and eastern coast remained an independent client kingdom. The Bosporan Kingdom also remained independent under Pharnaces II of Pontus as an ally and friend of Rome. Colchis was also made into a client kingdom. Pharnaces II later made an attempt at reconquering Pontus. During the civil war of Caesar and Pompey, he invaded Asia Minor (48 BC), taking Colchis, lesser Armenia, Pontus, and Cappadocia and defeating a Roman army at Nicopolis. Caesar responded swiftly and defeated him at Zela , where he uttered the famous phrase ' Veni, vidi, vici '.

[ 34 ] Pontic kings continued to rule the client Kingdom of Pontus, Colchis, and Cilicia until Polemon II was forced to abdicate the Pontic throne by Nero in AD 62.

Coinage [ edit ] Main article: Coinage of the Kingdom of Pontus Although the Pontic kings claimed descent from the Persian royal house, they generally acted as Hellenistic kings and portrayed themselves as such in their coins, mimicking Alexander's royal stater .

[ 13 ] Military [ edit ] The army of the Pontic Kingdom had a varied ethnic composition, as it recruited its soldiers from all over the kingdom. The standing army included Armenians , Bastarnae , Bithynians , Cappadocians , Galatians , Heniochoi , Iazyges , Koralloi , Leucosyrians , Phrygians , Sarmatians , Scythians , Tauri , and Thracians , as well as soldiers from other areas around the Black Sea. The Greeks who served in the military were not part of the standing army, but rather fought as citizens of their respective cities.

[ 35 ] Like many Hellenistic armies , the army of Pontus adopted the Macedonian phalanx ; it fielded a corps of Chalkaspides ('bronze-shields'), for example against Sulla at the Battle of Chaeronea , [ 36 ] while at the same battle 15,000 phalangites were recruited from freed slaves .

[ 37 ] Pontus also fielded various cavalry units, including cataphracts .

[ 38 ] In addition to normal cavalry Pontus also fielded scythed chariots .

[ 39 ] Under Mithridates VI Pontus also fielded a corps of 120,000 troops armed "in the Roman fashion" and "drilled in the Roman phalanx formation".

[ 40 ] These units imitated Roman legions , although it is disputed to what degree they achieved this.

[ citation needed ] The navy was organized in a similar fashion as the army. While the kingdom itself provided the main contingent of ships, a small portion represented the Greek cities. The crewmen either came from the various tribes of the kingdom, or were of Greek origin.

[ 35 ] See also [ edit ] Bosporan Kingdom Ethnarchy of Comana References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e McGing 2004 .

^ a b McGing 1986 , p. 11.

^ Children of Achilles: The Greeks in Asia Minor Since the Days of Troy , by John Freely, p. 69–70 ^ Strabo of Amasia: A Greek Man of Letters in Augustan Rome, by Daniela Dueck, p. 3.

^ Bosworth, A. B.; Wheatley, P. V. (November 1998). "The origins of the Pontic house".

The Journal of Hellenic Studies .

118 : 155– 164.

doi : 10.2307/632236 .

ISSN 2041-4099 .

JSTOR 632236 .

S2CID 162855144 .

^ Strabo Geography 12.3 ^ Östenberg, Ida (December 2013).

"Veni Vidi Vici and Caesar's Triumph" .

Classical Quarterly .

63 (2): 819.

doi : 10.1017/S0009838813000281 .

ISSN 0009-8388 .

S2CID 170291549 .

^ Kantor, Georgy (2012), "Mithradatic wars", The Encyclopedia of Ancient History , Blackwell Publishing, doi : 10.1002/9781444338386.wbeah09172 , ISBN 9781444338386 ^ Children of Achilles: The Greeks in Asia Minor Since the Days of Troy, by John Freely, p. 69–70 ^ Crook, Lintott & Rawson, The Cambridge Ancient History. Volume IX. The Last Age of the Roman Republic, 146–43 B.C.

, p. 133–136.

^ Cambridge Ancient v. 9, p. 137.

^ David Ulansey, The Origins of the Mithraic Mysteries , p. 89.

^ a b McGing 1986 , p. 10-11.

^ Heckel 2020 , p. 122.

^ McGing 1986 , p. 10.

^ Xenophon "Cyropaedia", VIII 8.4 ^ Appian "the Mithridatic wars", II ^ McGing 1986 , p. 16-17.

^ McGing 1986 , p. 17-23.

^ Polybius "Histories", XXIV. 1, 5, 8, 9 XXV. 2 ^ Polybius, XXXIII.12 ^ McGing 1986 , p. 36-39.

^ Cambridge Ancient v. 9, p. 133.

^ Cambridge Ancient v. 9, p. 137–138.

^ Cambridge Ancient v. 9, 141–144.

^ Appian, II ^ Cambridge Ancient v. 9, 146–49.

^ Cambridge Ancient v. 9, 150–54.

^ Cambridge Ancient v. 9, 155–60.

^ Cambridge Ancient v. 9, 229–36.

^ Cambridge Ancient v. 9, 237–39.

^ Cambridge Ancient v. 9, 240–44.

^ Cambridge Ancient v. 9, 249–54.

^ John Hazel "Who's who in the Greek world", p. 179.

^ a b Stefanidou Vera, "Kingdom of Pontus", 2008, Encyclopaedia of the Hellenic World, Asia Minor ^ Plutarch, Life of Sulla, 16.7 ^ Plutarch, Life of Sulla, 18.5 ^ The Cambridge Companion to the Hellenistic World by Glenn R. Bugh, p. 272 ^ Plutarch, Life of Sulla, 15.1 ^ Plutarch, Life of Lucullus. 7.4 Sources [ edit ] Modern sources [ edit ] Crook, John; Lintott, Andrew; Rawson, Elizabeth, eds. (1992).

The Cambridge ancient history . Vol. 9 (2nd ed.). Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-85073-8 .

OCLC 121060 .

Hazel, John (2002).

Who's who in the Roman World . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-29162-0 .

Heckel, Waldemar (2020).

In the Path of Conquest Resistance to Alexander the Great . Oxford University Press.

McGing, Brian C. (1986).

The Foreign Policy of Mithridates VI Eupator, King of Pontus . Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-07591-7 .

McGing, Brian (2004).

"Pontus" .

Encyclopædia Iranica .

Ancient sources [ edit ] Polybius, the histories.

Appian, the foreign wars.

Memnon of Heraclea, history of Heraclea.

Strabo, Geographica.

Plutarch, Parallel lives . 'Demetrius'.

v t e Ancient kingdoms of Anatolia Bronze Age Ahhiyawa Arzawa Assuwa League Carchemish Hapalla Hatti Hayasa-Azzi Hittite Empire Hurrian States ( Isuwa , Kizzuwatna , Mitanni ) Kalašma Kaskia Kussara Lukka Luwia Miletus Mira Mysia Nairi Pala Pisidia / Sagalassos Purushanda Seha Shupria Urshu Urumu Wilusa / Troy Zalpuwa Iron Age Aeolia Caria Cimmerians Colchis Diauehi Doris Etiuni Ionia Lycia Lydia Mushki Neo-Hittites ( Atuna , Carchemish , Gurgum , Ḫilakku , Ḫiyawa , Kammanu , Kummuh , Tabal ) Phrygia Urartu Classical Age Antigonids Bithynia Cappadocia Cilicia Galatia Paphlagonia Pergamon Pontus Turkey portal v t e Achaemenid Empire History Family tree Timeline History of democracy Art Achaemenid Persian Lion Rhyton Oxus Treasure Achaemenid coinage Apadana hoard Danake Daric Architecture Persepolis Apadana Gate of All Nations Tachara Palace of Darius in Susa Tomb of Cyrus Persian column Naqsh-e Rostam Ka'ba-ye Zartosht Mausoleum at Halicarnassus Tombs at Xanthos Harpy Tomb Nereid Monument Tomb of Payava Culture Achaemenid music Old Persian cuneiform Old Persian Behistun Inscription Xerxes I's inscription at Van Ganjnameh Cyrus Cylinder Warfare Persian Revolt Battle of Hyrba Battle of the Persian Border Lydian-Persian Wars Battle of Pteria Battle of Thymbra Siege of Sardis (547 BC) Battle of Opis Fall of Babylon Conquest of the Indus Valley First conquest of Egypt Battle of Pelusium Scythian campaign of Darius I Greco-Persian Wars Ionian Revolt Siege of Naxos (499 BC) Battle of Lade Siege of Eretria Battle of Marathon Battle of Thermopylae Battle of Artemisium Destruction of Athens Battle of Salamis Battle of Plataea Battle of Mycale Babylonian revolts Wars of the Delian League Battle of the Eurymedon Peloponnesian War Battle of Cyzicus Battle of Cunaxa Corinthian War Battle of Cnidus Great Satraps' Revolt Second conquest of Egypt Wars of Alexander the Great Battle of the Granicus Siege of Miletus Siege of Halicarnassus Battle of Issus Siege of Tyre (332 BC) Siege of Gaza Battle of Gaugamela Battle of the Persian Gate Diplomacy Earth and water Peace of Callias Peace of Antalcidas Administration Capitals Pasargadae Ecbatana Babylon Susa Satrapies Armenia Districts of the Empire Persepolis Administrative Archives Royal Road Chapar Khaneh Angarium Angarum Dynasties Achaemenid Pharnacid Mithridatic Pontus Ariarathid Cappadocia Lygdamid Caria Orontid Armenia Seven Achaemenid clans Related 2,500-year celebration of the Persian Empire Xanthian Obelisk Cappadocian calendar v t e Hellenistic rulers Argeads Philip II Alexander III the Great Philip III Arrhidaeus Alexander IV Antipatrids Cassander Philip IV Alexander V Antipater II Antipater Etesias Sosthenes Antigonids Antigonus I Monophthalmus Demetrius I Poliorcetes Antigonus II Gonatas Demetrius II Aetolicus Antigonus III Doson Philip V Perseus Philip VI (pretender) Ptolemies Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy Keraunos Ptolemy II Philadelphus Ptolemy III Euergetes Ptolemy IV Philopator Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra (regent) Ptolemy VI Philometor Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Cleopatra II Philometor Soter Ptolemy VIII Physcon Cleopatra III Ptolemy IX Lathyros Ptolemy X Alexander Berenice III Ptolemy XI Alexander Ptolemy XII Auletes Cleopatra VI Tryphaena Berenice IV Epiphanea Ptolemy XIII Ptolemy XIV Cleopatra VII Philopator Ptolemy XV Caesarion Monarchs of Cyrene Magas Berenice II Demetrius the Fair Ptolemy VIII Physcon Ptolemy Apion Cleopatra Selene II Seleucids Seleucus I Nicator Antiochus I Soter Antiochus II Theos Seleucus II Callinicus Seleucus III Ceraunus Antiochus III the Great Seleucus IV Philopator Antiochus IV Epiphanes Antiochus V Eupator Demetrius I Soter Alexander I Balas Demetrius II Nicator Antiochus VI Dionysus Diodotus Tryphon Antiochus VII Sidetes Alexander II Zabinas Cleopatra Thea Seleucus V Philometor Antiochus VIII Grypus Antiochus IX Cyzicenus Seleucus VI Epiphanes Antiochus X Eusebes Antiochus XI Epiphanes Demetrius III Eucaerus Philip I Philadelphus Antiochus XII Dionysus Cleopatra Selene I Antiochus XIII Asiaticus Philip II Philoromaeus Lysimachids Lysimachus Ptolemy Epigonos Attalids Philetaerus Eumenes I Attalus I Eumenes II Attalus II Attalus III Eumenes III Greco-Bactrians Diodotus I Diodotus II Euthydemus I Demetrius I Euthydemus II Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Demetrius II Eucratides I Plato Eucratides II Heliocles I Indo-Greeks Demetrius I Antimachus I Pantaleon Agathocles Apollodotus I Demetrius II Antimachus II Menander I Zoilos I Agathokleia Lysias Strato I Antialcidas Heliokles II Polyxenos Demetrius III Philoxenus Diomedes Amyntas Epander Theophilos Peukolaos Thraso Nicias Menander II Artemidoros Hermaeus Archebius Telephos Apollodotus II Hippostratos Dionysios Zoilos II Apollophanes Strato II Strato III Monarchs of Bithynia Boteiras Bas Zipoetes I Nicomedes I Zipoetes II Etazeta (regent) Ziaelas Prusias I Prusias II Nicomedes II Nicomedes III Nicomedes IV Socrates Chrestus Monarchs of Pontus Mithridates I Ctistes Ariobarzanes Mithridates II Mithridates III Pharnaces I Mithridates IV Philopator Philadephos with Laodice Mithridates V Euergetes Mithridates VI Eupator Pharnaces II Darius Arsaces Polemon I Pythodorida Polemon II Monarchs of Commagene Ptolemaeus Sames II Mithridates I Antiochus I Mithridates II Antiochus II Mithridates III Antiochus III Antiochus IV Monarchs of Cappadocia Ariarathes I Ariarathes II Ariamnes II Ariarathes III Ariarathes IV Ariarathes V Orophernes Ariarathes VI Ariarathes VII Ariarathes VIII Ariarathes IX Ariobarzanes I Ariobarzanes II Ariobarzanes III Ariarathes X Archelaus Monarchs of the Cimmerian Bosporus Paerisades I Satyros II Prytanis Eumelos Spartokos III Hygiainon (regent) Paerisades II Spartokos IV Leukon II Spartokos V [ ru ] Kamasarye Paerisades III Paerisades IV Paerisades V Mithridates I Pharnaces Asander with Dynamis Mithridates II Asander with Dynamis Scribonius 's attempted rule with Dynamis Dynamis with Polemon Polemon Aspurgus Gepaepyris Mithridates III Cotys I Monarchs of Epirus Admetus Tharrhypas Alcetas I Neoptolemus I Arybbas Alexander I Aeacides Neoptolemus II Alcetas II Pyrrhus I Alexander II Olympias II (regent) Pyrrhus II Ptolemy Pyrrhus III Deidamia Hellenistic rulers were preceded by Hellenistic satraps in most of their territories.

Authority control databases : National Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐8qj7m
Cached time: 20250817045011
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.850 seconds
Real time usage: 1.056 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8006/1000000
Revision size: 33962/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 171949/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15413/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 82314/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.501/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 29071613/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  862.219      1 -total
 26.11%  225.115      1 Template:Infobox_Former_Country
 17.83%  153.739      3 Template:Navbox
 11.47%   98.869      1 Template:Reflist
  9.92%   85.555      1 Template:Langx
  8.91%   76.803      1 Template:Ancient_kingdoms_in_Anatolia
  8.67%   74.783      2 Template:Cite_journal
  7.66%   66.014      1 Template:Achaemenid_Empire
  7.17%   61.833      1 Template:ISO_3166_code
  6.65%   57.299      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:8159901:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045011 and revision id 1304561434. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kingdom_of_Pontus&oldid=1304561434 " Categories : Kingdom of Pontus History of the Black Sea States and territories established in the 3rd century BC 281 BC 280s BC establishments 62 disestablishments Achaemenid Empire States and territories disestablished in the 1st century History of Trabzon Province History of Rize Province History of Giresun Province History of Amasya Province History of Tokat Province Dynasties in Persia and Iran Roman client kingdoms Zoroastrianism Ancient history of Ukraine States in Hellenistic Anatolia History of Odesa Oblast History of Mykolaiv Oblast History of Kherson Oblast Former empires in Asia Former countries in Europe Former empires Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2019 All articles needing additional references Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021 This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 19:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kingdom of Pontus 43 languages Add topic

