Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 History 3 Recent history and current use 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Leyton Marsh Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 51°34′1.48″N 0°2′43.61″W ﻿ / ﻿ 51.5670778°N 0.0454472°W ﻿ / 51.5670778; -0.0454472 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Leyton Marshes ) Open space in Leyton, London Horse grazing in open land near Marsh Lane Leyton Marsh is an open space in the Lower Lea Valley , located in Leyton in the London Borough of Waltham Forest .

Geography [ edit ] Playgrounds near the Seymour Road entrance The marsh is bordered by the Walthamstow Marshes to the north, and by Coppermill Fields , the Lee Navigation and the River Lee Flood Relief Channel . Much of the original area has been taken over for other uses. The remaining open land is split into two distinct areas: Leyton Marsh, to the north of Lea Bridge Road , adjoining the Walthamstow Marsh Nature Reserve. The part of the marsh north east of the Lea Bridge Road contains a large field (Porter's Field Meadow), which is used for a variety of events, including an annual schools countryside teaching event.

[ 1 ] The area is also used by local people for sporting events, and is part of various cycling and running routes that take in Leyton Marsh as well as other local parks and open spaces.

The Marsh Lane area of Seymour Road Playing Field and Marsh Lane Playing Field, north and south of Marsh Lane respectively. Since August 2012 its official name has been Leyton Jubilee Park.

[ 2 ] This area is now cut off from the rest of the marsh, connected only by a long pedestrian bridge over the railway. Access from Lea Bridge Road is at the end of Seymour Road. The Dagenham Brook forms the eastern extent of the historical Leyton Marshes.

Other areas which were historically part of Leyton Marshes are now put to other uses: Lee Valley Ice Centre .

There are proposals to redevelop the Ice Centre, improving facilities but at the expense of public open space.

[ 3 ] Lea Valley Riding Centre WaterWorks Nature Reserve Lammas Lane, despite historic associations, is buried in an industrial estate alongside the railway.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] Plan of Lammas lands, Leyton Urban District Council Act 1904 [ 5 ] Leyton Marsh was originally more extensive open marsh, historically drained by means of open drainage ditches. The marsh is former Lammas Land: the land was divided into strips, which were cultivated to grow hay for winter feed. Parishioners had ancient rights to graze cattle and horses between 1 August (after the hay harvest) and 25 March.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] In the 19th century the marsh was polluted by sewage from the extensive new residential developments in Walthamstow and Leyton .

By the 19th century the character of the marsh changed. Many acres were bought and built on by railway, water and gas companies. In the early 1890s the East London Waterworks Company erected fences, which angered local people. On Lammas Day in 1892, a large demonstration took place on the marsh and the fences were taken down. The locals set up the Leyton Lammas Lands Defence Committee and successfully challenged the water company in court. This led to the Leyton Urban District Council Act 1904, which provided that the marsh would be kept as an open space, in return for local people giving up Lammas rights.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The fields at Marsh Lane did not come under this agreement and remain as Lammas land.

[ 8 ] During World War II , a V-2 rocket landed and exploded on the marsh; the crater is still visible seven decades later [ 9 ] (Despite the account given in the reference, the V2 concerned fell a little to the north on the adjacent Walthamstow Marsh: see Bomb Crater Pond (Walthamstow) ). After the war, the marsh was used to dump rubble from The Blitz .

In 1971, the Lee Valley Regional Park Authority acquired much of the land by compulsory purchase. It acquired the Essex Filter Beds in 1986 (now the WaterWorks Nature Reserve ) and the Middlesex Filter Beds in 1988 (now the Middlesex Filter Beds Nature Reserve ). Both of these are on the south side of Lea Bridge Road and were formerly part of the marsh.

Recent history and current use [ edit ] Part of Leyton Marsh, restored after use for the 2012 Olympics The New Lammas Lands Defence Committee, a revival of the earlier organisation, is currently active in promoting, and on occasion defending, the public use of the marsh. Events include organised walks, with an annual highlight on 13 March: beating the bounds , an ancient ritual defining the boundaries of the land where grazing rights were enjoyed.

Parts of Leyton Marshes were used for the 2012 London Olympic and Paralympic Games, despite some local opposition. A temporary basketball training venue was built on Porter's Field Meadow for the games, which was opposed by members of Save Lea Marshes.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] The venue was dismantled after the Paralympic Games, the Olympic Delivery Authority being required to return the open space to its original state. In addition, on the request of the local user group, the Lee Valley Regional Park Authority committed to spending £65,000 on improving Leyton Marsh, including pathways and seating, as well as introducing habitats to attract existing and new species of wildlife into the area.

References [ edit ] ^ "Countryside Live - Lea Valley" . Archived from the original on 2 August 2011 . Retrieved 24 July 2011 .

^ Waltham Forest pamphlet on Leyton Jubilee Park ^ Newspaper article on progress of the proposal https://www.hackneycitizen.co.uk/2020/10/09/campaigners-warn-environmental-impact-new-lea-valley-ice-centre-approved/ ^ Google map ^ a b section of Leyton Urban District Council Act 1904 ^ a b British History online (fn.194 & fn.55) Retrieved 12 December 2007 ^ New Lammas Lands Defence Committee Retrieved 12 December 2007 ^ Lammas lands Retrieved 18 March 2008 ^ "London V2 Rocket Sites...Mapped" . 12 January 2009.

^ "London 2012: Occupy protesters halt Leyton Marsh work" .

BBC News . 28 March 2012 . Retrieved 30 April 2013 .

^ Parkinson, Jason N; Jess Hurd (21 December 2012).

"Save Leyton Marsh protester threatened with £335,000 eviction costs - video" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 30 April 2013 .

^ Leyeon Marsh campaign External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Leyton Marshes .

New Lammas Lands Defence Committee Maps of the Marshes 1861 map Lea Valley Park v t e Parks and open spaces in London Royal parks Bushy Green Greenwich Hyde Kensington Regent's Richmond St James's Large urban parks Alexandra Arnos Barking Barra Hall Battersea Beckenham Place Park Blackheath Brockwell Burgess Charlton Clissold Crystal Palace Dulwich Enfield Town Finsbury Forster Memorial Hampstead Heath Hanworth Holland Mayesbrook Mountsfield Old Deer Parsloes Primrose Hill Pymmes Queen's Park Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park Ravenscourt Ruskin Southwark Valentines Victoria Wandsworth Wanstead Waterlow Park West Ham Wimbledon Country parks Bayhurst Wood Bedfont Lakes Belhus Woods Eastbrookend Fairlop Waters Foots Cray Fryent Hainault Forest Havering High Elms Hornchurch Lee Valley South Norwood Stanmore Stockley Trent Commons Barnes Blackheath Bostall Heath Clapham Ealing East Sheen Eel Brook Eltham Hackney Marshes Hainault Forest Ham Hampstead Heath Hayes Keston Mitcham Monken Hadley Peckham Rye Plumstead Stanmore Streatham Sutton Tooting Tylers Wandsworth Wimbledon and Putney Winn's Woolwich Wormwood Scrubs Village greens Camberwell Crooked Billet Islington Kew Newington Parsons Richmond Shepherd's Bush Turnham Twickenham Marshes and wetlands Crayford Erith Hackney Hornchurch Ickenham Ingrebourne Leyton Rainham, Wennington, and Aveley Tottenham Walthamstow Woodberry Wetlands WWT London Wetland Centre Woodland Bostall Braeburn Coldfall Copse Dulwich Epping Forest Grangewood Park Highgate Lesnes Abbey Mad Bess Old Park Oxleas Park Petts Queen's Repository Woods Russia Dock Sydenham Hill House gardens Avenue House Belair Park Boston Manor Park Broomfield House Cannizaro Park Chiswick House Danson Park Grovelands Park Grove Park Gunnersbury Park Hall Place Hampton Court Park Hillingdon Court Kenwood House Lamorbey Park Langtons Manor House Gardens Marble Hill Park Morden Hall Park Morden Park Osterley Park Syon House Valence House Museum Walpole Park Entry-fee charging Kew Gardens London Wetland Centre Community gardens Phoenix Garden v t e Parks and open spaces by London borough Barking and Dagenham Barnet Bexley Brent Bromley Camden Croydon Ealing Enfield Greenwich Hackney Hammersmith and Fulham Haringey Harrow Havering Hillingdon Hounslow Islington Kensington and Chelsea Kingston upon Thames Lambeth Lewisham Merton Newham Redbridge Richmond upon Thames Southwark Sutton Tower Hamlets Waltham Forest Wandsworth City of Westminster 51°34′1.48″N 0°2′43.61″W ﻿ / ﻿ 51.5670778°N 0.0454472°W ﻿ / 51.5670778; -0.0454472 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Leyton_Marsh&oldid=1278791180 " Categories : Parks and open spaces in the London Borough of Waltham Forest Marshland in London Lee Valley Park Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2015 Use British English from June 2015 Commons category link is on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 March 2025, at 16:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Leyton Marsh Add languages Add topic

