Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Current senior fellows 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard Society of Fellows 3 languages Español Français 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group of scholars selected at the beginnings of their careers by Harvard University The Society of Fellows is a group of scholars selected at the beginnings of their careers by Harvard University for their potential to advance academic wisdom, upon whom are bestowed distinctive opportunities to foster their individual and intellectual growth. Junior fellows are appointed by senior fellows based upon previous academic accomplishments and receive generous financial support for three years while they conduct independent research at Harvard University in any discipline, without being required to meet formal degree requirements or to be graded in any way. The only stipulation is that they maintain primary residence in Cambridge, Massachusetts , for the duration of their fellowship. Membership in the society is for life.

[ 1 ] The society has contributed numerous scholars to the Harvard faculty and thus significantly influenced the tenor of discourse at the university. Among its best-known members are philosopher W. V. O. Quine , Jf '36; behaviorist B. F. Skinner , Jf '36; double Nobel laureate John Bardeen , Jf '38; economist Paul Samuelson , Jf '40; historian Arthur M. Schlesinger, Jr.

, Jf '43; presidential advisor McGeorge Bundy , Jf '48; historian and philosopher of science Thomas Kuhn , Jf '51; linguist and activist Noam Chomsky , Jf '55; biologist E. O. Wilson , Jf '56; cognitive scientist Marvin Minsky , Jf '57; former dean of the Harvard faculty, economist Henry Rosovsky , Jf '57; economist and whistleblower Daniel Ellsberg , Jf '59; philosopher Saul Kripke , Jf '66; ethnographer and photographer Bruce Jackson , Jf '67; Fields Medal -winning theoretical physicist Ed Witten , Jf '81; and writer, critic, and editor Leon Wieseltier , Jf '82.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] You have been selected as a member of this society for your personal prospect of serious achievement in your chosen field, and your promise of notable contribution to knowledge and thought. That promise you must redeem with your whole intellectual and moral force.

You will practice the virtues, and avoid the snares, of the scholar. You will be courteous to your elders who have explored to the point from which you may advance; and helpful to your juniors who will progress farther by reason of your labors. Your aim will be knowledge and wisdom, not the reflected glamour of fame. You will not accept credit that is due to another, or harbor jealousy of an explorer who is more fortunate.

You will seek not a near but a distant objective, and you will not be satisfied with what you may have done. All that you may achieve or discover you will regard as a fragment of a larger pattern of the truth which from the separate approaches every true scholar is striving to descry.

To these things, in joining the Society of Fellows, you dedicate yourself.

—The Society's "Declaration of Principles" [ 2 ] Beginning in 1925, Harvard scholars Henry Osborn Taylor , Alfred North Whitehead and Lawrence Joseph Henderson met several times to discuss their frustration with the conditions of graduate study at the university. They believed that in order to produce exceptional research, the most able men required freedom from financial worries, fewer formal requirements, and the liberty to choose whatever object of study attracted them.

[ 3 ] They soon found an ally in then-Harvard-president Abbott Lawrence Lowell who appointed a committee in 1926, with Henderson as chairman, to study the nature of an institution that might improve the quality of graduate education.

[ 4 ] The committee recommended the establishment of a Society of Fellows at Harvard, modeled particularly on the Prize Fellowship at Trinity College, Cambridge , [ 3 ] and partly on those at Fondation Dosne-Thiers in Paris and All Souls' College, Oxford , with the hope that such a society would produce not only "isolated geniuses, but men who will do the work of the world".

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] After years of trying to attract outside donations, Lowell funded the Society himself – his last major institutional act before his resignation in November 1932.

[ 3 ] "There being no visible source of necessary funds," he later wrote, "I gave it myself, in a kind of desperation, although it took nearly all I had." [ 7 ] Though it was an open secret that Lowell was the source of the anonymous donation, this was never acknowledged in his presence. After Lowell's death in 1943, the donation was officially made public; it is known as the Anna Parker Lowell Fund in memory of Lowell's wife.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] The society was officially inaugurated as an alternative to the Ph.D. system with the beginning of the 1933–34 academic year, granting fellows freedom to pursue lines of inquiry that transcended traditional academic disciplinary boundaries. Because of the core belief in the importance of informal discussions between scholars in different academic fields, both senior and junior fellows have met for dinner every Monday night during term-time.

[ 8 ] They are frequently joined by visiting scholars and Fellows are encouraged to bring guests.

[ 9 ] Originally headquartered in a two-room suite at Eliot House , one of the university's twelve residential colleges, the society was closed to women until 1972, when Martha Nussbaum was selected as the first female junior fellow.

[ 10 ] Current senior fellows [ edit ] These are the Society's current senior fellows, [ 11 ] who elect the incoming junior fellows: Name Department Years served Lawrence Bacow Economics 2018 – present Alan Garber Medicine, economics 2013 – present Claudine Gay Government 2018 – present Noah Feldman Law 2010 – present Peter Galison History of science 1996 – present Walter Gilbert Biology 1978 – present Jerry Green Economics 2000 – present Bertrand Halperin Physics 2004 – present Joseph Koerner History of Art 2008 – present Barry Mazur Mathematics 2002 – present Gregory Nagy Classics, comparative literature 1999 – present Naomi Pierce Biology 1997 – present Elaine Scarry English 1994 – present Amartya Sen Economics 1990–1998, 2004 – present Andrew Strominger Physics 2000 – present Maria Tatar Germanic Languages & literatures 2010 – present William Todd Slavic Languages & literatures 2002 – present Nur Yalman Anthropology 1993 – present See also [ edit ] List of Harvard junior fellows List of Black Harvard junior fellows References [ edit ] ^ "About the Society of Fellows" .

sites.fas.harvard.edu . Archived from the original on 2020-04-11 . Retrieved 2018-11-20 .

^ a b Tenner, Edward.

"Environment for Genius? Harvard University's Society of Fellows" .

Harvard Magazine , November/December, 1998.

^ a b c Homans, George Caspar (1984).

Coming to My Senses: The Autobiography of a Sociologist . New Brunswick & London: Transaction Publishers. p. 119.

ISBN 9781412819879 .

^ Bloom, Samuel William; Bloom, Samuel W. (2002).

The Word as Scalpel: A History of Medical Sociology . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 299.

ISBN 9780195149296 .

^ Henderson, Lawrence Joseph (1970). Barber, Bernard (ed.).

L. J. Henderson on the Social System: Selected Writings . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. p. 7.

ISBN 978-0226326894 .

^ HOMANS, George; BAILEY, ORVILLE (January 1949).

"THE SOCIETY OF FELLOWS AT HARVARD UNIVERSITY" .

American Scientist .

37 (1): 91– 106 . Retrieved 24 November 2022 .

^ a b Brinton, Crane, ed. (1959).

The Society of Fellows . Harvard University Press. p. 21.

^ a b "Harvard University Society of Fellows" .

Harvard University . Retrieved 20 November 2018 .

^ Homans, George C.; Bailey, Orville T. (1949). "The Society of Fellows at Harvard University".

American Scientist .

37 (1): 91– 106.

JSTOR 29773658 .

^ Nussbaum, Martha C.

Cultivating Humanity: A Classical Defense of Reform in Liberal Education.

Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press, 1997. pp. 6–7.

^ "Current Senior Fellows" .

socfell.fas.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2020-05-14 .

External links [ edit ] Official website About the Society v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_Society_of_Fellows&oldid=1303009646 " Categories : Harvard University Learned societies of the United States 1933 establishments in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 16:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard Society of Fellows 3 languages Add topic

