Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Rasas in the performing arts 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Natyashastra 2.2 Kashmiri aestheticians 2.3 Inclusion of bhakti 2.4 Attention to rasas 3 The Navarasas Toggle The Navarasas subsection 3.1 Śāntaṃ rasa 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Works cited 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Indian aesthetics 1 language Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "Navarasa" redirects here. For other uses, see Navarasa (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Indian aesthetics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Indian art evolved with an emphasis on inducing special spiritual or philosophical states in the audience, or with representing them symbolically.

Rasas in the performing arts [ edit ] Main article: Rasa (aesthetics) Raudram rasa of the destructive fury of goddess Durga in Bharatanatyam The theory of rasas still forms the aesthetic underpinning of all Indian classical dance and theatre, such as Bharatanatyam , kathak , Kuchipudi , Odissi , Manipuri , Kudiyattam , Kathakali and others. Expressing rasa in classical Indian dance form is referred to as rasa-abhinaya . The Nātyasāstra carefully delineates the bhavas used to create each rasa .

The expressions used in Kudiyattam or Kathakali are extremely exaggerated theatrical expressions. The opposite of this interpretation is Balasaraswathi 's school of subtle and understated abhinaya of the devadasis. There were serious public debates when Balasaraswathi condemned Rukmini Devi's puritanistic interpretations and applications of Sringara rasa. The abhinaya of the Melattur style of abhinaya remains extremely rich in variations of the emotions, while the Pandanallur style expressions are more limited in scope.

History [ edit ] Part of a series on Hinduism Hindus Mythology Origins Historical History Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic religion Dravidian folk religion Śramaṇa Tribal religions in India Traditional Itihasa-Purana Epic-Puranic royal genealogies Epic-Puranic chronology Sampradaya (traditions) Major Sampradaya (traditions) Vaishnavism Pancharatra Shaivism Kapalika Pashupata Pratyabhijña Shaktism Smartism Other Sampradaya (traditions) Deities Absolute Reality / Unifying Force Brahman Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Other major Devas / Devis Vedic Deities: Tridasha Adityas Rudras Vasus Ashvins Mahadevi Other Vedic Deities Post-Vedic: Avatar Dashavatara Durga Navadurga Mahavidya Kartikeya Ganesha Hanuman Radha Shakti Sita Devatas Vishvakarma Kubera Concepts Worldview Cosmology Mythology Ontology Tattvas Subtle elements Panchikarana Gross elements Guṇas Purusha Prakṛti Supreme reality Brahman Nirguna Saguna Om Saccidānanda God Ishvara Devas / Devi Devatas God in Hinduism God and gender Puruṣārtha (meaning of life) Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Āśrama (stages of life) Brahmacharya Gṛhastha Vānaprastha Sannyasa Three paths to liberation Bhakti yoga Jnana yoga Karma yoga Liberation Mokṣa-related topics: Paramātman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Mind Ātman (self) Anātman (non-self) Sūkṣma śarīra (subtle body) Antaḥkaraṇa (mental organs) Prajña (wisdom) Ānanda (happiness) Viveka (discernment) Vairagya (dispassion) Sama (equanimity) Dama (temperance) Uparati (self-settledness) Titiksha (forbearance) Shraddha (faith) Samadhana (concentration) Arishadvargas (six enemies) Ahamkara (attachment) Ethics Niti śastra Yamas Niyama Ahimsa Achourya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Damah Dayā Akrodha Arjava Santosha Tapas Svādhyāya Shaucha Mitahara Dāna Sources of dharma Epistemology Pratyakṣa (perception) Anumāṇa (inference) Upamāṇa (comparison, analogy) Arthāpatti (postulation, presumption) Anupalabdi (non-perception, negation) Śabda (word, testimony) Practices Worship , sacrifice, and charity Puja Ārtī Prarthana Śrauta Temple Murti Bhakti Japa Bhajana Kīrtana Yajna Homa Tarpana Vrata Prāyaścitta Tirtha Yatra Tirthadana Matha Nritta-Nritya Dāna Sevā Yoga Exorcism Meditation Tapas Dhyana Samādhāna Nididhyāsana Yoga Sadhu Yogi Yogini Asana Sādhanā Hatha yoga Jnana yoga Bhakti yoga Karma yoga Rāja yoga Kundalini yoga Arts Bharatanatyam Kathak Kathakali Kuchipudi Manipuri Mohiniyattam Odissi Sattriya Bhagavata Mela Yakshagana Dandiya Raas Carnatic music Pandav Lila Kalaripayattu Silambam Adimurai Rites of passage Garbhadhana Pumsavana Pumsavana Simantonayana Simantonnayana Jatakarma Nāmakaraṇa Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyāraṃbhaṃ Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyesti Festivals Diwali Holi Maha Shivaratri Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami-Dussehra Raksha Bandhan Ganesh Chaturthi Vasant Panchami Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Makar Sankranti Kumbh Mela Pongal Ugadi Vaisakhi Bihu Puthandu Vishu Ratha Yatra Philosophical schools Six Astika schools Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Advaita Dvaita Vishishtadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Shuddhadvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Akshar Purushottam Darshan Other schools Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Charvaka Gurus, Rishi, philosophers Ancient Saptarshi Vashistha Kashyapa Atri Jamadagni Gotama Vishvamitra Bharadwaja Agastya Angiras Aruni Ashtavakra Jaimini Kanada Kapila Patanjali Pāṇini Prashastapada Raikva Satyakama Jabala Valmiki Vyasa Yajnavalkya Medieval Abhinavagupta Adi Shankara Akka Mahadevi Allama Prabhu Alvars Basava Chaitanya Ramdas Kathiababa Chakradhara Chāngadeva Dadu Dayal Eknath Gangesha Upadhyaya Gaudapada Gorakshanatha Haridasa Thakur Harivansh Jagannatha Dasa Jayanta Bhatta Jayatīrtha Jiva Goswami Jñāneśvar Kabir Kanaka Dasa Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Madhusūdana Madhva Matsyendranatha Morya Gosavi Mukundarāja Namadeva Narahari Tirtha Narasimha Saraswati Nayanars Nimbarkacharya Srinivasacharya Prabhākara Purandara Dasa Raghavendra Swami Raghunatha Siromani Raghuttama Tirtha Ram Charan Ramananda Ramanuja Ramprasad Sen Ravidas Rupa Goswami Samarth Ramdas Sankardev Satyanatha Tirtha Siddheshwar Sripada Srivallabha Sripadaraja Surdas Swaminarayan Śyāma Śastri Tukaram Tulsidas Tyagaraja Vācaspati Miśra Vadiraja Tirtha Vallabha Valluvar Vedanta Desika Vidyaranya Vyasaraja Modern Aurobindo Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Bhaktivinoda Thakur Chandrashekarendra Saraswati Chinmayananda Dayananda Saraswati Jaggi Vasudev Krishnananda Saraswati Mahavatar Babaji Mahesh Yogi Narayana Guru Nigamananda Nisargadatta Maharaj Prabhupada Radhakrishnan R. D. Ranade Ramakrishna Rama Tirtha Ramana Maharshi Ravi Shankar Ramdas Samarth Sathya Sai Baba Shirdi Sai Baba Shraddhanand Satyadhyana Tirtha Siddharameshwar Maharaj Sivananda Trailanga U. G. Krishnamurti Upasni Maharaj Vethathiri Maharishi Vivekananda Yogananda Texts Sources and classification of scripture Śruti Smṛti Ācāra Ātmatuṣṭi Scriptures Timeline of Hindu texts Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Upanishads Principal Upanishads Rigveda: Aitareya Kaushitaki Yajurveda: Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Shvetashvatara Maitri Samaveda: Chandogya Kena Atharvaveda: Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Vedangas Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama s (Hinduism) Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Vishnu Purana Bhagavata Purana Devi Bhagavata Purana Naradiya Purana Vāmana Purana Matsya Purana Garuda Purana Brahma Purana Brahmanda Purana Brahma Vaivarta Purana Bhavishya Purana Padma Purana Agni Purana Shiva Purana Linga Purana Kūrma Purana Skanda Purana Varaha Purana Markandeya Purana Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Gandharvaveda Sthapatyaveda Shastras , sutras , and samhitas Dharma Shastra Artha Śastra Shilpa Shastras Kama Sutra Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Charaka Samhita Sushruta Samhita Natya Shastra Panchatantra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Ramcharitmanas Yoga Vasistha Swara yoga Panchadasi Stotras , stutis and Bhashya Kanakadhara Stotra Shiva Stuti Vayu Stuti Tamil literature Tirumurai Naalayira  Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Tiruppukal Kural Kamba Ramayanam/Ramavataram Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Other texts Hindu culture & society Society Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Kayastha Vaishya Shudra Dalit Jāti Gotra Dvija Dasa Hindu art Hindu art Hindu iconography Shilpa Shastras Rasa (aesthetics) Indian aesthetics Yantra Hindu architecture Hindu architecture Hindu temple architecture Vastu shastra Talamana Hindu music Hindu music Shruti (music) Svara Alankāra Tala (music) Raga Rasa (aesthetics) Sangita Vadya Natya Shastra Food & diet customs Ahimsa Diet in Hinduism Sattvic diet Mitahara Jhatka Vrata Time keeping practices Hindu units of time Hindu calendar Panchangam Vikram Samvat Shaka era Hindu pilgrimage Pilgrimage sites Other society-related topics Discrimination Persecution Nationalism Hindutva Organisations Reform movements Other topics Hinduism by country Greater India Balinese Hinduism Caribbean Shaktism Template:Hindu scriptures and texts Hinduism & other religions Hinduism and Jainism / and Buddhism / and Sikhism / and Judaism / and Christianity / and Islam Other related links (templates) Hindu scriptures & texts Hindu philosphy Sampradayas (traditions) Shaivism Vaishnavism Shaktism Glossary Outline Hinduism portal v t e Natyashastra [ edit ] "A Yakshagana artist expressing emotions on stage. Vaachikabhinaya is an important part of Yakshagana" Rasa theory blossoms beginning with the Sanskrit text Nātyashāstra ( nātya meaning "drama" and shāstra meaning "science of"), a work attributed to Bharata Muni where the Gods declare that drama is the 'Fifth Veda' because it is suitable for the degenerate age as the best form of religious instruction. The Nātyashāstra presents the aesthetic concepts of rasas and their associated bhāvas in chapters six and seven respectively, which appear to be independent of the work as a whole.  Eight rasas and associated bhāvas are named and their enjoyment is likened to savoring a meal: rasa is the enjoyment of flavors that arise from the proper preparation of ingredients and the quality of ingredients.

Kashmiri aestheticians [ edit ] The theory of the rasas develops significantly with the Kashmiri aesthetician Ãnandavardhana's classic on poetics, the Dhvanyāloka which introduces the ninth rasa, shānta-rasa as a specifically religious feeling of peace ( śānta ) which arises from its bhāva, weariness of the pleasures of the world.

[ citation needed ] The primary purpose of this text is to refine the literary concept dhvani or poetic suggestion, by arguing for the existence of rasa-dhvani , primarily in forms of Sanskrit including a word, sentence or whole work "suggests" a real-world emotional state or bhāva, but thanks to aesthetic distance , the sensitive spectator relishes the rasa, the aesthetic flavor of tragedy, heroism or romance.

The 9th - 10th century master of the religious system known as "the nondual Shaivism of Kashmir" (or Kashmir Shaivism ) and aesthetician, Abhinavagupta brought rasa theory to its pinnacle in his separate commentaries on the Dhvanyāloka, the Dhvanyāloka-locana (translated by Ingalls, Masson and Patwardhan, 1992) and the Abhinavabharati, his commentary on the Nātyashāstra , portions of which are translated by Gnoli and Masson and Patwardhan.  Abhinavagupta offers for the first time a technical definition of rasa which is the universal bliss of the Self or Atman colored by the emotional tone of a drama.

Inclusion of bhakti [ edit ] In the literary compositions, the emotion of bhakti as a feeling of adoration towards God was long considered only a minor feeling fit only for stotras, but not capable of being developed into a separate rasa as the sole theme of a whole poem or drama. In the tenth century, it was still struggling, and Abhinavagupta mentions bhakti in his commentary on the Natya Shastra , as an important accessory sentiment of the shanta rasa, which he strove with great effort to establish. However, just as shanta slowly attained a state of primacy that it was considered the rasa of sasas, bhakti also soon began to loom large and despite the lukewarmness of the great run of alankarikas, had the service of some distinguished advocates, including Tyagaraja . It is the Bhagavata that gave the great impetus to the study of bhakti from an increasingly aesthetic point of view.

[ citation needed ] Attention to rasas [ edit ] Poets like Kālidāsa were attentive to rasa, which blossomed into a fully developed aesthetic system.  Even in contemporary India the term rasa denoting "flavor" or "essence" is used colloquially to describe the aesthetic experiences in films.

[ citation needed ] The Navarasas [ edit ] Expression of Sringāra (Romance) in Bharatanatyam Raudram rasa of the destructive fury of goddess Durga in Bharatanatyam Bharata Muni enunciated the eight rasas in the Nātyasāstra , an ancient Sanskrit text of dramatic theory and other performance arts, written between 200 BC and 200 AD.

[ 1 ] In the Indian performing arts, a rasa is a sentiment or emotion evoked in each member of the audience by the art. The Natya Shastra mentions six rasa in one section, but in the dedicated section on rasa it states and discusses eight primary rasa .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Each rasa, according to Nātyasāstra, has a presiding deity and a specific colour. There are 4 pairs of rasas. For instance, Hāsya arises out of Sringara . The Aura of a frightened person is black, and the aura of an angry person is red.

Bharata Muni established the following: [ 4 ] Śṛṅgāraḥ (शृङ्गारः):  Romance, Love, attractiveness. Presiding deity: Vishnu . Colour: light green Hāsyaṃ (हास्यं):  Laughter, mirth, comedy. Presiding deity: Shiva . Colour: white Raudraṃ (रौद्रं): Fury. Presiding deity: Shiva . Colour: red Kāruṇyaṃ (कारुण्यं): Compassion, mercy. Presiding deity: Yama . Colour: grey Bībhatsam (बीभत्सं): Disgust, aversion. Presiding deity: Shiva . Colour: blue Bhayānakaṃ (भयानकं): Horror, terror. Presiding deity: Yama . Colour: black Vīraṃ (वीरं): Heroism. Presiding deity: Indra . Colour: saffron Adbhutaṃ (अद्भुतं): Wonder, amazement. Presiding deity: Brahma . Colour: yellow [ 5 ] Śāntaṃ rasa [ edit ] A ninth rasa was added by later authors. This addition had to undergo a good deal of struggle between the sixth and the tenth centuries, before it could be accepted by the majority of the Alankarikas, and the expression " Navarasa " (the nine rasas), could come into vogue.

Śāntaṃ : Peace or tranquility.

[ 6 ] deity: Vishnu . Colour: perpetual white.

Shānta-rasa functions as an equal member of the set of rasas, but it is simultaneously distinct as being the most clear form of aesthetic bliss.  Abhinavagupta likens it to the string of a jeweled necklace; while it may not be the most appealing for most people, it is the string that gives form to the necklace, allowing the jewels of the other eight rasas to be relished.  Relishing the rasas and particularly shānta-rasa is hinted as being as-good-as but never-equal-to the bliss of Self-realization experienced by yogis .

See also [ edit ] This article contains Indic text .

Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks or boxes , misplaced vowels or missing conjuncts instead of Indic text.

Abhinaya Bishōnen – A Japanese beauty concept with influence from Indian aesthetic concepts Nātyasāstra – An ancient Sanskrit text on performance arts and aesthetics Nātyakalpadrumam Rasa lila Sanskrit Literature Sanskrit Theatre References [ edit ] ^ Natalia Lidova 2014 ^ Daniel Meyer-Dinkgräfe (2005).

Approaches to Acting: Past and Present . Bloomsbury Academic. pp.

102– 103.

ISBN 978-1-4411-0381-9 .

^ Wallace Dace 1963 , pp. 249–250.

^ Ghosh, Manomohan (2002).

Natyasastra .

ISBN 81-7080-076-5 .

^ "The Navarasa" . Retrieved 2012-04-22 .

^ Pollock, Sheldon (26 April 2016).

A Rasa Reader: Classical Indian Aesthetics . Columbia University Press. p. 48.

ISBN 978-0-231-54069-8 .

Works cited [ edit ] Wallace Dace (1963). "The Concept of "Rasa" in Sanskrit Dramatic Theory".

Educational Theatre Journal .

15 (3): 249– 254.

doi : 10.2307/3204783 .

JSTOR 3204783 .

Natalia Lidova (2014).

Natyashastra . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/obo/9780195399318-0071 .

Further reading [ edit ] Sen, R. K., Aesthetic Enjoyment: Its Background in Philosophy and Medicine , Calcutta: University of Calcutta, 1966 Sen, R. K., A Brief Introduction to a Comparative Study of Greek and Indian Aesthetics and Poetics , Calcutta: Sen Ray & Co., 1954 Sen, R. K., Nature of Aesthetic Enjoyment in Greek and Indian Analyses , Indian Aesthetics and Art Activity, Simla: Indian Institute of Advanced Study, 1968 Sukla, Ananta Charan, The Concept of Imitation in Greek and Indian Aesthetics , Calcutta: Rupa & Co., 1977 Sukla, Ananta Charan, Understanding and Enjoyment in Aesthetic Experience , Journal of Comparative Literature and Aesthetics: 1978 Sukla, Ananta Charan, Contemporary Indian Aesthetics , Milan (Italy): Rubberttino, 1995 Sukla, Ananta Charan, Representation in Painting and Drama: Arguments from Indian Aesthetics , Journal of Comparative Literature and Aesthetics: 1992 Sukla, Ananta Charan, Aesthetics Beyond/ Within Aesthetics: The Scope and Limits of Indian Aesthetics , Journal of Comparative Literature and Aesthetics: 1995 Sukla, Ananta Charan, Rasa, Sringara and Sringara Rasa: Aesthetics as Mass Culture in Indian Antiquity , Lahti (Finland): 1995 Sukla, Ananta Charan, Art, Nature and the Artifactuality of Art and Nature: A Plea for Environmental Aesthetics in Ancient India , Journal of Comparative Literature and Aesthetics: 1996 Sukla, Ananta Charan, Art, Reality and the Reality of the Arts: Ontology, Representation and The Sister Arts Theory in Indian Aesthetics , Indian Response to Literary Theory, Delhi: 1996 Sukla, Ananta Charan, Emotion, Aesthetic Experience and the Contextualist Turn , International Yearbook of Aesthetics: 1996 Sukla, Ananta Charan, Dhvani as a Pivot in Sanskrit Literary Aesthetics , East and West in Aesthetics, Siena (Italy): 1997 Sukla, Ananta Charan, Transculturality of Classical Indian Aesthetics , Frontiers of Transculturality in Contemporary Aesthetics, Turin (Italy): 2001 Sukla, Ananta Charan, Contemporary Indian Aesthetics , Vishvanatha Kaviraja Institute (India): 1995 Matthew Jones (January 2010). "Bollywood, Rasa and Indian Cinema: Misconceptions, Meanings and Millionaire". Visual Anthropology 23 (1): 33–43.

Welch, Stuart Cary (1985).

India: art and culture, 1300-1900 . New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art.

ISBN 9780944142134 .

External links [ edit ] Rasa (sentiments) and Bhāva (psychological states) - in the Natya-shastra Indian aesthetics - OpenArt India v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐5777f5b8f9‐prmvc
Cached time: 20250815004357
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.563 seconds
Real time usage: 0.684 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2577/1000000
Revision size: 12856/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 135579/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3616/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 43524/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.345/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24714872/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  521.485      1 -total
 19.89%  103.720      1 Template:Reflist
 17.54%   91.462      5 Template:Cite_book
 16.15%   84.201      9 Template:IAST
 15.89%   82.890      1 Template:Hinduism
 15.82%   82.504      9 Template:Transliteration
 15.58%   81.234      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.37%   54.077      1 Template:Short_description
  8.87%   46.275      1 Template:Aesthetics
  8.59%   44.812      1 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:32642244:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815004357 and revision id 1294664446. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indian_aesthetics&oldid=1294664446 " Categories : Dance in India Movements in aesthetics Literary theory Indian philosophy History of aesthetics Indian aesthetics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2016 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2011 This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 02:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Indian aesthetics 1 language Add topic

