Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Status within ancient Egypt 2 Name in Egyptian, Greek, and Latin 3 History 4 Mythology 5 Family tree 6 Variant hieroglyphs for the Ennead 7 In popular culture 8 References 9 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Ennead 46 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Lietuvių Magyar Македонски مصرى Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group of nine deities in Egyptian mythology worshipped at Heliopolis Not to be confused with Enneads or Aeneid .

For other uses, see Ennead (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Ennead" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ennead Members : Atum , Shu , Tefnut , Geb , Nut , Osiris , Isis , Set , Nephthys Name in hieroglyphs [ 1 ] (p 2464) psḏt Equivalents Canaanite El 's Divine Council The Ennead or Great Ennead was a group of nine deities in Egyptian mythology worshipped at Heliopolis : the sun god Atum ; his children Shu and Tefnut ; their children Geb and Nut ; and their children Osiris , Isis , Set , and Nephthys .

[ 2 ] The Ennead sometimes includes Horus the Elder ; an ancient form of the falcon god, not the son of Osiris and Isis.

Status within ancient Egypt [ edit ] The Great Ennead was only one of several such groupings of nine deities in ancient Egypt. Claims to preeminence made by its Heliopolitan priests were not respected throughout Egypt, as each nome typically had its own local deities, whose priests insisted stood above all others; [ 3 ] even in the nearby city of Memphis , which along with Heliopolis is contained within the limits of modern Cairo , the priests of Ptah celebrated him as singularly superior to the Nine — In addition to Memphis having its own creation myth, the contemporaneous city of Hermopolis had another creation story, the Ogdoad , that accounted for the physical creation of the universe by eight (different) primordial gods.

[ 3 ] Name in Egyptian, Greek, and Latin [ edit ] The English name ennead is a borrowing via Latin of the Greek name enneás ( ἐννεάς ), meaning "the nine".

[ 4 ] The term was a calque of the Egyptian name, written psḏt and also meaning "the Nine". Its original pronunciation is uncertain, since hieroglyphs do not record vowels, but may have been /piˈsiːcʼat/ in Old Egyptian , /piˈsiːtʼaʔ/ in Middle Egyptian , and /pəˈsiːtʼə/ in Late Egyptian .

Egyptologists conventionally transcribe it as Pesedjet .

History [ edit ] The ancient Egyptians created several enneads as their unification under Dynasty I brought numerous local cults into contact with one another. The ancient Egyptian mythology often had many different explanations for the same phenomenon. This concept is especially unique because no single story was more accurate than another, but rather the truth was a mix of them all.

[ 2 ] The Pyramid Texts of Dynasties V and VI mention the "Great Ennead", the "Lesser Ennead", the "Dual Ennead", and the "Seven Enneads". Some pharaohs established enneads that incorporated themselves as gods . The most notable case is Seti I of Dynasty XIX , whose mortuary temple at Redesiyah celebrated an ennead of six major gods and three deified forms of himself. The ennead mentioned in the Egyptian calendar of lucky and unlucky days , [ 5 ] [ full citation needed ] may reference the Pleiades .

[ 6 ] The most important was the "Great" or "Heliopolitan Ennead" of Awanu ( Ancient Egyptian : I͗wnw ), known under the Greeks and Romans as Heliopolis . It celebrated the family of the sun god Atum (sometimes referred to as Atum-re [ 3 ] ) and thrived from the Old Kingdom to the Ptolemaic period .

Its development remains uncertain, although it appears to have first appeared when Ra 's cult – supreme under Dynasty V – declined in importance under Dynasty VI .

Egyptologists have traditionally theorized that the Heliopolitan priesthood established it to establish the preeminence of Atum over the others, incorporating some major gods in lesser positions and omitting others entirely. The most prominent of such deities was Osiris , god of vegetation and the afterlife , who was incorporated into the ennead as Atum's great-grandson. However, in the 20th century, some Egyptologists [ who?

] question the whole scenario. After the Great Ennead was well established, the cult of Ra – identified with Atum – recovered much of its importance until superseded by the cult of Horus . The two were then combined as Ra-Horus of the Horizons .

Mythology [ edit ] Part of a series on Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Creation myths Isfet Maat Maa Kheru Mythology Numerology Osiris myth Philosophy Soul Practices Canopic jars Embalming ritual Funerals Mortuary temples Offering formula Opening of the mouth Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities ( list ) Ogdoad Amun and Amunet Heh and Hauhet Kek and Kauket Nu and Naunet Ennead Atum Geb Isis Nephthys Nut Osiris Set Shu Tefnut Triads Theban Triad Elephantine Triad A Aani Aati Abaset Abtu Ahmose-Nefertari Aker Akhty Amenhotep, son of Hapu Amesemi Am-heh Ammit Amu-Aa Anat Andjety Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apesh Apis Apophis Aqen Arensnuphis Arsinoe II Ash Assessors of Maat Astarte Aten B Baal Baalat Gebal Babi Banebdjedet Ba-Pef Bastet Bat Bata Bennu Bes Beset Buchis C Cavern deities of the underworld Celestial Ferrymana D Dedun Dionysus-Osiris Djedefhor Duamutef Duau G Gate deities of the underworld Gengen-Wer H Ha Hapi Hapy Harmachis Harpocrates Harsomtus Hathor Hatmehit Hauron Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Henkhisesui Heqaib Heqet Hermanubis Hermes Trismegistus Heru-ur Heryshaf Hery-maat Hesat Horus Hu Hutchai I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemu-sek Imentet Imhotep Imsety Ipy Irer Ishtar Iunit Iusaaset J Jupiter Ammon K Kagemni I Kebechet Khensit Khenti-Amentiu Khenti-kheti Khepri Khereduankh Kherty Khnum Khonsu Kneph Kolanthes Kothar-wa-Khasis M Maahes Maat Mafdet Mandulis Medjed Mehen Mehet-Weret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebnerou Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nekhbet Nemty Neper Nepit O Onuris P Pakhet Panebtawy Perit Petbe Peteese Pihor Ptah Ptahhotep Q Qebehsenuef Qebui Qed-her Qetesh R Ra Raet-Tawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph Ruty S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sedjem Sekhmet Sepa Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shehbui Shemanefer Shepsy Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sokar Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Ta-Bitjet Tatenen Taweret Tayt Teka-her Thoth Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadj-wer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Y Yam Creatures Akhekh Apshait Criosphinx Griffin Hieracosphinx Medjed Serpopard Set animal Sphinx Uraeus Characters Djedi Djadjaemankh Rededjet Ubaoner Locations Aaru Akhet Benben Duat Lake of fire Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Ankh Anra scarab Atef Cartouche Cowroid Corn mummy Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Modius Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Seqtet boat Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Was-sceptre Winged sun Writings Amduat Books of Breathing Book of Caverns Book of the Dead Book of the Earth Book of Gates Book of the Heavenly Cow Book of Traversing Eternity Coffin Texts The Contendings of Horus and Seth Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld Festival Songs of Isis and Nephthys Great Hymn to the Aten Litany of the Eye of Horus Litany of Re Pyramid Texts Spell of the Twelve Caves Festivals Beautiful Festival of the Valley Cattle count Coronation of the pharaoh Min festival Mysteries of Osiris Opet Festival Sed festival Related religions Atenism Church of the Most High Goddess Gnosticism Hermeticism Kemetic Orthodoxy Kemetism Kushite religion Mysteries of Isis Temple of Set Thelema Ancient Egypt portal v t e According to the creation story of the Heliopolitan priests, the world originally consisted of the primordial waters of precreation personified as Nun .

[ 2 ] From it arose a mound on the First Occasion.

[ 2 ] Upon the mound sat the self-begotten god Atum , who was equated with the sun god Ra . Atum evolved from Nun through self-creation.

[ 2 ] Atum either spat or masturbated, producing air personified as Shu and moisture personified as Tefnut . The siblings Shu and Tefnut mated to produce the earth personified as Geb and the nighttime sky personified as Nut .

Geb and Nut were the parents of Osiris and Isis and of Set and Nephthys , who became respective couples in turn. Osiris and Isis represent fertility and order, while Set and Nephthys represent chaos to balance out Osiris and Isis.

[ 3 ] Horus , the son of Osiris and Isis, is often included in this creation tradition.

[ 2 ] Due to the duality of Ancient Egyptian myths, this is only one of many creation stories .

[ 3 ] The Egyptians believed no specific myth was more correct than the other, rather that some combination of these myths was correct.

[ 2 ] This creation story, the Heliopolitan tradition, is one of physiological creation.

[ 3 ] The other major creation traditions are the Memphite Theology and Hermopolitian Ogdoad creation myth .

[ 3 ] Family tree [ edit ] Atum Shu Tefnut Geb Nut Osiris Isis Set Nephthys Variant hieroglyphs for the Ennead [ edit ] [ 1 ] (p 1229) [ 1 ] (p 1233) [ citation needed ] (properly Z16H ) [ 1 ] (p 1232) (properly F37J , a variant with a plain line at a 45° angle) [ 1 ] (p 518) A dual Ennead ( Psḏty ) was written [ 1 ] (p 1702) In popular culture [ edit ] In JoJo's Bizarre Adventure : Stardust Crusaders , nine of Dio Brando 's minions have Stands named after the Ennead.

Most of the Ennead are portrayed in Gods of Egypt (2016 movie); the main focus of the movie is the conflict between the protagonist god Horus versus the antagonist god Set.

In the first episode of the 2022 Marvel Cinematic Universe television miniseries Moon Knight , Steven Grant points out a problem with some of the museum's marketing material that seems to refer to the Ennead as a pantheon consisting of seven, rather than nine, gods. Yet in episode 3 they name Hathor as part of the Ennead, pointing out a deviation with the series' interpretation of the mythology.

In the BL manhwa ENNEAD , written and illustrated by Mojito, Set (using the name Seth) is the main character. It draws heavily upon classic Egyptian mythology and centers on the conflict between Horus and Seth.

The Infernal Relics expansion to the cooperative, superhero card-game Sentinels of the Multiverse introduced a group of supervillains collectively called the Ennead. Each of its members wield an ancient artifact that grant them the powers and appearance of a member of the mythological Ennead; in the game's universe, most of the ancient Egyptian religion originated from stories about the original wielders of these artifacts.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Vygus, Mark (April 2015).

"Middle Egyptian Dictionary" (PDF) .

Pyramid Texts Online .

^ a b c d e f g Dunand, Françoise ; Zivie-Coche, Christiane (2004).

Gods and men in Egypt : 3000 BCE to 395 CE . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 0801488532 .

OCLC 937102309 .

^ a b c d e f g Clifford, Richard (1994).

Creation Accounts in the Ancient Near East and in the Bible . Washington, DC: Catholic Biblical Association. pp.

99– 116.

ISBN 9780915170258 .

LCCN 94026565 – via archive.org.

^ "Ennead, n.

" .

Oxford English Dictionary . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

^ Papyrus Cairo 86637.

^ Jetsu, L.; Porceddu, S. (2015).

"Shifting milestones of natural sciences: The ancient Egyptian discovery of Algol's period confirmed" .

PLOS ONE .

10 (12): e0144140.

arXiv : 1601.06990 .

Bibcode : 2015PLoSO..1044140J .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0144140 .

PMC 4683080 .

PMID 26679699 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Vygus, Mark (April 2015).

"Middle Egyptian Dictionary" (PDF) .

Pyramid Texts Online .

v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Ancient Egyptian race controversy Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Population history of Egypt Pottery Prehistoric Egypt Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade Egypt–Mesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject v t e Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Creation myths Isfet Maa Kheru Maat Mythology Numerology Osiris myth Philosophy Soul Practices Canopic jars Embalming ritual Funerals Mortuary temples Offering formula Opening of the mouth Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities ( list ) Ogdoad Amun and Amunet Heh and Hauhet Kek and Kauket Nu and Naunet Ennead Atum Geb Isis Nephthys Nut Osiris Set Shu Tefnut Triads Elephantine Triad Theban Triad A Aani Aati Abaset Abtu Ahmose-Nefertari Aker Akhty Amenhotep, son of Hapu Amesemi Am-heh Ammit Amu-Aa Anat Andjety Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apesh Apis Apophis Aqen Arensnuphis Arsinoe II Ash Assessors of Maat Astarte Aten B Baal Baalat Gebal Babi Banebdjedet Ba-Pef Bastet Bat Bata Bennu Bes Beset Buchis C Cavern deities of the underworld Celestial Ferryman D Dedun Dionysus-Osiris Djedefhor Duamutef Duau G Gate deities of the underworld Gengen-Wer H Ha Hapi Hapy Harmachis Harpocrates Harsomtus Hathor Hatmehit Hauron Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Henkhisesui Heqaib Heqet Hermanubis Hermes Trismegistus Heru-ur Heryshaf Hery-maat Hesat Horus Hu Hutchai I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemu-sek Imentet Imhotep Imsety Ipy Irer Ishtar Iunit Iusaaset J Jupiter Ammon K Kagemni I Kebechet Khensit Khenti-Amentiu Khenti-kheti Khepri Khereduankh Kherty Khnum Khonsu Kneph Kolanthes Kothar-wa-Khasis M Maahes Maat Mafdet Mandulis Medjed Mehen Mehet-Weret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebtuwi Nebnerou Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nekhbet Nemty Neper Nepit O Onuris P Pakhet Panebtawy Perit Petbe Peteese Pihor Ptah Ptahhotep Q Qebehsenuef Qebui Qed-her Qetesh R Ra Raet-Tawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph Ruty S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sedjem Sekhmet Sepa Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shehbui Shemanefer Shepsy Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sokar Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Ta-Bitjet Tatenen Taweret Tayt Teka-her Thoth Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadj-wer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Y Yam Creatures Akhekh Apshait Criosphinx Griffin Hieracosphinx Medjed Serpopard Sha Sphinx Uraeus Characters Djadjaemankh Djedi Rededjet Ubaoner Locations Aaru Akhet Benben Duat Lake of fire Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Ankh Anra scarab Atef Cartouche Corn mummy Cowroid Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Modius Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Was-sceptre Winged sun Writings Amduat Books of Breathing Book of Caverns Book of the Dead Book of the Earth Book of Gates Book of the Heavenly Cow Book of Traversing Eternity Coffin Texts Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld Festival Songs of Isis and Nephthys Great Hymn to the Aten Litany of the Eye of Horus Litany of Re Pyramid Texts Spell of the Twelve Caves The Contendings of Horus and Seth Festivals Beautiful Festival of the Valley Cattle count Coronation of the pharaoh Min festival Mysteries of Osiris Opet Festival Sed festival Related religions Atenism Church of the Most High Goddess Gnosticism Hermeticism Kemetic Orthodoxy Kemetism Kushite religion Mysteries of Isis Temple of Set Thelema Ancient Egypt portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐zttch
Cached time: 20250817043745
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.687 seconds
Real time usage: 0.871 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4778/1000000
Revision size: 12824/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 160884/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4098/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 83431/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.382/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26341062/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  703.979      1 -total
 24.55%  172.848      1 Template:Infobox_deity
 20.02%  140.951      1 Template:Infobox
 16.97%  119.432      1 Template:Reflist
 15.57%  109.618      1 Template:Ancient_Egyptian_religion
 15.28%  107.543      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.69%   75.283      4 Template:Navbox
 10.42%   73.324      2 Template:Cite_web
 10.29%   72.472      1 Template:Transliteration
  8.60%   60.522      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:97187:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043745 and revision id 1296900592. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ennead&oldid=1296900592 " Categories : Nonets Groups of Egyptian deities Egyptian mythology Creation myths Cultural lists Hidden categories: Pages using the WikiHiero extension Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles having same image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages with plain IPA All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from November 2022 Articles containing Ancient Egyptian-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2009 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2017 This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 01:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ennead 46 languages Add topic

