Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Tyras 16 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ Català Čeština Eesti Ελληνικά Español Français Italiano ქართული Polski Română Русский Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 46°12′3″N 30°21′6″E ﻿ / ﻿ 46.20083°N 30.35167°E ﻿ / 46.20083; 30.35167 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek city-state in Ukraine For other uses, see Tyras (disambiguation) .

Tyras Τύρας Remains of Tyras, near the medieval walls of the Bilhorod-Dnistrovskyi fortress .

Shown within Ukraine Show map of Ukraine Tyras (Odesa Oblast) Show map of Odesa Oblast Location Bilhorod-Dnistrovskyi , Odesa Oblast , Ukraine Coordinates 46°12′3″N 30°21′6″E ﻿ / ﻿ 46.20083°N 30.35167°E ﻿ / 46.20083; 30.35167 Type Settlement History Builder Settlers from Miletus Founded Approximately 600 BC Abandoned Late 4th century AD Periods Archaic Greek to Roman Imperial Cultures Greek , Roman Site notes Condition Ruined Ownership Public Public access Yes Immovable Monument of National Significance of Ukraine Official name Городище "Тіра-Білгород" ( Tyras-Bilhorod settlement ) Type Archaeology Reference no.

150007-Н Tyras ( Ancient Greek : Τύρας ) was an ancient Greek city on the northern coast of the Black Sea . It was founded by colonists from Miletus , probably about 600 BC . The city was situated some 10 km from the mouth of the Tyras River , which is now called the Dniester . The surrounding native tribe was called the Tyragetae . The ruins of Tyras are now located in the modern city of Bilhorod-Dnistrovskyi in the Odesa Oblast of Ukraine .

History [ edit ] Of great importance in early times, in the 2nd century BC Tyras fell under the dominion of native kings whose names appear on its coins, and it was destroyed by the Getae about 50 BC.

[ 1 ] In 56 AD , it seems to have been restored by the Romans under Nero and, henceforth, formed part of the province of Lower Moesia . There exists a series of its coins with heads of emperors from Domitian to Alexander Severus .

[ 1 ] Indeed, the autonomous minting of coins in the city lasted from the time of the emperor Domitian ( 81 AD ) up to the end of the reign of the emperor Alexander Severus ( 235 AD ) with few breaks. The coins of Tyras of this period were of copper with the portraits of the members of the Imperial house for the province of the Roman Empire .

In Tyras was stationed a small unit of the Roman fleet, Classis Flavia Moesica .

In 201 CE , Septimius Severus and Caracalla granted the inhabitants of the city the right to engage in duty-free trade.

[ 2 ] Soon after the time of Alexander Severus, it was partially destroyed by the Goths , but archaeological findings show that Romans remained there until the end of the 4th century under Theodosius I . Later, the Byzantines renamed the city, destroyed by barbarian invasions, with the new name Maurokastron , "black fort".

Its government was in the hands of five archons , a senate , a popular assembly and a registrar. The images on its coins suggest a trade in wheat, wine and fish. The few inscriptions are also mostly concerned with trade.

[ 1 ] Remains of the city are scant, as its site has been covered by the great medieval fortress called by the Genoese Maurocastro (and later Akkerman/Cetatea Albă).

[ 1 ] Tyras and the other Greek colonies along the north coast of the Black Sea, 8th to 3rd century BC See also [ edit ] List of Ancient Greek cities References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Minns 1911 .

^ Bertolazzi, Riccardo (2024). "The Severan Augustae as Mistresses of the World". In Hoffmann-Salz, Julia; Heil, Matthäus; Wienholz, Holger (eds.).

The Eastern Roman Empire under the Severans: Old Connections, new Beginnings?

.

Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht . p. 243.

ISBN 978-3-647-30251-5 .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Minns, Ellis Hovell (1911). " Tyras ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 27 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 548.

This work in turn cites: E. H. Minns.

Scythians and Greeks (Cambridge, 1909) V. V. Latyshev, Inscriptiones Orae Septentrionalis Ponti Euxini , Volume I.

Further reading [ edit ] Kleiman, I. B.

(2001). "Defensive Structures on the Territory of Tyras". In Tsetskhladze, Gocha R. (ed.).

North Pontic Archaeology: Recent Discoveries and Studies . Colloquia Pontica. Vol. 6. Leiden: Brill. pp.

53– 66.

ISBN 9789004120419 .

Karyshkovskij, Petr O.

; Kleiman, Isaac B.

(1994).

The City of Tyras: A Historical and Archaeological Essay . Odesa: Polis Press.

ISBN 9785770745313 .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tyras .

v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tyras&oldid=1294928944 " Categories : Milesian Pontic colonies Roman towns and cities in Ukraine Ancient history of Ukraine Former populated places in Eastern Europe Bilhorod-Dnistrovskyi Members of the Delian League History of Bilhorod-Dnistrovskyi Raion Archaeological sites in Ukraine Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Ukrainian-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 June 2025, at 17:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tyras 16 languages Add topic

