Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General and ideological overview Toggle General and ideological overview subsection 1.1 Distinction 1.2 American individualist anarchism 1.3 European individualist anarchism 2 American individualist anarchism Toggle American individualist anarchism subsection 2.1 Early precursors 2.1.1 William Godwin 2.1.2 Pierre-Joseph Proudhon 2.1.3 Max Stirner 2.1.4 Egoism 2.1.5 Early individualist anarchism in the United States 2.2 Individualist anarchism in the United States 2.2.1 Mutualism and utopianism 2.2.2 Boston anarchists 3 Individualist anarchism in Europe Toggle Individualist anarchism in Europe subsection 3.1 Early precursors 3.1.1 France 3.1.2 Germany 3.1.3 Italy 3.1.4 Russia 3.1.5 Spain 3.2 Individualist anarchism in Latin America 4 Developments and expansion Toggle Developments and expansion subsection 4.1 Anarcha-feminism, free love, freethought and LGBT issues 4.2 Anarcho-naturism 5 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 5.1 Individualist anarchism and anarcho-capitalism 6 See also 7 References 8 Bibliography 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Individualist anarchism 33 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Íslenska Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of anarchism that emphasizes the individual and their will Part of a series on Anarchism Glossary History Outline Schools of thought Black Feminist Green Primitivist Social ecology Total liberation Individualist Egoist Market Philosophical Mutualist Queer Religious Christian Jewish Social Collectivist Parecon Communist Magonism Without adjectives Methodology Counter-economics Illegalism Insurrectionary Pacifist Platformism Relationship Syndicalist Synthesis Theory and practice Anarchy Anarchist Black Cross Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-militarism Affinity group Autonomous social center Black bloc Classless society Class struggle Consensus decision-making Conscientious objector Critique of work Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Law Mutual aid Participatory politics Permanent autonomous zone Prefigurative politics Proletarian internationalism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Revolution Rewilding Sabotage Security culture Self-ownership Social ecology Sociocracy Somatherapy Spontaneous order Squatting Temporary autonomous zone Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Durruti Ellul Ervin Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Issues Animal rights Capitalism Education Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K.

Architecture Arts DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale Lifestylism May Day " No gods, no masters " Popular education " Property is theft!

" Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism Economics Communization Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association General strike Gift economy Give-away shop Labor voucher Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' self-management By region Africa Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Finland France French Guiana Georgia Germany Greece Guatemala Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Korea Latvia Malaysia Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria ( DAANES ) Taiwan Timor-Leste Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States ( Puerto Rico ) Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-statism Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomism Communism Definition of anarchism and libertarianism Dual power IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Libertarianism portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Individualist anarchism or anarcho-individualism is a collection of anarchist currents that generally emphasize the individual and their will over external determinants such as groups, society, traditions, and ideological systems.

Individualist anarchism can be divided into two main distinct movements, each with its own ideological orientations and choices. On one hand, there is American individualist anarchism, which began with Warren in the 1860s. It focuses primarily on economic freedom , drawing upon Stirner 's egoist anarchism and Proudhon 's mutualism , and develops perspectives that are notably financial in nature. Most American individualist anarchists of the 19th century advocated mutualism , a libertarian socialist form of market socialism , or a free-market socialist form of classical economics . American individualist anarchists are opposed to property that violates the entitlement theory of justice , that is, gives privilege due to unjust acquisition or exchange, and thus is exploitative, [ 1 ] seeking to "destroy the tyranny of capital,—that is, of property" by mutual credit .

[ 2 ] On the other hand, European individualist anarchism emerged between 1885 and 1895 in the labour movement . Much less studied and not directly connected to American individualist anarchism, with virtually no influence by Proudhon or Stirner for example, it generally consisted of militants with very different outlooks—particularly marked by strong radicalism, general adherence to anarchist communism , and often highly radical positions, including significant support for revolutionary violence and propaganda of the deed .

[ 3 ] The European movement was also distinguished by its strong opposition to the emerging anarcho-syndicalism of the same period, its rejection of the distinction between bourgeoisie and proletariat —seen as social constructs of capitalism to be abolished—and its close affinity with the social outlook of the women , sex workers or criminals . This helps explain its rapid association with the rise of anarcha-feminism or illegalism in Europe, for example.

Although usually contrasted with social anarchism , [ 4 ] both individualist and social [ 4 ] anarchism have influenced each other. Among the early influences on American individualist anarchism Josiah Warren ( sovereignty of the individual ), Max Stirner ( egoism ), [ 5 ] Lysander Spooner ( natural law ), Pierre-Joseph Proudhon ( mutualism ), Henry David Thoreau ( transcendentalism ), [ 6 ] Herbert Spencer ( law of equal liberty ) [ 7 ] and Anselme Bellegarrigue ( civil disobedience ).

[ 8 ] For European individualist anarchism, one can find Pierre Martinet , Vittorio Pini , Clément Duval , Errico Malatesta , Émile Henry , Zo d'Axa , or groups such as the Intransigeants of London and Paris or the Pieds plats .

Within anarchism, American individualist anarchism is primarily a literary phenomenon [ 9 ] while social anarchism has been the dominant form of anarchism, [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] emerging in the late 19th century as a distinction from individualist anarchism after anarcho-communism replaced collectivist anarchism as the dominant tendency.

[ 14 ] American individualist anarchism has been described by some as the anarchist branch most influenced by and tied to liberalism (specifically classical liberalism ), or as a part of the liberal or liberal-socialist wing of anarchism — in contrast to the collectivist or communist wing of anarchism and libertarian socialism .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] However, others suggest a softer divide, seeing individualist anarchists as sharing with social anarchists an opposition to state , capitalism and authority , while diverging (a) due to their evolutionary approach to change, preferring the creation of alternative institutions, such as mutual banks or communes, and (b) in their preference for a market-based system of distribution over the need-based system advocated by social anarchists.

[ 18 ] The very idea of an individualist–socialist divide is also contested by those who argue that individualist anarchism is largely socialistic [ 19 ] and can be considered a form of individualist socialism , with non- Lockean individualism encompassing socialism.

[ 20 ] Lastly, some anarcho-capitalists claim anarcho-capitalism is part of the individualist anarchist tradition, while others disagree and reject the notion that anarcho-capitalism is a genuinely anarchist belief system or movement.

[ 21 ] General and ideological overview [ edit ] Distinction [ edit ] American and European individualist anarchism are distinct movements that can be considered independently from one another.

[ 22 ] This is largely due to the fact that the ideological perspectives within these currents are highly fragmented and that both movements don't influence each other in their first decades.

[ 22 ] For example, while Stirner's egoist anarchism and Proudhon's mutualism are major influences on the American individualist anarchist movement, they have little to no impact on the European movement.

[ 23 ] Stirner, for instance, was only belatedly received in France by individualist anarchists, who found his ideas unoriginal and articulating concepts they believed they had already developed more effectively themselves.

[ 23 ] American individualist anarchism is usually way more studied and known than it's European counterpart.

[ 23 ] American individualist anarchism [ edit ] The term individualist anarchism is often used as a classificatory term but in very different ways. Some such as the authors of An Anarchist FAQ use the classification individualist anarchism/ social anarchism , [ 3 ] while Bob Black contrasts an individualist anarchism and anarcho-capitalism ("Type 2 anarchism") less representative of the anarchist tradition with the more representative collectivist anarchism or anarcho-leftism ("Type 1 anarchism").

[ 24 ] Others such as Geoffrey Ostergaard , who see individualist anarchism as distinctly non-socialist, recognizing anarcho-capitalist as part of the individualist anarchist tradition, use the classification individualist anarchism/socialist anarchism accordingly.

[ 25 ] However, others do not consider anarcho-capitalism as part of the anarchist movement , arguing that anarchism has historically been an anti-capitalist movement and anarchists reject that it is compatible with capitalism .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] In addition, an analysis of several individualist anarchists who advocated free-market anarchism shows that it is different from anarcho-capitalism and other capitalist theories due to these individualist anarchists retaining the labor theory of value and socialist doctrines .

[ 19 ] [ 31 ] Other classifications include communal/mutualist anarchism.

[ 32 ] Michael Freeden identifies four broad types of individualist anarchism. Freeden says the first is the type associated with William Godwin that advocates self-government with a "progressive rationalism that included benevolence to others". The second type is the amoral self-serving rationality of egoism as most associated with Max Stirner . The third type is "found in Herbert Spencer 's early predictions, and in that of some of his disciples such as Wordsworth Donisthorpe , foreseeing the redundancy of the state in the source of social evolution". The fourth type retains a moderated form of egoism and accounts for social cooperation through the advocacy of market relationships.

[ 7 ] Individualist anarchism of different kinds have the following things in common: The concentration on the individual and their will in preference to any construction such as morality , ideology, social custom, religion, metaphysics , ideas or the will of others.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] The rejection of or reservations about the idea of revolution, seeing it as a time of mass uprising which could bring about new hierarchies. Instead, they favor more evolutionary methods of bringing about anarchy through alternative experiences and experiments and education which could be brought about today .

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Individual experience and exploration is emphasized. The view that relationships with other persons or things can be in one's own interest only and can be as transitory and without compromises as desired since in individualist anarchism sacrifice is usually rejected. In this way, Max Stirner recommended associations of egoists .

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Tucker's two socialisms were the state socialism which he associated to the Marxist school and the libertarian socialism that he advocated. What those two schools of socialism had in common was the labor theory of value and the ends, by which anarchism pursued different means.

[ 39 ] The egoist form of individualist anarchism, derived from the philosophy of Max Stirner , supports the individual doing exactly what he pleases—taking no notice of God, state, or moral rules.

[ 40 ] To Stirner, rights were spooks in the mind, and he held that society does not exist but "the individuals are its reality"—he supported property by force of might rather than moral right.

[ 41 ] Stirner advocated self-assertion and foresaw "associations of egoists" drawn together by respect for each other's ruthlessness.

[ 42 ] Another important tendency within individualist anarchist currents emphasizes individual subjective exploration and defiance of social conventions. Individualist anarchist philosophy attracted "amongst artists, intellectuals and the well-read, urban middle classes in general".

[ 43 ] Anarchist historian George Woodcock wrote of individualist anarchism's tendency to distrust co-operation beyond the bare necessities for an ascetic life .

[ 8 ] European individualist anarchism [ edit ] In Europe, the tendency emerged later, during the 1880s and 1890s.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Although it emerged later chronologically, this tendency generally did not exhibit causal links with previous American individualist anarchism, at least during its initial period.

[ 22 ] Before being theorized, the first European individualists, particularly in France, were often militants involved in illegalism or insurrectionarism .

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] Within these circles, French individualist anarchism gradually took shape. In general, anarchists of this tendency shared several intellectual positions identified by Carl Frayne in their thesis regarding the French individualist tendency: [ 48 ] Anti-capitalism , anarchist communism and need for an immediate Revolution : French individualist anarchists were economically committed to anarchist communism and believed that a revolution was necessary.

[ 49 ] They sometimes held romanticized views of revolution, inspired by the Paris Commune and the French Revolution .

[ 49 ] This led them to adopt a generally radical stance and support violent methods to advance the revolution. As such, they were strong advocates of propaganda by the deed or illegalism as revolutionary strategies.

[ 49 ] Anti-syndicalism: A strong opposition to syndicalism and anarcho-syndicalism was found among these militants.

[ 49 ] Unions were perceived as structures of domination ("archistic") and as potential social-traitors due to their alleged reformist stances and collaboration with power. As a result, these militants were strongly opposed to the majority of the European anarchist movement at the time, which was gradually moving toward anarcho-syndicalism.

[ 49 ] Critique of economic frameworks and attention to other struggles : These anarchists also distinguished themselves by challenging the exclusively economic interpretations of domination.

[ 50 ] Thus, communism, although shared, was not placed at the center of French individualist thought.

[ 50 ] They advocated for the abolition of the proletariat after the revolution, considering it—like the bourgeoisie—to be a social construct of capitalism .

[ 50 ] The central role given to the worker in anarcho-syndicalism also became a strong point of criticism for individualist anarchists of this tendency, who generally focused more on women , the unemployed , sex workers , or criminals , showing particular interest in the struggles of the so-called Lumpenproletariat .

[ 50 ] This last point is illustrated for example by the soup conferences held in Paris by Pierre Martinet or Séverine in the winters of the early 1890s.

[ 50 ] The European individualist anarchism later on met the American one, such as in the thought, for example, of Émile Armand , who started including Stirner in his thought and his tendency of the European branch in the interwar period .

[ 51 ] American individualist anarchism [ edit ] Early precursors [ edit ] William Godwin [ edit ] Main article: William Godwin William Godwin , a radical liberal and utilitarian , who was one of the first to espouse what became known as individualist anarchism William Godwin can be considered an individualist anarchist.

[ 42 ] Godwin advocated extreme individualism, proposing that all cooperation in labor be eliminated.

[ 52 ] Godwin was a utilitarian who believed that all individuals are not of equal value, with some of us "of more worth and importance" than others depending on our utility in bringing about social good . Therefore, he does not believe in equal rights, but the person's life that should be favored that is most conducive to the general good.

[ 53 ] Godwin opposed government because it infringes on the individual's right to "private judgement" to determine which actions most maximize utility, but also makes a critique of all authority over the individual's judgement. This aspect of Godwin's philosophy, minus the utilitarianism, was developed into a more extreme form later by Stirner.

[ 54 ] Godwin took individualism to the radical extent of opposing individuals performing together in orchestras , writing in Political Justice that "everything understood by the term co-operation is in some sense an evil".

[ 52 ] He believed democracy to be preferable to other forms of government.

[ 55 ] Godwin's political views were diverse and do not perfectly agree with any of the ideologies that claim his influence as writers of the Socialist Standard , organ of the Socialist Party of Great Britain , consider Godwin both an individualist and a communist; [ 56 ] Murray Rothbard did not regard Godwin as being in the individualist camp at all, referring to him as the "founder of communist anarchism "; [ 57 ] and historian Albert Weisbord considers him an individualist anarchist without reservation.

[ 58 ] Pierre-Joseph Proudhon [ edit ] Main article: Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Pierre-Joseph Proudhon was the first philosopher to label himself an "anarchist".

[ 59 ] Some consider Proudhon to be an individualist anarchist [ 60 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] while others regard him to be a social anarchist .

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Some commentators do not identify Proudhon as an individualist anarchist due to his preference for association in large industries rather than individual control.

[ 42 ] Max Stirner [ edit ] Main article: Max Stirner Portrait of Max Stirner by Friedrich Engels Johann Kaspar Schmidt, better known as Max Stirner (the nom de plume he adopted from a schoolyard nickname he had acquired as a child because of his high brow, in German Stirn ), was a German philosopher who ranks as one of the literary fathers of nihilism , existentialism , post-modernism and anarchism , especially of individualist anarchism. Stirner's main work is The Ego and Its Own , also known as The Ego and His Own ( Der Einzige und sein Eigentum in German which translates literally as The Only One [individual] and his Property or The Unique Individual and His Property ).

[ 65 ] This work was first published in 1844 in Leipzig and has since appeared in numerous editions and translations.

Egoism [ edit ] Main articles: Egoist anarchism and Philosophy of Max Stirner See also: Ethical egoism and Moral nihilism Max Stirner 's philosophy, sometimes called egoism, is a form of individualist anarchism.

[ 66 ] Stirner was a Hegelian philosopher whose "name appears with familiar regularity in historically oriented surveys of anarchist thought as one of the earliest and best-known exponents of individualist anarchism".

[ 5 ] In 1844, Stirner's work The Ego and Its Own was published and is considered to be "a founding text in the tradition of individualist anarchism".

[ 5 ] Stirner does not recommend that the individual try to eliminate the state, but simply that they disregard the state when it conflicts with one's autonomous choices and go along with it when doing so is conducive to one's interests.

[ 67 ] Stirner says that the egoist rejects pursuit of devotion to "a great idea, a good cause, a doctrine, a system, a lofty calling", arguing that the egoist has no political calling, but rather "lives themselves out" without regard to "how well or ill humanity may fare thereby".

[ 68 ] Stirner held that the only limitation on the rights of the individual is that individual's power to obtain what he desires.

[ 69 ] Stirner proposes that most commonly accepted social institutions, including the notion of state , property as a right , natural rights in general and the very notion of "society" as a legal and ideal abstractness, were mere spooks in the mind. Stirner wants to "abolish not only the state but also society as an institution responsible for its members".

[ 70 ] Stirner advocated self-assertion and foresaw Union of egoists , non-systematic associations which he proposed in as a form of organization in place of the state.

[ 71 ] A Union is understood as a relation between egoists which is continually renewed by all parties' support through an act of will.

[ 42 ] [ 72 ] Even murder is permissible "if it is right for me", [ 73 ] although it is claimed by egoist anarchists that egoism will foster genuine and spontaneous unions between individuals.

[ 74 ] Stirner's concept of "egoistic property" not only a lack of moral restraint on how one obtains and uses things , but includes other people as well.

[ 75 ] His embrace of egotism is in stark contrast to Godwin's altruism . Although Stirner was opposed to communism , for the same reasons he opposed capitalism , humanism , liberalism , property rights and nationalism , seeing them as forms of authority over the individual and as spooks in the mind, he has influenced many anarcho-communists and post-left anarchists . The writers of An Anarchist FAQ report that "many in the anarchist movement in Glasgow, Scotland, took Stirner's 'Union of egoists' literally as the basis for their anarcho-syndicalist organising in the 1940s and beyond". Similarly, the noted anarchist historian Max Nettlau states that "[o]n reading Stirner, I maintain that he cannot be interpreted except in a socialist sense".

[ 76 ] This position on property is quite different from the native American, natural law, form of individualist anarchism which defends the inviolability of the private property that has been earned through labor.

[ 77 ] Other egoists include James L. Walker , Sidney Parker , Dora Marsden and John Beverly Robinson . In Russia, individualist anarchism inspired by Stirner combined with an appreciation for Friedrich Nietzsche attracted a small following of bohemian artists and intellectuals such as Lev Chernyi as well as a few lone wolves who found self-expression in crime and violence.

[ 78 ] They rejected organizing, believing that only unorganized individuals were safe from coercion and domination, believing this kept them true to the ideals of anarchism.

[ 79 ] This type of individualist anarchism inspired anarcha-feminist Emma Goldman .

[ 78 ] Early individualist anarchism in the United States [ edit ] The intentional communal experiments pioneered by Josiah Warren influenced European individualist anarchists of the late 19th and early 20th centuries such as Émile Armand and the intentional communities they founded.

[ 80 ] The American version of individualist anarchism has a strong emphasis on the non-aggression principle and individual sovereignty .

[ 81 ] Some individualist anarchists such as Thoreau [ 82 ] [ 83 ] do not speak of economics, but simply of the right of "disunion" from the state and foresee the gradual elimination of the state through social evolution.

Individualist anarchism in the United States [ edit ] Main article: Individualist anarchism in the United States Mutualism and utopianism [ edit ] Stephen Pearl Andrews For American anarchist historian Eunice Minette Schuster, "[i]t is apparent [...] that Proudhonian Anarchism was to be found in the United States at least as early as 1848 and that it was not conscious of its affinity to the Individualist Anarchism of Josiah Warren and Stephen Pearl Andrews [...] William B. Greene presented this Proudhonian Mutualism in its purest and most systematic form".

[ 84 ] William Batchelder Greene is best known for the works Mutual Banking (1850) which proposed an interest-free banking system and Transcendentalism , a critique of the New England philosophical school . He saw mutualism as the synthesis of "liberty and order".

[ 84 ] His "associationism [...] is checked by individualism. [...] 'Mind your own business,' 'Judge not that ye be not judged.' Over matters which are purely personal, as for example, moral conduct, the individual is sovereign, as well as over that which he himself produces. For this reason he demands 'mutuality' in marriage—the equal right of a woman to her own personal freedom and property.

[ 84 ] Within some individualist anarchist circles, mutualism came to mean non-communist anarchism.

[ 85 ] Boston anarchists [ edit ] Lysander Spooner by Amory Nelson Hardy Another form of individualist anarchism was found in the United States as advocated by the so-called Boston anarchists.

[ 78 ] By default, American individualists had no difficulty accepting the concepts that "one man employ another" or that "he direct him", in his labor but rather demanded that "all natural opportunities requisite to the production of wealth be accessible to all on equal terms and that monopolies arising from special privileges created by law be abolished".

[ 86 ] They believed state monopoly capitalism (defined as a state-sponsored monopoly) [ 87 ] prevented labor from being fully rewarded.

Lysander Spooner besides his individualist anarchist activism was also an important anti-slavery activist and became a member of the First International .

[ 88 ] Some Boston anarchists, including Benjamin Tucker , identified themselves as socialists , which in the 19th century was often used in the sense of a commitment to improving conditions of the working class (i.e. " the labor problem ").

[ 89 ] The Boston anarchists such as Tucker and his followers continue to be considered socialists due to their opposition to usury .

[ 90 ] They do so because as the modern economist Jim Stanford points out there are many different kinds of competitive markets such as market socialism and capitalism is only one type of a market economy.

[ 91 ] By around the start of the 20th century, the heyday of individualist anarchism had passed.

[ 92 ] Individualist anarchism in Europe [ edit ] Early precursors [ edit ] France [ edit ] From the legacy of Proudhon and Stirner there emerged a strong tradition of French individualist anarchism. An early important individualist anarchist was Anselme Bellegarrigue . He participated in the French Revolution of 1848 , was author and editor of Anarchie, Journal de l'Ordre and Au fait ! Au fait ! Interprétation de l'idée démocratique and wrote the important early Anarchist Manifesto in 1850. Catalan historian of individualist anarchism Xavier Diez reports that during his travels in the United States "he at least contacted (Henry David) Thoreau and, probably (Josiah) Warren ".

[ 93 ] Later, this tradition continued with such intellectuals as Albert Libertad , André Lorulot , Émile Armand , Victor Serge , Zo d'Axa and Rirette Maîtrejean , who in 1905 developed theory in the main individualist anarchist journal in France, L'Anarchie .

[ 94 ] In this sense, "the theoretical positions and the vital experiences of [F]rench individualism are deeply iconoclastic and scandalous, even within libertarian circles. The call of nudist naturism , the strong defence of birth control methods, the idea of " unions of egoists " with the sole justification of sexual practices, that will try to put in practice, not without difficulties, will establish a way of thought and action, and will result in sympathy within some, and a strong rejection within others".

[ 95 ] Caricature of the Bonnot gang Illegalists usually did not seek moral basis for their actions, recognizing only the reality of "might" rather than "right"; and for the most part, illegal acts were done simply to satisfy personal desires, not for some greater ideal.

[ 46 ] Influenced by theorist Max Stirner's egoism as well as Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (his view that " property is theft!

"), Clément Duval and Marius Jacob proposed the theory of la reprise individuelle ( individual reclamation ) which justified robbery on the rich and personal direct action against exploiters and the system.

[ 46 ] Germany [ edit ] See also: Der Einzige In Germany, the Scottish-German John Henry Mackay became the most important propagandist for individualist anarchist ideas. He fused Stirnerist egoism with the positions of Benjamin Tucker and actually translated Tucker into German. Two semi-fictional writings of his own, Die Anarchisten and Der Freiheitsucher , contributed to individualist theory through an updating of egoist themes within a consideration of the anarchist movement. English translations of these works arrived in the United Kingdom and in individualist American circles led by Tucker.

[ 96 ] Stirnerist individualism was popular among literary and intellectual anarchists  in pre-WWI Germany, for instance influencing the expressionist movement and the early thought of Otto Gross .

[ 97 ] Italy [ edit ] See also: Renzo Novatore , Pietro Bruzzi , and Outlaw (1999 film) In Italy, individualist anarchism had a strong tendency towards illegalism and violent propaganda by the deed similar to French individualist anarchism, but perhaps more extreme [ 98 ] and which emphazised criticism of organization be it anarchist or of other type.

[ 99 ] Russia [ edit ] See also: Alexei Borovoi Individualist anarchism was one of the three categories of anarchism in Russia , along with the more prominent anarcho-communism and anarcho-syndicalism .

[ 100 ] The ranks of the Russian individualist anarchists were predominantly drawn from the intelligentsia and the working class .

[ 100 ] For anarchist historian Paul Avrich , "[t]he two leading exponents of individualist anarchism, both based in Moscow , were Aleksei Alekseevich Borovoi and Lev Chernyi (born Pavel Dmitrievich Turchaninov). From Nietzsche , they inherited the desire for a complete overturn of all values accepted by bourgeois society political, moral, and cultural. Furthermore, strongly influenced by Max Stirner and Benjamin Tucker, the German and American theorists of individualist anarchism, they demanded the total liberation of the human personality from the fetters of organized society".

[ 100 ] Some Russian individualists anarchists "found the ultimate expression of their social alienation in violence and crime, others attached themselves to avant-garde literary and artistic circles, but the majority remained " philosophical " anarchists who conducted animated parlor discussions and elaborated their individualist theories in ponderous journals and books".

[ 100 ] Lev Chernyi advocated a Nietzschean overthrow of the values of bourgeois Russian society, and rejected the voluntary communes of anarcho-communist Peter Kropotkin as a threat to the freedom of the individual.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] [ 103 ] Scholars including Avrich and Allan Antliff have interpreted this vision of society to have been greatly influenced by the individualist anarchists Max Stirner and Benjamin Tucker.

[ 104 ] Spain [ edit ] While Spain was influenced by American individualist anarchism, it was more closely related to the French currents. Around the start of the 20th century, individualism in Spain gathered force through the efforts of people such as Dorado Montero, Ricardo Mella , Federico Urales , Miguel Giménez Igualada , Mariano Gallardo and J. Elizalde who translated French and American individualists.

[ 95 ] Important in this respect were also magazines such as La Idea Libre , La Revista Blanca , Etica , Iniciales , Al margen , Estudios and Nosotros . The most influential thinkers there were Max Stirner , Émile Armand and Han Ryner . Just as in France, the spread of Esperanto and anationalism had importance just as naturism and free love currents.

[ 95 ] Later, Armand and Ryner themselves started writing in the Spanish individualist press. Armand's concept of amorous camaraderie had an important role in motivating polyamory as realization of the individual.

[ 95 ] Catalan historian Xavier Diez reports that the Spanish individualist anarchist press was widely read by members of anarcho-communist groups and by members of the anarcho-syndicalist trade union CNT . There were also the cases of prominent individualist anarchists such as Federico Urales and Miguel Giménez Igualada who were members of the CNT and J. Elizalde who was a founding member and first secretary of the Iberian Anarchist Federation (IAF).

[ 105 ] Between October 1937 and February 1938, Spanish individualist anarchist Miguel Giménez Igualada was editor of the individualist anarchist magazine Nosotros [ 95 ] in which many works of Armand and Ryner appeared. He also participated in the publishing of another individualist anarchist maganize Al Margen: Publicación quincenal individualista .

[ 106 ] In his youth, he engaged in illegalist activities.

[ 105 ] His thought was deeply influenced by Max Stirner, of which he was the main popularizer in Spain through his own writings. He published and wrote the preface [ 95 ] to the fourth edition in Spanish of The Ego and Its Own from 1900. He proposed the creation of a " Union of egoists " to be a federation of individualist anarchists in Spain, but it did not succeed.

[ 107 ] Federico Urales was an important individualist anarchist who edited La Revista Blanca . The individualist anarchism of Urales was influenced by Auguste Comte and Charles Darwin . He saw science and reason as a defense against blind servitude to authority. He was critical of influential individualist thinkers such as Nietzsche and Stirner for promoting an asocial egoist individualism and instead promoted an individualism with solidarity seen as a way to guarantee social equality and harmony. He was highly critical of anarcho-syndicalism , which he viewed as plagued by excessive bureaucracy ; and he thought that it tended towards reformism . Instead, he favored small groups based on ideological alignment. He supported and participated in the establishment of the IAF in 1927.

[ 105 ] In 2000, Ateneo Libertario Ricardo Mella, Ateneo Libertario Al Margen, Ateneu Enciclopèdic Popular, Ateneo Libertario de Sant Boi and Ateneu Llibertari Poble Sec y Fundació D'Estudis Llibertaris i Anarcosindicalistes republished Émile Armand's writings on free love and individualist anarchism in a compilation titled Individualist anarchism and Amorous camaraderie .

[ 108 ] Individualist anarchism in Latin America [ edit ] Argentine anarchist historian Ángel Cappelletti reports that in Argentina "[a]mong the workers that came from Europe in the 2 first decades of the century, there was curiously some stirnerian individualists influenced by the philosophy of Nietzsche , that saw syndicalism as a potential enemy of anarchist ideology. They established [...] affinity groups that in 1912 came to, according to Max Nettlau , to the number of 20. In 1911 there appeared, in Colón , the periodical El Único , that defined itself as 'Publicación individualista'".

[ 109 ] Developments and expansion [ edit ] Anarcha-feminism, free love, freethought and LGBT issues [ edit ] Main articles: Anarchism and issues related to love and sex , Anarcha-feminism , and Queer anarchism See also: Free love and Freethought In Europe, interest in free love developed in French and Spanish individualist anarchist circles: " Anticlericalism , just as in the rest of the libertarian movement, is another of the frequent elements which will gain relevance related to the measure in which the (French) Republic begins to have conflicts with the church [...] Anti-clerical discourse, frequently called for by the french individualist André Lorulot , will have its impacts in Estudios (a Spanish individualist anarchist publication). There will be an attack on institutionalized religion for the responsibility that it had in the past on negative developments, for its irrationality which makes it a counterpoint of philosophical and scientific progress . There will be a criticism of proselitism and ideological manipulation which happens on both believers and agnostics".

[ 110 ] This tendencies will continue in French individualist anarchism in the work and activism of Charles-Auguste Bontemps and others. In the Spanish individualist anarchist magazine Ética and Iniciales , "there is a strong interest in publishing scientific news, usually linked to a certain atheist and anti-theist obsession, philosophy which will also work for pointing out the incompatibility between science and religion, faith and reason. In this way there will be a lot of talk on Darwin's theories or on the negation of the existence of the soul".

[ 111 ] Anarcho-naturism [ edit ] Main article: Anarcho-naturism Individualist anarchist groups also were affiliated with naturism [ 112 ] and individualist anarchist Henri Zisly promoted naturism in France.

[ 113 ] Criticism [ edit ] This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This "criticism" or "controversy" section may compromise the article's neutrality .

Please help integrate negative information into other sections or remove undue focus on minor aspects through discussion on the talk page .

( July 2025 ) This section contains too many or overly lengthy quotations .

Please help summarise the quotations . Consider transferring direct quotations to Wikiquote or excerpts to Wikisource .

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) See also: Criticism of anarchism Murray Bookchin criticized individualist anarchism for its opposition to democracy and its embrace of " lifestylism " at the expense of anti-capitalism and class struggle .

[ 114 ] George Bernard Shaw initially had flirtations with individualist anarchism before coming to the conclusion that it was "the negation of socialism, and is, in fact, unsocialism carried as near to its logical conclusion as any sane man dare carry it". Shaw's argument was that even if wealth was initially distributed equally, the degree of laissez-faire advocated by Tucker would result in the distribution of wealth becoming unequal because it would permit private appropriation and accumulation.

[ 115 ] According to Carlotta Anderson, American individualist anarchists accept that free competition results in unequal wealth distribution , but they "do not see that as an injustice".

[ 116 ] Nonetheless, Peter Marshall states that "the egalitarian implications of traditional individualist anarchists" such as Tucker and Lysander Spooner have been overlooked.

[ 117 ] Collectivist and social anarchists dispute the individualist anarchist claim that free competition and markets would yield the libertarian - egalitarian anarchist society that individualist anarchists share with them. In their views, "state intervention merely props up a system of class exploitation and gives capitalism a human face".

[ 118 ] The authors of An Anarchist FAQ argue that individualist anarchists did not advocate free competition and markets as normative claims and merely thought those were better means than the ones proposed by anarcho-communists for the development of an anarchist society. Individualist anarchists such as Tucker thought interests, profits, rents and usury would disappear, something that both anarcho-capitalists and social anarchists did not think was true or believe would not happen. In a free market, people would be paid in proportion to how much labor they exerted and exploitation or usury was taking place if they were not. The theory was that unregulated banking would cause more money to be available and that this would allow proliferation of new businesses which would in turn raise demand for labor. This led Tucker to believe that the labor theory of value would be vindicated and equal amounts of labor would receive equal pay. Later in his life, Tucker grew skeptical that free competition could remove concentrated capital.

[ 119 ] Individualist anarchism and anarcho-capitalism [ edit ] Main article: Anarcho-capitalism and individualist anarchism See also: Anarchism and capitalism and Anarcho-capitalism and anarchism While anarcho-capitalism is sometimes described as a form of individualist anarchism, [ 25 ] [ 120 ] [ 121 ] some scholars have criticized those, including some Marxists and right-libertarians , for taking it at face value.

[ 31 ] Other scholars such as Benjamin Franks, who considers anarcho-capitalism part of individualist anarchism and hence excludes those forms of individualist anarchism that defend or reinforce hierarchical forms from the anarchist camp, [ 19 ] have been criticized by those who include individualist anarchism as part of the anarchist and socialist traditions whilst excluding anarcho-capitalism, [ 117 ] [ 31 ] including the authors of An Anarchist FAQ .

[ 3 ] Some anarchist scholars criticized those, especially in Anglo-American philosophy, who define anarchism only in terms of opposition to the state, when anarchism, including both individualist and social traditions, is much more than that.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] [ 124 ] Anarchists, including both individualist and social anarchists, also criticized some Marxists and other socialists for excluding anarchism from the socialist camp.

[ 3 ] In European Socialism: A History of Ideas and Movements , Carl Landauer summarized the difference between communist and individualist anarchists by stating that "the communist anarchists also do not acknowledge any right to society to force the individual. They differ from the anarchistic individualists in their belief that men, if freed from coercion, will enter into voluntary associations of a communistic type, while the other wing believes that the free person will prefer a high degree of isolation".

[ 1 ] [ 125 ] Without the labor theory of value , [ 120 ] some argue that 19th-century individualist anarchists approximate the modern movement of anarcho-capitalism, [ 25 ] [ 121 ] although this has been contested [ 19 ] or rejected.

[ 126 ] As economic theory changed, the popularity of the labor theory of classical economics was superseded by the subjective theory of value of neoclassical economics and Murray Rothbard , a student of Ludwig von Mises , combined Mises' Austrian School of economics with the absolutist views of human rights and rejection of the state he had absorbed from studying the individualist American anarchists of the 19th century such as Tucker and Spooner.

[ 127 ] In the mid-1950s, Rothbard was concerned with differentiating himself from communist and socialistic economic views of other anarchists, including the individualist anarchists of the 19th century, arguing that "we are not anarchists [...] but not archists either [...]. Perhaps, then, we could call ourselves by a new name: nonarchist".

[ 19 ] There is a strong current within anarchism including anarchist activists and scholars which rejects that anarcho-capitalism can be considered a part of the anarchist movement because anarchism has historically been an anti-capitalist movement and anarchists see it as incompatible with capitalist forms.

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] [ 130 ] [ 131 ] [ 132 ] Although some regard anarcho-capitalism as a form of individualist anarchism, [ 133 ] [ 134 ] others contend individualist anarchism is largely socialistic and contest the concept of a socialist–individualist divide.

[ 19 ] [ 135 ] Some writers deny that anarcho-capitalism is a form of anarchism [ 136 ] and that capitalism is compatible with anarchism.

[ 137 ] The Palgrave Handbook of Anarchism writes that "[a]s Benjamin Franks rightly points out, individualisms that defend or reinforce hierarchical forms such as the economic-power relations of anarcho-capitalism are incompatible with practices of social anarchism based on developing immanent goods which contest such as inequalities". Laurence Davis cautiously asks "[I]s anarcho-capitalism really a form of anarchism or instead a wholly different ideological paradigm whose adherents have attempted to expropriate the language of anarchism for their own anti-anarchist ends?" Davis cites Iain McKay , "whom Franks cites as an authority to support his contention that 'academic analysis has followed activist currents in rejecting the view that anarcho-capitalism has anything to do with social anarchism'", as arguing "quite emphatically on the very pages cited by Franks that anarcho-capitalism is by no means a type of anarchism". McKay writes that "[i]t is important to stress that anarchist opposition to the so-called capitalist 'anarchists' does not reflect some kind of debate within anarchism, as many of these types like to pretend, but a debate between anarchism and its old enemy capitalism. [...] Equally, given that anarchists and 'anarcho'-capitalists have fundamentally different analyses and goals it is hardly 'sectarian' to point this out".

[ 138 ] Davis writes that "Franks asserts without supporting evidence that most major forms of individualist anarchism have been largely anarcho-capitalist in content, and concludes from this premise that most forms of individualism are incompatible with anarchism". Davis argues that "the conclusion is unsuistainable because the premise is false, depending as it does for any validity it might have on the further assumption that anarcho-capitalism is indeed a form of anarchism. If we reject this view, then we must also reject the individual anarchist versus the communal anarchist 'chasm' style of argument that follows from it".

[ 138 ] Davis maintains that "the ideological core of anarchism is the belief that society can and should be organised without hierarchy and domination. Historically, anarchists have struggles against a wide range of regimes of domination, from capitalism, the state system, patriarchy , heterosexism , and the domination of nature to colonialism , the war system, slavery , fascism , white supremacy , and certain forms of organised religion ". According to Davis, "[w]hile these visions range from the predominantly individualistic to the predominantly communitarian, features common to virtually all include an emphasis on self-management and self-regulatory methods of organisation, voluntary association , decentralised society, based on the principle of free association, in which people will manage and govern themselves".

[ 139 ] Finally, Davis includes a footnote stating that "[i]ndividualist anarchism may plausibly be re regarded as a form of both socialism and anarchism. Whether the individualist anarchists were consistent anarchists (and socialists) is another question entirely. [...] McKay comments as follows: 'any individualist anarchism which support wage labour is inconsistent anarchism. It can easily be made consistent anarchism by applying its own principles consistently. In contrast 'anarcho'-capitalism rejects so many of the basic, underlying, principles of anarchism [...] that it cannot be made consistent with the ideals of anarchism'".

[ 140 ] See also [ edit ] Anarchism and Friedrich Nietzsche#Individualist anarchism References [ edit ] ^ a b McKay, Iain, ed. (2012) [2008]. "Appendix: Anarchism and 'anarcho'-capitalism".

An Anarchist FAQ . Vol. I/II. Stirling: AK Press.

ISBN 9781849351225 .

^ Dana, Charles Anderson.

Proudhon and his "Bank of the People" . p. 46.

^ a b c d McKay, Iain, ed. (2012) [2008].

An Anarchist FAQ . Vol. I/II. Stirling: AK Press.

ISBN 9781849351225 .

^ a b McKay, Iain.

An Anarchist FAQ .

AK Press. Oakland. 2008. pp 59-60.

^ a b c Leopold, David (2006-08-04).

"Max Stirner" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Díez 2006 , pp. 31–32: "Paralelamente, al otro lado del atlántico, en el diferente contexto de una nación a medio hacer, los Estados Unidos, otros filósofos elaboraron un pensamiento individualista similar, aunque con sus propias especificidades. Henry David Thoreau (1817–1862), uno de los escritores próximos al movimiento de la filosofía trascendentalista, es uno de los más conocidos. Su obra más representativa es Walden, aparecida en 1854, aunque redactada entre 1845 y 1847, cuando Thoreau decide instalarse en el aislamiento de una cabaña en el bosque, y vivir en íntimo contacto con la naturaleza, en una vida de soledad y sobriedad. De esta experiencia, su filosofía trata de transmitirnos la idea que resulta necesario un retorno respetuoso a la naturaleza, y que la felicidad es sobre todo fruto de la riqueza interior y de la armonía de los individuos con el entorno natural. Muchos han visto en Thoreau a uno de los precursores del ecologismo y del anarquismo primitivista representado en la actualidad por Jonh Zerzan. Para George Woodcock, esta actitud puede estar también motivada por una cierta idea de resistencia al progreso y de rechazo al materialismo creciente que caracteriza la sociedad norteamericana de mediados de siglo XIX." ^ a b Freeden, Michael. Ideologies and Political Theory: A Conceptual Approach. Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-829414-X . pp. 313–314 ^ a b Woodcock 1962 .

^ Skirda, Alexandre (2002).

Facing the Enemy: A History of Anarchist Organization from Proudhon to May 1968 . AK Press. p. 191.

^ Jennings, Jeremy (1993). "Anarchism". In Eatwell, Roger; Wright, Anthony (eds.).

Contemporary Political Ideologies . London: Pinter. pp. 127–146.

ISBN 978-0-86187-096-7 . "[...] anarchism does not stand for the untrammelled freedom of the individual (as the 'anarcho-capitalists' appear to believe) but, as we have already seen, for the extension of individuality and community" (p. 143).

^ Gay, Kathlyn; Gay, Martin (1999).

Encyclopedia of Political Anarchy . ABC-CLIO. p. 15.

ISBN 978-0-87436-982-3 . "For many anarchists (of whatever persuasion), anarcho-capitalism is a contradictory term, since 'traditional' anarchists oppose capitalism".

^ Morriss, Andrew (2008). "Anarcho-capitalism". In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . SAGE; Cato Institute. pp. 13–14.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n8 .

ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4 .

OCLC 191924853 . "Social anarchists, those anarchists with communitarian leanings, are critical of anarcho-capitalism because it permits individuals to accumulate substantial power through markets and private property." ^ Franks, Benjamin (August 2013). Freeden, Michael; Stears, Marc (eds.). "Anarchism".

The Oxford Handbook of Political Ideologies . Oxford University Press: 393– 394.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199585977.013.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-958597-7 .

Individualisms that defend or reinforce hierarchical forms such as the economic-power relations of anarcho-capitalism [...] are incompatible with practices of social anarchism. [...] Increasingly, academic analysis has followed activist currents in rejecting the view that anarcho-capitalism has anything to do with social anarchism.

^ McKay, Iain, ed. (2012).

An Anarchist FAQ . Vol. II. Stirling: AK Press.

ISBN 9781849351225 .

No, far from it. Most anarchists in the late nineteenth century recognised communist-anarchism as a genuine form of anarchism and it quickly replaced collectivist anarchism as the dominant tendency. So few anarchists found the individualist solution to the social question or the attempts of some of them to excommunicate social anarchism from the movement convincing.

^ Boyd, Tony; Harrison, Kevin, eds. (2003). "Marxism and Anarchism".

Understanding Political Ideas and Movements . Manchester University Press. p. 251.

ISBN 9780719061516 .

^ McKay, Iain, ed. (2012). "Section G – Is Individualist Anarchism Capitalistic?".

An Anarchist FAQ . Vol. II. Stirling: AK Press.

ISBN 9781849351225 .

^ Carson, Kevin (2017). "Anarchism and Markets". In Jun, Nathan J. (2017).

Brill's Companion to Anarchism and Philosophy . BRILL. p. 81.

ISBN 9789004356894 .

^ McKay, Iain.

An Anarchist FAQ.

AK Press. Oakland. 2008. pp. 59.

^ a b c d e f Franks, Benjamin (August 2013). Freeden, Michael; Stears, Marc (eds.). "Anarchism".

The Oxford Handbook of Political Ideologies . Oxford University Press: 385– 404.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199585977.013.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-958597-7 .

^ Wood, Ellen Meiksins (1972).

Mind and Politics: An Approach to the Meaning of Liberal and Socialist Individualism . University of California Press. p. 7.

ISBN 0520020294 .

^ McKay, Iain.

An Anarchist FAQ.

AK Press. Oakland. 2008. pp 22, 526.

^ a b c Frayne 2022 , p. 11-12.

^ a b c Frayne 2022 , p. 58-63.

^ Curran, Giorel (2007).

"21st century dissent: Anarchism, anti-globalization and environmentalism" (PDF) .

Choice Reviews Online .

44 (10): 44– 5863.

doi : 10.5860/choice.44-5863 (inactive 1 July 2025).

hdl : 10072/12679 .

S2CID 35607336 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-03-03.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ a b c Ostergaard, Geoffrey . "Anarchism".

The Blackwell Dictionary of Modern Social Thought . Blackwell Publishing. p. 14.

^ Meltzer, Albert (2000).

Anarchism: Arguments For and Against . AK Press. p. 50. "The philosophy of 'anarcho-capitalism' dreamed up by the 'libertarian' New Right, has nothing to do with Anarchism as known by the Anarchist movement proper".

^ Goodway, David (2006).

Anarchist Seeds Beneath the Snow: Left-Libertarian Thought and British Writers from William Morris to Colin Ward . Liverpool: Liverpool University Press. p. 4. "'Libertarian' and 'libertarianism' are frequently employed by anarchists as synonyms for 'anarchist' and 'anarchism', largely as an attempt to distance themselves from the negative connotations of 'anarchy' and its derivatives. The situation has been vastly complicated in recent decades with the rise of anarcho-capitalism, 'minimal statism' and an extreme right-wing laissez-faire philosophy advocated by such theorists as Murray Rothbard and Robert Nozick and their adoption of the words 'libertarian' and 'libertarianism'. It has therefore now become necessary to distinguish between their right libertarianism and the left libertarianism of the anarchist tradition".

^ Marshall 1992 , p. 565: "In fact, few anarchists would accept the 'anarcho-capitalists' into the anarchist camp since they do not share a concern for economic equality and social justice, Their self-interested, calculating market men would be incapable of practising voluntary co-operation and mutual aid. Anarcho-capitalists, even if they do reject the State, might therefore best be called right-wing libertarians rather than anarchists".

^ "Section F – Is 'anarcho'-capitalism a type of anarchism?" Archived 2019-09-09 at the Wayback Machine .

An Anarchist FAQ (2008). Published in physical book form by "An Anarchist FAQ" as Volume I. Oakland/Edinburgh: AK Press. 558 pp.

ISBN 9781902593906 .

^ Newman, Saul (2010).

The Politics of Postanarchism, Edinburgh University Press . p. 43.

ISBN 0748634959 . "It is important to distinguish between anarchism and certain strands of right-wing libertarianism which at times go by the same name (for example, Murray Rothbard's anarcho-capitalism)".

^ a b c Adams, Matthew S.; Levy, Carl, eds. (2018).

The Palgrave Handbook of Anarchism . London: Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

64– 66.

ISBN 978-3-319-75619-6 .

^ Carson, Kevin , "A Mutualist FAQ" Archived 2007-07-18 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Díez 2006 , pp. 30–31: "En la vida de todo único, todo vínculo, independientemente de la forma en que éste se presente, supone una cadena que condiciona, y por tanto elimina la condición de persona libre. Ello supone dos consecuencias; la libertad se mantendrá al margen de toda categoría moral. Este último concepto quedará al margen del vocabulario estirneriano, puesto que tanto ética como moral serán dos conceptos absolutos que, como tales, no pueden situarse por encima de la voluntad individual. La libertad se vive siempre al margen de cualquier condicionamiento material o espiritual, 'más allá del bien y del mal' como enunciará Nietzsche en una de sus principales obras. Las creencias colectivas, los prejuicios compartidos, los convencionalismos sociales serán, pues, objeto de destrucción." ^ "Stirner himself, however, has no truck with 'higher beings.' Indeed, with the aim of concerning himself purely with his own interests, he attacks all "higher beings," regarding them as a variety of what he calls "spooks," or ideas to which individuals sacrifice themselves and by which they are dominated. First amongst these is the abstraction "Man", into which all unique individuals are submerged and lost. As he put it, "liberalism is a religion because it separates my essence from me and sets it above me, because it exalts 'Man' to the same extent as any other religion does to God ... it sets me beneath Man." Indeed, he "who is infatuated with Man leaves persons out of account so far as that infatuation extends, and floats in an ideal, sacred interest. Man, you see, is not a person, but an ideal, a spook." [p. 176 and p. 79] Among the many "spooks" Stirner attacks are such notable aspects of capitalist life as private property, the division of labour, the state, religion, and (at times) society itself. We will discuss Stirner's critique of capitalism before moving onto his vision of an egoist society and how it relates to social anarchism.

"G.6 What are the ideas of Max Stirner" Archived November 23, 2010, at the Wayback Machine in An Anarchist FAQ ^ "The first is in regard to the means of action in the here and now (and so the manner in which anarchy will come about). Individualists generally prefer education and the creation of alternative institutions, such as mutual banks, unions, communes, etc. Such activity, they argue, will ensure that present society will gradually develop out of government into an anarchist one. They are primarily evolutionists, not revolutionists, and dislike social anarchists' use of direct action to create revolutionary situations." "A.3.1 What are the differences between individualist and social anarchists?" Archived 2010-11-23 at the Wayback Machine in An Anarchist FAQ ^ Díez 2006 , p. 30: "Toda revolución, pues, hecha en nombre de principios abstractos como igualdad, fraternidad, libertad o humanidad, persigue el mismo fin; anular la voluntad y soberanía del individuo, para así poderlo dominar." ^ Díez 2006 , p. 31: Finalmente, y este es un tema poco resuelto por el filósofo bávaro, resulta evidente que, a pesar de todo culto a la soberanía individual, es necesario y deseable que los individuos cooperen. Pero el peligro de la asociación conlleva la reproducción, an escala diferente, de una sociedad, y es evidente que en este contexto, los individuos deban renunciar a buena parte de su soberanía. Stirner propone "uniones de egoístas", formadas por individuos libres que pueden unirse episódicamente para colaborar, pero evitando la estabilidad o la permanencia." ^ "The unions Stirner desires would be based on free agreement, being spontaneous and voluntary associations drawn together out of the mutual interests of those involved, who would "care best for their welfare if they unite with others." [p. 309] The unions, unlike the state, exist to ensure what Stirner calls "intercourse," or "union" between individuals. To better understand the nature of these associations, which will replace the state, Stirner lists the relationships between friends, lovers, and children at play as examples. [No Gods, No Masters, vol. 1, p. 25] These illustrate the kinds of relationships that maximise an individual's self-enjoyment, pleasure, freedom, and individuality, as well as ensuring that those involved sacrifice nothing while belonging to them. Such associations are based on mutuality and a free and spontaneous co-operation between equals. As Stirner puts it, "intercourse is mutuality, it is the action, the commercium, of individuals." [p. 218] Its aim is "pleasure" and "self-enjoyment." Thus Stirner sought a broad egoism, one which appreciated others and their uniqueness, and so criticised the narrow egoism of people who forgot the wealth others are: "But that would be a man who does not know and cannot appreciate any of the delights emanating from an interest taken in others, from the consideration shown to others. That would be a man bereft of innumerable pleasures, a wretched character ... would he not be a wretched egoist, rather than a genuine Egoist? ... The person who loves a human being is, by virtue of that love, a wealthier man that someone else who loves no one." [No Gods, No Masters, vol. 1, p. 23]" What are the differences between individualist and social anarchists?

^ Brown, Susan Love (1997). "The Free Market as Salvation from Government". In Carrier, James G., ed.

Meanings of the Market: The Free Market in Western Culture . Berg Publishers. p. 107.

ISBN 9781859731499 .

^ Miller, David (1987).

The Blackwell Encyclopaedia of Political Thought . Blackwell Publishing. p. 11.

ISBN 0631227814 .

^ "What my might reaches is my property; and let me claim as property everything I feel myself strong enough to attain, and let me extend my actual property as fas as I entitle, that is, empower myself to take..." From The Ego and Its Own , quoted in Ossar, Michael (1980).

Anarchism in the Dramas of Ernst Toller .

State University of New York Press . p. 27.

ISBN 0873953932 .

^ a b c d Woodcock, George (2004).

Anarchism: A History of Libertarian Ideas and Movements . Broadview Press. p. 20.

ISBN 0140206221 .

^ Parry 1987 , p.

15 .

^ "MARTINET Pierre, Paul, Désiré [dit Pol] [Dictionnaire des anarchistes] – Maitron" (in French) . Retrieved 2025-05-23 .

^ Frayne, Carl Tobias (2021).

"The Anarchist Diet: Vegetarianism and Individualist Anarchism in Early 20th-Century France" .

Journal of Animal Ethics .

11 (2): 86.

doi : 10.5406/janimalethics.11.2.0083 .

ISSN 2156-5414 .

JSTOR 10.5406/janimalethics.11.2.0083 .

^ a b c Parry, Richard. The Bonnot Gang. Rebel Press, 1987. p. 15 ^ Woodcock 1962 : "Anarchist historian George Woodcock reports the incident in which the important Italian social anarchist Errico Malatesta became involved "in a dispute with the individualist anarchists of Paterson , who insisted that anarchism implied no organization at all, and that every man must act solely on his impulses. At last, in one noisy debate, the individual impulse of a certain Ciancabilla directed him to shoot Malatesta, who was badly wounded but obstinately refused to name his assailant." ^ a b Frayne 2022 , p. 71.

^ a b c d e Frayne 2022 , p. 71-73.

^ a b c d e Frayne 2022 , p. 74-78.

^ Frayne 2022 , p. 61.

^ a b " "William Godwin" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 18 August 2024 .

^ McLaughlin, Paul (2007).

Anarchism and Authority: A Philosophical Introduction to Classical Anarchism . Ashgate Publishing. p. 119.

ISBN 978-0754661962 .

^ McLaughlin, Paul (2007).

Anarchism and Authority: A Philosophical Introduction to Classical Anarchism . Ashgate Publishing. p. 123.

ISBN 978-0754661962 .

^ Marshall, Peter (1984).

William Godwin . New Haven: Yale University Press. p. 106.

ISBN 978-0-300-03175-1 .

OCLC 9971338 .

^ "William Godwin, Shelly and Communism" by ALB, The Socialist Standard ^ Rothbard, Murray. " Edmund Burke, Anarchist Archived 2014-01-12 at archive.today ." ^ Weisbord, Albert (1937).

"Libertarianism" .

The Conquest of Power .

New York : Covici-Friede.

OCLC 1019295 .

Archived from the original on 2018-05-23 . Retrieved 2008-08-05 .

^ "Anarchism" Archived 2009-02-16 at the Wayback Machine , BBC Radio 4 program, In Our Time , Thursday December 7, 2006. Hosted by Melvyn Bragg of the BBC, with John Keane, Professor of Politics at University of Westminster , Ruth Kinna , Senior Lecturer in Politics at Loughborough University , and Peter Marshall , philosopher and historian.

^ George Edward Rines, ed. (1918).

"Anarchism" .

Encyclopedia Americana . New York: Encyclopedia Americana Corp. p. 624.

OCLC 7308909 .

^ Hamilton, Peter (1995).

Émile Durkheim . New York: Routledge. p. 79.

ISBN 0415110475 .

^ Faguet, Émile (1970).

Politicians & Moralists of the Nineteenth Century . Freeport: Books for Libraries Press. p. 147.

ISBN 0836918282 .

^ Bowen, James; Purkis, Jon (2004).

Changing Anarchism: Anarchist Theory and Practice in a Global Age . Manchester University Press. p.

24 .

ISBN 9780719066948 .

^ Knowles, Rob (Winter 2000). "Political Economy From Below: Communitarian Anarchism as a Neglected Discourse in Histories of Economic Thought".

History of Economics Review .

31 (31): 30– 47.

doi : 10.1080/10370196.2000.11733332 .

S2CID 141027974 .

^ Moggach, Douglas. The New Hegelians. Cambridge University Press. p. 177.

^ Goodway, David (2006).

Anarchist Seeds Beneath the Snow . Liverpool University Press. p.

99 .

ISBN 1846310261 .

^ Moggach, Douglas. The New Hegelians. Cambridge University Press, 2006 p. 190.

^ Moggach, Douglas. The New Hegelians. Cambridge University Press, 2006 p. 183.

^ The Encyclopedia Americana: A Library of Universal Knowledge. Encyclopedia Corporation. p. 176 ^ Heider, Ulrike.

Anarchism: Left, Right and Green , San Francisco: City Lights Books, 1994, pp. 95–96 ^ Thomas, Paul (1985).

Karl Marx and the Anarchists . London: Routledge / Kegan Paul . p.

142 .

ISBN 0710206852 .

^ Nyberg, Svein Olav.

"The union of egoists" (PDF) .

Non Serviam .

1 . Oslo, Norway: Svein Olav Nyberg: 13– 14.

OCLC 47758413 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 December 2010 . Retrieved 1 September 2012 .

^ Moggach, Douglas. The New Hegelians. Cambridge University Press, 2006 p. 191 ^ Carlson, Andrew (1972).

"Philosophical Egoism: German Antecedents" .

Anarchism in Germany . Metuchen: Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 0810804840 . Archived from the original on 2008-12-10 . Retrieved 2008-12-04 .

^ Moggach, Douglas. The New Hegelians. Cambridge University Press, 2006 p. 194 ^ McKay, Iain, ed. (2012). "What are the ideas of Max Stirner?".

An Anarchist FAQ . Vol. II. Stirling: AK Press.

ISBN 9781849351225 .

^ Weir , David. Anarchy & Culture.

University of Massachusetts Press . 1997. p. 146 ^ a b c Levy, Carl. " Anarchism ". Microsoft Encarta Online Encyclopedia 2007.

Archived 2009-10-13 at the Wayback Machine 2009-10-31.

^ Avrich, Paul. "The Anarchists in the Russian Revolution".

Russian Review , Vol. 26, No. 4. (Oct., 1967). p. 343 ^ Díez 2007 , p. 42.

^ Madison, Charles A. (1945). "Anarchism in the United States".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

6 (1). University of Pennsylvania Press: 46– 66.

doi : 10.2307/2707055 .

JSTOR 2707055 .

^ Johnson, Ellwood.

The Goodly Word: The Puritan Influence in America Literature , Clements Publishing, 2005, p. 138.

^ Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences , edited by Edwin Robert Anderson Seligman, Alvin Saunders Johnson, 1937, p. 12.

^ a b c Native American Anarchism: A Study of Left-Wing American Individualism by Eunice Minette Schuster Archived February 13, 2016, at the Wayback Machine ^ Wilbur, Shawn P. (2018). "Mutualism". In Adams, Matthew S.; Levy, Carl.

The Palgrave Handbook of Anarchism . Springer. p. 221.

ISBN 9783319756202 .

^ Madison, Charles A. "Anarchism in the United States." Journal of the History of Ideas , Vol 6, No 1, January 1945, p. 53.

^ Schwartzman, Jack. "Ingalls, Hanson, and Tucker: Nineteenth-Century American Anarchists." American Journal of Economics and Sociology , Vol. 62, No. 5 (November 2003). p. 325.

^ Woodcock 1962 , p. 459.

^ Brooks, Frank H. 1994.

The Individualist Anarchists: An Anthology of Liberty (1881–1908). Transaction Publishers. p. 75.

^ "G.1.4 Why is the social context important in evaluating Individualist Anarchism?" in An Anarchist FAQ Archived March 15, 2013, at the Wayback Machine ^ Stanford, Jim. Economics for Everyone: A Short Guide to the Economics of Capitalism. Ann Arbor: MI., Pluto Press. 2008. p. 36.

^ Avrich, Paul . 2006.

Anarchist Voices: An Oral History of Anarchism in America .

AK Press . p. 6.

^ Díez 2007 , p. 60.

^ Woodcock 1962 : "On the fringe of the movement, and particularly in the individualist faction which became relatively strong after 1900 and began to publish its own sectarian paper, – 315 – L'Anarchie ( 1905–14), there were groups and individuals who lived largely by crime. Among them were some of the most original as well as some of the most tragic figures in anarchist history." ^ a b c d e f Díez 2006 .

^ Riley, Thomas A. (1945). "New England Anarchism in Germany".

The New England Quarterly .

18 (1): 25– 38.

doi : 10.2307/361389 .

ISSN 0028-4866 .

JSTOR 361389 .

^ Mitzman, Arthur (1977).

"Anarchism, Expressionism and Psychoanalysis" .

New German Critique (10): 77– 104.

doi : 10.2307/487673 .

JSTOR 487673 .

^ Woodcock 1962 : "At this point, encouraged by the disillusionment that followed the breakdown of the general strike, the terrorist individualists who had always – despite Malatesta's influence – survived as a small minority among Italian anarchists, intervened frightfully and tragically." ^ Woodcock 1962 : "in a dispute with the individualist anarchists of Paterson , who insisted that anarchism implied no organization at all, and that every man must act solely on his impulses. At last, in one noisy debate, the individual impulse of a certain Ciancabilla directed him to shoot Malatesta, who was badly wounded but obstinately refused to name his assailant." ^ a b c d Avrich, Paul (2006).

The Russian Anarchists . Stirling: AK Press . p. 56.

ISBN 1904859488 .

^ Avrich 2006 , p. 180.

^ Avrich 2006 , p. 254.

^ Chernyi, Lev (1923) [1907].

Novoe Napravlenie v Anarkhizme: Asosiatsionnii Anarkhism (Moscow; 2nd ed.). New York.

^ Antliff, Allan (2007).

"Anarchy, Power, and Poststructuralism" (PDF) .

SubStance .

36 (113): 56– 66.

doi : 10.1353/sub.2007.0026 .

S2CID 146156609 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-04-08 . Retrieved 2008-03-10 .

^ a b c Díez 2007 .

^ Díez 2006 , p. 47: "Entre los redactores y colaboradores de Al Margen, que trasladará su redacción a Elda, en Alicante, encontraremos a Miguel Giménez Igualada ..." ^ Díez 2006 , p. 48: "A partir de la década de los treinta, su pensamiento empieza a derivar hacia el individualismo, y como profundo estirneriano tratará de impulsar una federación de individualistas" ^ "Individualismo anarquista y camaradería amorosa" Archived 2009-07-19 at the Wayback Machine by Émile Armand ^ Rama, Carlos M; Cappellett, Ángel J (1990).

El Anarquismo en América Latina (in Spanish). Fundacion Biblioteca Ayacuch. p. CLVII.

ISBN 9789802761173 .

anarquismo nietzsche.

^ Díez 2007 , p. 143.

^ Díez 2007 , p. 152.

^ Boni, Stefano (2010). "Naturism".

The International Encyclopedia of Revolution and Protest . John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. pp.

1– 2.

doi : 10.1002/9781405198073.wbierp1713 .

ISBN 978-1-4051-9807-3 .

From the 1880s, anarcho-individualist publications and teachings promoted the social emancipatory function of naturism and denounced deforestation, mechanization, civilization, and urbanization as corrupting effects of the consolidating industrial-capitalist order.

^ Boni, Stefano (2010). "Zisly, Henri (1872–1945)".

The International Encyclopedia of Revolution and Protest . John Wiley & Sons. p. 1.

doi : 10.1002/9781405198073.wbierp1749 .

ISBN 978-1-4051-9807-3 .

Henri Zisly, self-labeled individualist anarchist, is considered one of the forerunners and principal organizers of the naturist movement in France and one of its most able and outspoken defenders worldwide.

^ Morris, Brian (2014).

"The Political Legacy of Murray Bookchin" .

Anthropology, Ecology, and Anarchism: A Brian Morris Reader .

PM Press . pp.

169– 170.

ISBN 978-1-60486-986-6 .

^ Griffith, Gareth.

Socialism and Superior Brain: The Political Thought of George Bernard Shaw . Routledge (UK). 1993. p. 310.

^ Anderson, Carlotta R.

All-American Anarchist: Joseph A. Labadie and the Labor Movement , Wayne State University Press, 1998, p. 250.

^ a b Marshall 1992 , pp. 564–565.

^ Heywood, Andrew (16 February 2017). "Anarchism". Political Ideologies: An Introduction (6th ed.). London: Macmillan International Higher Education. p. 146.

ISBN 9781137606044 . "Collectivist anarchists argue that state intervention merely props up a system of class exploitation and gives capitalism a human face. Individualist anarchists suggest that intervention distorts the competitive market and creates economies dominated by both public and private monopolies." ^ McKain, Ian, ed. (2008).

"Is individualist anarchism capitalistic?" Archived 2020-10-24 at the Wayback Machine An Anarchist FAQ .

I Oakland: AK Press.

ISBN 9781902593906 .

^ a b Avrich, Paul (1996).

Anarchist Voices: An Oral History of Anarchism in America (abridged paperback ed.). Princeton: Princeton University Press. p. 282.

ISBN 9780691044941 . "Although there are many honorable exceptions who still embrace the 'socialist' label, most people who call themselves individualist anarchists today are followers of Murray Rothbard's Austrian economics, and have abandoned the labor theory of value." ^ a b Outhwaite, William (2003).

The Blackwell Dictionary of Modern Social Thought . "Anarchism". Hoboken: Wiley-Blackwell. p. 13.

ISBN 9780631221647 . "Their successors today, such as Murray Rothbard, having abandoned the labor theory of value, describe themselves as anarcho-capitalists." ^ McLaughlin, Paul (2007).

Anarchism and Authority: A Philosophical Introduction to Classical Anarchism . Ashgate.

pp. 28 Archived 2024-02-08 at the Wayback Machine –166.

ISBN 9780754661962 . "Anarchists do reject the state, as we will see. But to claim that this central aspect of anarchism is definitive is to sell anarchism short. [...] [Opposition to the state] is (contrary to what many scholars believe) not definitive of anarchism ." ^ Jun, Nathan (September 2009). "Anarchist Philosophy and Working Class Struggle: A Brief History and Commentary".

WorkingUSA .

12 (3): 505–519.

doi : 10.1111/j.1743-4580.2009.00251.x .

ISSN 1089-7011 . "One common misconception, which has been rehearsed repeatedly by the few Anglo-American philosophers who have bothered to broach the topic [...] is that anarchism can be defined solely in terms of opposition to states and governments" (p. 507).

^ Franks, Benjamin (August 2013). Freeden, Michael; Stears, Marc (eds.). "Anarchism".

The Oxford Handbook of Political Ideologies . Oxford University Press: 385–404.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199585977.013.0001 . "[M]any, questionably, regard anti-statism as the irremovable, universal principle at the core of anarchism. [...] The fact that [anarchists and anarcho-capitalists] share a core concept of 'anti-statism', which is often advanced as [...] a commonality between them [...], is insufficient to produce a shared identity [...] because [they interpret] the concept of state-rejection [...] differently despite the initial similarity in nomenclature" (pp. 386–388).

^ Landauer, Carl (1960).

European Socialism: A History of Ideas and Movements . University of California Press. p. 127.

^ Wieck, David (1978).

"Anarchist Justice" Archived 2020-09-28 at the Wayback Machine . In Chapman, John W.; Pennock, J. Roland Pennock, eds.

Anarchism: Nomos XIX . New York: New York University Press. pp. 227–228. "Out of the history of anarchist thought and action Rothbard has pulled forth a single thread, the thread of individualism, and defines that individualism in a way alien even to the spirit of a Max Stirner or a Benjamin Tucker, whose heritage I presume he would claim – to say nothing of how alien is his way to the spirit of Godwin, Proudhon, Bakunin, Kropotkin, Malatesta, and the historically anonymous persons who through their thoughts and action have tried to give anarchism a living meaning. Out of this thread Rothbard manufactures one more bourgeois ideology." Retrieved 7 April 2020.

^ Miller, David, ed. (1987).

The Blackwell Encyclopaedia of Political Thought . Hoboken: Wiley-Blackwell. p. 290.

ISBN 0-631-17944-5 .

^ Marshall 1992 , pp. 564–565: "Anarcho-capitalists are against the State simply because they are capitalists first and foremost. [...] They are not concerned with the social consequences of capitalism for the weak, powerless and ignorant. [...] As such, anarcho-capitalism overlooks the egalitarian implications of traditional individualist anarchists like Spooner and Tucker. In fact, few anarchists would accept the 'anarcho-capitalists' into the anarchist camp since they do not share a concern for economic equality and social justice. Their self-interested, calculating market men would be incapable of practising voluntary co-operation and mutual aid. Anarcho-capitalists, even if they do reject the state, might therefore best be called right-wing libertarians rather than anarchists." ^ Meltzer, Albert (2000).

Anarchism: Arguments For and Against . Oakland: AK Press. p. 50. "The philosophy of 'anarcho-capitalism' dreamed up by the 'libertarian' New Right, has nothing to do with Anarchism as known by the Anarchist movement proper." ^ Goodway, David (2006).

Anarchist Seeds Beneath the Snow: Left-Libertarian Thought and British Writers from William Morris to Colin Ward . Liverpool: Liverpool University Press. p. 4. "'Libertarian' and 'libertarianism' are frequently employed by anarchists as synonyms for 'anarchist' and 'anarchism', largely as an attempt to distance themselves from the negative connotations of 'anarchy' and its derivatives. The situation has been vastly complicated in recent decades with the rise of anarcho-capitalism, 'minimal statism' and an extreme right-wing laissez-faire philosophy advocated by such theorists as Rothbard and Nozick and their adoption of the words 'libertarian' and 'libertarianism'. It has therefore now become necessary to distinguish between their right libertarianism and the left libertarianism of the anarchist tradition." ^ Newman, Saul (2010).

The Politics of Postanarchism . Edinburgh University Press. p. 43. "It is important to distinguish between anarchism and certain strands of right-wing libertarianism which at times go by the same name (for example, Rothbard's anarcho-capitalism)." ISBN 0748634959 ^ McKain, Ian, ed. (2008).

"Is 'anarcho'-capitalism a type of anarchism?" Archived 2019-09-09 at the Wayback Machine An Anarchist FAQ .

I Oakland: AK Press.

ISBN 9781902593906 .

^ Bottomore, Tom (1991). "Anarchism".

A Dictionary of Marxist Thought . Oxford: Blackwell Reference. p.

21 .

ISBN 0-63118082-6 .

^ See Alan and Trombley, Stephen (Eds.) Bullock, The Norton Dictionary of Modern Thought , W. W. Norton & Co (1999), p. 30.

Barry, Norman.

Modern Political Theory , 2000, Palgrave, p. 70.

Adams, Ian.

Political Ideology Today , Manchester University Press (2002) ISBN 0-7190-6020-6 , p. 135.

Grant, Moyra.

Key Ideas in Politics , Nelson Thomas 2003 ISBN 0-7487-7096-8 , p. 91.

Heider, Ulrike.

Anarchism: Left, Right, and Green , City Lights, 1994. p. 3.

Avrich, Paul .

Anarchist Voices: An Oral History of Anarchism in America , Abridged Paperback Edition (1996), p. 282.

Tormey, Simon.

Anti-Capitalism , One World, 2004. pp. 118–119.

Raico, Ralph .

Authentic German Liberalism of the 19th Century , École Polytechnique, Centre de Recherche en Épistémologie Appliquée, Unité associée au CNRS, 2004.

Busky, Donald. Democratic Socialism: A Global Survey, Praeger/Greenwood (2000), p. 4.

Heywood, Andrew. Politics: Second Edition, Palgrave (2002), p. 61.

Offer, John.

Herbert Spencer: Critical Assessments , Routledge (UK) (2000), p. 243.

^ McKay, Iain, ed. (2012).

An Anarchist FAQ . Vol. II. Stirling: AK Press.

ISBN 9781849351225 .

^ See K, David. "What is Anarchism?" Bastard Press (2005) Marshall 1992 , Chapter 38 MacSaorsa, Iain. "Is 'anarcho' capitalism against the state?" Spunk Press (archive) Wells, Sam. "Anarcho-Capitalism is Not Anarchism, and Political Competition is Not Economic Competition" Frontlines 1 (January 1979) ^ See Peikoff, Leonard. 'Objectivism: The Philosophy of Ayn Rand' Dutton Adult (1991) Chapter "Government" Doyle, Kevin. 'Crypto Anarchy, Cyberstates, and Pirate Utopias' New York: Lexington Books, (2002) pp. 447–48 Sheehan, Seán M. 'Anarchism' Reaktion Books, 2003 p. 17 Kelsen, Hans. The Communist Theory of Law. Wm. S. Hein Publishing (1988) p. 110 Egbert. Tellegen, Maarten. Wolsink 'Society and Its Environment: an introduction' Routledge (1998) p. 64 Jones, James 'The Merry Month of May' Akashic Books (2004) pp. 37–38 Sparks, Chris. Isaacs, Stuart 'Political Theorists in Context' Routledge (2004) p. 238 Bookchin, Murray. 'Post-Scarcity Anarchism' AK Press (2004) p. 37 Berkman, Alexander. 'Life of an Anarchist' Seven Stories Press (2005) p. 268.

^ a b Adams, Matthew S.; Levy, Carl, eds. (2018).

The Palgrave Handbook of Anarchism . London: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 64.

ISBN 978-3-319-75619-6 .

^ Adams, Matthew S.; Levy, Carl, eds. (2018).

The Palgrave Handbook of Anarchism . London: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 65.

ISBN 978-3-319-75619-6 .

^ Adams, Matthew S.; Levy, Carl, eds. (2018).

The Palgrave Handbook of Anarchism . London: Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

65– 66.

ISBN 978-3-319-75619-6 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Díez, Xavier (2006).

"La insumisión voluntaria. El anarquismo individualista español durante la dictadura y la segund arepública (1923-1938)" .

Germinal: Revista de estudios libertarios (in Spanish) (1): 23– 58.

ISSN 1886-3019 .

Díez, Xavier (2007).

El anarquismo individualista en España 1923–1938 (in Spanish). Barcelona: Virus Editorial.

ISBN 978-84-96044-87-6 .

Archived from the original on March 23, 2021 . Retrieved June 24, 2017 .

Frayne, Carl Tobias (2022), Individualist Anarchism in France and Its Legacy (PhD thesis) , Cambridge: University of Cambridge, doi : 10.17863/CAM.80240 Marshall, Peter (1992).

Demanding the Impossible: A History of Anarchism . London: HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0-00-217855-6 .

Parry, Richard (1987).

The Bonnot Gang . London: Rebel Press.

ISBN 0-946061-04-1 .

Woodcock, George (1962).

Anarchism: A History of Libertarian Ideas and Movements . Cleveland: World Publishing Company.

OCLC 911230882 .

Further reading [ edit ] Brooks, Frank H., ed. (1994).

The Individualist Anarchists: An Anthology of Liberty (1881–1908) .

New Brunswick : Transaction Publishers .

ISBN 1-56000-132-1 .

LCCN 93-30303 .

Carson, Kevin (2017). "Anarchism and Markets". In Jun, Nathan (ed.).

Brill's Companion to Anarchism and Philosophy . Leiden: Brill . pp.

81– 119.

doi : 10.1163/9789004356894_005 .

ISBN 978-90-04-35689-4 .

Archived from the original on 2021-11-08 . Retrieved 2023-11-07 .

Chartier, Gary; Johnson, Charles W., eds. (2011).

Markets Not Capitalism: Individualist Anarchism Against Bosses, Inequality, Corporate Power, and Structural Poverty .

Brooklyn : Minor Compositions .

ISBN 978-1-57027-242-4 .

Davis, Laurence (2019). "Individual and Community". In Levy, Carl; Adams, Matthew S. (eds.).

The Palgrave Handbook of Anarchism .

Palgrave Macmillan . pp.

47– 70.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-75620-2_3 .

ISBN 978-3-319-75620-2 .

LCCN 2018942897 .

S2CID 150149495 .

Egoumenides, Magda (2020). "Anarchism and Political Obligation". In Chartier, Gary; Van Schoelandt, Chad (eds.).

The Routledge Handbook of Anarchy and Anarchist Thought .

New York : Routledge . pp.

207– 221.

doi : 10.4324/9781315185255-14 .

ISBN 9781315185255 .

S2CID 228898569 .

Long, Roderick T. (2017). "Anarchism and Libertarianism". In Jun, Nathan (ed.).

Brill's Companion to Anarchism and Philosophy .

Leiden : Brill . pp.

285– 317.

doi : 10.1163/9789004356894_012 .

ISBN 978-90-04-35689-4 .

Archived from the original on 2021-11-08 . Retrieved 2023-11-07 .

Long, Roderick T. (2020). "The Anarchist Landscape". In Chartier, Gary; Van Schoelandt, Chad (eds.).

The Routledge Handbook of Anarchy and Anarchist Thought .

New York : Routledge . pp.

28– 38.

doi : 10.4324/9781315185255-2 .

ISBN 9781315185255 .

S2CID 228898569 .

Mack, Eric (2020). "Rights, Morality and Egoism in Individualist Anarchism". In Chartier, Gary; Van Schoelandt, Chad (eds.).

The Routledge Handbook of Anarchy and Anarchist Thought .

New York : Routledge . pp.

126– 151.

doi : 10.4324/9781315185255-9 .

ISBN 9781315185255 .

S2CID 228898569 .

Parvulescu, Constantin (2018).

The Individualist Anarchism of Early Interwar Germany .

Cluj University Press .

ISBN 978-606-37-0486-4 .

Perraudeau, Michel (2011).

Dictionnaire de l'individualisme libertaire (in French). éditions Libertaires.

ISBN 978-2-919568-06-2 .

Rocker, Rudolf (1949).

Pioneers of American Freedom: Origin of Liberal and Radical Thought in America . Translated by Briggs, Arthur E.

Los Angeles : Rocker Publishing Committee.

Ryley, Peter (2019). "Individualism". In Levy, Carl; Adams, Matthew S. (eds.).

The Palgrave Handbook of Anarchism .

Palgrave Macmillan . pp.

225– 236.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-75620-2_12 .

ISBN 978-3-319-75620-2 .

LCCN 2018942897 .

S2CID 242080801 .

Sartwell, Crispin (2017). "Anarchism and Nineteenth-Century American Political Thought". In Jun, Nathan (ed.).

Brill's Companion to Anarchism and Philosophy .

Leiden : Brill . pp.

454– 483.

doi : 10.1163/9789004356894_018 .

ISBN 978-90-04-35689-4 .

Archived from the original on 2021-11-08 . Retrieved 2023-11-07 .

Skoble, Aeon (2008).

"Individualist Anarchism" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE ; Cato Institute . pp.

243– 44.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n149 .

ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

Archived from the original on 2023-01-09 . Retrieved 2016-03-18 .

Sonn, Richard D. (2010).

Sex, Violence, and the Avant-Garde: Anarchism in Interwar France .

Penn State University Press .

ISBN 978-0-271-03663-2 .

Steiner, Anne (2008).

Les en-dehors: Anarchistes individualistes et illégalistes à la " Belle époque " (in French). L'Echappée.

Various Authors (2011).

Enemies of Society: An Anthology of Individualist & Egoist Thought . Ardent Press.

Vest, J. Martin (2020). "Barbarians in the Agora: American Market Anarchism, 1945–2011". In Chartier, Gary; Van Schoelandt, Chad (eds.).

The Routledge Handbook of Anarchy and Anarchist Thought . New York: Routledge . pp.

112– 125.

doi : 10.4324/9781315185255-8 .

ISBN 9781315185255 .

S2CID 228898569 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Individualist anarchism .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Individualist anarchism .

Archives of individualist ( Archived 2014-02-01 at the Wayback Machine ) and egoist texts at the Anarchist Library.

v t e Anarchism Concepts Anarchy Anarchist Black Cross Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-militarism Affinity group Autonomous social center Black bloc Classless society Class struggle Consensus decision-making Conscientious objector Critique of work Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Law Mutual aid Participatory politics Permanent autonomous zone Prefigurative politics Proletarian internationalism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Revolution Rewilding Sabotage Security culture Self-ownership Social ecology Sociocracy Somatherapy Spontaneous order Squatting Temporary autonomous zone Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council Issues Animal rights Capitalism Education Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence Schools of thought Classical Individualist Egoist Illegalist Naturist Philosophical Mutualist Social Collectivist Communist Magonist Post-classical Feminist Green Primitivist Social ecology Independence Insurrectionary Pacifist Religious Christian Buddhist Jewish Without adjectives Contemporary Black Free-market Postcolonial Post-anarchist Post-left Queer Types of federation Affinity group Anarcho-syndicalism Platformism Anarchist synthesis Union of egoists Economics Communization Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association General strike Gift economy Give-away shop Labor voucher Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' self-management Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K.

Architecture Arts DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale Lifestylism May Day " No gods, no masters " Popular education " Property is theft!

" Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Durruti Ellul Ervin Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals By region Africa Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Finland France French Guiana Georgia Germany Greece Guatemala Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Korea Latvia Malaysia Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria ( DAANES ) Taiwan Timor-Leste Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States ( Puerto Rico ) Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-statism Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomism Communism Definition of anarchism and libertarianism Dual power IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Category Outline v t e Libertarianism Origins Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Schools Libertarian capitalism ( Right-libertarianism ) Anarcho-capitalism Autarchism Fusionism Libertarianism bleeding-heart christian consequentialist conservative feminism geo green natural-rights neo paleo paternalism techno crypto transhumanism Libertarian authoritarianism neo-reactionary Minarchism Neo-classical liberalism Objectivism Propertarianism Voluntaryism Libertarian socialism ( Left-libertarianism ) Anarchism black collectivist communist feminism free-market agorism green individualist egoist insurrectionary libertarian communism mutualism pacifist philosophical queer social syndicalist Autonomism Communalism Guild socialism Libertarian Marxism communization mao-spontex Syndicalism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Philosophers Left-wing Bakunin Bookchin Camus Chomsky Cleyre Déjacque Fourier Godwin Goldman Guérin Hodgskin Kropotkin Marcuse Öcalan Proudhon Warren Tucker Right-wing Bastiat Block Brennan Emerson D. Friedman M. Friedman R. Friedman Goldwater Hayek Herbert Hoppe Jillette Kinsella Korwin-Mikke Lane Locke von Mises de Molinari Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Read Rothbard Simon Spencer Stossel Other George Hess Konkin de La Boétie McElroy Paine Spooner Stirner Szasz Thoreau Politicians Cleveland Coolidge Farage Gandhi Johnson Jorgensen Korwin-Mikke Milei Paul Sarwark Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Works Atlas Shrugged (1957) The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto (1973) Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973–1979) Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974) Free to Choose (1980) Related Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Outline of libertarianism Portal : Anarchism Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐7lmb4
Cached time: 20250812014616
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.777 seconds
Real time usage: 1.986 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9814/1000000
Revision size: 99784/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 351417/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12713/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 33/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 411390/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.158/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9770521/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1629.915      1 -total
 29.94%  488.066      1 Template:Reflist
 22.36%  364.491     52 Template:Cite_book
 18.71%  304.896      5 Template:Navbox
 17.53%  285.725      1 Template:Anarchism
 14.91%  243.015      9 Template:Excerpt
  9.76%  159.124     40 Template:Sfn
  8.24%  134.361      1 Template:Multiple_issues
  7.01%  114.196      1 Template:Anarchism_sidebar
  6.20%  101.010      2 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:14936:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014616 and revision id 1300611369. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Individualist_anarchism&oldid=1300611369 " Categories : Individualist anarchism Anarchist schools of thought Anarchist terminology Individualism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism by form Political theories Hidden categories: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) Webarchive template archiveis links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with criticism or controversy sections from July 2025 All articles with criticism or controversy sections Wikipedia articles with style issues from July 2025 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 10:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Individualist anarchism 33 languages Add topic

