Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Fundamental aspects 2 Relationship to continuum mechanics 3 Response models 4 Timeline 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Notes 6.2 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Solid mechanics 39 languages العربية Asturianu বাংলা Беларуская Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Македонски मराठी Bahasa Melayu 日本語 ភាសាខ្មែរ Português Română Русский සිංහල Simple English Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of mechanics concerned with solid materials and their behaviors This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( December 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Continuum mechanics J = − − D d φ φ d x {\displaystyle J=-D{\frac {d\varphi }{dx}}} Fick's laws of diffusion Laws Conservations Mass Momentum Energy Inequalities Clausius–Duhem (entropy) Solid mechanics Deformation Elasticity linear Plasticity Hooke's law Stress Strain Finite strain Infinitesimal strain Compatibility Bending Contact mechanics frictional Material failure theory Fracture mechanics Fluid mechanics Fluids Statics · Dynamics Archimedes' principle · Bernoulli's principle Navier–Stokes equations Poiseuille equation · Pascal's law Viscosity ( Newtonian · non-Newtonian ) Buoyancy · Mixing · Pressure Liquids Adhesion Capillary action Chromatography Cohesion (chemistry) Surface tension Gases Atmosphere Boyle's law Charles's law Combined gas law Fick's law Gay-Lussac's law Graham's law Plasma Rheology Viscoelasticity Rheometry Rheometer Smart fluids Electrorheological Magnetorheological Ferrofluids Scientists Bernoulli Boyle Cauchy Charles Euler Fick Gay-Lussac Graham Hooke Newton Navier Noll Pascal Stokes Truesdell v t e Solid mechanics (also known as mechanics of solids ) is the branch of continuum mechanics that studies the behavior of solid materials, especially their motion and deformation under the action of forces , temperature changes, phase changes, and other external or internal agents.

Solid mechanics is fundamental for civil , aerospace , nuclear , biomedical and mechanical engineering , for geology , and for many branches of physics and chemistry such as materials science .

[ 1 ] It has specific applications in many other areas, such as understanding the anatomy of living beings, and the design of dental prostheses and surgical implants . One of the most common practical applications of solid mechanics is the Euler–Bernoulli beam equation . Solid mechanics extensively uses tensors to describe stresses, strains, and the relationship between them.

Solid mechanics is a vast subject because of the wide range of solid materials available, such as steel, wood, concrete, biological materials, textiles, geological materials, and plastics.

Fundamental aspects [ edit ] A solid is a material that can support a substantial amount of shearing force over a given time scale during a natural or industrial process or action. This is what distinguishes solids from fluids , because fluids also support normal forces which are those forces that are directed perpendicular to the material plane across from which they act and normal stress is the normal force per unit area of that material plane.

Shearing forces in contrast with normal forces , act parallel rather than perpendicular to the material plane and the shearing force per unit area is called shear stress .

Therefore, solid mechanics examines the shear stress, deformation and the failure of solid materials and structures.

The most common topics covered in solid mechanics include: stability of structures - examining whether structures can return to a given equilibrium after disturbance or partial/complete failure, see Structure mechanics dynamical systems and chaos - dealing with mechanical systems highly sensitive to their given initial position thermomechanics - analyzing materials with models derived from principles of thermodynamics biomechanics - solid mechanics applied to biological materials e.g. bones, heart tissue geomechanics - solid mechanics applied to geological materials e.g. ice, soil, rock vibrations of solids and structures - examining vibration and wave propagation from vibrating particles and structures i.e. vital in mechanical, civil, mining, aeronautical, maritime/marine, aerospace engineering fracture and damage mechanics - dealing with crack-growth mechanics in solid materials composite materials - solid mechanics applied to materials made up of more than one compound e.g.

reinforced plastics , reinforced concrete , fiber glass variational formulations and computational mechanics - numerical solutions to mathematical equations arising from various branches of solid mechanics e.g.

finite element method (FEM) experimental mechanics - design and analysis of experimental methods to examine the behavior of solid materials and structures Relationship to continuum mechanics [ edit ] As shown in the following table, solid mechanics inhabits a central place within continuum mechanics. The field of rheology presents an overlap between solid and fluid mechanics .

Continuum mechanics The study of the physics of continuous materials Solid mechanics The study of the physics of continuous materials with a defined rest shape.

Elasticity Describes materials that return to their rest shape after applied stresses are removed.

Plasticity Describes materials that permanently deform after a sufficient applied stress.

Rheology The study of materials with both solid and fluid characteristics.

Fluid mechanics The study of the physics of continuous materials which deform when subjected to a force.

Non-Newtonian fluid Do not undergo strain rates proportional to the applied shear stress.

Newtonian fluids undergo strain rates proportional to the applied shear stress.

Response models [ edit ] A material has a rest shape and its shape departs away from the rest shape due to stress. The amount of departure from rest shape is called deformation , the proportion of deformation to original size is called strain. If the applied stress is sufficiently low (or the imposed strain is small enough), almost all solid materials behave in such a way that the strain is directly proportional to the stress; the coefficient of the proportion is called the modulus of elasticity . This region of deformation is known as the linearly elastic region.

It is most common for analysts in solid mechanics to use linear material models, due to ease of computation. However, real materials often exhibit non-linear behavior. As new materials are used and old ones are pushed to their limits, non-linear material models are becoming more common.

These are basic models that describe how a solid responds to an applied stress: Elasticity – When an applied stress is removed, the material returns to its undeformed state. Linearly elastic materials, those that deform proportionally to the applied load, can be described by the linear elasticity equations such as Hooke's law .

Viscoelasticity – These are materials that behave elastically, but also have damping : when the stress is applied and removed, work has to be done against the damping effects and is converted in heat within the material resulting in a hysteresis loop in the stress–strain curve. This implies that the material response has time-dependence.

Plasticity – Materials that behave elastically generally do so when the applied stress is less than a yield value. When the stress is greater than the yield stress, the material behaves plastically and does not return to its previous state. That is, deformation that occurs after yield is permanent.

Viscoplasticity - Combines theories of viscoelasticity and plasticity and applies to materials like gels and mud .

Thermoelasticity - There is coupling of mechanical with thermal responses. In general, thermoelasticity is concerned with elastic solids under conditions that are neither isothermal nor adiabatic. The simplest theory involves the Fourier's law of heat conduction, as opposed to advanced theories with physically more realistic models.

Timeline [ edit ] 1452–1519 Leonardo da Vinci made many contributions [ 2 ] 1638: Galileo Galilei published the book " Two New Sciences " in which he examined the failure of simple structures Galileo Galilei published the book " Two New Sciences " in which he examined the failure of simple structures 1660: Hooke's law by Robert Hooke 1687: Isaac Newton published " Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica " which contains Newton's laws of motion Isaac Newton published " Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica " which contains the Newton's laws of motion 1750: Euler–Bernoulli beam equation 1700–1782: Daniel Bernoulli introduced the principle of virtual work 1707–1783: Leonhard Euler developed the theory of buckling of columns Leonhard Euler developed the theory of buckling of columns 1826: Claude-Louis Navier published a treatise on the elastic behaviors of structures 1873: Carlo Alberto Castigliano presented his dissertation "Intorno ai sistemi elastici", which contains his theorem for computing displacement as partial derivative of the strain energy. This theorem includes the method of least work as a special case 1874: Otto Mohr formalized the idea of a statically indeterminate structure.

1922: Timoshenko corrects the Euler–Bernoulli beam equation 1936: Hardy Cross ' publication of the moment distribution method, an important innovation in the design of continuous frames.

1941: Alexander Hrennikoff solved the discretization of plane elasticity problems using a lattice framework 1942: R. Courant divided a domain into finite subregions 1956: J. Turner, R. W. Clough, H. C. Martin, and L. J. Topp's paper on the "Stiffness and Deflection of Complex Structures" introduces the name "finite-element method" and is widely recognized as the first comprehensive treatment of the method as it is known today See also [ edit ] Wikiversity has learning resources about Solid mechanics Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Solid mechanics Strength of materials - Specific definitions and the relationships between stress and strain.

Applied mechanics Materials science Continuum mechanics Fracture mechanics Impact (mechanics) Solid-state physics Rigid body References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Allan Bower (2009).

Applied mechanics of solids . CRC press . Retrieved March 5, 2017 .

^ "Leonardo da Vinci: The Mechanics of Genius" .

Queen Elizabeth Prize for Engineering . Retrieved 2024-05-27 .

Bibliography [ edit ] L.D. Landau , E.M. Lifshitz , Course of Theoretical Physics : Theory of Elasticity Butterworth-Heinemann, ISBN 0-7506-2633-X J.E. Marsden, T.J. Hughes, Mathematical Foundations of Elasticity , Dover, ISBN 0-486-67865-2 P.C. Chou, N. J. Pagano, Elasticity: Tensor, Dyadic, and Engineering Approaches , Dover, ISBN 0-486-66958-0 R.W. Ogden, Non-linear Elastic Deformation , Dover, ISBN 0-486-69648-0 S. Timoshenko and J.N. Goodier," Theory of elasticity", 3d ed., New York, McGraw-Hill, 1970.

G.A. Holzapfel , Nonlinear Solid Mechanics: A Continuum Approach for Engineering , Wiley, 2000 A.I. Lurie, Theory of Elasticity , Springer, 1999.

L.B. Freund, Dynamic Fracture Mechanics , Cambridge University Press, 1990.

R. Hill, The Mathematical Theory of Plasticity , Oxford University, 1950.

J. Lubliner, Plasticity Theory , Macmillan Publishing Company, 1990.

J. Ignaczak, M. Ostoja-Starzewski , Thermoelasticity with Finite Wave Speeds , Oxford University Press, 2010.

D. Bigoni, Nonlinear Solid Mechanics: Bifurcation Theory and Material Instability , Cambridge University Press, 2012.

Y. C. Fung, Pin Tong and Xiaohong Chen, Classical and Computational Solid Mechanics , 2nd Edition, World Scientific Publishing, 2017, ISBN 978-981-4713-64-1 .

v t e Major branches of physics Divisions Pure Applied Engineering Approaches Experimental Theoretical Computational Classical Classical mechanics Newtonian Analytical Celestial Continuum Acoustics Classical electromagnetism Classical optics Ray Wave Thermodynamics Statistical Non-equilibrium Modern Relativistic mechanics Special General Nuclear physics Particle physics Quantum mechanics Atomic, molecular, and optical physics Atomic Molecular Modern optics Condensed matter physics Solid-state physics Crystallography Interdisciplinary Astrophysics Atmospheric physics Biophysics Chemical physics Geophysics Materials science Mathematical physics Medical physics Ocean physics Quantum information science Related History of physics Nobel Prize in Physics Philosophy of physics Physics education research Timeline of physics discoveries Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Solid_mechanics&oldid=1277153827 " Categories : Solid mechanics Mechanics Continuum mechanics Rigid bodies mechanics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from December 2014 All articles lacking in-text citations Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 23 February 2025, at 00:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Solid mechanics 39 languages Add topic

