Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types of cleavage 2 Parting 3 Uses 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Cleavage (crystal) 45 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Latviešu Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Scots Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Tendency of crystalline materials Green fluorite with prominent cleavage Biotite with basal cleavage Cleavage , in mineralogy and materials science , is the tendency of crystalline materials to split along definite crystallographic structural planes. These planes of relative weakness are a result of the regular locations of atoms and ions in the crystal, which create smooth repeating surfaces that are visible both in the microscope and to the naked eye. If bonds in certain directions are weaker than others, the crystal will tend to split along the weakly bonded planes. These flat breaks are termed "cleavage".

[ 1 ] The classic example of cleavage is mica , which cleaves in a single direction along the basal pinacoid , making the layers seem like pages in a book. In fact, mineralogists often refer to "books of mica".

Diamond and graphite provide examples of cleavage. Each is composed solely of a single element , carbon . In diamond, each carbon atom is bonded to four others in a tetrahedral pattern with short covalent bonds . The planes of weakness (cleavage planes) in a diamond are in four directions, following the faces of the octahedron . In graphite, carbon atoms are contained in layers in a hexagonal pattern where the covalent bonds are shorter (and thus even stronger) than those of diamond. However, each layer is connected to the other with a longer and much weaker van der Waals bond . This gives graphite a single direction of cleavage, parallel to the basal pinacoid. So weak is this bond that it is broken with little force, giving graphite a slippery feel as layers shear apart. As a result, graphite makes an excellent dry lubricant .

[ 2 ] While all single crystals will show some tendency to split along atomic planes in their crystal structure , if the differences between one direction or another are not large enough, the mineral will not display cleavage.

Corundum , for example, displays no cleavage.

Types of cleavage [ edit ] Miller index {h k ℓ} Cleavage forms parallel to crystallographic planes: [ 1 ] Basal, pinacoidal, or planar cleavage occurs when there is only one cleavage plane.

Talc has basal cleavage.

Mica (like muscovite or biotite ) also has basal cleavage; this is why mica can be peeled into thin sheets.

Prismatic cleavage occurs when there are two cleavage planes in a crystal (but not three).

Spodumene is an example where the planes meet at a 90 degree angles.

Hornblende is an example where the planes intersect at 56° and 124°.

Cubic cleavage occurs when there are three cleavage planes intersecting at 90 degrees.

Halite (or salt ) has cubic cleavage, and therefore, when halite crystals are broken, they will form more cubes.

Rhombohedral cleavage occurs when there are three cleavage planes intersecting at angles that are not 90 degrees.

Calcite has rhombohedral cleavage.

Octahedral cleavage occurs when there are four cleavage planes in a crystal.

Fluorite exhibits perfect octahedral cleavage. Octahedral cleavage is common for semiconductors .

Diamond also has octahedral cleavage.

Dodecahedral cleavage occurs when there are six cleavage planes in a crystal.

Sphalerite has dodecahedral cleavage.

Parting [ edit ] Crystal parting occurs when minerals break along planes of structural weakness due to external stress, along twin composition planes, or along planes of weakness due to the exsolution of another mineral. Parting breaks are very similar in appearance to cleavage, but the cause is different. Cleavage occurs because of design weakness while parting results from growth defects (deviations from the basic crystallographic design). Thus, cleavage will occur in all samples of a particular mineral, while parting is only found in samples with structural defects. Examples of parting include the octahedral parting of magnetite , the rhombohedral and basal parting in corundum , [ 3 ] and the basal parting in pyroxenes .

[ 1 ] Uses [ edit ] A diamond cutter apprentice cleaving a diamond prior to cutting it, using a steel wedge-like blade and a small club , supervised by a senior cutter in the Netherlands 1946.

Cleavage is a physical property traditionally used in mineral identification, both in hand-sized specimen and microscopic examination of rock and mineral studies. As an example, the angles between the prismatic cleavage planes for the pyroxenes (88–92°) and the amphiboles (56–124°) are diagnostic.

[ 1 ] Crystal cleavage is of technical importance in the electronics industry and in the cutting of gemstones .

Precious stones are generally cleaved by impact, as in diamond cutting .

Synthetic single crystals of semiconductor materials are generally sold as thin wafers which are much easier to cleave. Simply pressing a silicon wafer against a soft surface and scratching its edge with a diamond scribe is usually enough to cause cleavage; however, when dicing a wafer to form chips, a procedure of scoring and breaking is often followed for greater control. Elemental semiconductors ( silicon , germanium , and diamond) are diamond cubic , a space group for which octahedral cleavage is observed. This means that some orientations of wafer allow near-perfect rectangles to be cleaved. Most other commercial semiconductors ( GaAs , InSb , etc.) can be made in the related zinc blende structure , with similar cleavage planes.

See also [ edit ] Cleavage (geology) References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Hurlbut, Cornelius S.; Klein, Cornelis, 1985, Manual of Mineralogy , 20th ed., Wiley, ISBN 0-471-80580-7 ^ "How can graphite and diamond be so different if they are both composed of pure carbon?" .

ScientificAmerican.com . Retrieved 25 November 2020 .

^ White, John Sampson (1979).

"Boehmite exsolution in corundum" (PDF) .

American Mineralogist .

64 : 1300– 1302 . Retrieved 25 November 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Mineral galleries: Mineral properties – Cleavage v t e Mineral identification Cleavage Crystal habit Crystal system Fracture Lustre Mohs scale Specific gravity Streak Minerals portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cleavage_(crystal)&oldid=1273834971 " Categories : Crystallography Mineralogy concepts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 February 2025, at 06:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cleavage (crystal) 45 languages Add topic

