Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Great experiment 1.2 Birth of Cabot House 1.3 Shield 1.4 Motto 1.5 Colors 2 Faculty deans, resident dean, and tutors 3 Constituent halls 4 Notable alumni 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Cabot House 1 language Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′53″N 71°7′27″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.38139°N 71.12417°W ﻿ / 42.38139; -71.12417 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Residential House of Harvard College This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Cabot House" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Cabot House Residential House Harvard University Briggs Hall, Cabot House Shield Location 60 Linnaean Street Coordinates 42°22′53″N 71°7′27″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.38139°N 71.12417°W ﻿ / 42.38139; -71.12417 Full name Thomas and Virginia Cabot House Latin name Domus Capoceus Motto Semper cor ( Latin ) Motto in English Always heart Established 1901 Named for Thomas and Virginia Cabot Previous names South House, East House Sister college Trumbull College Freshman dorm Wigglesworth Hall Faculty Deans Ian Miller and Crate Herbert Dean Ken Thomas HoCo chairs Gabe LeBlanc and Christopher "Chris" Hidalgo Undergraduates 376 Tutors 18 Called Cabotoix, Cabotians, Caboteers Website cabot .harvard .edu Cabot House is one of twelve undergraduate residential Houses at Harvard University . Cabot House derives from the merger in 1970 of Radcliffe College 's South and East House, which took the name South House (also known as "SoHo"), until the name was changed and the House reincorporated in 1984 to honor Harvard benefactors Thomas Cabot and Virginia Cabot.

[ 1 ] The house is composed of six buildings surrounding Radcliffe Quadrangle; in order of construction, they are Bertram Hall (1901), Eliot Hall (1906), Whitman Hall (1911), Barnard Hall (1912), Briggs Hall (1923), and Cabot Hall (1937). All six of these structures were originally women-only Radcliffe College dormitories until they were integrated in 1970. Along with Currier House and Pforzheimer House , Cabot is part of the Radcliffe Quad .

As of September 2022 [update] , the Faculty Deans of Cabot House are Ian Miller and Crate Herbert.

[ 2 ] Prior Masters include then-Radcliffe President Mary Bunting and New Republic publisher Martin Peretz .

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Great experiment [ edit ] In 1970, Harvard and Radcliffe began experimenting with co-educational housing. 150 Harvard students from the River Houses (including former Dean of Harvard College Benedict Gross ) switched places with 150 Radcliffe students from the Quadrangle. Ten years later the experiment was taken to its logical conclusion, as the last all-male dorm, Straus Hall in Harvard Yard, went co-ed. Today, all Harvard dormitories, including the three Houses of the Quadrangle, house both men and women.

Birth of Cabot House [ edit ] In 1961 Radcliffe College began to organize the brick buildings of the Radcliffe Quad into residential colleges in the style of Harvard. These Houses were styled North, South, and East, in reference to the cardinal directions of the building clusters.

Cabot House (originally named South House) was formed in 1970 when East House and the original South House were merged. Anna Maria Abernathy held the title of Head of House, and she and her husband Fred served as Cabot’s first House Masters (now Faculty Dean). In 1971, Mary Bunting, President of Radcliffe, began her tenure as House Master.

Bertram Hall, Radcliffe’s first permanent dormitory, was built in 1901 and donated by Mrs. David Pulsifer Kimball in memory of her son. In 1906, Eliot Hall, also donated by Mrs. Kimball, was built in honor of Grace Hopkinson Eliot, wife of Harvard President Charles W. Eliot. Alexander Wadsworth Longfellow, Jr, designed both Bertram and Eliot Halls. Barnard Hall was built in 1912 and named for Augusta Barnard and her husband. Briggs Hall, named for Radcliffe’s second president, LeBaron Russell Briggs, was constructed in 1923, and Cabot Hall, named in honor of Ella Lyman Cabot , a member of the Radcliffe Governing Board from 1902 to 1934, followed in 1937. The sixth building, Whitman Hall, was completed in 1911 and named for Sarah Wyman Whitman, the creator of two of the stained glass windows in Memorial Hall and a member of the Radcliffe Governing Board for several years. The Faculty Deans’ residence is located at 107 Walker Street. A residential wood-frame house at 103 Walker Street is the Senior Tutor’s residence.

While the outside of the brick dormitories has remained unchanged, renovations to the House 19 years ago and to the dining area in the summer of 2002 provide new facilities and newly configured suites more in line with the "vertical hallway" arrangements of the River dormitories.

Shield [ edit ] The Cabot House shield was adopted when South House became Cabot House, in 1984. The shield is the coat of arms used by the Boston Brahmin Cabots after whom the House is named, though, the shield is not their heraldic achievement; the coat of arms actually belongs to the French family Chabot, to whom the Boston Cabots have no relation.

Cabotoix have a unique affection for their shield, its red fish in particular. They are the inspiration for the common House cheer, "Go Fish!"—a play on the popular card game. Cabotoix feature their coat of arms on various apparel, including polo shirts, rugby shirts, and hooded sweatshirts. The standard coloration is used, or its inverse.

The House Office also has an antique copy of the Cabot Shield which had been hanging in the dining hall before the renovations. Oddly, this shield's colors are drastically different, although the shield still features the same general design and motto: the field is black and the perch are silver, and the crest is a white scallop shell. While the origin of this scheme is unknown, these colors are identical to those of Trumbull College , Cabot's sister college at Yale .

The standard arms are described heraldically as follows: Or, three chabots, haurient, gules. Crest: an escallop, or.

Motto [ edit ] The Cabot family motto is 'Semper Cor,' meaning 'Always Heart'; this motto is shared by Cabot House.

Colors [ edit ] The House colors, red and gold, are derived from the House shield; black, one of Radcliffe's colors, is an unofficial color, featured in much House apparel.

Faculty deans, resident dean, and tutors [ edit ] As of September 2022 [update] , the Cabot Faculty Deans are Ian Miller and Crate Herbert. Miller is a professor of History and Herbert is the Vice President for Institutional Advancement at Wentworth Institute of Technology.

Previous Faculty Deans (then known as House Masters) have included Rakesh Khurana and Rulan Chao Pian .

Allston Burr Resident Dean Ken Thomas began serving as Resident Dean in 2021.

Resident Tutors are academicians and/or professionals who live in the House and provide academic, career and life guidance to House residents while undertaking further studies, research and professional ventures. Resident Tutors at Cabot House have included Tyler Goodspeed .

Constituent halls [ edit ] Cabot Hall Cabot House has the following six halls: Cabot Hall Whitman Hall Briggs Hall Barnard Hall Bertram Hall Eliot Hall Cabot, Whitman, Briggs and Barnard are connected by a series of tunnels in the basement. The Dining Hall, JCR, and Grand Entry also serve to connect these buildings above ground. Bertram and Eliot Halls, the oldest, are not connected to the rest of the house, but are a short distance away, co-located on the Radcliffe Quadrangle. The Faculty Deans' Residence and Resident Dean's Residence, 107 and 103 Walker Street, respectively, are located directly across the street from the rest of the house, and are the only such residences in the Harvard House system not to be physically connected to the rest of the house.

Notable alumni [ edit ] Benazir Bhutto , Prime Minister of Pakistan Stockard Channing , actress Rivers Cuomo , musician Greg Daniels , screenwriter Kerry Healy , Lieutenant Governor of Massachusetts Helen Keller (South House), author and political activist Fiona Hill , Russian advisor in Trump administration Jim Koch , Co-Founder of Boston Beer Company Soledad O'Brien , journalist Bonnie Raitt , singer-songwriter Mira Sorvino , actress Edward Zwick , film producer Kenneth C. Griffin , founder of Citadel LLC Ketanji Brown Jackson , Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court Lindsay Crouse , actress Ellen Goodman , journalist References [ edit ] ^ Cabot House Webpage: House History Archived July 19, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Faculty Deans | Cabot House" .

cabot.harvard.edu . Retrieved September 16, 2022 .

^ The Harvard Crimson :: News :: Timeline: 1972-1976 External links [ edit ] Cabot House official site v t e Residential houses of Harvard Adams House Cabot House Currier House Dudley House Dunster House Eliot House Kirkland House Leverett House Lowell House Mather House Pforzheimer House Quincy House Winthrop House v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cabot_House&oldid=1267584104 " Categories : Harvard Houses Radcliffe College and Institute Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from August 2014 All articles lacking reliable references Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from September 2022 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 5 January 2025, at 19:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cabot House 1 language Add topic

