Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary Toggle Summary subsection 1.1 Central claims 2 Influences 3 Reception 4 Editions (incomplete list) 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Text 5.2 Citations Toggle the table of contents Sexual Politics 10 languages বাংলা Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Հայերեն עברית Português Русский Српски / srpski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1970 book by Kate Millett For the general concept, see Sexual politics .

Sexual Politics Cover of the first edition Author Kate Millett Language English Subjects Sexism Publisher Doubleday Publication date 1970 Publication place United States Media type Print (hardcover and paperback) Pages 393 ISBN 0-385-05292-8 OCLC 88446 Sexual Politics is the debut book by American writer and activist Kate Millett , based on her PhD dissertation at Columbia University .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It was published in 1970 by Doubleday . It is regarded as a classic of feminism and one of radical feminism 's key texts, a formative piece in shaping the intentions of the second-wave feminist movement . In Sexual Politics , an explicit focus is placed on male dominance throughout prominent 20th century art and literature. According to Millett, western literature reflects patriarchal constructions and the heteronormativity of society. She argues that men have established power over women, but that this power is the result of social constructs rather than innate or biological qualities.

[ citation needed ] Summary [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( November 2019 ) The book begins by quoting Henry Miller and Norman Mailer . Millett examines sex scenes by both authors in which a male main character seduces a compliant woman who is insatiably hungry for sex, then humiliates, beats, sexually assaults, or murders the women.

[ 3 ] Millett argues that the scenes have political undertones. By punishing women for their sexuality the male characters enforce the rules of patriarchy , which Millett defines as "the birthright priority whereby males rule females." [ 4 ] She feels these male characters are stand-ins for the authors themselves, whom she feels are mired in violent sexual myths designed to maintain men as a ruling class. In contrast, she applauds the writer Jean Genet for writing queer sex scenes that critically examine these myths. Genet's work points to the "sick delirium of power and violence" that must be analyzed if society is to achieve sexual liberation .

[ 5 ] These literary scenes serves as examples of what Millett names "sexual politics." She clarifies that she does not mean politics in the narrow sense of political parties and elections. Instead, politics describes any situation in which one group of people has power over another.

[ 6 ] Millett points to her observation that the military, the police, political offices, science fields, etc., are populated almost exclusively by men. Even the concept of God is typically portrayed as male. Because men hold all these positions of power, they dominate the relationship between the sexes; women are subordinate.

[ 4 ] Men are rewarded in life for adopting an attitude of dominance, whereas women are encouraged to be passive and ignorant. This training makes patriarchy appear natural, as though it were determined by biology, when in fact it is a social convention or a political relationship.

[ 7 ] The rest of the book is largely her literary reflections of different authors and books, including Lady Chatterley's Lover and others.

Central claims [ edit ] Millett makes the claim that romantic love disguises the mismatch in power between men and women, but it leaves women vulnerable to emotional exploitation.

[ 8 ] As evidence, she points to the fact that women tend to have less economic power than men, and make less income.

[ 9 ] Millett says we don't often consider the ways that outright force is used to uphold patriarchy, yet this is the purpose of sexual violence, which is common.

[ 10 ] Millett often critiques the sexual revolution of the 1960s , arguing that it did not bring about true liberation for women as intended. She explores how traditional gender roles persisted despite changes in sexual behavior and norms. She later delves into the history and politics of sexuality, which is where she discusses how sexual pleasure has been defined and controlled throughout history by men and their expectations for women.

She discusses the social construction of femininity and critiques how women's bodies have been objectified and commodified. She discusses the impact of societal expectations on women's self-perception and relationships and examines how, due to the socialization of children, gender roles are often ingrained from an early age. She discusses the ways in which societal expectations shape children's understanding of gender and sexuality. She touches upon and analyzes Freudian ideas to explain her points, and goes on to offer new interpretations of them.

[ 11 ] Influences [ edit ] Sexual Politics was largely influenced by Simone de Beauvoir 's 1949 book The Second Sex .

[ 12 ] Reception [ edit ] Sexual Politics has been seen as a classic feminist text, said to be "the first book of academic feminist literary criticism", [ 1 ] and "one of the first feminist books of this decade to raise nationwide male ire", [ 13 ] though like Betty Friedan 's The Feminine Mystique (1963) and Germaine Greer 's The Female Eunuch (1970), its status has declined.

[ 14 ] Sexual Politics was an important theoretical touchstone for the second wave feminism of the 1970s. It was also extremely controversial.

Norman Mailer , whose work, especially his novel An American Dream (1965), had been criticised by Millett, wrote the article " The Prisoner of Sex " in Harper's Magazine in response, attacking Millett's claims and defending Miller and Lawrence, and later extensively attacked her writings in his non-fiction book of the same name.

[ citation needed ] The psychoanalyst Juliet Mitchell argues that Millett, like many other feminists, misreads Freud and misunderstands the implications of psychoanalytic theory for feminism.

[ 15 ] Christina Hoff Sommers writes that, by teaching women that politics is "essentially sexual" and that "even the so-called democracies" are "male hegemonies", Sexual Politics helped to move feminism in a different direction, toward an ideology that Sommers calls "gender feminism".

[ 16 ] The author Richard Webster writes that Millett's "analysis of the reactionary character of psychoanalysis" was inspired by the philosopher Simone de Beauvoir 's The Second Sex (1949).

[ 17 ] The critic Camille Paglia called Sexual Politics an "atrocious book", which "reduced complex artworks to their political content". She accused it of spawning what she sees as the excesses of women's studies departments, especially for attacks on the alleged pervasive sexism of the male authors of the Western canon .

[ 18 ] The historian Arthur Marwick described Sexual Politics as, alongside Shulamith Firestone 's The Dialectic of Sex (1970), one of the two key texts of radical feminism.

[ 19 ] Doubleday 's trade division, although it declined to reprint it when it went out of print briefly, said Sexual Politics was one of the ten most important books that it had published in its hundred years of existence and included it in its anniversary anthology.

[ 20 ] The New York Times published a review of the book in 1970 that predicted it would become "the Bible of Women's Liberation." [ 21 ] The article was written by Marcia Seligson and praised the book as "a piece of passionate thinking on a life-and-death aspect of our public and private lives." Editions (incomplete list) [ edit ] Kate Millett, Sexual Politics (Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1970) Kate Millett, "Sexual Politics" (New York: Avon Discus (trade paperback reprint), 1971 Kate Millett, Sexual Politics (London: Rupert Hart-Davis Ltd., 1971) Kate Millett, Sexual Politics (London: Virago, 1977) Kate Millett, Sexual Politics (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2000) Kate Millett, Sexual Politics (New York: Columbia University Press, 2016) References [ edit ] Text [ edit ] Millett, Kate (2000).

Sexual Politics (PDF) . University of Illinois Press.

ISBN 978-0-252-06889-8 .

Citations [ edit ] ^ a b Clough, Patricia Ticineto (August 1994). "The Hybrid Criticism of Patriarchy: Rereading Kate Millett's Sexual Politics ".

The Sociological Quarterly .

35 (3): 473– 486.

doi : 10.1111/j.1533-8525.1994.tb01740.x .

JSTOR 4121222 .

^ Sehgal, Parul; Genzlinger, Neil (September 6, 2017).

"Kate Millett, Ground-Breaking Feminist Writer, Is Dead at 82" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved July 10, 2020 .

^ Millett 2000 , p. 3–16.

^ a b Millett 2000 , p. 25.

^ Millett 2000 , p. 16–22.

^ Millett 2000 , p. 23–24.

^ Millett 2000 , p. 26–33.

^ Millett 2000 , p. 26–37.

^ Millett 2000 , p. 40–41.

^ Millett 2000 , p. 44.

^ Millett 2000 , p. 180–228.

^ Rossi, Alice S. (1997).

The Feminist Papers: From Abigail Adams to Simone de Beauvoir . Boston: Northeastern University Press. p.

673 .

ISBN 1555530281 .

^ Willson, Norma (September 1974). "Majority Report: A Liberated Glossary: Guide to Feminist Writings".

The English Journal .

63 (6): 14– 15.

doi : 10.2307/814657 .

JSTOR 813418 .

^ Nathan Smith (March 21, 2015).

"Feminist Artifacts: The Archive of Germaine Greer" .

Lareviewofbooks.org . Retrieved February 14, 2022 .

^ Mitchell, Juliet (2000).

Psychoanalysis and Feminism: A Radical Reassessment of Freudian Psychoanalysis . London: Penguin Books. pp. xxix, 303– 356.

ISBN 0-14-027953-9 .

^ Sommers, Christina Hoff (1995).

Who Stole Feminism? How Women Have Betrayed Women . New York: Simon & Schuster. p.

23 .

ISBN 0-684-80156-6 .

^ Webster, Richard (2005).

Why Freud Was Wrong: Sin, Science and Psychoanalysis . Oxford: The Orwell Press. p. 22.

ISBN 0-9515922-5-4 .

^ Chronicle of Higher Education 25 July 1997 C. Paglia "Feminists Must Begin to Fulfill Their Noble, Animating Ideal" ^ Marwick, Arthur (1998).

The Sixties: Cultural Revolution in Britain, France, Italy, and the United States, c. 1958–c.1974 . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p.

687 .

ISBN 0-19-210022-X .

^ Millett, Kate (2000) [1970].

Sexual Politics . University of Chicago Press. pp.

ix– x.

^ Seligson, Marcia (September 6, 1970).

"De Beauvoir Lessing - Now, Kate Millett" .

The New York Times . Retrieved March 24, 2017 .

v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index v t e Radical feminism People Wim Hora Adema Chude Pam Allen Ti-Grace Atkinson Kathleen Barry Rosalyn Baxandall Linda Bellos Julie Bindel Jenny Brown Judith Brown Susan Brownmiller Phyllis Chesler D. A. Clarke Nikki Craft Kimberlé Crenshaw Mary Daly Christine Delphy Gail Dines Andrea Dworkin Melissa Farley Shulamith Firestone Marilyn French Marilyn Frye Germaine Greer Carol Hanisch Merle Hoffman bell hooks Sheila Jeffreys Robert Jensen Lierre Keith Anne Koedt Marjorie Kramer Holly Lawford-Smith Audre Lorde Catharine A. MacKinnon Sheila Michaels Kate Millett Robin Morgan Meghan Murphy Irene Peslikis Janice Raymond Rosetta Reitz Adrienne Rich Florence Rush Kathie Sarachild Alix Kates Shulman Valerie Solanas Gloria Steinem John Stoltenberg Michele Wallace Marilyn Salzman Webb Ellen Willis Harriet Wistrich Monique Wittig Laura X Groups Cell 16 Chicago Women's Liberation Union Coalition Against Trafficking in Women Deep Green Resistance Lesbian Organization of Toronto Michigan Womyn's Music Festival Mountain Moving Coffeehouse New York Radical Feminists New York Radical Women Redstockings Stop Porn Culture The Feminists The Furies Collective WOMAD Women Against Pornography Women's Liberation Center Women's Liberation Front (WoLF) Issues 4 NOs Child sexual abuse False consciousness Feminism Lesbian Second wave Feminist separatism Feminist views on transgender topics Gender role Male privilege Patriarchy Political lesbianism Pornography Feminist views on pornography Postgenderism Prostitution Feminist views Reproductive rights Sexism Misogyny Internalized sexism Social construction of gender Violence against women Media Books The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for Feminist Revolution ( 1970) Sexual Politics (1970) Sisterhood Is Powerful (1970) " The Myth of the Vaginal Orgasm " (1970) The Female Eunuch (1970) Lesbian Nation (1973) Woman Hating (1974) Against Our Will: Men, Women and Rape (1974) Pornography: Men Possessing Women (1981) Ain't I a Woman?

(1981) Against Sadomasochism (1982) Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center (1984) Sisterhood Is Global (1984) Intercourse (1987) Feminism Unmodified (1987) Toward a Feminist Theory of the State (1989) The Straight Mind and Other Essays (1992) Only Words (1993) Scapegoat: The Jews, Israel, and Women's Liberation (2000) Sisterhood Is Forever (2003) The Industrial Vagina (2008) Other Off Our Backs (1970–2008) SCUM Manifesto (1967) She's Beautiful When She's Angry (2014) Other Consciousness raising Herstory Miss America protest (1968) Radical lesbianism Womyn's land Feminism portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sexual_Politics&oldid=1305328635 " Categories : 1970 non-fiction books American non-fiction books Books by Kate Millett Books of literary criticism Debut books Doubleday (publisher) books English-language non-fiction books Feminist criticism of marriage Non-fiction books about sexuality Radical feminist books Second-wave feminism in the United States Sociology books Theses Works about patriarchy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 Articles to be expanded from November 2019 All articles to be expanded Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 12:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sexual Politics 10 languages Add topic

