Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Publication history 2 Themes 3 Cultural notes 4 Featured individuals 5 Reception 6 References Toggle the table of contents In Praise of Shadows 13 languages Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Português Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1933 essay by Jun'ichirō Tanizaki For the album by the Chicago Underground Duo, see In Praise of Shadows (album) .

In Praise of Shadows English language cover Author Jun'ichirō Tanizaki Original title 陰翳礼讃 (In'ei Raisan) Translator Thomas J. Harper and Edward G. Seidensticker Language Japanese Genre Philosophy Publication date 1933 [ 1 ] Publication place Japan Published in English 1977 [ 1 ] Media type Print ( Paperback ) Pages 73 In Praise of Shadows ( 陰翳礼讃 , In'ei Raisan ) is a 1933 essay on Japanese aesthetics by the Japanese author Jun'ichirō Tanizaki . It was translated into English, in 1977, by the academic students of Japanese literature Thomas J. Harper and Edward Seidensticker . A new translation by Gregory Starr was published in 2017; a further translation, along with three additional essays, is slated to be published by Tuttle in the fall of 2025.

[ 2 ] Publication history [ edit ] Already sketched out in a series of comments that appear in Some Prefer Nettles , Tanizaki's aesthetic credo, in the more finished form of this essay, was originally published in 1933 in Japanese .

[ citation needed ] The English translation was published in 1977 by Leete's Island Books.

[ 1 ] The translation contains a foreword by architect and educator Charles Moore and an afterword by one of the translators, Thomas J. Harper. Harper was Senior Lecturer in Japanese Literature at the Australian National University in Canberra . The other translator, Edward Seidensticker , was Professor of Japanese Literature at Columbia University .

[ 3 ] Much shorter than the author's novels, this book is a small meditative work of 73 pages, of which 59 are the essay itself.

[ citation needed ] In 2001, Random House published a reprint in paperback.

[ 4 ] A new English translation by Gregory Starr, with illustrations and photographs by Andrew Pothecary, was published by Sora Books in December 2017. The 102-page edition also includes a foreword by the Japanese architect Kengo Kuma and an afterword by Japanese literature Professor Eve Zimmerman of Wellesley College.

[ 5 ] Themes [ edit ] The essay consists of 16 sections that discuss traditional Japanese aesthetics in contrast with change. Comparisons of light with darkness are used to contrast Western and Asian cultures . The West, in its striving for progress, is presented as continuously searching for light and clarity, while the subtle and subdued forms of East Asian art and literature are seen by Tanizaki to represent an appreciation of shadow and subtlety, closely relating to the traditional Japanese concept of sabi . In addition to contrasting light and dark, Tanizaki further considers the layered tones of various kinds of shadows and their power to reflect low sheen materials like gold embroidery, patina and cloudy crystals. In addition, he distinguishes between the values of gleam and shine.

The text presents personal reflections on topics as diverse as architecture and its fittings, crafts, finishes, jade , food, cosmetics and mono no aware (the art of impermanence). Tanizaki explores in close description the use of space in buildings, lacquerware by candlelight, [ 1 ] monastery toilets [ 6 ] and women in the dark of a brothel. The essay acts as "a classic description of the collision between the shadows of traditional Japanese interiors and the dazzling light of the modern age".

[ attribution needed ] [ 7 ] In the Sora Books edition, the 16 section themes are: On construction The toilet aesthetic A different course A novelist's daydreams On paper, tin and dirt Candlelight and lacquerware Bowls of broth The enigma of shadows An uncanny silence Reflections in darkness Shadows on the stage The woman of old Beauty in the dark A world of shadows A cool breeze in total darkness Final grumblings Cultural notes [ edit ] Tanizaki's observations include cultural notes on topics such as arts and crafts, paper making, lacquerware design and the Japanese room. He gives a recipe for the unusual dish of Persimmon leaf Sushi on pages 60 to 62. He also refers to many historic places and temples, as well as celebrated eateries of the day, along with customs like "moon-viewing" ( tsukimi ).

Featured individuals [ edit ] Among the historic and contemporary individuals mentioned in the essay are: [ 8 ] Natsume Sōseki , novelist, on the experience of textures and landscape via the traditional Japanese toilet, p. 9; Sōseki's Pillow of Grass , p. 26.

Saitō Ryokuu , poet quoted as saying "elegance is frigid", p. 10.

Buddha and Confucius , p. 16.

Kongō Iwao, Nō actor, p. 39.

Baikō, aging Kabuki actor, p. 43.

Takebaya Sanehiko, president of Kaizō Publishing House (which had published Tanizaki's earlier novel Quicksand ), p. 54.

Albert Einstein , scientist, p. 54.

Reception [ edit ] The work has been praised for its insight and relevance into issues of modernity and culture, [ 9 ] and Tanizaki has been called an "ecological prophet".

[ 9 ] A. C. Grayling has described Tanizaki's essay on Japanese taste as a "hymn to nuance" and an exercise in mindfulness.

[ 1 ] Junichiro Tanizaki selects for praise all things delicate and nuanced, everything softened by shadows and the patina of age, anything understated and natural—as for example the patterns of grain in old wood, the sound of rain dripping from eaves and leaves, or washing over the footing of a stone lantern in a garden, and refreshing the moss that grows about it – and by doing so he suggests an attitude of appreciation and mindfulness, especially mindfulness of beauty, as central to life lived well.

[ 1 ] In the spirit of Tanizaki juxtaposing the cultures of east and west, Grayling notes a link to a similar approach and emphasis in the British writer Walter Pater whose late Renaissance essay he quotes, "The service of speculative culture towards the human spirit is to rouse, to startle it to a life of constant and eager observation". Grayling concludes that the difference between the two essayists lies in the "tranquility" of Tanizaki and the "intensity" of Pater.

[ 1 ] Regarding the new translation published by Sora Books, David Mitchell , author of Cloud Atlas , wrote, "A rhapsodic meditation on a vanishing world, its aesthetics and its values. Gregory Starr's new translation is pitch perfect and transparent." Stephen Mansfield, in the Japan Times wrote, "Tanizaki, in Gregory Starr’s new and highly accomplished translation, samples a number of instances where the use and perception of light differs from the West, noting that, where Western paper reflects light, traditional Japanese paper absorbs it." [ 10 ] The book also served as the primary inspiration for an album of the same name by musician Puma Blue.

[ 11 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Grayling, A. C. (October 5, 2002).

"Rereadings: AC Grayling on a fine study of Japanese aesthetics" .

Privy Counsels .

The Guardian . Retrieved 8 November 2008 .

^ Tanizaki, Jun'ichiro (2025-09-16).

In Praise of Shadows and Other Essays . Tuttle Publishing.

ISBN 978-4-8053-1935-2 .

^ Fox, Margalit (31 August 2007).

"Edward Seidensticker, Translator, is Dead at 86" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 1 June 2025 .

^ "About us" .

^ "In Praise of Shadows – XXX Books" .

www.sorabooksjapan.com . Archived from the original on 2017-12-25.

^ Grayling, A.C. (October 5, 2002).

"Rereadings: A. C. Grayling on a fine study of Japanese aesthetics" .

Privy Counsels .

The Guardian . Retrieved 8 November 2008 .

Readers of Tanizaki are variously startled or entertained to find that his essay on the delights of what is muted, enclosed and refined by shadows, begins with a paean to the lavatories found in Japanese monasteries ^ Jacket notes, Vintage Classics 2001 edn.

^ Jun'ichirō Tanizaki (1933).

In Praise of Shadows .

^ a b Sowin, Joshua (23 September 2008).

"In Praise of Shadows: A Meditation" .

www.fireandknowledge.org . Archived from the original on 30 September 2008 . Retrieved 8 November 2008 .

^ "Darkness aside, beauty exists in Tanizaki's shadows" . 17 February 2018.

^ Gurduiala, Dimitra (2021-02-05).

"Interview: Puma Blue and the Poignant Poetry of Debut Album 'In Praise of Shadows' " .

Atwood Magazine . Retrieved 2023-12-19 .

v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Works by Jun'ichirō Tanizaki Novels Naomi (1924) Quicksand (1928–30) Some Prefer Nettles (1929) Arrowroot (1931) The Secret History of the Lord of Musashi (1935) A Cat, A Man, and Two Women (1936) The Makioka Sisters (1943–48) Captain Shigemoto's Mother (1949) The Key (1956) Diary of a Mad Old Man (1961) The Maids (1962-3) Other In Praise of Shadows (1933) Childhood Years: A Memoir (1955–56) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=In_Praise_of_Shadows&oldid=1306151535 " Categories : 1933 essays Aesthetics essays Japanese aesthetics Works by Junichiro Tanizaki Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Japanese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 All Wikipedia articles needing words, phrases or quotes attributed Wikipedia articles needing words, phrases or quotes attributed from April 2018 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 06:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents In Praise of Shadows 13 languages Add topic

