Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 History 3 Fall of Mallorca 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Kingdom of Majorca 39 languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia State on the eastern coast and islands of the Iberian Peninsula from 1276 to 1715 This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Kingdom of Majorca" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Kingdom of Mallorca Regne de Mallorca ( Catalan ) Reino de Mallorca ( Spanish ) Regnum Maioricae ( Latin ) Royaume de Majorque ( French ) 1276–1715 Flag Coat of arms The Kingdom of Majorca in the 13th and 14th centuries Status Vassal state of the Crown of Aragon (until 1344) Part of the Crown of Aragon (1344–1715) Capital Palma and Perpignan Common languages Catalan Religion Roman Catholicism ( official ) [ 1 ] Islam Judaism Government Aragonese led-Royal Constitutional Monarchy History • Established 1276 • Nueva Planta decrees 1715 Preceded by Succeeded by Crown of Aragon Kingdom of Spain Today part of Spain France The Kingdom of Mallorca ( Catalan : Regne de Mallorca , IPA: [ˈreŋnə ðə məˈʎɔɾkə] ; Spanish : Reino de Mallorca ; Latin : Regnum Maioricae ; French : Royaume de Majorque ) was an insular realm off the east coast of modern day Spain, which included the islands of Mallorca , Menorca , Ibiza and Formentera . The islands were conquered from the Almohad Caliphate by James I of Aragon , and were integrated in the Crown of Aragon . The king became known as James the Conqueror due to the Conquest of Mallorca .

When James I died in 1276, he divided his territories between his three surviving sons. Peter, the eldest, succeeded his father in the mainland as Peter III of Aragon or Peter the Great.

The Kingdom of Mallorca passed to the younger son James, who reigned as James II of Mallorca .

After 1279, Peter III of Aragon decreed that the King of Mallorca was to be a vassal of the King of Aragon. Naturally, this led to conflict between the two brothers. Finally, in 1344, the Kingdom of Mallorca was invaded by King Peter IV of Aragon and brought under the Crown of Aragon . It remained a separate Kingdom, but with the same King, until its dissolution in 1715 by the Nueva Planta decrees .

Geography [ edit ] The kingdom included the Balearic Islands : Mallorca , Menorca , [ 2 ] Ibiza and Formentera . The king was also lord of the mainland counties of Roussillon and Cerdanya , and the territories James I kept in Occitania : the signory of Montpellier , the viscountcy of Carlat in Auvergne , and the barony of Aumelas , contiguous with Montpellier.

History [ edit ] Flag of the Kingdom of Mallorca in 1269 by James I Conquest of Mallorca by James I of Aragon (1229) The legacy of James I included the creation of a strategic Mediterranean enclave, including territories between two large kingdoms, the Capetians of France and the Crown of Aragon, which were in constant conflict at the time. Conscious of the fragility of the Kingdom of Mallorca, James I undertook the conquest of Cerdanya to unify the new kingdom. He also entered into negotiations to arrange the marriage of his son James to Beatrice of Savoy , daughter of Amadeus IV, Count of Savoy . Neither plan was successful.

The King of Mallorca, James II initially tried to remain independent of the Aragonese crown. The weakness of the Mallorcan state, lacking any parliament or other unifying institutions, however, brought it close to collapse. In 1279, the Mallorcan monarch reconciled and recognized the King of Aragon as his overlord. The resulting Treaty of Perpignan re-established the centralised state that existed before the death of James I.

At this point, James II of Mallorca found himself in the awkward position of opposing his overlord, having allied himself with Pope Martin IV and the French.

Alfonso , son of the Aragonese king, invaded the realm of his uncle and conquered the island of Mallorca in 1286. Some 10 years later, a new treaty - the Treaty of Anagni - ordered the return of the islands to King James II of Mallorca.

On the death of James II in 1324, his son Sancho succeeded him. Relations between Aragon and Mallorca were strained: despite the Treaty of Anagni, the descendants of Alfonso had not renounced their claim to the Mallorcan throne. In 1325, deep in debt from his invasion of Sardinia , Sancho agreed to appoint the kings of Aragon as his heirs to the crown of Mallorca.

While this act may have solved the problem of succession, the kingdom was plunged into a severe financial crisis. Mallorca was forced to develop policies similar to those of Aragon. The war against the Republic of Genoa (1329–1336) resulted in the loss of various overseas markets. It was necessary to impose new taxes and fines, which were levied on the Jewish community; despite this, the financial crisis continued.

In 1341, Peter IV of Aragon broke off relations with the Kingdom of Mallorca as a prelude to invasion. In May 1343, Peter IV invaded the Balearic Islands and followed that in 1344 with the invasions of the counties of Roussillon and Cerdanya .

James III of Mallorca was left with only his French possessions. Selling these to the King of France, in 1349 James III set out to reconquer his kingdom. He was defeated and killed at the Battle of Llucmajor on 25 October 1349. From then on, the Kingdom of Mallorca remained in personal union with the Crown of Aragon.

Fall of Mallorca [ edit ] The extinction of the Kingdom of Mallorca was inevitable given the conflicts by which it was affected: the Hundred Years War between France and England ; the War with the Benimerines , which involved Castile and the Crown of Aragon as well as attempts by the Genoese to make the Balearics a satellite state. The Kingdom of Mallorca, which had bonds of vassalage with the crowns of France (through Montpellier) and Aragon, could not remain neutral during the conflicts. In addition, increased taxes to fund the kingdom's treasury during its neutrality caused substantial unrest.

The Kingdom of Mallorca continued for nearly another four hundred years in personal union with the Crown of Aragon, retaining its own viceroy and political identity. However, during the War of the Spanish Succession the Crown of Aragon mostly backed the claims of the Archduke Charles and with his defeat the victorious Philip V of Spain abolished the kingdom via the Nueva Planta decrees in 1715.

See also [ edit ] List of monarchs of Mallorca References [ edit ] ^ Hughes, Robert (2011).

Barcelona . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. p. 3.

ISBN 978-0307764614 .

^ which was still under the rule of Muslims until 1231 when its sovereignty was surrendered to James I A Mediterranean emporium – The Catalan kingdom of Mallorca, by David Abulafia , ISBN 0-521-89405-0 Abulafia, David.

The Western Mediterranean Kingdoms, 1200–1500 . 1997.

ISBN 0-582-07820-2 External links [ edit ] (in Spanish) — Genealogía, Reyes y Reinos: Reino de Mallorca [ usurped ] (in Spanish) — La Conquista de Mallorca en mapas y cuadros v t e Spain in the Middle Ages Early Middle Ages Visigoths Visigothic Kingdom Suebi Kingdom of the Suebi (Eastern) Roman Province of Spania Duchy of Cantabria Duchy of Vasconia Al-Andalus (711-1492) Province of the Umayyad Caliphate Emirate of Córdoba Caliphate of Córdoba First Taifa Almoravid Emirate Second Taifa Almohad Caliphate Third Taifa Emirate of Granada Feudal Christian realms Kingdom of Asturias → Kingdom of León Kingdom of Galicia County of Castile Kingdom of Castile → Crown of Castile ( Castile-León ) Kingdom of Toledo Catalan counties ( County of Barcelona ) → Principality of Catalonia Kingdom of Pamplona → Kingdom of Navarre Kingdom of Viguera Kingdom of Najera Kingdom of Artajona [ eu ] County of Aragon → Kingdom of Aragon → Crown of Aragon Kingdom of Majorca Kingdom of Valencia Visigothic monarchs Suebic monarchs Monarchs of al-Andalus Monarchs of Aragon Monarchs of Asturias Monarchs of Barcelona/Catalonia Monarchs of Castile Monarchs of Galicia Monarchs of Granada Monarchs of León Monarchs of Majorca Monarchs of Navarre Monarchs of Valencia Military orders Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Israel Catalonia Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kingdom_of_Majorca&oldid=1303345004 " Categories : Kingdom of Majorca Christian states Crown of Aragon History of the Balearic Islands Former countries in Europe Former kingdoms Former monarchies of Europe Island countries States and territories established in 1231 States and territories disestablished in 1715 1231 establishments in Europe 1715 disestablishments in Spain 13th-century establishments in Aragon Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2009 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text Pages with Catalan IPA Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) Spain articles missing geocoordinate data All articles needing coordinates Articles missing coordinates with coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 12:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kingdom of Majorca 39 languages Add topic

