Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Usage 2 Requirements 3 Criticism 4 Science fiction 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Exploratory engineering 2 languages Português Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Exploratory engineering" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Branch of engineering dealing with hypothetical models Futures studies Concepts Accelerating change Cashless society Global catastrophic risk Future Earth Mathematics Race Climate Space exploration Universe Historical materialism Kondratiev wave Kardashev scale Moore's law Peak oil Population cycle Resource depletion Singularity Swanson's law Techniques Backcasting Causal layered analysis Chain-linked model Consensus forecast Cross impact analysis Delphi Real-time Delphi Foresight Future-proof Futures wheel Future workshop Horizon scanning Reference class forecasting Scenario planning Systems analysis Threatcasting Trend analysis Technology assessment and forecasting Critical design Design fiction Exploratory engineering FTA Hype cycle Science fiction prototyping Speculative design TRL Technology scouting Related topics Futarchy Transhumanism v t e Exploratory engineering is a term coined by K. Eric Drexler to describe the process of designing and analyzing detailed hypothetical models of systems that are not feasible with current technologies or methods, but do seem to be clearly within the bounds of what science considers to be possible within the narrowly defined scope of operation of the hypothetical system model. It usually results in paper or video prototypes, or (more likely nowadays) computer simulations that are as convincing as possible to those that know the relevant science, given the lack of experimental confirmation. By analogy with protoscience , it might be considered a form of protoengineering .

Usage [ edit ] Due to the difficulty and necessity of anticipating results in such areas as genetic modification , climate change , molecular engineering , and megascale engineering , parallel fields such as bioethics , climate engineering and hypothetical molecular nanotechnology sometimes emerge to develop and examine hypotheses, define limits, and express potential solutions to the anticipated technological problems. Proponents of exploratory engineering contend that it is an appropriate initial approach to such problems.

Engineering is concerned with the design of a solution to a practical problem. A scientist may ask "why?" and proceed to research the answer to the question. By contrast, engineers want to know how to solve a problem, and how to implement that solution. Exploratory engineering often posits that a highly detailed solution exists, and explores the putative characteristics of such a solution, while holding in abeyance the question of how to implement that solution. If a point can be reached where the attempted implementation of the solution is addressed using the principles of engineering physics , the activity transitions from protoengineering to actual engineering, and results in success or failure to implement the design.

Requirements [ edit ] Unlike the scientific method which relies on peer reviewed experiments which attempt to prove or disprove a falsifiable hypothesis , exploratory engineering relies on peer review , simulation and other methods employed by scientists, but applies them to some hypothetical artifact, a specific and detailed hypothesized design or process, rather than to an abstract model or theory. Because of the inherent lack of experimental falsifiability in exploratory engineering, its practitioners must take particular care to avoid falling into practices analogous to cargo cult science , pseudoscience , and pathological science .

Criticism [ edit ] Exploratory engineering has its critics, who dismiss the activity as mere armchair speculation, albeit with computer assist. A boundary which would take exploratory engineering out of the realm of mere speculation and define it as a realistic design activity is often indiscernible to such critics, and at the same time is often inexpressible by the proponents of exploratory engineering. While both critics and proponents often agree that much of the highly detailed simulation effort in the field may never result in a physical device, the dichotomy between the two groups is exemplified by the situation in which proponents of molecular nanotechnology contend that many complicated molecular machinery designs will be realizable after an unspecified "assembler breakthrough" envisioned by K. Eric Drexler , while critics contend that this attitude embodies wishful thinking equivalent to that in the famous Sidney Harris cartoon ( ISBN 0-913232-39-4 ) "And then a miracle occurs" published in the American Scientist magazine. In summary the critics contend that a hypothetical model which is both self-consistent and consistent with the laws of science concerning its operation, in the absence of a path to build the device modeled, provides no evidence that the desired device can be built. Proponents contend that there are so many potential ways to build the desired device that surely at least one of those ways will not display a critical flaw preventing the device from being built.

Science fiction [ edit ] Both proponents and critics often point to science fiction stories as the origin of exploratory engineering. On the positive side of the science fiction ledger, the ocean-going submarine , the telecommunications satellite , and other inventions were anticipated in such stories before they could be built.

[ 1 ] On the negative side of the same ledger, other science fiction devices such as the space elevator may be forever impossible because of basic strength of materials issues or due to other difficulties, either anticipated or unanticipated.

See also [ edit ] Climate engineering Macro-engineering Megascale engineering Planetary engineering References [ edit ] ^ Robert Bly (2005).

The Science in Science Fiction: 83 SF Predictions that Became Scientific Reality . BenBella Books. p.

1 .

ISBN 1-932100-48-2 .

2. Eric Drexler : "Physical Laws and the future of nanotechnology". Inaugural Lecture of the Oxford Martin Program, Feb,2012.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zQHA-UaUAe0 v t e Molecular nanotechnology Concepts Molecular assembler Molecular machine Mechanosynthesis Mechanochemistry Nanorobotics Self-replicating machine Productive nanosystems Gray goo Exploratory engineering Carbon nanotube nanomotor Utility fog Ecophagy Starseed launcher Organizations Foresight Institute Future of Humanity Institute Zyvex Works Engines of Creation Great Mambo Chicken and the Transhuman Condition " There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom " Other Feynman Prize in Nanotechnology Drexler–Smalley debate on molecular nanotechnology People James C. Bennett K. Eric Drexler Robert Freitas J. Storrs Hall Ralph Merkle Carlo Montemagno Christine Peterson Related topics Nanotechnology Nanomedicine Transhumanism Cryonics Technological singularity Impact of nanotechnology Societal v t e Engineering History Outline List of engineering branches Specialties and interdisciplinarity Civil Architectural Coastal Construction Earthquake Ecological Environmental Sanitary Geological Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Municipal/urban Offshore River Structural Transportation Traffic Railway Mechanical Acoustic Aerospace Automotive Biomechanical Energy Manufacturing Marine Naval architecture Railway Sports Thermal Tribology Electrical Broadcast outline Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Optical Power Radio-frequency Signal processing Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical/bioprocess Biological Bioresource Genetic Tissue Chemical reaction Electrochemical Food Molecular Paper Petroleum Process Reaction Materials Biomaterial Ceramics Corrosion Metallurgy Molecular Nanotechnology Polymers Semiconductors Surfaces Computer AI Computer Cybersecurity Data Networks Robotics Software Engineering education Bachelor of Engineering Bachelor of Science Master's degree Doctorate Graduate certificate Engineer's degree Licensed engineer Related topics Engineer Glossaries Engineering A–L M–Z Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering Other Agricultural Audio Automation Biomedical Bioinformatics Clinical Health technology Pharmaceutical Rehabilitation Building services MEP Design Explosives Facilities Fire Forensic Climate Geomatics Graphics Industrial Information Instrumentation Instrumentation and control Logistics Management Mathematics Mechatronics Military Nuclear Ontology Packaging Physics Privacy Safety Security Survey Sustainability Systems Textile Category Commons Wikiproject Portal v t e Emerging technologies Topics Automation Collingridge dilemma Differential technological development Disruptive innovation Ephemeralization Ethics AI Bioethics Cyberethics Neuroethics Robot ethics Exploratory engineering Proactionary principle Technological change Technological unemployment Technological convergence Technological evolution Technological paradigm Technology forecasting Accelerating change Future-oriented technology analysis Horizon scanning Moore's law Technological singularity Technology scouting Technology in science fiction Technology readiness level Technology roadmap Transhumanism List Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Exploratory_engineering&oldid=1268911963 " Categories : Exploratory engineering Engineering disciplines Nanotechnology Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from May 2007 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 January 2025, at 03:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Exploratory engineering 2 languages Add topic

