Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early history Toggle Early history subsection 1.1 Aristotle 1.2 Medieval syllogism 1.2.1 Boethius 1.2.2 Peter Abelard 1.2.3 Jean Buridan 2 Modern history Toggle Modern history subsection 2.1 Boole's acceptance of Aristotle 3 Basic structure Toggle Basic structure subsection 3.1 Polysyllogism 4 Types Toggle Types subsection 4.1 Examples 4.1.1 Barbara (AAA-1) 4.1.2 Celarent (EAE-1) 4.1.3 Darii (AII-1) 4.1.4 Ferio (EIO-1) 4.1.5 Baroco (AOO-2) 4.1.6 Bocardo (OAO-3) 4.1.7 Barbari (AAI-1) 4.1.8 Celaront (EAO-1) 4.1.9 Camestros (AEO-2) 4.1.10 Felapton (EAO-3) 4.1.11 Darapti (AAI-3) 4.2 Table of all syllogisms 5 Terms in syllogism 6 Existential import 7 Syllogistic fallacies 8 Other types 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Sources 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Syllogism 63 languages Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Novial Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of logical argument that applies deductive reasoning "Epagoge" redirects here. For the genus of moth, see Epagoge (moth) .

"Minor premise" redirects here. For the 2020 thriller film, see Minor Premise (film) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Syllogism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A syllogism ( Ancient Greek : συλλογισμός , syllogismos , 'conclusion, inference') is a kind of logical argument that applies deductive reasoning to arrive at a conclusion based on two propositions that are asserted or assumed to be true.

"Socrates" at the Louvre In its earliest form (defined by Aristotle in his 350 BC book Prior Analytics ), a deductive syllogism arises when two true premises (propositions or statements) validly imply a conclusion, or the main point that the argument aims to get across.

[ 1 ] For example, knowing that all men are mortal (major premise), and that Socrates is a man (minor premise), we may validly conclude that Socrates is mortal. Syllogistic arguments are usually represented in a three-line form: All men are mortal.

Socrates is a man.

Therefore, Socrates is mortal.

[ 2 ] In antiquity, two rival syllogistic theories existed: Aristotelian syllogism and Stoic syllogism .

[ 3 ] From the Middle Ages onwards, categorical syllogism and syllogism were usually used interchangeably. This article is concerned only with this historical use. The syllogism was at the core of historical deductive reasoning, whereby facts are determined by combining existing statements, in contrast to inductive reasoning , in which facts are predicted by repeated observations.

Within some academic contexts, syllogism has been superseded by first-order predicate logic following the work of Gottlob Frege , in particular his Begriffsschrift ( Concept Script ; 1879). Syllogism, being a method of valid logical reasoning, will always be useful in most circumstances, and for general-audience introductions to logic and clear-thinking.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Early history [ edit ] Main article: History of logic In antiquity, two rival syllogistic theories existed: Aristotelian syllogism and Stoic syllogism.

[ 3 ] Aristotle [ edit ] Main article: Term logic Aristotle defines the syllogism as "a discourse in which certain (specific) things having been supposed, something different from the things supposed results of necessity because these things are so." [ 6 ] Despite this very general definition, in Prior Analytics Aristotle limits himself to categorical syllogisms that consist of three categorical propositions , including categorical modal syllogisms.

[ 7 ] The use of syllogisms as a tool for understanding can be dated back to the logical reasoning discussions of Aristotle . Before the mid-12th century, medieval logicians were only familiar with a portion of Aristotle's works, including such titles as Categories and On Interpretation , works that contributed heavily to the prevailing Old Logic, or logica vetus . The onset of a New Logic, or logica nova , arose alongside the reappearance of Prior Analytics , the work in which Aristotle developed his theory of the syllogism.

Prior Analytics , upon rediscovery, was instantly regarded by logicians as "a closed and complete body of doctrine", leaving very little for thinkers of the day to debate, and reorganize. Aristotle's theory on the syllogism for assertoric sentences was considered especially remarkable, with only small systematic changes occurring to the concept over time. This theory of the syllogism would not enter the context of the more comprehensive logic of consequence until logic began to be reworked in general in the mid-14th century by the likes of John Buridan .

Aristotle's Prior Analytics did not, however, incorporate such a comprehensive theory on the modal syllogism—a syllogism that has at least one modalized premise, that is, a premise containing the modal words necessarily , possibly , or contingently . Aristotle's terminology in this aspect of his theory was deemed vague, and in many cases unclear, even contradicting some of his statements from On Interpretation . His original assertions on this specific component of the theory were left up to a considerable amount of conversation, resulting in a wide array of solutions put forth by commentators of the day. The system for modal syllogisms laid forth by Aristotle would ultimately be deemed unfit for practical use, and would be replaced by new distinctions and new theories altogether.

Medieval syllogism [ edit ] Boethius [ edit ] Boethius (c. 475–526) contributed an effort to make the ancient Aristotelian logic more accessible. While his Latin translation of Prior Analytics went primarily unused before the 12th century, his textbooks on the categorical syllogism were central to expanding the syllogistic discussion. Rather than in any additions that he personally made to the field, Boethius' logical legacy lies in his effective transmission of prior theories to later logicians, as well as his clear and primarily accurate presentations of Aristotle's contributions.

Peter Abelard [ edit ] Another of medieval logic's first contributors from the Latin West, Peter Abelard (1079–1142), gave his own thorough evaluation of the syllogism concept, and accompanying theory in the Dialectica —a discussion of logic based on Boethius' commentaries and monographs. His perspective on syllogisms can be found in other works as well, such as Logica Ingredientibus . With the help of Abelard's distinction between de dicto modal sentences and de re modal sentences, medieval logicians began to shape a more coherent concept of Aristotle's modal syllogism model.

Jean Buridan [ edit ] The French philosopher Jean Buridan (c. 1300 – 1361), whom some consider the foremost logician of the later Middle Ages, contributed two significant works: Treatise on Consequence and Summulae de Dialectica , in which he discussed the concept of the syllogism, its components and distinctions, and ways to use the tool to expand its logical capability. For 200 years after Buridan's discussions, little was said about syllogistic logic. Historians of logic have assessed that the primary changes in the post-Middle Age era were changes in respect to the public's awareness of original sources, a lessening of appreciation for the logic's sophistication and complexity, and an increase in logical ignorance—so that logicians of the early 20th century came to view the whole system as ridiculous.

[ 8 ] Modern history [ edit ] The Aristotelian syllogism dominated Western philosophical thought for many centuries. Syllogism itself is about drawing valid conclusions from assumptions ( axioms ), rather than about verifying the assumptions. However, people over time focused on the logic aspect, forgetting the importance of verifying the assumptions.

In the 17th century, Francis Bacon emphasized that experimental verification of axioms must be carried out rigorously, and cannot take syllogism itself as the best way to draw conclusions in nature.

[ 9 ] Bacon proposed a more inductive approach to the observation of nature, which involves experimentation, and leads to discovering and building on axioms to create a more general conclusion.

[ 9 ] Yet, a full method of drawing conclusions in nature is not the scope of logic or syllogism, and the inductive method was covered in Aristotle's subsequent treatise, the Posterior Analytics .

In the 19th century, modifications to syllogism were incorporated to deal with disjunctive ("A or B") and conditional ("if A then B") statements.

Immanuel Kant famously claimed, in Logic (1800), that logic was the one completed science, and that Aristotelian logic more or less included everything about logic that there was to know. (This work is not necessarily representative of Kant's mature philosophy, which is often regarded as an innovation to logic itself.) Kant's opinion stood unchallenged in the West until 1879, when Gottlob Frege published his Begriffsschrift ( Concept Script ). This introduced a calculus, a method of representing categorical statements (and statements that are not provided for in syllogism as well) by the use of quantifiers and variables.

A noteworthy exception is the logic developed in Bernard Bolzano 's work Wissenschaftslehre ( Theory of Science , 1837), the principles of which were applied as a direct critique of Kant, in the posthumously published work New Anti-Kant (1850). The work of Bolzano had been largely overlooked until the late 20th century, among other reasons, because of the intellectual environment at the time in Bohemia , which was then part of the Austrian Empire . In the last 20 years, Bolzano's work has resurfaced and become subject of both translation and contemporary study.

This led to the rapid development of sentential logic and first-order predicate logic , subsuming syllogistic reasoning, which was, therefore, after 2000 years, suddenly considered obsolete by many.

[ original research?

] The Aristotelian system is explicated in modern fora of academia primarily in introductory material and historical study.

One notable exception to this modern relegation is the continued application of Aristotelian logic by officials of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith , and the Apostolic Tribunal of the Roman Rota , which still requires that any arguments crafted by Advocates be presented in syllogistic format.

Boole's acceptance of Aristotle [ edit ] George Boole 's unwavering acceptance of Aristotle's logic is emphasized by the historian of logic John Corcoran in an accessible introduction to Laws of Thought .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Corcoran also wrote a point-by-point comparison of Prior Analytics and Laws of Thought .

[ 12 ] According to Corcoran, Boole fully accepted and endorsed Aristotle's logic. Boole's goals were "to go under, over, and beyond" Aristotle's logic by: [ 12 ] providing it with mathematical foundations involving equations; extending the class of problems it could treat, as solving equations was added to assessing validity ; and expanding the range of applications it could handle, such as expanding propositions of only two terms to those having arbitrarily many.

More specifically, Boole agreed with what Aristotle said; Boole's 'disagreements', if they might be called that, concern what Aristotle did not say. First, in the realm of foundations, Boole reduced Aristotle's four propositional forms to one form, the form of equations, which by itself was a revolutionary idea. Second, in the realm of logic's problems, Boole's addition of equation solving to logic—another revolutionary idea—involved Boole's doctrine that Aristotle's rules of inference (the "perfect syllogisms") must be supplemented by rules for equation solving. Third, in the realm of applications, Boole's system could handle multi-term propositions and arguments, whereas Aristotle could handle only two-termed subject-predicate propositions and arguments. For example, Aristotle's system could not deduce: "No quadrangle that is a square is a rectangle that is a rhombus" from "No square that is a quadrangle is a rhombus that is a rectangle" or from "No rhombus that is a rectangle is a square that is a quadrangle." Basic structure [ edit ] A categorical syllogism consists of three parts: Major premise Minor premise Conclusion/Consequent Each part is a categorical proposition , and each categorical proposition contains two categorical terms.

[ 13 ] In Aristotle, each of the premises is in the form "All S are P," "Some S are P", "No S are P" or "Some S are not P", where "S" is the subject-term and "P" is the predicate-term: "All S are P," and "No S are P" are termed universal propositions ; "Some S are P" and "Some S are not P" are termed particular propositions .

More modern logicians allow some variation. Each of the premises has one term in common with the conclusion: in a major premise, this is the major term (i.e., the predicate of the conclusion); in a minor premise, this is the minor term (i.e., the subject of the conclusion). For example: Major premise : All humans are mortal.

Minor premise : All Greeks are humans.

Conclusion/Consequent : All Greeks are mortal.

Each of the three distinct terms represents a category. From the example above, humans , mortal , and Greeks : mortal is the major term, and Greeks the minor term. The premises also have one term in common with each other, which is known as the middle term ; in this example, humans . Both of the premises are universal, as is the conclusion.

Major premise : All mortals die.

Minor premise : All men are mortals.

Conclusion/Consequent : All men die.

Here, the major term is die , the minor term is men , and the middle term is mortals . Again, both premises are universal, hence so is the conclusion.

Polysyllogism [ edit ] Main article: Polysyllogism A polysyllogism, or a sorites , is a form of argument in which a series of incomplete syllogisms is so arranged that the predicate of each premise forms the subject of the next until the subject of the first is joined with the predicate of the last in the conclusion. For example, one might argue that all lions are big cats, all big cats are predators, and all predators are carnivores. To conclude that therefore all lions are carnivores is to construct a sorites argument.

Types [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( July 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Relationships between the four types of propositions in the square of opposition (Black areas are empty, red areas are nonempty.) Further information: List of valid argument forms There are infinitely many possible syllogisms, but only 256 logically distinct types and only 24 valid types (enumerated below). A syllogism takes the form (note: M – Middle, S – subject, P – predicate.): Major premise : All M are P.

Minor premise : All S are M.

Conclusion/Consequent : All S are P.

The premises and conclusion of a syllogism can be any of four types, which are labeled by letters [ 14 ] as follows. The meaning of the letters is given by the table: code quantifier subject copula predicate type example A All S are P universal affirmative All humans are mortal.

E No S are P universal negative No humans are perfect.

I Some S are P particular affirmative Some humans are healthy.

O Some S are not P particular negative Some humans are not old.

In Prior Analytics , Aristotle uses mostly the letters A, B, and C (Greek letters alpha , beta , and gamma ) as term place holders, rather than giving concrete examples. It is traditional to use is rather than are as the copula , hence All A is B rather than All As are Bs . It is traditional and convenient practice to use a, e, i, o as infix operators so the categorical statements can be written succinctly. The following table shows the longer form, the succinct shorthand, and equivalent expressions in predicate logic: Form Shorthand Predicate logic All A is B AaB ∀ ∀ x .

A ( x ) → → B ( x ) {\displaystyle \forall x.A(x)\rightarrow B(x)} or ¬ ¬ ∃ ∃ x .

A ( x ) ∧ ∧ ¬ ¬ B ( x ) {\displaystyle \neg \exists x.A(x)\land \neg B(x)} No A is B AeB ¬ ¬ ∃ ∃ x .

A ( x ) ∧ ∧ B ( x ) {\displaystyle \neg \exists x.A(x)\land B(x)} or ∀ ∀ x .

A ( x ) → → ¬ ¬ B ( x ) {\displaystyle \forall x.A(x)\rightarrow \neg B(x)} Some A is B AiB ∃ ∃ x .

A ( x ) ∧ ∧ B ( x ) {\displaystyle \exists x.A(x)\land B(x)} Some A is not B AoB ∃ ∃ x .

A ( x ) ∧ ∧ ¬ ¬ B ( x ) {\displaystyle \exists x.A(x)\land \neg B(x)} The convention here is that the letter S is the subject of the conclusion, P is the predicate of the conclusion, and M is the middle term. The major premise links M with P and the minor premise links M with S. However, the middle term can be either the subject or the predicate of each premise where it appears. The differing positions of the major, minor, and middle terms gives rise to another classification of syllogisms known as the figure . Given that in each case the conclusion is S-P, the four figures are: Figure 1 Figure 2 Figure 3 Figure 4 Major premise M–P P–M M–P P–M Minor premise S–M S–M M–S M–S (Note, however, that, following Aristotle's treatment of the figures, some logicians—e.g., Peter Abelard and Jean Buridan —reject the fourth figure as a figure distinct from the first.) Putting it all together, there are 256 possible types of syllogisms (or 512 if the order of the major and minor premises is changed, though this makes no difference logically). Each premise and the conclusion can be of type A, E, I or O, and the syllogism can be any of the four figures. A syllogism can be described briefly by giving the letters for the premises and conclusion followed by the number for the figure. For example, the syllogism BARBARA below is AAA-1, or "A-A-A in the first figure".

The vast majority of the 256 possible forms of syllogism are invalid (the conclusion does not follow logically from the premises). The table below shows the valid forms. Even some of these are sometimes considered to commit the existential fallacy , meaning they are invalid if they mention an empty category. These controversial patterns are marked in italics . All but four of the patterns in italics (felapton, darapti, fesapo and bamalip) are weakened moods, i.e. it is possible to draw a stronger conclusion from the premises.

Figure 1 Figure 2 Figure 3 Figure 4 B a rb a r a C e s a r e D a t i s i C a l e m e s C e l a r e nt C a m e str e s D i s a m i s D i m a t i s D a r ii F e st i n o F e r i s o n Fr e s i s o n F e r io B a r o c o B o c a rd o C a l e m o s B a rb a r i C e s a r o F e l a pt o n F e s a p o C e l a r o nt C a m e str o s D a r a pt i B a m a l i p The letters A, E, I, and O have been used since the medieval Schools to form mnemonic names for the forms as follows: 'Barbara' stands for AAA, 'Celarent' for EAE, etc.

Next to each premise and conclusion is a shorthand description of the sentence. So in AAI-3, the premise "All squares are rectangles" becomes "MaP"; the symbols mean that the first term ("square") is the middle term, the second term ("rectangle") is the predicate of the conclusion, and the relationship between the two terms is labeled "a" (All M are P).

The following table shows all syllogisms that are essentially different. The similar syllogisms share the same premises, just written in a different way. For example "Some pets are kittens" (SiM in Darii ) could also be written as "Some kittens are pets" (MiS in Datisi).

In the Venn diagrams, the black areas indicate no elements, and the red areas indicate at least one element. In the predicate logic expressions, a horizontal bar over an expression means to negate ("logical not") the result of that expression.

It is also possible to use graphs (consisting of vertices and edges) to evaluate syllogisms.

[ 15 ] Examples [ edit ] M: men S: Greeks P: mortal Barbara (AAA-1) [ edit ] All men are mortal. (MaP) All Greeks are men. (SaM) ∴ All Greeks are mortal. (SaP) M: reptile S: snake P: fur Celarent (EAE-1) [ edit ] Similar: Cesare (EAE-2) No reptile has fur. (MeP) All snakes are reptiles. (SaM) ∴ No snake has fur. (SeP) Camestres (AEE-2) M: reptile S: fur P: snake Camestres is essentially like Celarent with S and P exchanged.

Similar: Calemes (AEE-4) All snakes are reptiles. (PaM) No fur bearing animal is a reptile. (SeM) ∴ No fur bearing animal is a snake. (SeP) M: rabbit S: pet P: fur Darii (AII-1) [ edit ] Similar: Datisi (AII-3) All rabbits have fur. (MaP) Some pets are rabbits. (SiM) ∴ Some pets have fur. (SiP) Disamis (IAI-3) M: rabbit S: fur P: pet Disamis is essentially like Darii with S and P exchanged.

Similar: Dimatis (IAI-4) Some rabbits are pets. (MiP) All rabbits have fur. (MaP) ∴ Some fur bearing animals are pets. (SiP) M: homework S: reading P: fun Ferio (EIO-1) [ edit ] Similar: Festino (EIO-2), Ferison (EIO-3), Fresison (EIO-4) No homework is fun. (MeP) Some reading is homework. (SiM) ∴ Some reading is not fun. (SoP) M: mammal S: pet P: cat Baroco (AOO-2) [ edit ] All cats are mammals. (PaM) Some pets are not mammals. (SoM) ∴ Some pets are not cats. (SoP) M: cat S: mammal P: pet Bocardo (OAO-3) [ edit ] Some cats are not pets. (MoP) All cats are mammals. (MaS) ∴ Some mammals are not pets. (SoP) M: man S: Greek P: mortal Barbari (AAI-1) [ edit ] All men are mortal. (MaP) All Greeks are men. (SaM) ∴ Some Greeks are mortal. (SiP) Bamalip (AAI-4) M: man S: mortal P: Greek Bamalip is exactly like Barbari with S and P exchanged: All Greeks are men. (PaM) All men are mortals. (MaS) ∴ Some (all) mortals are Greek. (SiP) M: reptile S: snake P: fur Celaront (EAO-1) [ edit ] Similar: Cesaro (EAO-2) No reptiles have fur. (MeP) All snakes are reptiles. (SaM) ∴ Some snakes have no fur. (SoP) M: hooves S: human P: horse Camestros (AEO-2) [ edit ] Similar: Calemos (AEO-4) All horses have hooves. (PaM) No humans have hooves. (SeM) ∴ Some humans are not horses. (SoP) M: flower S: plant P: animal Felapton (EAO-3) [ edit ] Similar: Fesapo (EAO-4) No flowers are animals. (MeP) All flowers are plants. (MaS) ∴ Some plants are not animals. (SoP) M: square S: rhomb P: rectangle Darapti (AAI-3) [ edit ] All squares are rectangles . (MaP) All squares are rhombuses . (MaS) ∴ Some rhombuses are rectangles. (SiP) Table of all syllogisms [ edit ] This table shows all 24 valid syllogisms, represented by Venn diagrams . Columns indicate similarity, and are grouped by combinations of premises. Borders correspond to conclusions. Those with an existential assumption are dashed.

Table of all 24 valid syllogisms A ∧ A A ∧ E A ∧ I A ∧ O E ∧ I 1 Barbara Barbari Celarent Celaront Darii Ferio 2 Camestres Camestros Cesare Cesaro Baroco Festino 3 Darapti Felapton Datisi Disamis Bocardo Ferison 4 Bamalip Calemes Calemos Fesapo Dimatis Fresison Terms in syllogism [ edit ] This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( July 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( July 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) With Aristotle, we may distinguish singular terms , such as Socrates , and general terms, such as Greeks . Aristotle further distinguished types (a) and (b): terms that could be the subject of predication; and terms that could be predicated of others by the use of the copula ("is a").

Such a predication is known as a distributive , as opposed to non-distributive as in Greeks are numerous . It is clear that Aristotle's syllogism works only for distributive predication, since we cannot reason All Greeks are animals, animals are numerous, therefore all Greeks are numerous . In Aristotle's view singular terms were of type (a), and general terms of type (b). Thus, Men can be predicated of Socrates but Socrates cannot be predicated of anything. Therefore, for a term to be interchangeable—to be either in the subject or predicate position of a proposition in a syllogism—the terms must be general terms, or categorical terms as they came to be called. Consequently, the propositions of a syllogism should be categorical propositions (both terms general) and syllogisms that employ only categorical terms came to be called categorical syllogisms .

It is clear that nothing would prevent a singular term occurring in a syllogism—so long as it was always in the subject position—however, such a syllogism, even if valid, is not a categorical syllogism. An example is Socrates is a man, all men are mortal, therefore Socrates is mortal.

Intuitively this is as valid as All Greeks are men, all men are mortal therefore all Greeks are mortals . To argue that its validity can be explained by the theory of syllogism would require that we show that Socrates is a man is the equivalent of a categorical proposition. It can be argued Socrates is a man is equivalent to All that are identical to Socrates are men , so our non-categorical syllogism can be justified by use of the equivalence above and then citing BARBARA.

Existential import [ edit ] This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( July 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( July 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) If a statement includes a term such that the statement is false if the term has no instances, then the statement is said to have existential import with respect to that term. It is ambiguous whether or not a universal statement of the form All A is B is to be considered as true, false, or even meaningless if there are no As. If it is considered as false in such cases, then the statement All A is B has existential import with respect to A.

It is claimed Aristotle's logic system does not cover cases where there are no instances. Aristotle's goal was to develop a logic for science. He relegates fictions, such as mermaids and unicorns, to the realms of poetry and literature. In his mind, they exist outside the ambit of science, which is why he leaves no room for such non-existent entities in his logic. This is a thoughtful choice, not an inadvertent omission. Technically, Aristotelian science is a search for definitions, where a definition is "a phrase signifying a thing's essence." Because non-existent entities cannot be anything, they do not, in Aristotle's mind, possess an essence. This is why he leaves no place for fictional entities like goat-stags (or unicorns).

[ 16 ] However, many logic systems developed since do consider the case where there may be no instances. Medieval logicians were aware of the problem of existential import and maintained that negative propositions do not carry existential import, and that positive propositions with subjects that do not supposit are false.

The following problems arise: In natural language and normal use, which statements of the forms, All A is B, No A is B, Some A is B, and Some A is not B, have existential import and with respect to which terms?

In the four forms of categorical statements used in syllogism, which statements of the form AaB, AeB, AiB and AoB have existential import and with respect to which terms?

What existential imports must the forms AaB, AeB, AiB and AoB have for the square of opposition to be valid?

What existential imports must the forms AaB, AeB, AiB and AoB have to preserve the validity of the traditionally valid forms of syllogisms?

Are the existential imports required to satisfy (d) above such that the normal uses in natural languages of the forms All A is B, No A is B, Some A is B and Some A is not B are intuitively and fairly reflected by the categorical statements of forms AaB, AeB, AiB and AoB?

For example, if it is accepted that AiB is false if there are no As and AaB entails AiB, then AiB has existential import with respect to A, and so does AaB. Further, if it is accepted that AiB entails BiA, then AiB and AaB have existential import with respect to B as well. Similarly, if AoB is false if there are no As, and AeB entails AoB, and AeB entails BeA (which in turn entails BoA) then both AeB and AoB have existential import with respect to both A and B. It follows immediately that all universal categorical statements have existential import with respect to both terms. If AaB and AeB is a fair representation of the use of statements in normal natural language of All A is B and No A is B respectively, then the following example consequences arise: "All flying horses are mythical" is false if there are no flying horses.

If "No men are fire-eating rabbits" is true, then "There are fire-eating rabbits" is true; and so on.

If it is ruled that no universal statement has existential import then the square of opposition fails in several respects (e.g. AaB does not entail AiB) and a number of syllogisms are no longer valid (e.g. BaC, AaB->AiC).

These problems and paradoxes arise in both natural language statements and statements in syllogism form because of ambiguity, in particular ambiguity with respect to All. If "Fred claims all his books were Pulitzer Prize winners", is Fred claiming that he wrote any books? If not, then is what he claims true? Suppose Jane says none of her friends are poor; is that true if she has no friends?

The first-order predicate calculus avoids such ambiguity by using formulae that carry no existential import with respect to universal statements. Existential claims must be explicitly stated. Thus, natural language statements—of the forms All A is B, No A is B , Some A is B , and Some A is not B —can be represented in first order predicate calculus in which any existential import with respect to terms A and/or B is either explicit or not made at all. Consequently, the four forms AaB, AeB, AiB , and AoB can be represented in first order predicate in every combination of existential import—so it can establish which construal, if any, preserves the square of opposition and the validity of the traditionally valid syllogism. Strawson claims such a construal is possible, but the results are such that, in his view, the answer to question (e) above is no .

Syllogistic fallacies [ edit ] People often make mistakes when reasoning syllogistically.

[ 17 ] For instance, from the premises some A are B, some B are C, people tend to come to a definitive conclusion that therefore some A are C.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] However, this does not follow according to the rules of classical logic. For instance, while some cats (A) are black things (B), and some black things (B) are televisions (C), it does not follow from the parameters that some cats (A) are televisions (C). This is because in the structure of the syllogism invoked (i.e. III-1) the middle term is not distributed in either the major premise or in the minor premise, a pattern called the " fallacy of the undistributed middle ". Because of this, it can be hard to follow formal logic, and a closer eye is needed in order to ensure that an argument is, in fact, valid.

[ 20 ] Determining the validity of a syllogism involves determining the distribution of each term in each statement, meaning whether all members of that term are accounted for.

In simple syllogistic patterns, the fallacies of invalid patterns are: Undistributed middle : Neither of the premises accounts for all members of the middle term, which consequently fails to link the major and minor term.

Illicit treatment of the major term : The conclusion implicates all members of the major term (P – meaning the proposition is negative); however, the major premise does not account for them all (i.e., P is either an affirmative predicate or a particular subject there).

Illicit treatment of the minor term : Same as above, but for the minor term (S – meaning the proposition is universal) and minor premise (where S is either a particular subject or an affirmative predicate).

Exclusive premises : Both premises are negative, meaning no link is established between the major and minor terms.

Affirmative conclusion from a negative premise : If either premise is negative, the conclusion must also be.

Negative conclusion from affirmative premises : If both premises are affirmative, the conclusion must also be.

Other types [ edit ] Disjunctive syllogism Hypothetical syllogism Legal syllogism Polysyllogism Prosleptic syllogism Quasi-syllogism Statistical syllogism See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Syllogistic fallacy Argumentation theory Buddhist logic Enthymeme Formal fallacy Logical fallacy The False Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures Tautology (logic) Venn diagram Some decidable fragments of set theory are called syllogistics.

References [ edit ] ^ Lundberg, Christian (2018).

The Essential Guide to Rhetoric . Bedford/St.Martin's. p. 38.

^ John Stuart Mill, A System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive, Being a Connected View of the Principles of Evidence, and the Methods of Scientific Investigation , 3rd ed., vol. 1, chap. 2 (London: John W. Parker, 1851), 190.

^ a b Frede, Michael . 1975. "Stoic vs. Peripatetic Syllogistic." Archive for the History of Philosophy 56:99–124.

^ Hurley, Patrick J. 2011.

A Concise Introduction to Logic . Cengage Learning.

ISBN 9780840034175 ^ Zegarelli, Mark. 2010.

Logic for Dummies . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 9781118053072 .

^ Aristotle , Prior Analytics , 24b18–20 ^ Bobzien, Susanne . [2006] 2020. " Ancient Logic ." Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . § Aristotle .

^ Lagerlund, Henrik (2 February 2004).

"Medieval Theories of the Syllogism" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Edward N. Zalta . Retrieved 17 February 2014 .

^ a b Bacon, Francis . [1620] 2001.

The Great Instauration . – via Constitution Society . Archived from the original on 13 April 2019.

^ Boole, George . [1854] 2003.

The Laws of Thought , with an introduction by J. Corcoran. Buffalo: Prometheus Books .

^ van Evra, James. 2004. "'The Laws of Thought' by George Boole" (review).

Philosophy in Review 24:167–69.

^ a b Corcoran, John . 2003. "Aristotle's 'Prior Analytics' and Boole's 'Laws of Thought'." History and Philosophy of Logic 24:261–88.

^ "Philosophical Dictionary: Caird-Catharsis" . Philosophypages.com. 2002-08-08 . Retrieved 2009-12-14 .

^ According to Copi , p. 127: 'The letter names are presumed to come from the Latin words " A ff I rmo" and "n E g O ," which mean "I affirm" and "I deny," respectively; the first capitalized letter of each word is for universal, the second for particular' ^ "Syllogisms Made Easy" . 10 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 2021-12-11 – via www.youtube.com.

^ "Groarke, Louis F., "Aristotle: Logic", section 7. (Existential Assumptions), Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" . Archived from the original on 2017-02-04 . Retrieved 2017-03-07 .

^ See, e.g., Evans, J. St. B. T (1989).

Bias in human reasoning . London: LEA.

^ Khemlani, S., and P. N. Johnson-Laird. 2012. "Theories of the syllogism: A meta-analysis." Psychological Bulletin 138:427–57.

^ Chater, N., and M. Oaksford. 1999. "The Probability Heuristics Model of Syllogistic Reasoning." Cognitive Psychology 38:191–258.

^ Lundberg, Christian (2018).

The Essential Guide to Rhetoric . Bedford/St. Martin's. p. 39.

Sources [ edit ] Aristotle , [c. 350 BCE] 1989.

Prior Analytics , translated by R. Smith. Hackett.

ISBN 0-87220-064-7 Blackburn, Simon . [1994] 1996. "Syllogism." In The Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-283134-8 .

Broadie, Alexander. 1993.

Introduction to Medieval Logic . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-824026-0 .

Copi, Irving . 1969.

Introduction to Logic (3rd ed.). Macmillan Company.

Corcoran, John . 1972. "Completeness of an ancient logic." Journal of Symbolic Logic 37:696–702.

— 1994. "The founding of logic: Modern interpretations of Aristotle's logic." Ancient Philosophy 14:9–24.

Corcoran, John, and Hassan Masoud. 2015. "Existential Import Today: New Metatheorems; Historical, Philosophical, and Pedagogical Misconceptions." History and Philosophy of Logic 36(1):39–61.

Englebretsen, George. 1987.

The New Syllogistic . Bern: Peter Lang .

Hamblin, Charles Leonard . 1970.

Fallacies . London: Methuen .

ISBN 0-416-70070-5 .

Cf.

on validity of syllogisms: "A simple set of rules of validity was finally produced in the later Middle Ages, based on the concept of Distribution." Łukasiewicz, Jan . [1957] 1987.

Aristotle's Syllogistic from the Standpoint of Modern Formal Logic . New York: Garland Publishers.

ISBN 0-8240-6924-2 .

OCLC 15015545 .

Malink, Marko. 2013.

Aristotle's Modal Syllogistic . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press .

Patzig, Günter. 1968.

Aristotle's theory of the syllogism: a logico-philological study of Book A of the Prior Analytics . Dordrecht: Reidel.

Rescher, Nicholas. 1966.

Galen and the Syllogism . University of Pittsburgh Press.

ISBN 978-0822983958 .

Smiley, Timothy . 1973. "What is a syllogism?" Journal of Philosophical Logic 2:136–54.

Smith, Robin. 1986. "Immediate propositions and Aristotle's proof theory." Ancient Philosophy 6:47–68.

Thom, Paul. 1981. "The Syllogism." Philosophia . München.

ISBN 3-88405-002-8 .

External links [ edit ] Smith, Robin.

"Aristotle's Logic" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Koutsoukou-Argyraki, Angeliki.

Aristotle's Assertoric Syllogistic (Formal proof development in Isabelle/HOL, Archive of Formal Proofs) Lagerlund, Henrik.

"Medieval Theories of the Syllogism" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Aristotle's Prior Analytics: the Theory of Categorical Syllogism an annotated bibliography on Aristotle's syllogistic Fuzzy Syllogistic System Development of Fuzzy Syllogistic Algorithms and Applications Distributed Reasoning Approaches Comparison between the Aristotelian Syllogism and the Indian/Tibetan Syllogism The Buddhist Philosophy of Universal Flux (Chapter XXIII – Members of a Syllogism (avayava)) Online Syllogistic Machine An interactive syllogistic machine for exploring all the fallacies, figures, terms, and modes of syllogisms.

v t e Aristotelian logic (syllogistic) General Square of opposition Problem of multiple generality Dictum de omni et nullo Syncategorema Predicable Definition Genus Differentia Property Accident Propositions Apodictic Assertoric Categorical Syllogism Enthymeme Epicheireme Prosleptic Baroco Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Isagoge Port-Royal Logic Sum of Logic The False Subtlety of the Four Syllogistic Figures v t e Mathematical logic General Axiom list Cardinality First-order logic Formal proof Formal semantics Foundations of mathematics Information theory Lemma Logical consequence Model Theorem Theory Type theory Theorems ( list ) and paradoxes Gödel's completeness and incompleteness theorems Tarski's undefinability Banach–Tarski paradox Cantor's theorem, paradox and diagonal argument Compactness Halting problem Lindström's Löwenheim–Skolem Russell's paradox Logics Traditional Classical logic Logical truth Tautology Proposition Inference Logical equivalence Consistency Equiconsistency Argument Soundness Validity Syllogism Square of opposition Venn diagram Propositional Boolean algebra Boolean functions Logical connectives Propositional calculus Propositional formula Truth tables Many-valued logic 3 finite ∞ Predicate First-order list Second-order Monadic Higher-order Fixed-point Free Quantifiers Predicate Monadic predicate calculus Set theory Set hereditary Class ( Ur- ) Element Ordinal number Extensionality Forcing Relation equivalence partition Set operations: intersection union complement Cartesian product power set identities Types of sets Countable Uncountable Empty Inhabited Singleton Finite Infinite Transitive Ultrafilter Recursive Fuzzy Universal Universe constructible Grothendieck Von Neumann Maps and cardinality Function / Map domain codomain image In / Sur / Bi -jection Schröder–Bernstein theorem Isomorphism Gödel numbering Enumeration Large cardinal inaccessible Aleph number Operation binary Set theories Zermelo–Fraenkel axiom of choice continuum hypothesis General Kripke–Platek Morse–Kelley Naive New Foundations Tarski–Grothendieck Von Neumann–Bernays–Gödel Ackermann Constructive Formal systems ( list ), language and syntax Alphabet Arity Automata Axiom schema Expression ground Extension by definition conservative Relation Formation rule Grammar Formula atomic closed ground open Free/bound variable Language Metalanguage Logical connective ¬ ∨ ∧ → ↔ = Predicate functional variable propositional variable Proof Quantifier ∃ !

∀ rank Sentence atomic spectrum Signature String Substitution Symbol function logical/constant non-logical variable Term Theory list Example axiomatic systems ( list ) of arithmetic : Peano second-order elementary function primitive recursive Robinson Skolem of the real numbers Tarski's axiomatization of Boolean algebras canonical minimal axioms of geometry : Euclidean : Elements Hilbert's Tarski's non-Euclidean Principia Mathematica Proof theory Formal proof Natural deduction Logical consequence Rule of inference Sequent calculus Theorem Systems axiomatic deductive Hilbert list Complete theory Independence ( from ZFC ) Proof of impossibility Ordinal analysis Reverse mathematics Self-verifying theories Model theory Interpretation function of models Model equivalence finite saturated spectrum submodel Non-standard model of arithmetic Diagram elementary Categorical theory Model complete theory Satisfiability Semantics of logic Strength Theories of truth semantic Tarski's Kripke's T-schema Transfer principle Truth predicate Truth value Type Ultraproduct Validity Computability theory Church encoding Church–Turing thesis Computably enumerable Computable function Computable set Decision problem decidable undecidable P NP P versus NP problem Kolmogorov complexity Lambda calculus Primitive recursive function Recursion Recursive set Turing machine Type theory Related Abstract logic Algebraic logic Automated theorem proving Category theory Concrete / Abstract category Category of sets History of logic History of mathematical logic timeline Logicism Mathematical object Philosophy of mathematics Supertask Mathematics portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐rm72b
Cached time: 20250814215719
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.893 seconds
Real time usage: 1.196 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4982/1000000
Revision size: 46623/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 225964/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 33710/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 126856/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.467/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22343262/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  825.529      1 -total
 19.13%  157.937      1 Template:Reflist
 15.55%  128.349      6 Template:Navbox
 13.19%  108.907      3 Template:Multiple_issues
 12.83%  105.956      1 Template:Langx
 11.04%   91.141      2 Template:Cite_book
 10.14%   83.728      1 Template:Aristotelian_logic
  7.88%   65.023      1 Template:Short_description
  7.20%   59.478      7 Template:Ambox
  6.47%   53.388      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:48046:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215719 and revision id 1302753982. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Syllogism&oldid=1302753982 " Categories : Syllogism Term logic Ancient Greek logic Arguments Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2023 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with style issues from February 2023 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from January 2013 Articles that may contain original research from July 2020 Articles needing additional references from July 2020 This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 09:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Syllogism 63 languages Add topic

