Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 1.1 Birds 1.2 Geology 1.2.1 Simplified geological overview 1.3 Vegetation 1.4 Intertidal ecology 2 History 3 Gallery 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ōmana Regional Park Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 36°52′48″S 175°01′26″E ﻿ / ﻿ 36.8799°S 175.0239°E ﻿ / -36.8799; 175.0239 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia New Zealand regional park Ōmana Regional Park View from Omana towards Waiheke Island Location Franklin , Auckland , New Zealand Coordinates 36°52′48″S 175°01′26″E ﻿ / ﻿ 36.8799°S 175.0239°E ﻿ / -36.8799; 175.0239 Operated by Auckland Council Ōmana Regional Park is situated south-east of Auckland and just west of Maraetai , in the Franklin area of the Auckland Region of New Zealand's North Island . It is owned and managed by Auckland Council .

[ 1 ] Geography [ edit ] View over Omana park from the highest point, 40 metres above sea level, towards Rangitoto Island The park is located on a gently contoured knoll, which rises 40 meters above sea level. From the highest point looking inland, visitors can see from Maraetai to the Beachlands settlements. Looking seaward, there are views of the Hauraki Gulf.

[ 2 ] The eastern boundary is the Whitford-Maraetai road which is separated from view by a strip of mature native bush. There are 40.81 hectares of park of which about 20 hectares are used to graze sheep and the rest is used for recreational activities.

[ 3 ] The western boundary is the brackish Te Puru Creek.

[ 4 ] Birds [ edit ] Southern black-backed gulls at Omana.

At least twenty-six different types of bird are found in the park. natives include: pied stilt, pūkeko ( Porphyrio melanotus ), kererū , tūī which appears almost black except for a white tuft under its chin, fantail , grey warbler , red-billed gull , southern black-backed gull (see kelp gull ), South Island pied oystercatcher and the closely related variable oystercatcher ( Haematopus unicolor ), pied shag , kingfisher , and white-faced heron .

[ 5 ] The white-fronted tern can be found resting on the greywacke outcrops which become visible at low tide.

Geology [ edit ] Omana shore platform, sandstones about 19 million years old.

The beach and extensive rock platform, form the northern boundary of the park. The whole of Omana Regional Park is underlain at a depth of 30 – 100m by ancient greywacke (a harder basement sedimentary rock).

[ 6 ] The greywacke belongs to the Waiheke group. The softer more recent sandstone is of the Waitamata group.

Ancient (200-million-year-old) Greywacke outcrop. Omana.

The layered sandstones and siltstones (mudstones) are seen in the cliff faces and also form the shore platform around the north
and west sides of the park. These softer, generally yellow-brown rocks are approximately 19-20 million years old and are made up of the Waitamata formation (East Coast Bays facies) of early Miocene (Late Otaian) age.

[ 7 ] Distortion and faulted dipping, of this once soft strata, can be seen both in the cliffs and in the small ridges of the rock platform extending out from the beach at low tide.

Ancient Greywacke, poking through the 19-million-year-old mudstone shore platform.

What makes an interesting discovery is that protruding through the softer yellow-brown sedimentary sandstone and mudstone layers, there are ancient (200-million-year-old) tips of greywacke sea stacks from the Jurassic age.

[ 7 ] They are older and harder (cut or formed from the original 200-million-year-old greywacke about 25 million years ago). They are about 1–2 meters high and are found in the shore platform, about 200 metres east of the park at Omana Beach.

[ 7 ] Holocene sands (less than 7000 years old) form the flat area behind Omana Beach and at Te Puru Creek.

[ 5 ] Simplified geological overview [ edit ] Greywacke - an ancient sedimentary rock. Omana.

200 - 150 million years ago sand eroded from the super-continent Gondwana into a deep trough in the sea floor. These deposits were kilometers thick and compressed, folded and heated became hard greywacke.

150 - 120 million years ago The hard greywacke was uplifted and became the first mountainous backbone of New Zealand.

120 - 70 million years ago the mountain ranges were eroded to a great degree.

35 – 15 million years ago the sea completely covered much of New Zealand. During this long quiet period, sediments were deposited over the old basement rock and gradually metamorphosed into sandstones.

15 – 5 million years ago The greywackes were again uplifted (Late Miocene ). This second set of earth movements, known as the Kaikoura Orogeny , elevated large fault-bounded blocks to form the horsts (upfaulted blocks of land) of the Hunua and Coromandel Ranges, and threw down the grabens (down-faulted blocks) of the Firth of Thames and Hauraki Gulf which Omana now overlooks.

[ 8 ] Vegetation [ edit ] Salt marsh, Te Puru creek. mangroves and kanuka Apart from the pōhutukawa and grass areas, there is a southern patch of mature tānekaha and a northern patch of pūriri (ripe red berries) and taraire . Other large trees include rewarewa , mapou , kōwhai , tōtara , tree ferns, cabbage trees, and kahikatea .

Kānuka can be found on the slopes of the Te Puru creek (the estuarine mangrove salt marsh).

[ 9 ] Intertidal ecology [ edit ] Cockle shells on Omana beach.

The intertidal ecology is mainly composed of three areas: Rocky shore platform with small pools at low tide on north and west of the park are occupied by small barnacles, rock oysters, Neptune's necklace (a sea weed) and tube worms.

Sand and mudflats surrounding the shore platform contain cockles, pipi ( Paphies australis ), crabs and Polychaete worms. Because of the cockle bed out in the sea, the cockle shells wash up high on the beach during storms. The sand can be found underneath.

Mangroves with mud snails ( Amphibola crenata ), small mussels and barnacles.

[ 10 ] History [ edit ] O-manutere pa site showing ring ditch.

Ōmana Regional Park has been a traditional home for Ngāi Tai ki Tāmaki for generations.

[ 11 ] The name Ōmana is a shortening of Ōmanawatere ("The Place of Manawatere"), referring to the name of a Ngāi Tai ancestor.

[ 11 ] According to legend, "This man Manawatere came from Hawaiki , he did not come in a canoe ( waka ), he glided over the ripples of the waves".

[ 12 ] The ARC information board beside the pa says he rode on the back of a taniwha .

On the perimeter track, visitors will find a grassed area, overlooking the sea, which was the original site of a Ngāi Tai pā.

[ 13 ] (see Pā ). This grassed area has a deep ditch whose internal bank would have once been much higher and topped with a strong palisade of posts. O-Manawatere is a relatively small pā.

[ 14 ] The park was part of William Fairburn 's Maraetai Mission Station , which operated from 1837 to 1842. It was one of the first European farms in eastern Auckland.

[ 11 ] The forest covering the park and surrounding area was felled for timber by European settlers who cleared the land for farming during the mid-1840s. Kauri felled in the Maraetai hills behind Omana was hauled by bullock teams down to the sea and then floated to mills in Auckland.

[ 15 ] The Omana park area was also dug for kauri gum and even prospected for gold and silver.

[ 16 ] In 1852 following the discovery of gold in Coromandel many searched the hills digging shafts wherever quartz veins could be located.

[ 17 ] The area was farmed continuously, since the development of the mission until March 1970, when it was purchased by the Auckland Regional Authority to be developed into a regional park.

[ 11 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Gallery [ edit ] Pūriri (Vitex lucens) at Omana with red berries in summer.

Neptune's necklace, Omana.

Dry grass of February. One sheep on the horizon, Omana.

Young kauri on the perimeter walk.

Oyster shells on Omana beach.

Raupo at Omana.

Kumara pit on the pa site.

Goats and cabbage trees in the ditch beside the pa site.

Goat with the pa ring ditch in the background.

Two variable oystercatchers Haematopus unicolor . Omana.

Mud snail near mangroves.

Amphibola crenata (titiko).

White-fronted terns on ancient Greywacke sea stack.

References [ edit ] ^ "Council profile" .

aucklandcouncil.govt.nz .

Auckland Council .

^ http://www.nzarchaeology.org/northauckcoro.htm Archived 2008-02-02 at the Wayback Machine retrieved 2008 ^ http://www.sges.auckland.ac.nz/the_school/jobs_pdf/arc_parks/southern_sector_brief_2005.doc Archived 2006-10-04 at the Wayback Machine retrieved 2008 ^ Janssen, Peter (January 2021), Greater Auckland Walks , New Holland Publishers , p. 157-158, OL 34023249W , Wikidata Q118136068 ^ a b Regional Parks Management Plan: Volume 2 Resource Inventory. Page 49 ^ Regional Parks Management Plan: Volume 2. Resource Inventory. Page 49 ^ a b c http://www.geotours.co.nz/geo-noteomana.html [ dead link ] Geological notes on Omana. Retrieved March 2008 ^ Regional Parks Management Plan: Volume 2. Resource Inventory. Page 23 ^ Regional Parks Management Plan: Volume 2 Resource Inventory. Page 49-50 ^ Regional Parks Management Plan: Volume 2 Resource Inventory. page 49 ^ a b c d Cameron, Ewen; Hayward, Bruce ; Murdoch, Graeme (2008).

A Field Guide to Auckland: Exploring the Region's Natural and Historical Heritage (Revised ed.). Random House New Zealand. p. 251.

ISBN 978-1-86962-1513 .

^ The journal of the Polynesian Society Volume 30 1921 Pg 252-253 ^ The information board placed beside the pa site in Omana Park (2008) ^ http://greensite.arc.govt.nz/arc/index.cfm?5A8F782C-E1D8-4264-9183-ADC91579D547 [ dead link ] retrieved 2008 ^ http://www.pohutukawacoast.co.nz/default.asp?pageNo=135 Archived 2008-10-14 at the Wayback Machine retrieved 2008 ^ http://www.arc.govt.nz/parks/our-parks/parks-in-the-region/omana/ Archived 2008-03-27 at the Wayback Machine retrieved 2008 ^ http://www.pohutukawacoast.co.nz/w/Local-History-109.html Archived 2008-03-05 at the Wayback Machine retrieved 2008 ^ "Omana Regional Park: Paradise on Auckland's fringe" .

The New Zealand Herald . 29 January 2012 . Retrieved 6 October 2022 .

^ History of Regional Parks and their names (PDF) (Report).

Auckland Council . 11 November 2021 . Retrieved 11 February 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Auckland Regional Parks - Omana Gives descriptions of geology of Duder park, Waiheke and Hunua etc v t e Wairoa Subdivision - Franklin Local Board Area , Auckland , New Zealand Populated places Ararimu Ardmore Beachlands Bombay Brookby Clevedon Drury Hūnua Kawakawa Bay Maraetai Ōrere Point Ramarama Tuscany Estate Whitford Geographic features Bombay Hills Hauraki Gulf Hunua Ranges Cosseys Reservoir Hūnua Falls Magazine Bay Mangemangeroa Creek Motukaraka Island Ōrere River Pōhutukawa Coast Tūranga Creek Umupuia Beach Wairoa River Facilities and attractions Ardmore Solar Farm Ayrlies Garden Duder Regional Park Hunua Ranges Regional Park Ōmana Regional Park Orere Point Regional Park Southern Line Drury railway station (proposed) Tāpapakanga Regional Park Tawhitokino Regional Park Waitawa Regional Park Government Auckland Council Franklin Local Board Franklin ward Franklin District Council (defunct) Organisations Beachlands Maraetai AFC Franklin United Maraetai Mission Station (defunct) v t e Auckland Council Wards Local Boards Local Subdivisions Albany Ward Hibiscus and Bays Local Board East Coast Bays Subdivision Hibiscus Coast Subdivision Upper Harbour Local Board n/a Albert-Eden-Puketāpapa Ward Albert-Eden Local Board Maungawhau Subdivision Ōwairaka Subdivision Puketāpapa Local Board n/a Franklin Ward Franklin Local Board Pukekohe Subdivision Wairoa Subdivision Waiuku Subdivision Howick Ward Howick Local Board Botany Subdivision Howick Subdivision Pakuranga Subdivision Manukau Ward Māngere-Ōtāhuhu Local Board n/a Ōtara-Papatoetoe Local Board Papatoetoe Subdivision Ōtara Subdivision Manurewa-Papakura Ward Manurewa Local Board n/a Papakura Local Board n/a Maungakiekie-Tāmaki Ward Maungakiekie-Tāmaki Local Board Maungakiekie Subdivision Tāmaki Subdivision North Shore Ward Devonport-Takapuna Local Board n/a Kaipātiki Local Board n/a Ōrākei Ward Ōrākei Local Board n/a Rodney Ward Rodney Local Board Dairy Flat Subdivision Kumeū Subdivision Warkworth Subdivision Wellsford Subdivision Waitākere Ward Henderson-Massey Local Board n/a Waitākere Ranges Local Board n/a Waitematā and Gulf Ward Aotea / Great Barrier Local Board n/a Waiheke Local Board n/a Waitematā Local Board n/a Whau Ward Whau Local Board n/a Regional parks Ambury Ātiu Creek Auckland Botanic Gardens Āwhitu Duder Glenfern Sanctuary Hunua Ranges Long Bay Mahurangi Motukorea Browns Island Muriwai Mutukaroa / Hamlins Hill Ōmana Orere Point Pākiri Scandrett Shakespear Tāpapakanga Tāwharanui Tawhitokino Te Ārai Te Muri Te Rau Pūriri Waharau Waitākere Ranges Waitawa Wenderholm Whakanewha Whakatīwai Former councils Rodney North Shore City Waitakere City Auckland City Manukau City Papakura Franklin v t e Protected areas of New Zealand Conservation parks Ahuriri Aorangi Aotea Catlins Coromandel Craigieburn Eyre Mountains/Taka Ra Haka Hakatere Hāwea Hanmer Kaimai Mamaku Kaimanawa Kaweka Ka Whata Tu O Rakihouia Korowai / Torlesse Tussocklands Lake Sumner Mavora Lakes Mount Richmond Northland North-west Nelson Oteake Pirongia Pureora Remutaka Ruahine Raukumara Ruataniwha Tararua Te Kahui Kaupeka Te Papanui Victoria Whakarewarewa Whirinaki Te Pua-a-Tāne Ecological islands Brook Waimārama Sanctuary Bushy Park Sanctuary Mountain Maungatautari Orokonui Ecosanctuary Tawharanui Open Sanctuary Zealandia Government purpose reserves Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Pukaha / Mount Bruce National Wildlife Centre Historic reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Maungauika / North Head Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Stony Batter Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Marine reserves Akaroa Auckland Islands Cape Rodney-Okakari Point Hautai Hawea (Clio Rocks) Hikurangi Horoirangi Kahukura (Gold Arm) Kahurangi Kapiti Kermadec Islands Kutu Parera (Gaer Arm) Long Bay-Okura Long Island-Kokomohua Moana Uta (Wet Jacket Arm) Motu Manawa-Pollen Island Moutere Hauriri / Bounty Islands Moutere Ihupuku / Campbell Island Moutere Mahue / Antipodes Island Parininihi Piopiotahi (Milford Sound) Pohatu / Flea Bay Poor Knights Islands Punakaiki Taipari Roa (Elizabeth Island) Tapuae Taputeranga Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Tauparikākā Tāwharanui Te Angiangi Te Awaatu Channel (The Gut) Te Hapua (Sutherland Sound) Te Matuku Te Paepae o Aotea (Volkner Rocks) Te Tapuwae o Hua (Long Sound) Te Tapuwae o Rongokako Tonga Island Tuhua (Mayor Island) Ulva Island-Te Wharawhara Waiau Glacier Coast Westhaven (Te Tai Tapu) Whanganui-A-Hei (Cathedral Cove) Whangarei Harbour National parks Current Abel Tasman Aoraki / Mount Cook Arthur's Pass Egmont Fiordland Kahurangi Mount Aspiring Nelson Lakes Paparoa Rakiura Tongariro Westland Tai Poutini Whanganui Former Te Urewera National reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Lewis Pass Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Subantarctic Islands Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Recreation reserves Bastion Point Otago Central Rail Trail Truby King Recreation Reserve Regional parks Akatarawa Ambury Ashley Rakahuri Ātiu Creek Auckland Botanic Gardens Āwhitu Battle Hill Farm Belmont Duder East Harbour Ferrymead Glenfern Sanctuary Hunua Ranges Kaitoke Lake Tekapo Long Bay Mahurangi Motukorea Browns Island Muriwai Mutukaroa / Hamlins Hill Ōmana Onekawa Te Mawhai Orere Point Pākiri Pakuratahi Papamoa Hills Queen Elizabeth Scandrett Shakespear Tāpapakanga Tāwharanui Tawhitokino Te Ārai Te Muri Te Rau Pūriri Waharau Waimakariri River Wainuiomata Regional Park Waitākere Ranges Waitawa Wenderholm Whakanewha Whakatīwai Scenic reserves Alice Eaves Reserve Bruce Park Goldie Bush Peel Forest Park Waro Limestone Wetlands Awarua Wetland Farewell Spit Firth of Thames Kopuatai Peat Dome Manawatū Estuary Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Wairarapa Moana Whangamarino Other areas Fensham Reserve Hutt Water Collection Area Northern Pegasus Bay Wainuiomata Water Collection Area Whitireia Other Amenity area Ecological area Sanctuary area Wilderness area Wildlife management area Ōmana Regional Park at Wikipedia's sister projects : Media from Commons Data from Wikidata Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ōmana_Regional_Park&oldid=1239768303 " Categories : Franklin Local Board Area Regional parks of the Auckland Region Tourist attractions in the Auckland Region Pōhutukawa Coast 1970 establishments in New Zealand Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2012 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use New Zealand English from April 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Use dmy dates from September 2021 Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2024, at 12:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ōmana Regional Park Add languages Add topic

