Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Colors of the color wheel Toggle Colors of the color wheel subsection 2.1 Trichromatic model 2.1.1 Subtractive 2.1.2 Additive 2.2 Opponent process model 3 The color circle and color vision 4 Color wheels and paint color mixing Toggle Color wheels and paint color mixing subsection 4.1 Color wheel software 5 Color schemes 6 Gallery 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Color wheel 29 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Bikol Central Català Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Igbo Italiano עברית Nederlands Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Tagalog Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Illustrative organization of color hues For other uses, see Color wheel (disambiguation) .

Gradient RGB / CMY color wheel Seven-color and twelve-color color circles from 1708 (attributed to Claude Boutet ) Wilhelm von Bezold 's 1874 Farbentafel A color wheel or color circle [ 1 ] is an abstract illustrative organization of color hues around a circle, which shows the relationships between primary colors , secondary colors , tertiary colors etc.

Some sources use the terms color wheel and color circle interchangeably; [ 2 ] [ 3 ] however, one term or the other may be more prevalent in certain fields or certain versions as mentioned above. For instance, some reserve the term color wheel for mechanical rotating devices, such as color tops , filter wheels or the Newton disc . Others classify various color wheels as color disc , color chart , and color scale varieties.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] The color wheel dates back to Isaac Newton 's work on color and light.

[ 5 ] In his book Opticks , Newton presented a color circle to illustrate the relations between these colors.

[ 6 ] The original color circle of Isaac Newton showed only the spectral hues and was provided to illustrate a rule for the color of mixtures of lights, that these could be approximately predicted from the center of gravity of the numbers of "rays" of each spectral color present (represented in his diagram by small circles).

[ 7 ] The divisions of Newton's circle are of unequal size, being based on the intervals of a Dorian musical scale.

[ 8 ] Most later color circles include the purples , however, between red and violet, and have equal-sized hue divisions.

[ 9 ] Color scientists and psychologists often use the additive primaries , red, green , and blue; and often refer to their arrangement around a circle as a color circle as opposed to a color wheel.

[ 10 ] Thomas Young postulated that the eye contains receptors that respond to three different primary sensations, or spectra of light.

James Clerk Maxwell showed that all hues, and almost all colors, can be created from three primary colors such as red, green, and blue, if they are mixed in the right proportions.

Goethe 's Theory of Colours provided the first systematic study of the physiological effects of color (1810). His observations on the effect of opposed colors led him to a symmetric arrangement of his color wheel anticipating Ewald Hering 's opponent color theory (1872).

... for the colours diametrically opposed to each other ... are those that reciprocally evoke each other in the eye.

— Goethe , Theory of Colours Colors of the color wheel [ edit ] Trichromatic model [ edit ] Most color wheels are based on three primary colors, three secondary colors, and the six intermediates formed by mixing a primary with a secondary, known as tertiary colors, for a total of 12 main divisions; some add more intermediates, for 24 named colors. They make use of the trichromatic model of color.

Subtractive [ edit ] A 1908 color wheel with red, green, and violet "plus colors" and magenta, yellow, and cyan blue "minus colors".

The typical artists' paint or pigment color wheel includes the blue, red, and yellow primary colors . The corresponding secondary colors are green, orange, and violet or purple. The tertiary colors are green-yellow, yellow-orange, orange-red, red-violet/purple, purple/violet-blue and blue-green.

Non-digital visual artists typically use red , yellow , and blue primaries ( RYB color model ) arranged at three equally spaced points around their color wheel.

[ 11 ] Printers and others who use modern subtractive color methods and terminology use cyan , magenta , and yellow as subtractive primaries . Intermediate and interior points of color wheels and circles represent color mixtures. In a paint or subtractive color wheel, the 'center of gravity' is usually (but not always [ 12 ] ) black, representing all colors of light being absorbed.

Additive [ edit ] A color wheel based on RGB (red, green, blue) additive primaries has cyan, magenta, and yellow secondaries. Alternatively, the same arrangement of colors around a circle can be described as based on cyan, magenta, and yellow subtractive primaries, with red, green, and blue being secondaries. Sometimes a RGV (red, green, violet) triad is used instead. In an additive color circle, the center is white or gray, indicating a mixture of different wavelengths of light (all wavelengths, or two complementary colors, for example).

A color wheel based on HSV , labeled with HTML color keywords.

The HSL and HSV color spaces are simple geometric transformations of the RGB cube into cylindrical form. The outer top circle of the HSV cylinder – or the outer middle circle of the HSL cylinder – can be thought of as a color wheel. There is no authoritative way of labelling the colors in such a color wheel, but the six colors which fall at the corners of the RGB cube are given names in the X11 color list , and are named keywords in HTML .

[ 13 ] Opponent process model [ edit ] Some color wheels are based on the four opponent process colors - red, yellow, blue and green. This includes those of the Natural Color System .

The color circle and color vision [ edit ] sRGB rendering of the spectrum of visible light Color Wave­length ( nm ) Fre­quen­cy ( THz ) Photon energy ( eV ) violet 380–450 670–790 2.75–3.26 blue 450–485 620–670 2.56–2.75 cyan 485–500 600–620 2.48–2.56 green 500–565 530–600 2.19–2.48 yellow 565–590 510–530 2.10–2.19 orange 590–625 480–510 1.98–2.10 red 625–750 400–480 1.65–1.98 A 1917 four-way color circle related to the color opponent process .

See also: Visible spectrum and Spectral color A color circle based on spectral wavelengths appears with red at one end of the spectrum and is 100% mixable violet at the other. A wedge-shaped gap represents colors that have no unique spectral frequency. These extra-spectral colors, the purples , form from an additive mixture of colors from the ends of the spectrum.

In normal human vision, wavelengths of between about 400 nm and 700 nm are represented by this incomplete circle, with the longer wavelengths equating to the red end of the spectrum. Complement colors are located directly opposite each other on this wheel. These complement colors are not identical to colors in pigment mixing (such as are used in paint), but when lights are additively mixed in the correct proportions appear as a neutral grey or white.

[ 14 ] The color circle is used for, among other purposes, illustrating additive color mixture. Combining two colored lights from different parts of the spectrum will produce a third color that appears like a light from another part of the spectrum, even though dissimilar wavelengths are involved. This type of color matching is known as metameric matching.

[ 15 ] Thus, a combination of green and red light will produce the color yellow in apparent hue. The newly formed color lies between the two original colors on the color circle.

Objects may be viewed under a variety of different lighting conditions. The human visual system is able to adapt to these differences by chromatic adaptation . This aspect of the visual system is relatively easy to mislead, and optical illusions relating to color are therefore a common phenomenon. The color circle is a useful tool for examining these illusions.

Arranging spectral colors in a circle to predict admixture of light stems from work by Sir Isaac Newton . Newton's calculation of the resulting color involves three steps: First, mark on the color circle the constituent colors according to their relative weight. Second, find the barycenter of these differently weighted colors. Third, interpret the radial distance (from the center of the circle to the barycenter ) as the saturation of the color, and the azimuthal position on the circle as the hue of the color. Thus, Newton's color circle is a predecessor of the modern, horseshoe-shaped CIE color diagram.

The psychophysical theory behind the color circle dates to the early color triangle of Thomas Young , whose work was later extended by James Clerk Maxwell and Hermann von Helmholtz .

Color wheels and paint color mixing [ edit ] Ignaz Schiffermüller, Versuch eines Farbensystems (Vienna, 1772), plate I. Color wheels can be used to create pleasing color schemes.

There is no straight-line relationship between colors mixed in pigment, which vary from medium to medium. With a psychophysical color circle, however, the resulting hue of any mixture of two colored light sources can be determined simply by the relative brightness and wavelength of the two lights.

[ 15 ] A similar calculation cannot be performed with two paints. As such, a painter's color wheel is indicative rather than predictive, being used to compare existing colors rather than calculate exact colors of mixtures. Because of differences relating to the medium, different color wheels can be created according to the type of paint or other medium used, and many artists make their own individual color wheels. These often contain only blocks of color rather than the gradation between tones that is characteristic of the color circle.

[ 16 ] Color wheel software [ edit ] Main article: Color picker A number of interactive color wheel applications are available both on the Internet and as desktop applications. These programs are used by artists and designers for picking colors for a design.

Color schemes [ edit ] Main article: Color scheme For a list of ways to construct color schemes, regarding properties such as warmness/achromiticness/complementariness, see Color theory .

Moses Harris, in his book The Natural System of Colours (1776), presented this color palette.

In color theory , a color scheme is the choice of colors used in design for a range of media. For example, the use of a white background with black text is an example of a common default color scheme in web design.

Color schemes are logical combinations of colors on the color wheel. Color schemes are used to create style and appeal. Colors that create an aesthetic feeling together commonly appear together in color schemes. A basic color scheme uses two colors that look appealing together. More advanced color schemes involve several colors in combination, usually based around a single color—for example, text with such colors as red, yellow, orange and light blue arranged together on a black background in a magazine article. Color schemes can also contain different shades of a single color; for example, a color scheme that mixes different shades of green, ranging from very light (almost white) to very dark.

Complementary colors are two colors directly across from each other; for example, red and green are complementary colors. Tetradic color palettes use four colors, a pair of complementary color pairs. For example, one could use yellow, purple, red, and green. Tetrad colors can be found by putting a square or rectangle on the color wheel.
An analogous color scheme is made up of colors next to each other on the wheel. For example, red, orange, and yellow are analogous colors. Monochromatic colors are different shades of the same color. For example, light blue, indigo, and cyan blue. Complementary colors are colors across from each other on a color wheel. For example, blue and orange. Triadic colors are colors that are evenly across from each other, in a triangle over the color wheel. For example, the primary colors red, yellow, and blue are triadic colors.

[ 17 ] Gallery [ edit ] Newton's asymmetric color wheel based on musical intervals. Mixing "rays" in amounts given by the circles yields color "z" (1704) Goethe's symmetric color wheel with 'reciprocally evoked colors' (1810) Dathanna colour wheel with Irish Gaelic colour terms, explaining that glas ("pale blue/grey/green") and gorm ("deep blue/grey/green") are distinguished based on intensity ( luminosity ) rather than hue . Similarly, buí refers not only to "yellow" and "gold", but pale browns as "buff beige" and "ochre", while dunn is for darker browns.

Rua refers to red of hair ( fox , robin ), whereas dearg refers to red of blood and bándearg is "pale red". Then, Bán , fionn , geal , and liath all refer to varying degrees of brightness or "fairness" — without mapping clearly only the English "white" — against dubh for "dark" or "black".

A color circle based on additive combinations of the light spectrum, after Schiffman (1990) Human Color Wheel based on the hue and light detected on human skins, after Harbisson (2004–2009) RGB color wheel RYB color wheel Color circle based on the HSV color space, showing all colors with a value (brightness) of 255 (100%). White is at the center, and fully saturated colors are at the outer edge. It is the circular face of the HSV "color cone".

See also [ edit ] Circle of fifths Color theory Visual perception Psychophysics Color solid Spectral color Octave Color blindness Color picker References [ edit ] ^ Morton, J.L.

"Basic Color Theory" .

Color Matters .

^ Simon Jennings (2003).

Artist's Color Manual: The Complete Guide to Working With Color . Chronicle Books. p.

26 .

ISBN 0-8118-4143-X .

color-wheel color-circle.

^ Birren, Faber (1934).

Color dimensions; creating new principles of color harmony and a practical equation in color definition . Chicago: Crimson Press.

^ Joseph Anthony Gillet and William James Rolfe (1881).

Elements of Natural Philosophy: For the Use of Schools and Academies . New York: Potter, Ainsworth. p.

186 .

color-disc.

^ Marshall, Katherine (2021-11-09).

"Colour wheel | Royal Society" .

royalsociety.org . Retrieved 2025-03-02 .

^ Newton, Isaac (1730).

Opticks: Or, A Treatise of the Reflections, Refractions, Inflections and Colours of Light . William Innys at the West-End of St. Paul's. pp.

154– 158.

^ Newton, Isaac (1704).

Opticks . pp.

114– 117.

^ Briggs, David.

"Newton's hue system" .

^ Steven K. Shevell (2003).

The Science of Color . Elsevier.

ISBN 0-444-51251-9 .

^ Linda Leal (1994).

The Essentials of Psychology . Research & Education Assoc. p.

26 .

ISBN 0-87891-930-9 .

color-circle psychology red green blue.

^ Kathleen Lochen Staiger (2006).

The Oil Painting Course You've Always Wanted: Guided Lessons for Beginners . Watson–Guptill.

ISBN 0-8230-3259-0 .

^ Martha Gill (2000).

Color Harmony Pastels: A Guidebook for Creating Great Color Combinations . Rockport Publishers.

ISBN 1-56496-720-4 .

^ "Basic HTML data types" .

HTML 4.01 Specification .

W3C . 24 December 1999.

^ Krech, D., Crutchfield, R.S., Livson, N., Wilson, W.A. jr., Parducci, A. (1982) Elements of psychology (4th ed.). New York: Alfred A. Knopf. pp. 108–109.

^ a b Schiffman, H.R. (1990) Sensation and perception: An integrated approach (3rd ed.). New York: John Wiley & Sons, pp. 252–253.

^ Rodwell, J. (1987) The complete watercolour artist. London: Paul Press, pp. 94–95.

^ How to create color palettes External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Colorwheels .

David Briggs (2007).

Hue in The Dimensions of Colour Interactive Color Wheel (Color Scheme Generator) "Colour Wheels, Charts, and Tables Through History" .

The Public Domain Review .

Illustrated history, with links to mostly public domain images from digitized historic books.

v t e Color topics Color science Color physics Electromagnetic spectrum Light Rainbow Visible Spectral colors Chromophore Structural coloration Animal coloration Color of chemicals Water Spectral power distribution Colorimetry Color perception Chromesthesia Sonochromatism Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Color calibration Color constancy Color task Color code Color temperature Color vision test Evolution of color vision Impossible colors Metamerism Opponent process Afterimage Unique hues Tetrachromacy The dress Color psychology Color symbolism Color preferences Lüscher color test Kruithof curve Political color National colors Chromophobia Chromotherapy Color reproduction Color photography Color balance Color cast Digital image processing Color management Color printing Multi-primary color display Quattron Color model additive RGB subtractive CMYK Color space Color mapping Color philosophy Color scheme Color tool Monochromatic colors Black-and-white Grisaille Complementary colors Analogous colors Achromatic colors (Neutral) Polychromatic colors Light-on-dark Web colors Tinctures in heraldry Color theory Color mixing Primary color Secondary color Chromaticity Color solid Color wheel Color triangle Color analysis (fashion) Color realism (art style) On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer) Theory of Colours (Goethe) Color terms Basic English terms Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Purple Pink Brown White Gray Black Cultural differences Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate Blue–green distinction in language Color history Black-and-white dualism Blue in culture Color in Chinese culture Traditional colors of Japan Human skin color Color dimensions Hue Dichromatism Colorfulness Pastel colors Luminance Lightness Darkness Brightness Iridescence Fluorescence Grayscale Tint, shade and tone Color organizations Pantone Color Marketing Group Color Association of the United States International Colour Authority International Commission on Illumination (CIE) International Color Consortium International Colour Association Names Lists List of colors: A–F List of colors: G–M List of colors: N–Z List of colors (compact) List of colors by shade List of color palettes List of color spaces List of Crayola crayon colors history Color chart List of RAL colors List of web colors Shades of: Red Orange Yellow Green Cyan Blue Violet Purple Magenta Pink Brown White Gray Black Related Vision Contrast Qualia Lighting Category Index v t e Johann Wolfgang von Goethe Bibliography Poems Epiphanias Erlkönig Die erste Walpurgisnacht Ganymed Gesang der Geister über den Wassern Gingo biloba Harzreise im Winter Heidenröslein Hermann and Dorothea Der König in Thule Marienbad Elegy Nur wer die Sehnsucht kennt Prometheus Roman Elegies The Sorcerer's Apprentice Welcome and Farewell Wanderer's Nightsong West–östlicher Divan Xenien Plays Der Bürgergeneral Clavigo Faust Faust I Faust II Egmont Erwin und Elmire Götz von Berlichingen Iphigenia in Tauris The Magic Flute Part Two (libretto fragment) The Natural Daughter Stella Torquato Tasso Prose Elective Affinities The Green Snake and the Beautiful Lily The Sorrows of Young Werther Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship Wilhelm Meister's Journeyman Years Autobiographical Dichtung und Wahrheit Italian Journey Journals Propyläen Natural sciences Metamorphosis of Plants Theory of Colours Conversations Gespräche mit Goethe Related Christine Vulpius (wife) Catharina Elisabeth Goethe (mother) Goethean science Weimar Classicism Goethe-Institut Goethe Medal Goethe House (Weimar) National Museum Goethe House (Frankfurt) Goethe-Gesellschaft Goethe Monument (Berlin) Goethe–Schiller Monument (Weimar) Goethe–Schiller Monument (Milwaukee) Goethe Prize Goethe Plaque of the City of Frankfurt Goethe-Plakette des Landes Hessen Goethe Society of North America Goetheanum Goethe in the Roman Campagna (1787 painting) Goethe at the Window (1786/7 painting) Lotte in Weimar (1939 Thomas Mann novel) Lotte in Weimar (1975 film) A Man in Love (2008 novel) Young Goethe in Love (2010 film) Goethe: Life as a Work of Art (2013 biography) NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐zmpkm
Cached time: 20250814215113
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.524 seconds
Real time usage: 0.681 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2255/1000000
Revision size: 18794/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 99258/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1604/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 87228/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.338/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21833169/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  544.995      1 -total
 26.53%  144.579      1 Template:Reflist
 25.00%  136.259      1 Template:Gallery
 16.32%   88.967      6 Template:Navbox
 15.95%   86.923     12 Template:Lang
 15.28%   83.272      5 Template:Cite_web
 14.86%   80.974      1 Template:Color_topics
  9.71%   52.924      1 Template:Short_description
  8.84%   48.201      9 Template:Cite_book
  6.49%   35.379      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:915627:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215113 and revision id 1305694077. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Color_wheel&oldid=1305694077 " Categories : Color Color scales Circles Hidden categories: Articles containing Irish-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from August 2016 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 15:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Color wheel 29 languages Add topic

