Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Building 2 Faculty Deans and Resident Dean 3 Athletic success 4 Student government 5 Famous alumni 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Currier House (Harvard College) 1 language Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′54.09″N 71°07′32.78″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3816917°N 71.1257722°W ﻿ / 42.3816917; -71.1257722 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Residential House of Harvard College Currier House Residential House at Harvard University Harvard University Shield Location 64 Linnaean Street Coordinates 42°22′54.09″N 71°07′32.78″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3816917°N 71.1257722°W ﻿ / 42.3816917; -71.1257722 Motto Timete Arborem ( Latin ) Motto in English Fear The Tree Established 1970 Named for Audrey Bruce Currier Colours Green, red, and black Sister college Ezra Stiles College Faculty Deans Latanya Sweeney and Sylvia Barrett [ 1 ] Undergraduates 360 Called Currierites Website currier .harvard .edu Currier House is one of twelve undergraduate residential Houses of Harvard College , in Cambridge, Massachusetts , United States. Opened in September 1970, it is named after Audrey Bruce Currier, a member of the Radcliffe College Class of 1956 who, along with her husband, was killed in a plane crash in 1967. The area was formerly used as housing for Radcliffe College , and as such the four towers of Currier House are named for distinguished alumnae of Radcliffe, including the author Barbara Tuchman . Along with Cabot House and Pforzheimer House , Currier is part of the former Radcliffe Quadrangle , known colloquially as simply "the Quad." Building Currier House consists of four towers containing mostly single rooms adjoined by a sink room or bathroom.  Currier also has some coveted living arrangements, including the "Ten-Man," which is a suite of ten singles and three full bathrooms arranged around Harvard's largest common room, and three penthouse suites nicknamed "Solarium rooms." In 2005, Currier renovated a common space known as the "Fishbowl" to set up an entertainment center with a big screen projector and surround sound system.

Currier House entrance Currier dining hall with its stone fountain Faculty Deans and Resident Dean The current Faculty Deans are Latanya Sweeney and Sylvia Barrett. The Allston Burr Resident Dean is Laura Johnson. Previous deans have included scholar of Islam and former Dean of Harvard Divinity School William A. Graham, chemist and Nobel laureate Dudley R. Herschbach , classicist Gregory Nagy , and historian of science Barbara Gutmann Rosenkrantz.

Athletic success In 2004–2005, Currier House won the Straus Cup for the first time in over twenty years.  The cup is given to the house that scores the most points in intramural athletic competition during the school year.

Student government Student government in Currier House consists of the Currier House Committee, of which all house residents are members. The committee operates separately from the Harvard Undergraduate Council (UC), to organize student events and manage funding. The Currier HoCo, like student government organizations in the other Houses, is funded by the UC and maintained by an executive council run by students in leadership positions. Elections for the two Chair positions and the other social organization positions are held each January during the Super Bowl Halftime show, which is broadcast in the Fishbowl common space. The two HoCo co-chairs are Jacob Miller and Annie Garofalo.

Famous alumni Notable alumni include: Michael Chertoff (class of 1975) Yo-Yo Ma (1976) Bill Gates (class of 1977, but left before graduating) Steve Ballmer (1977) Caroline Kennedy (1980) Neil deGrasse Tyson (1980) Paul Attanasio (1981) Alan Khazei (1983) Tom Morello (1986) Sylvia Mathews Burwell (1987) Seth Moulton (2001) Damien Chazelle (2007/08) [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Justin Hurwitz (2007/08) [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Michelle Wu (2007) Gates and Ballmer met in Currier House, where the two lived on the same floor, [ 4 ] and formed a friendship that later led Gates to recruit his college friend to join his budding software company.

[ 5 ] Gates also described during his 2007 commencement address at Harvard how he initiated one of his first software deals while making a call from his room in Currier House.

[ 6 ] References ^ "New faculty deans appointed" .

Harvard Gazette . May 9, 2016 . Retrieved September 2, 2018 .

^ a b Walsh, Colleen (January 20, 2017).

"From Harvard to 'La La Land' " .

Harvard Gazette . Retrieved May 12, 2017 .

^ a b "Industry Successes" .

Harvardwood . January 1, 2016. Archived from the original on February 6, 2023 . Retrieved November 5, 2017 .

^ "Bill Gates To Speak at Commencement", The Harvard Crimson ^ "The $100 Billion Friendship", Fortune Magazine , October 25, 1999 Archived October 16, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Remarks of Bill Gates", Harvard University Gazette Online External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Currier House (Harvard College) .

Currier House official site Harvard Quadrangle map Photo album featuring Currier House life, by the Harvard Gazette v t e Residential houses of Harvard Adams House Cabot House Currier House Dudley House Dunster House Eliot House Kirkland House Leverett House Lowell House Mather House Pforzheimer House Quincy House Winthrop House v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Currier_House_(Harvard_College)&oldid=1226308233 " Categories : Harvard Houses Radcliffe College and Institute Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from May 2024 Use American English from May 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 May 2024, at 20:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Currier House (Harvard College) 1 language Add topic

