Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics 2 Hypothesized formation mechanisms 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Mammatus cloud 28 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latviešu Lombard Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Supplementary feature of clouds "Mammatus" redirects here. For the Ninjago character, see Mammatus (Ninjago) .

Mammatus cloud seen at Puthenpeedika , India Mammatus clouds formation in Coimbatore, India Mammatus clouds over the Nepal Himalayas Mammatus (also called mamma [ 1 ] or mammatocumulus , meaning "mammary cloud") is a cellular pattern of pouches hanging underneath the base of a cloud , typically a cumulonimbus raincloud, although they may be attached to other classes of parent clouds. The name mammatus is derived from the Latin mamma (meaning " udder " or " breast ").

According to the WMO International Cloud Atlas , mamma is a cloud supplementary feature rather than a genus, species or variety of cloud. The distinct "lumpy" undersides form as cold air sinks, creating pockets that contrast with the rising puffs of clouds caused by the convection of warm air. These formations were first described in 1894 by William Clement Ley .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Characteristics [ edit ] Mammatus clouds on a cumulonimbus capillatus Mammatus are most often associated with anvil clouds and also severe thunderstorms. They often extend from the base of a cumulonimbus cloud , but may also be found under altostratus , and cirrus clouds, as well as volcanic ash clouds.

[ 4 ] When occurring in cumulonimbus, mammatus are often indicative of a particularly strong storm. Due to the intensely sheared environment in which mammatus form, aviators are strongly cautioned to avoid cumulonimbus with mammatus as they indicate convectively induced turbulence.

[ 5 ] Contrails may also produce lobes but these are incorrectly termed as mammatus.

[ 1 ] Mammatus may appear as smooth, ragged or lumpy lobes and may be opaque or translucent.  Because mammatus occur as a grouping of lobes, the way they clump together can vary from an isolated cluster to a field of mammae that spread over hundreds of kilometers to being organized along a line, and may be composed of either unequal or similarly-sized lobes.  The individual mammatus lobe average diameters of 1–3 kilometres (0.6–1.9 mi) and lengths on average of 1 ⁄ 2 kilometre (0.3 mi).  A lobe can last an average of 10 minutes, but a whole cluster of mamma can range from 15 minutes to a few hours. They are usually composed of ice, but also can be a mixture of ice and liquid water or be composed of almost entirely liquid water.

True to their ominous appearance, mammatus clouds are often harbingers of a coming storm or other extreme weather system. Typically composed primarily of ice, they can extend for hundreds of miles in each direction and individual formations can remain visibly static for ten to fifteen minutes at a time. They usually appear around, before, or even after severe weather.

Hypothesized formation mechanisms [ edit ] Panorama of mammatus cloud formations in Swifts Creek, Victoria Mammatus cloud formation lit by sunset in Visakhapatnam, India Several pouches of mammatus clouds seen under cumulonimbus incus in Biñan , Laguna , Philippines The existence of many different types of mammatus clouds, each with distinct properties and occurring in distinct environments, has given rise to multiple hypotheses on their formation, which are also relevant to other cloud forms.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] One environmental trend is shared by all of the formation mechanisms hypothesized for mammatus clouds: sharp gradients in temperature, moisture and momentum ( wind shear ) across the anvil cloud/sub-cloud air boundary, which strongly influence interactions therein. The following are the proposed mechanisms, each described with its shortcomings: The anvil of a cumulonimbus cloud gradually subsides as it spreads out from its source cloud.  As air descends, it warms.  However, the cloudy air will warm more slowly (at the moist adiabatic lapse rate ) than the sub-cloud, dry air (at the dry adiabatic lapse rate ).  Because of the differential warming, the cloud/sub-cloud layer destabilizes and convective overturning can occur, creating a lumpy cloud-base.  The problems with this theory are that there are observations of mammatus lobes that do not support the presence of strong subsidence in the lobes, and that it is difficult to separate the processes of hydrometeor fallout and cloud-base subsidence, thus rendering it unclear as to whether either process is occurring.

Cooling due to hydrometeor fallout is a second proposed formation mechanism.  As hydrometeors fall into the dry sub-cloud air, the air containing the precipitation cools due to evaporation or sublimation . Being now cooler than the environmental air and unstable, they descend until in static equilibrium, at which point a restoring force curves the edges of the fallout back up, creating the lobed appearance. One problem with this theory is that observations show that cloud-base evaporation does not always produce mammatus.  This mechanism could be responsible for the earliest stage of development, but other processes (namely process 1, above) may come into play as the lobes are formed and mature.

There may also be destabilization at cloud base due to melting.  If the cloud base exists near the freezing line, then the cooling in the immediate air caused by melting can lead to convective overturning, just as in the processes above.  However, this strict temperature environment is not always present.

The above processes specifically relied on the destabilization of the sub-cloud layer due to adiabatic or latent heating effects.  Discounting the thermodynamical effects of hydrometeor fallout, another mechanism proposes that dynamics of the fallout alone are enough to create the lobes. Inhomogeneities in the masses of the hydrometeors along the cloud-base may cause inhomogeneous descent along the base. Frictional drag and associated eddy-like structures create the lobed appearance of the fallout.  The main shortcoming of this theory is that vertical velocities in the lobes have been observed to be greater than the fall speeds of the hydrometeors within them; thus, there should be a dynamical downward forcing, as well.

Another method, that was first proposed by Kerry Emanuel , is called cloud-base detrainment instability (CDI), which acts very much like convective cloud-top entrainment . In CDI, cloudy air is mixed into the dry sub-cloud air rather than precipitating into it.  The cloudy layer destabilizes due to evaporative cooling and mammatus are formed.

Clouds undergo thermal reorganization due to radiative effects as they evolve.  There are a couple of ideas as to how radiation can cause mammatus to form.  One is that, because clouds radiatively cool ( Stefan–Boltzmann law ) very efficiently at their tops, entire pockets of cool, negatively buoyant cloud can penetrate downward through the entire layer and emerge as mammatus at cloud-base. Another idea is that as the cloud-base warms due to radiative heating from land surface's longwave emission, the base destabilizes and overturns. This method is valid for only optically thick clouds.  However, the nature of anvil clouds is that they are largely made up of ice, and are therefore relatively optically thin.

Gravity waves are proposed to be the formation mechanism of linearly organized mammatus clouds. Indeed, wave patterns have been observed in the mammatus environment, but this is mostly due to gravity wave creation as a response to a convective updraft impinging upon the tropopause and spreading out in wave form over the entirety of the anvil. Therefore, this method does not explain the prevalence of mammatus clouds in one part of the anvil versus another. Furthermore, time and size scales for gravity waves and mammatus do not match up entirely. Gravity wave trains may be responsible for organizing the mammatus rather than forming them.

[ 7 ] Kelvin–Helmholtz (K–H) instability is prevalent along cloud boundaries and results in the formation of wave-like protrusions (called Kelvin-Helmholtz billows) from a cloud boundary. Mammatus are not in the form of K-H billows, thus, it is proposed that the instability can trigger the formation of the protrusions, but that another process must form the protrusions into lobes.  Still, the main downfall with this theory is that K-H instability occurs in a stably stratified environment, and the mammatus environment is usually at least somewhat turbulent .

Rayleigh–Taylor instability is the name given to the instability that exists between two fluids of differing densities, when the denser of the two is atop the less dense fluid. Along a cloud-base/sub-cloud interface, the denser, hydrometeor-laden air could cause mixing with the less-dense sub-cloud air. This mixing would take the form of mammatus clouds. The physical problem with this proposed method is that an instability existing along a static interface cannot necessarily be applied to the interface between two sheared atmospheric flows.

The last proposed formation mechanism is that mammatus arise from Rayleigh–Bénard convection , where differential heating (cooling at the top and heating at the bottom) of a layer causes convective overturning.  However, in this case of mammatus, the base is cooled by thermodynamical mechanisms mentioned above.  As the cloud base descends, it happens on the scale of mammatus lobes, while adjacent to the lobes, there is a compensating ascent.  This method has not proven to be observationally sound and is viewed as generally insubstantial.

This plenitude of proposed formation mechanisms shows, if nothing else, that the mammatus cloud is generally poorly understood.

[ 1 ] [ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Schultz, David M.; Hancock, Y. (2016).

"Contrail lobes or mamma? The importance of correct terminology" (PDF) .

Weather .

71 (8): 203.

Bibcode : 2016Wthr...71..203S .

doi : 10.1002/wea.2765 .

^ Anonymous (1975).

International Cloud Atlas. Volume I. Manual on the observation of clouds and other Meteors (PDF) . World Meteorological Organization. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-07-08 . Retrieved 2017-05-13 .

^ Ley, William Clement (1894).

Cloudland: A study on the structure and characters of clouds . London, England: Edward Stanford. pp.

104– 105.

^ a b Schultz, David M.; Kanak, Katharine M.; Straka, Jerry M.; Trapp, Robert J.; Gordon, Brent A.; Zrnić, Dusan S.

; Bryan, George H.; Durant, Adam J.; Garrett, Timothy J.; Klein, Petra M.; Lilly, Douglas K. (2006).

"The Mysteries of Mammatus Clouds: Observations and Formation Mechanisms" .

Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences .

63 (10): 2409.

Bibcode : 2006JAtS...63.2409S .

doi : 10.1175/JAS3758.1 .

S2CID 53128552 .

^ Lane, Todd P.; Sharman, Robert D.; Trier, Stanley B.; Fovell, Robert G.; Williams, John K. (2012).

"Recent Advances in the Understanding of Near-Cloud Turbulence" .

Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society .

93 (4): 499.

Bibcode : 2012BAMS...93..499L .

doi : 10.1175/BAMS-D-11-00062.1 .

^ Garrett, Timothy J.; Schmidt, Clinton T.; Kihlgren, Stina; Cornet, Céline (2010).

"Mammatus Clouds as a Response to Cloud-Base Radiative Heating" .

Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences .

67 (12): 3891.

Bibcode : 2010JAtS...67.3891G .

doi : 10.1175/2010JAS3513.1 .

S2CID 54938314 .

^ Winstead, Nathaniel S.; Verlinde, J.; Arthur, S. Tracy; Jaskiewicz, Francine; Jensen, Michael; Miles, Natasha; Nicosia, David (2001).

"High-Resolution Airborne Radar Observations of Mammatus" .

Monthly Weather Review .

129 (1): 159– 166.

Bibcode : 2001MWRv..129..159W .

doi : 10.1175/1520-0493(2001)129<0159:HRAROO>2.0.CO;2 .

^ Kanak, Katharine M.; Straka, Jerry M.; Schultz, David M. (2008). "Numerical Simulation of Mammatus".

Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences .

65 (5): 1606.

Bibcode : 2008JAtS...65.1606K .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.720.2477 .

doi : 10.1175/2007JAS2469.1 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mammatus clouds .

Forming Mammatus Clouds Time Lapse Video Mammatus clouds over Hastings, Nebraska Mammatus Clouds sagging pouch-like structures NASA Astronomy Picture of the Day: Mammatus Clouds Over Mexico (30 December 2007) Mammatus Clouds over St Albans, Hertfordshire, UK on 12 August 2008 at the BBC News web site. 21 August 2008 v t e Cloud genera and selected species, supplementary features, and other airborne hydrometeors - WMO Latin terminology except where indicated Mesospheric Extreme-level 80–85 km Noctilucent (NLC) Polar mesospheric clouds Noctilucent type I veils Noctilucent type II bands Noctilucent type III billows Noctilucent type IV whirls Stratospheric Very high-level 15–30 km Nacreous polar stratospheric clouds (PSC) Cirriform nacreous Lenticular nacreous Nitric acid and water polar stratospheric clouds (PSC) No differentiated sub-types; tends to resemble cirrostratus Tropospheric High-level 3–18 km Cirrus (Ci) Species Cirrus castellanus (Ci cas) Cirrus fibratus (Ci fib) Cirrus floccus (Ci flo) Cirrus spissatus (Ci spa) Cirrus uncinus (Ci unc) Ci-only varieties Cirrus intortus (Ci in) Cirrus vertebratus (Ci ve) Cirrocumulus (Cc) Species Cirrocumulus castellanus (Cc cas) Cirrocumulus floccus (Cc flo) Cirrocumulus lenticularis (Cc len) Cirrocumulus stratiformis (Cc str) Cirrostratus (Cs) Species Cirrostratus fibratus (Cs fib) Cirrostratus nebulosus (Cs neb) High-level-only mutatus cloud Mutatus non-height specific (see below) Medium-level 2–8 km Altocumulus (Ac) Species Altocumulus castellanus (Ac cas) Altocumulus floccus (Ac flo) Altocumulus lacunosus (Ac la) Altocumulus lenticularis (Ac len) Altocumulus stratiformis (Ac str) Altocumulus volutus (Ac vol) Altostratus (As) Altostratus undulatus Nimbostratus (Ns) Multi-level Varieties Nimbostratus virga (Ns vir) Low-level 0–2 km Cumulonimbus (Cb) Towering vertical Species Cumulonimbus calvus (Cb cal) Cumulonimbus capillatus (Cb cap) Cb-only supplementary features Cumulonimbus cauda ((cau) Tail cloud) Cumulonimbus incus (inc) Cumulonimbus murus ((mur) Wall cloud) Cb-only accessories and other Cumulonimbus flumen ((Cb flu) Beaver tail) Overshooting top Hot tower Cumulus (Cu) Variable vertical extent Species Fractus Cumulus humilis (Cu hum) Cumulus mediocris (Cu med) ( Cumulus congestus (Cu con) ( Cumulus castellanus (unofficial alternative name for Cu con)) ( ICAO term for Cu con and "Cu cas" is  Towering cumulus [Tcu])) Other Horseshoe Trade wind cumulus Stratus (St) Species Stratus fractus (St fra) Stratus nebulosus (St neb) St-only genitus cloud and other Stratus silvagenitus (St sil) Fog (Fg) Surface level Stratocumulus (Sc) Species Stratocumulus castellanus (Sc cas) Stratocumulus floccus (Sc flo) Stratocumulus lenticularis (Sc len) Stratocumulus stratiformis (Sc str) Stratocumulus Undulatus Stratocumulus volutus (Sc vol) Low-level-only supplementary features Arcus ((arc) Shelf) Tuba ((tub) Funnel cloud) Low-level-only accessory cloud and other Pileus (pil) Velum (vel) Pannus (pan) Other- Actinoform cloud (Stratocumulus) Non-height specific Varieties Duplicatus (du) Lacunosus (la) Opacus (op) Perlucidus (pe) Radiatus (ra) Translucidus (tr) Undulatus (un) Supplementary features Asperitas (asp) Cavum (cav) Fluctus (flu) Mamma (mam) Praecipitatio (pra) Virga (vir) Mother clouds and human-made clouds (Mother cloud)+genitus (e.g. cumulogenitus (cugen) (Mother cloud)+mutatus (e.g. cumulomutatus (cumut) Homogenitus (hogen) Homomutatus (homut) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mammatus_cloud&oldid=1300720846 " Categories : Accessory clouds Cumulus Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 01:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mammatus cloud 28 languages Add topic

