Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education 2 Emergent dualism 3 Selected publications 4 References Toggle the table of contents William Hasker Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher Biography portal Philosophy portal Religion portal R. William Hasker ( / ˈ h æ s k ər / ; born 1935) is an American philosopher and Distinguished Professor Emeritus of Philosophy at Huntington University . For many years, he was editor of the prestigious journal Faith and Philosophy . He has published many journal articles and books dealing with issues such as the mind–body problem , theodicy , and divine omniscience.

Education [ edit ] Hasker received his PhD in theology and philosophy of religion from the University of Edinburgh .

[ 1 ] Emergent dualism [ edit ] Hasker has argued for open theism and a view known as emergent dualism regarding the nature of the human person. Hasker regards the soul as an "emergent" substance, dependent upon the body for its existence.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Emergent dualism is a type of substance dualism which argues that the soul develops "naturally from the structure and functioning of the organism".

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Hasker's emergent dualism rejects cartesian dualism, property dualism , and physicalism.

[ 4 ] He argues that emergent dualism supports free will, mental causation, rationality and survival of physical death and is compatible with neuroscientific discoveries showing the dependence of mind on brain and evolutionary theory.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Emergent dualism states that in the course of evolutionary development an individual mind as an immaterial substance emerges from the brain. He likens the individual mind to a magnetic field in its qualitative difference from the physical properties that generate it and also in its ability to act on the brain that generates it. Hasker disagrees with the traditional dualist view that the mind exists independently of the body as he holds the view that it is generated by matter. He defends survival of death on the ground that God's mind produces another body to sustain it.

[ 4 ] His 1999 publication The Emergent Self discusses the philosophy of mind and attempts to establish that mind cannot be solely a material process but is also not completely distinct from its physical basis in the brain.

[ 5 ] Emergent dualism has been criticized by other substance dualist philosophers including Frank B. Dilley and Stewart Goetz .

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] Selected publications [ edit ] Hasker has published numerous works. A selection: 1983, Metaphysics: Constructing a World View (InterVarsity Press) 1989, God, Time, and Knowledge 1999, The Emergent Self (Cornell University Press) 2004, Providence, Evil, and the Openness of God 2008, The Triumph of God over Evil: Theodicy for a World of Suffering (IVP Academic) 2013, Metaphysics and the Tri-Personal God.

Oxford Studies in Analytic Theology. (Oxford University Press) References [ edit ] ^ "William Hasker" .

Huntingdon University . 2023.

Archived from the original on December 10, 2023.

^ a b Baker, Lynne Rudder (2002). "The Emergent Self by William Hasker".

Philosophy and Phenomenological Research .

65 (3): 734– 736.

JSTOR 3071148 .

^ a b c Baker, Lynne Rudder (2017).

"Contemporary Dualism: A Defense" .

Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2024.

^ a b c d Dilley, Frank B. (2003).

"A Critique of Emergent Dualism" .

Faith and Philosophy: Journal of the Society of Christian Philosophers .

20 (1): 37– 49.

doi : 10.5840/faithphil200320114 .

^ "Dr. William Hasker to discuss new book" .

Huntington College . February 17, 2002. Archived from the original on May 28, 2010.

^ Goetz, Stewart (2022). "Some Musings About William Hasker's Philosophy of Mind".

Roczniki Filozoficzne .

70 (1): 7– 48.

JSTOR 27116822 .

v t e Mind–body dualism Types Cartesian dualism Emergent dualism Non-Cartesian dualism Predicate dualism Property dualism Substance dualism Thomistic dualism Dualists Robert F. Almeder Mario Beauregard Frank B. Dilley John Beloff René Descartes Michael Egnor C. Stephen Evans Edward Feser Richard Fumerton Brie Gertler Stewart Goetz W. D. Hart William Hasker Michael Huemer Edward Francis Kelly Charles Landesman E. J. Lowe David. H. Lund Geoffrey Madell J. P. Moreland Denyse O'Leary Martine Nida-Rümelin Scott B. Rae Daniel N. Robinson Howard D. Roelofs Howard Robinson Jeffrey M. Schwartz Richard Swinburne Charles Taliaferro William Homan Thorpe Peter Unger Keith Yandell Dean Zimmerman Related Cartesianism Dualism (Indian philosophy) Interactionism Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Korea Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii PhilPeople Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=William_Hasker&oldid=1250397349 " Categories : 1935 births 21st-century American philosophers Alumni of the University of Edinburgh American philosophers of mind American theologians Dualists Living people Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 October 2024, at 05:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents William Hasker Add languages Add topic

