Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Cornelius Jansen 33 languages العربية Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Lëtzebuergesch Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dutch bishop and theologian (1585–1638) For Cornelius Jansen the Elder, see Cornelius Jansen (Bishop of Ghent) . For Cornelius Janssen the artist, see Cornelis Janssens van Ceulen .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( May 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Cornelius Jansen Bishop of Ypres Painting of Cornelius Jansen.

Church Catholic Church Diocese Diocese of Ypres Installed 1635 Term ended 1638 Predecessor Georges Chamberlain Successor Josse Bouckaert Personal details Born 28 October 1585 Acquoy , County of Holland , Dutch Republic Died 6 May 1638 Ypres , Spanish Netherlands Education University of Leuven Signature Cornelius Jansen ( / ˈ dʒ æ n s ə n / ; Dutch: [ˈjɑnsə(n)] ; Latinized name Cornelius Jansenius ; also Corneille Jansen ; 28 October 1585 – 6 May 1638) was the Dutch Catholic bishop of Ypres in Flanders and the father of a theological movement known as Jansenism .

Biography [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Cornelius Jansen" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) He was born to humble Catholic parents Jan Ottje, a smith, and Lijntje Gijsberts [ 1 ] at Acquoy (then in the province of Holland , now in Gelderland ). In 1602 he entered the University of Leuven , then in the throes of an ideological conflict between the Jesuit – or scholastic – party and the followers of Michael Baius , who swore by St. Augustine . Jansen ended by attaching himself strongly to the latter "Augustinian" party, and presently made a momentous friendship with a like-minded fellow-student, Jean du Vergier de Hauranne , afterwards Abbé de Saint-Cyran .

[ 2 ] After taking his degree he went to Paris, partly to improve his health by a change of scene, partly to study Greek. Eventually he joined du Vergier at his country home near Bayonne , and spent some years teaching at the bishop's college. All his spare time was spent in studying the early Fathers with du Vergier, and laying plans for a reform of the Church.

[ 2 ] In 1616 he returned to Leuven , to take charge of the college of St Pulcheria, a hostel for Dutch students of theology. Pupils found him a somewhat choleric and exacting master and a great recluse from academic society. However, he took an active part in the university's resistance to the Jesuits, for they had established a theological school of their own in Leuven, which was proving itself a formidable rival to the official university faculty of divinity . In the hope of suppressing their encroachments, Jansen was sent twice to Madrid , in 1624 and 1626; the second time he narrowly escaped the Inquisition . He warmly supported the Catholic missionary archbishop ( apostolic vicar ) of the Catholic Holland Mission in the Dutch Republic , Philippus Rovenius , in his contests with the Jesuits, who were trying to evangelize that country without regard to the archbishop's wishes. He also crossed more than once the Dutch Calvinist – Presbyterian champion, Gisbertus Voetius , still remembered for his attacks on René Descartes .

[ 2 ] Antipathy to the Jesuits brought Jansen no nearer to Protestantism ; on the contrary, he yearned to beat them with their own weapons, chiefly by showing them that Catholics could interpret the Bible in just as mystical and pietistic a manner. This became the great object of his lectures, when he was appointed regius professor of scriptural interpretation at Leuven in 1630. Still more was it the object of his Augustinus , a bulky treatise on the theology of St. Augustine, barely finished at the time of his death.

[ 2 ] Its preparation was his chief occupation since his return to Leuven. He had introduced in this treaty a long development favourable to contrition (IIIrd part, De gratia Christi salvatoris , book V, chap.XXI–XXV). In its appendix, titled Erroris Massiliensium, et opinionis quorumdam recentiorum parallelon et statera , he harshly condemned the Jesuits , in particular Luis de Molina , Gabriel Vasquez and Leonardus Lessius .

But Jansen, as he said, did not mean to be a school-pedant all his life; and there were moments when he entertained political ambitions. He looked forward to a time when Flanders would throw off the Spanish yoke and become an independent Catholic republic, possibly even Flemish -ruled, according to the model of the Protestant United Provinces . These ideas became known to his Spanish rulers, and to assuage them he wrote a philippic called the Mars gallicus (1635), a violent attack on French ambitions generally, and on Cardinal Richelieu 's indifference to international Catholic interests in particular.

The Mars gallicus did little to help Jansen's rather persecuted theological friends in France, but it reversed Madrid's wrath with Jansen; in 1636 he was appointed bishop of Ypres (Ieper) in West Flanders by the Pope and the Spanish Court. Within two years he was however cut down at age 52 by a sudden illness; the Augustinus , the book of his life, was published posthumously in 1640.

[ 2 ] Opposed to Jansenism, a little group of theological doctors from the Sorbonne extracted 8 propositions of Jansenius's Augustinus , later reduced to 5, treating of the problems concerning the relation between nature and grace . They accused Jansenius of having misinterpreted St. Augustine, conflating Jansenists with Lutherans . This led Pope Innocent X to condemn in 1653 these 5 propositions in the papal bull Cum Occasione , without attributing them to Jansenius in particular. The 5 propositions were condemned again by Pope Alexander VII three years later in the apostolic constitution Ad sanctam beati Petri sedem . The Jesuits, who then enjoyed predominant political and theological power (including a personal confessor to the King of France), then persuaded the Pope to force all Jansenists to sign a formulary leading them to admit the papal bull and to confess to their errors. The formulary controversy led Pascal to write the famous Lettres provinciales (1657) in which he harshly attacked the Jesuits and their moral, in particular their casuistry .

Following this anonymous publication, the King sent spies everywhere, condemned the librarians and successfully attempted to discover the author of the Lettres provinciales . The Jansenists of Port-Royal , Antoine Arnauld , Pierre Nicole , La Mère Angélique , Soeur Agnès, etc., were forced to sign the formulary. Although ostensibly obeying Papal authority, they added that the condemnation would only be sensible if the 5 allegedly heretical propositions were in fact found in Jansenius' Augustinus , and claimed that they did not figure there. The Jansenists' reasoning was that the Pope had of course the power to condemn heretical propositions, but not to cause that which did not figure in Jansenius' Augustinus to actually be there. This strategy would impose decades of theological disputes and debate.

On the other hand, Pascal and some other Jansenists adopted a radical strategy, alleging that condemning Jansenius was equivalent to condemning the Father of the Church, St. Augustine himself, and adamantly refused to sign the formulary, with or without reserve. This in turn led to the further radicalization of the King and of the Jesuits, and in 1661 the Convent of Port-Royal was closed and the Jansenist community dissolved – it would be ultimately razed in 1710 on orders of Louis XIV . The controversy did not involve only Papal authority, but rather his authority concerning Biblical exegesis .

Further controversy led to the bull Unigenitus , issued by Clement XI in 1713, which marked the end of Catholic toleration of Jansenist doctrine. The bull Unigenitus , dated 8 September 1713, was produced with the contribution of Gregorio Selleri [ fr ] , a lector at the College of Saint Thomas, the future Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum , [ 3 ] fostered the condemnation of Jansenism by condemning 101 propositions from the Réflexions morales of Quesnel as heretical , and as identical with propositions already condemned in the writings of Jansen.

Up until the French Revolution , Jansenism would live on as a political force in France, supported by some chairs in the parlements of Paris. Anonymous Jansenists published a magazine called Nouvelles ecclésiastiques , which frequently featured anti-Jesuit propaganda. Eventually, Jansenists would collaborate with independent-minded Gallicanists in promoting the Jesuits' expulsion from France in 1764.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Ultrajectine Jansenism Old Catholic Church of the Netherlands Notes [ edit ] ^ Also spelled: Otthe, Ottes; Lyntje; Gysberts, Gisberts.

^ a b c d e Northcote 1911 .

^ The Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church .  Retrieved 2 May 2012 ^ Dale Van Kley, The Jansenists and the Expulsion of the Jesuits from France 1757–1765 References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Northcote, Stafford Henry (1911). " Jansen, Cornelius ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 15 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 153.

Sainte-Beuve, Charles Augustin , Port-Royal (5 vols., 1840–1859).

External links [ edit ] Schem, Alexander Jacob (1879).

"Jansenius, Cornelius" .

The American Cyclopædia .

v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium People Netherlands 2 Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐r2qsd
Cached time: 20250817044518
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.548 seconds
Real time usage: 0.677 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2597/1000000
Revision size: 11001/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 77395/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3577/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 26333/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.372/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19683820/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  568.392      1 -total
 15.55%   88.411      1 Template:IPA
 14.02%   79.715      1 Template:History_of_Catholic_theology
 13.74%   78.094      1 Template:Navbox
 13.58%   77.212      1 Template:EB1911
 10.82%   61.479      1 Template:Short_description
  9.95%   56.571      1 Template:Authority_control
  9.09%   51.656      2 Template:Ambox
  7.59%   43.121      1 Template:More_footnotes_needed
  7.53%   42.790      1 Template:Infobox_Christian_leader Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:192484:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044518 and revision id 1305851841. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cornelius_Jansen&oldid=1305851841 " Categories : Jansenists 1585 births 1638 deaths Roman Catholic bishops of Ypres 16th-century Dutch Roman Catholic theologians People from Geldermalsen Old University of Leuven alumni Academic staff of the Old University of Leuven 17th-century Dutch Roman Catholic theologians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from May 2022 All articles lacking in-text citations Use dmy dates from December 2019 Pages with Dutch IPA Articles needing additional references from August 2022 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from The American Cyclopaedia with a Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 12:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cornelius Jansen 33 languages Add topic

