Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Commentaries Toggle Commentaries subsection 1.1 Contents 2 Influence 3 Translation 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Conimbricenses 4 languages Español Français Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jesuit commentaries on Aristotle This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Conimbricenses" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Conimbricenses are an important collection of Jesuit commentaries on Aristotle compiled at University of Coimbra in Coimbra , Portugal .

Commentaries [ edit ] The Coimbra Commentaries, also known as the Conimbricenses or Cursus Conimbricenses, are a group of 11 books on Aristotle (only eight can be called commentaries).

[ 1 ] They were produced as part of King John III of Portugal 's efforts to make the University of Coimbra rival the University of Paris.

[ 1 ] The names of 200 Jesuits, including those of professors and students, appeared repeatedly on the college registries. From the late 16th to the early 17th centuries, the university produced voluminous commentaries on Aristotle's philosophical writings.

[ 1 ] The commentaries were, in fact, dictated to the students by the professors and so were not intended for publication. After they were published anyway, to interpret and disown incorrect and unauthorized editions, Claudio Acquaviva , the General of the Society of Jesus, assigned Pedro da Fonseca , the provincial of the Portuguese province, the task of supervising the revision of the commentaries for authorized publication. Fonseca was called "the Aristotle of Portugal" by Charles George Herbermann in his Catholic Encyclopedia .

Contents [ edit ] The treatises appeared in the following order: Commentarii, Collegii, Conimbricenses, Societatis, Jesu in octo, libros Physicorum , Aristotelis, Stagyritæ, (Coimbra, 1591, reprint Hildesheim, Georg Olms, 1984); Commentarii, Collegii, Conimbricenses, Societatis, Jesu in quattuor, libros, Physicorum, Aristotelis de Cœlo (Coimbra, 1592); Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu in libros Meteororum Aristotelis Stagyritæ (Coimbra, 1592); Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu in libros Aristotelis qui Parva naturalia appelantur (Coimbra, 1592); Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu in libros Ethicorum Aristotelis ad Nichomachum aliquot Cursus Conimbricensis disputationes in quibus præcipua quaedam Ethicæ disciplinæ capita continentur (Coimbra, 1595); Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu in duos libros Aristotelis De generatione et corruptione (Coimbra, 1595, reprint Hildesheim, Georg Olms, 2003); Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu in tres libros Aristotelis De Anima (Coimbra, 1592 reprint Hildesheim, Georg Olms, 2006). This treatise was published after the death of Father Manuel de Góis (whom Father Fonseca had commissioned to publish the earlier volumes) by Father Comas Maggalliano (Magalhães). He added a treatise of Father Balthazaar Alvarez De Anima Separata and his own work Tractatio aliquot problematum ad quinque Sensus Spectantium ; Commentarii Collegii Conimbricensis Societatis Jesu In universam dialecticam nunc primum (ed. Venice, 1606, reprint Hildesheim, Georg Olms, 1976) The works commented are In Isagogem Porphyry, In libros Categoriarium Aristotelis, In libros Aristotelis de Interpretatione, In libros Aristotelis Stagiritae de Priori Resolutione, In primum librum Posteriorum Aristotelis, In librum primum Topicorum Aristotelis and In duos libros Elenchorum Aristotelis.

A foreword prefixed the last treatise and disowned any connection with the work published at Frankfurt in 1604 and claiming to be the "Commentarii Conimbricenses". It reads in part, "Before we could finish the task entrusted to us of editing our Logic, to which we were bound by many promises, certain German publishers fraudulently brought out a work professing to be from us, abounding in errors and inaccuracies which were really their own. They also substituted for our commentaries certain glosses gotten furtively. It is true these writings thirty years previously were the work of one of our professors not indeed intended for publication. They were the fruit of his zeal and he never dreamed they would appear in print".

The last treatise was prepared for printing by Father Sebastian Couto. The eight parts formed five quarto volumes in wide circulation and appeared in many editions. The best known were those of Lyon , Lisbon and Cologne . The Commentaries are in Latin and are supplemented by reliable explanations of the text and an exhaustive discussion of the Aristotelian system.

In the Introduction to his translation work, John Doyle writes that three methods were utilized in the Conimbricenses. The first, summary, reflects the work of Avicenna. The second method, explanation, reflects the work of Averroes. The third method, exposition by way of question, reflects the work of Duns Scotus. The Conimbricenses relied heavily on exposition by way of question while still employing summary and explanation.

[ 2 ] Influence [ edit ] According the John Deely , [ 3 ] Poinsot and Peirce owe their attention to "Thirdness" to the influence of the Conimbricenses.

In the Introduction to  the English translation of The Conimbricenses. Some Questions on Signs , Doyle writes that These commentaries had broad influence throughout the seventeenth century in Europe, North and South America, Africa, India, and the Far East, including both Japan and China.

[ 4 ] Doyle goes on to write that Descartes , Leibniz , and possibly Spinoza were influenced by the Conimbricenses.

[ 5 ] Translation [ edit ] The Conimbricenses. Some Questions on Signs , Milwaukee: Marquette University Press 2001. (Translation with an introduction and notes by John P. Doyle of the commentary to the first chapter of Aristotle's De Interpretatione ; "Foreword" 'A New Determination of the Middle Ages' by John Deely .) See also [ edit ] Pedro da Fonseca (philosopher) School of Salamanca References [ edit ] ^ a b c Carvalho, Mário Santiago de.

"Cursus Conimbricensis" .

Conimbricenses.org . Retrieved 2022-07-04 .

^ The Conimbricenses. Some Questions on Signs , Milwaukee: Marquette University Press 2001 pg 16 ^ "Yet their [Poinsot, Peirce] common acquaintance with the Conimbricenses achieved a common influence in orienting them alike to the problem, as we might put it, of "Thirdness" in nature and culture." Deely John N. Descartes & Poinsot: The Crossroad of Signs and Ideas. University of Scranton Press 2008. pp. xi - xii.

^ The Conimbricenses. Some Questions on Signs , Milwaukee: Marquette University Press 2001 p. 15 .

^ The Conimbricenses. Some Questions on Signs, Milwaukee: Marquette University Press 2001 p. 20.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Cassidy, John (1908). " Conimbricenses ". In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 4. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

External links [ edit ] Conimbricenses.org - Digital Project on the Conimbricenses, funded at the Institute for Philosophical Studies (IEF) of at University of Coimbra The Latin texts of the Commentaries (PDF) In libro de generatione et corruptione , In octo libros physicorum , In libros meteorum , In libro de anima in PDF or JPEG format at University of Coimbra ’s site.

v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conimbricenses&oldid=1297160508 " Categories : 16th-century writers in Latin 17th-century writers in Latin Ethical schools and movements Jesuit education Latin commentators on Aristotle Scholasticism University of Coimbra Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 13:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conimbricenses 4 languages Add topic

