Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 History 3 Impact 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 4 languages Français Nederlands Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This page includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this page by introducing more precise citations.

( January 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Academic journal Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A Discipline Physics , chemistry , mathematics , engineering , earth sciences , computer science , materials science Language English Edited by Richard Catlow Publication details History 1665–present Publisher Royal Society (United Kingdom) Frequency Fortnightly Open access Hybrid and delayed, after 24 months Impact factor 3.7 (2024) Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) ISO 4 Philos. Trans. R. Soc. A Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L CODEN PTMSFB ISSN 1364-503X (print) 1471-2962 (web) LCCN 97655039 OCLC no.

34435526 Links Journal homepage Online access Online archive Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences is a fortnightly peer-reviewed scientific journal published by the Royal Society . It publishes original research and review content in a wide range of physical scientific disciplines. Articles can be accessed online a few months prior to the printed journal. All articles become freely accessible two years after their publication date. The current editor-in-chief is Richard Catlow .

Overview [ edit ] Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A publishes themed journal issues on topics of current scientific importance and general interest within the physical , mathematical and engineering sciences , edited by leading authorities and comprising original research, reviews and opinions from prominent researchers. Past issue titles include "Supercritical fluids - green solvents for green chemistry?", "Tsunamis: Bridging science, engineering and society", "Spatial transformations: from fundamentals to applications", and "Before, behind and beyond the discovery of the Higgs boson".

History [ edit ] Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society was established in 1665 by the Royal Society and is the oldest scientific journal in the English-speaking world.

[ 1 ] Henry Oldenburg was appointed as the first (joint) secretary to the society and he was also the first editor of the society's journal. In 1887 the journal expanded to become two separate publications, one serving the physical sciences , Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences , and the other focusing on the life sciences , Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences . Nowadays, both journals publish themed issues and discussion meeting issues, while individual research articles are published in the sister journal Proceedings of the Royal Society .

The journal celebrated its 350th anniversary in 2015. To commemorate this event it published a special collection [ 2 ] of commentaries on landmark papers from the archive by scientists such as Isaac Newton , Humphry Davy and Michael Faraday .

Impact [ edit ] According to the 2024 Journal Citation Reports , the journal has an impact factor of 3.7.

[ 3 ] [ better source needed ] References [ edit ] ^ Philosophical Transactions: 350 years of publishing at the Royal Society (1665 – 2015) (PDF) . The Royal Society.

^ Garner, D. (6 March 2015).

"Celebrating 350 years of Philosophical Transactions: physical sciences papers" .

Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A .

373 (2039): 20140472.

Bibcode : 2015RSPTA.37340472G .

doi : 10.1098/rsta.2014.0472 .

PMC 4360094 .

PMID 25750154 .

^ 2022 Journal Citation Reports . Web of Science (Science ed.).

Clarivate Analytics . 2022.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A at Wikimedia Commons Official website Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philosophical_Transactions_of_the_Royal_Society_A&oldid=1296178718 " Categories : Multidisciplinary scientific journals Publications established in 1887 Biweekly journals English-language journals Royal Society academic journals 1887 establishments in the United Kingdom Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from January 2022 All articles lacking in-text citations Use Oxford spelling from August 2023 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Biweekly journals (infobox) Hybrid open access journals (infobox) Articles with outdated impact factors from 2024 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from January 2022 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 June 2025, at 10:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 4 languages Add topic

