Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Film career Toggle Film career subsection 2.1 1967–1976: Short films and Eraserhead 2.2 1980–1989: Populist surrealism 2.3 1990–1999: Twin Peaks and film work 2.4 2000–2009: Mulholland Drive and beyond 2.5 2010–2019: Return to television 2.6 2020–2025: Weather reports and final projects 3 Other work Toggle Other work subsection 3.1 Unrealized projects 3.2 The Angriest Dog in the World 3.3 The Cowboy and the Frenchman 3.4 Industrial Symphony No. 1 3.5 Painting 3.6 Music 3.7 Design 3.8 Literature 3.9 Website 4 Personal life Toggle Personal life subsection 4.1 Relationships 4.2 Political and public views 4.3 Transcendental Meditation 5 Illness and death Toggle Illness and death subsection 5.1 Tributes 5.2 Memorials 6 Artistry Toggle Artistry subsection 6.1 Style 6.2 Themes and motifs 6.3 Influences 6.4 Recurring collaborators 6.5 Legacy 7 Filmography Toggle Filmography subsection 7.1 Film 7.2 Television 8 Awards and nominations 9 Discography 10 Solo exhibitions 11 Notes 12 References 13 Bibliography 14 External links Toggle the table of contents David Lynch 85 languages Afrikaans Anarâškielâ العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingue Íslenska Italiano עברית Kapampangan ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Volapük Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American filmmaker (1946–2025) This article is about the American director. For other people named David Lynch, see David Lynch (disambiguation) .

David Lynch Lynch in 1990 Born David Keith Lynch ( 1946-01-20 ) January 20, 1946 Missoula, Montana , U.S.

Died January 15, 2025 (2025-01-15) (aged 78) Los Angeles, California, U.S.

Resting place Hollywood Forever Cemetery Other names Judas Booth Alma mater Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts (dropped out) Occupations Filmmaker painter visual artist musician author actor Years active 1967–2025 Works Filmography discography bibliography unrealized Style Surrealism mystery neo-noir horror thriller arthouse experimental Spouses Peggy Lentz ​ ​ ( m.

1968; div.

1974) ​ Mary Fisk ​ ​ ( m.

1977; div.

1987) ​ Mary Sweeney ​ ​ ( m.

2006; div.

2007) ​ Emily Stofle ​ ​ ( m.

2009; sep.

2023) ​ Partner Isabella Rossellini (1986–1991) Children 4, including Jennifer Awards Full list David Lynch's voice from a 1982 introduction to Eraserhead .

Signature This article is part of a series about David Lynch Personal Early life Jennifer Lynch (daughter) Filmography Eraserhead The Elephant Man Dune Blue Velvet Twin Peaks Fire Walk with Me The Missing Pieces The Return Wild at Heart Lost Highway The Straight Story Mulholland Drive Inland Empire Discography Eraserhead BlueBOB The Air Is on Fire Twin Peaks Music: Season Two Music and More Polish Night Music Crazy Clown Time The Big Dream Thought Gang Cellophane Memories Bibliography Images Catching the Big Fish The Air Is on Fire Dark Night of the Soul Genealogies of Pain Room to Dream Characters Frank Booth Dale Cooper Laura Palmer Sheriff Harry Truman Shelly Johnson Donna Hayward Audrey Horne Maddy Ferguson Benjamin Horne Phillip Jeffries Bob Windom Earle Mike Leland Palmer Log Lady The Giant The Man from Another Place / The Arm Tommy Hill Bobby Briggs Related Unrealized projects Accolades received Cultural impact Frequent collaborators David Lynch Foundation v t e David Keith Lynch (January 20, 1946 – January 15, 2025) was an American filmmaker, visual artist, musician, and actor. Often called a " visionary " and acclaimed for films distinguished by their surrealist and experimental qualities, Lynch is widely regarded as one of the greatest and most influential filmmakers in the history of cinema .

[ a ] In a career spanning more than five decades, he received numerous accolades , including the Golden Lion for Lifetime Achievement at the Venice Film Festival in 2006 and an Academy Honorary Award in 2019.

Lynch studied painting and made short films before making his first feature, the independent body horror film Eraserhead (1977), which found success as a midnight movie . He earned critical acclaim and nominations for the Academy Award for Best Director for the biographical drama The Elephant Man (1980) and the neo-noir mystery art films Blue Velvet (1986) and Mulholland Drive (2001). For his romantic crime drama Wild at Heart (1990), he received the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival . He also directed the space opera Dune (1984), the neo-noir horror Lost Highway (1997), the road movie The Straight Story (1999), and the experimental psychological thriller Inland Empire (2006).

Lynch and Mark Frost created the ABC surrealist horror-mystery series Twin Peaks (1990–1991), for which he received five Primetime Emmy Award nominations, including Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series and Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series . Lynch co-wrote and directed its film prequel, Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me (1992) and a third season in 2017 . His acting career included roles on Twin Peaks , The Cleveland Show (2010–2013), and Louie (2012), and in the films Lucky (2017) and The Fabelmans (2022). He directed music videos for Chris Isaak , X Japan , Moby , Interpol , Nine Inch Nails and Donovan , and commercials for Dior , YSL , Gucci , PlayStation 2 and the New York City Department of Sanitation .

Lynch also worked as a musician, releasing solo and collaborative albums, and as a furniture designer, cartoonist , animator, photographer, sculptor, and author. A practitioner of Transcendental Meditation , he founded the David Lynch Foundation to fund meditation lessons for at-risk populations. A lifelong smoker, he died from complications of emphysema after being evacuated from his home due to the January 2025 Southern California wildfires .

[ 6 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Main article: Early life of David Lynch My childhood was elegant homes, tree-lined streets, the milkman, building backyard forts, droning airplanes, blue skies, picket fences, green grass, cherry trees.

Middle America as it's supposed to be. But on the cherry tree there's this pitch oozing out – some black, some yellow, and millions of red ants crawling all over it. I discovered that if one looks a little closer at this beautiful world, there are always red ants underneath. Because I grew up in a perfect world, other things were a contrast.

[ 7 ] : 10–11 David Keith Lynch was born in Missoula, Montana , on January 20, 1946.

[ 7 ] : 1 His father, Donald Walton Lynch (1915–2007), was a research scientist working for the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and his mother, Edwina "Sunny" Lynch (née Sundholm; 1919–2004), was an English-language tutor. Two of Lynch's maternal great-grandparents were Finnish-Swedish immigrants who arrived in the U.S. during the 19th century.

[ 8 ] He recalled that his father "would drive me through the woods in his green Forest Service truck, over dirt roads, through the most beautiful forests where the trees are very tall and shafts of sunlight come down and in the mountain streams the rainbow trout leap out and their little trout sides catch glimpses of light. Then my father would drop me in the woods and go off. It was a weird, comforting feeling being in the woods." [ 9 ] He was raised as a Presbyterian .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The Lynch family often moved around according to where the USDA assigned Donald: Lynch moved with his parents to Sandpoint, Idaho , when he was two months old; two years later, after his brother John was born, the family moved to Spokane, Washington .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Lynch's sister Martha was born there. The family then moved to Durham, North Carolina , Boise, Idaho , and Alexandria, Virginia .

[ 7 ] : 1 Lynch adjusted to this transitory early life with relative ease, noting that he usually had no difficulty making new friends when he attended a new school.

[ 7 ] : 2–3 Of his early life, he remarked: I found the world completely and totally fantastic as a child. Of course, I had the usual fears, like going to school ... for me, back then, school was a crime against young people. It destroyed the seeds of liberty. The teachers didn't encourage knowledge or a positive attitude.

[ 7 ] : 14 Lynch's high school senior portrait, 1964 Alongside his schooling, Lynch joined the Boy Scouts . Later, he said he "became [a Scout] so I could quit and put it behind me", and rose to the highest rank of Eagle Scout . Lynch befriended Toby Keeler, whose father, Bushnell, was a painter. Bushnell gave Lynch The Art Spirit by Robert Henri . It was a revelation, and Lynch decided to dedicate himself to "the art life".

[ 14 ] : 1 At Francis C. Hammond High School in Alexandria, Lynch did not excel academically, having little interest in schoolwork, but he was popular with other students, and after leaving he decided that he wanted to study painting at college. He began his studies at the Corcoran School of the Arts and Design in Washington, D.C., before transferring in 1964 to the School of the Museum of Fine Arts, Boston with roommate musician Peter Wolf .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] He left after only a year, saying, "I was not inspired at all in that place." He instead decided that he wanted to travel around Europe for three years with his friend Jack Fisk , who was similarly unhappy with his studies at Cooper Union . They had some hopes that they could train in Europe with Austrian expressionist painter Oskar Kokoschka at his school. Upon reaching Salzburg , however, they found that Kokoschka was not available. Disillusioned, they returned to the United States after spending only two weeks in Europe.

[ 7 ] : 31–34 Film career [ edit ] 1967–1976: Short films and Eraserhead [ edit ] Back in the United States, Lynch returned to Virginia. Because his parents had moved to Walnut Creek, California , he stayed with his friend Toby Keeler for a while.

[ 7 ] : 36 He decided to move to Philadelphia and enroll at the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts , after advice from Fisk, who was already enrolled there. He preferred this college to his previous school in Boston, saying, "In Philadelphia there were great and serious painters, and everybody was inspiring one another and it was a beautiful time there." [ 7 ] : 36–37 He recalled that Philadelphia had "a great mood—factories, smoke, railroads, diners, the strangest characters and the darkest night. I saw vivid images—plastic curtains held together with Band-Aids, rags stuffed in broken windows." He was influenced by the Irish painter Francis Bacon .

[ 18 ] In Philadelphia, Lynch began a relationship with a fellow student, Peggy Reavey, whom he married in 1967. The next year, their daughter Jennifer was born. Peggy later said Lynch "definitely was a reluctant father, but a very loving one. Hey, I was pregnant when we got married. We were both reluctant." [ 7 ] : 31 As a family, they moved to Philadelphia's Fairmount neighborhood, where they bought a 12-room house for the relatively low price of $3,500 (equivalent to $33,000 in 2024) due to the area's high crime and poverty rates. Lynch later said: We lived cheap, but the city was full of fear. A kid was shot to death down the street ... We were robbed twice, had windows shot out and a car stolen. The house was first broken into only three days after we moved in ... The feeling was so close to extreme danger, and the fear was so intense. There was violence and hate and filth. But the biggest influence in my whole life was that city.

[ 7 ] : 42–43 Meanwhile, to help support his family, Lynch took a job printing engravings .

[ 7 ] : 43 At the Pennsylvania Academy, Lynch made his first short film, Six Men Getting Sick (Six Times) (1967). He had first come up with the idea when he developed a wish to see his paintings move, and he began discussing creating animation with an artist named Bruce Samuelson. When this project never came about, Lynch decided to work on a film alone and purchased the cheapest 16mm camera he could find. Taking one of the academy's abandoned upper rooms as a workspace, he spent $150, [ 19 ] which at the time he felt was a lot of money, to produce Six Men Getting Sick .

[ 7 ] : 37–38 Calling the film "57 seconds of growth and fire, and three seconds of vomit", Lynch played it on a loop at the academy's annual end-of-year exhibit, where it shared joint-first prize with a painting by Noel Mahaffey.

[ 7 ] : 38 [ 20 ] : 15–16 This led to a commission from one of his fellow students, the wealthy H. Barton Wasserman, who offered him $1,000 (equivalent to $9,000 in 2024) to create a film installation in his home. Spending $478 of that on the second-hand Bolex camera "of [his] dreams", Lynch produced a new animated short but, upon getting the film developed, realized that the result was a blurred, frameless print. He later said, "So I called up [Wasserman] and said, 'Bart, the film is a disaster. The camera was broken and what I've done hasn't turned out.' And he said, 'Don't worry, David, take the rest of the money and make something else for me. Just give me a print.' End of story." [ 7 ] : 39 With his leftover money, Lynch decided to experiment with a mix of animation and live action, producing the four-minute short The Alphabet (1968). The film starred Lynch's wife Peggy as a character known as The Girl, who chants the alphabet to a series of images of horses before dying at the end by hemorrhaging blood all over her bed sheets. Adding a sound effect, Lynch used a broken Uher tape recorder to record the sound of Jennifer crying, creating a distorted sound that Lynch found particularly effective. Later describing what had inspired him, Lynch said, "Peggy's niece was having a bad dream one night and was saying the alphabet in her sleep in a tormented way. So that's sort of what started 'The Alphabet' going. The rest of it was just subconscious." [ 20 ] : 15–16 [ 7 ] : 39–40 Learning about the newly founded American Film Institute , which gave grants to filmmakers who could support their application with a prior work and a script for a new project, Lynch decided to submit a copy of The Alphabet along with a script he had written for a new short film, The Grandmother , that would be almost entirely live action.

[ 7 ] : 42 The institute agreed to help finance the work, initially offering him $5,000 out of his requested budget of $7,200, but later granting him the additional $2,200. Starring people he knew from both work and college and filmed in his own house, [ 7 ] : 44–47 The Grandmother featured a neglected boy who "grows" a grandmother from a seed to care for him. The film critics Michelle Le Blanc and Colin Odell wrote, "this film is a true oddity but contains many of the themes and ideas that would filter into his later work, and shows a remarkable grasp of the medium".

[ 20 ] : 18 Theatrical release poster for Eraserhead (1977) Lynch left the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts after three semesters and in 1970 moved with his wife and daughter to Los Angeles, [ 21 ] [ 22 ] where he began studying filmmaking at the AFI Conservatory , a place he later called "completely chaotic and disorganized, which was great ... you quickly learned that if you were going to get something done, you would have to do it yourself. They wanted to let people do their thing." [ 7 ] : 57–58 He began writing a script for a proposed work, Gardenback , that had "unfolded from this painting I'd done". In this venture he was supported by a number of figures at the Conservatory, who encouraged him to lengthen the script and add more dialogue, which he reluctantly agreed to do. All the interference on his Gardenback project made him fed up with the Conservatory and led him to quit after returning to start his second year and being put in first-year classes. AFI dean Frank Daniel asked Lynch to reconsider, believing that he was one of the school's best students. Lynch agreed on the condition that he could create a project that would not be interfered with. Feeling that Gardenback was "wrecked", he set out on a new film, Eraserhead .

[ 7 ] : 58–59 Eraserhead was planned to be about 42 minutes long (it ended up being 89 minutes), its script was only 21 pages, and Lynch was able to create the film without interference. He recalled its origin: "My original image was of a man's head bouncing on the ground, being picked up by a boy and taken to a pencil factory. I don’t know where it came from." [ 9 ] Filming began on May 29, 1972, at night in some abandoned stables, allowing the production team (which was largely Lynch and some of his friends, including Sissy Spacek , Jack Fisk , cinematographer Frederick Elmes , and sound designer Alan Splet ) to set up a camera room, green room, editing room, sets, as well as a food room and a bathroom.

[ 7 ] : 59–60 The AFI gave Lynch a $10,000 grant, but it was not enough to complete the film, and under pressure from studios after the success of the relatively cheap feature film Easy Rider , it was unable to give him more. Lynch was then supported by a loan from his father and money that he earned from a paper route that he took up, delivering The Wall Street Journal .

[ 7 ] : 60, 76 [ 23 ] Not long into Eraserhead ' s production, Lynch and Peggy amicably separated and divorced, and he began living full-time on set. In 1977, Lynch married Jack Fisk's sister Mary Fisk.

[ 7 ] : 60, 80, 110 In 1973, Lynch's sister suggested he try Transcendental Meditation . It proved a revelation, and Lynch claimed "to never have missed a session since: twenty minutes, twice a day." [ 14 ] : 2–3 Due to financial problems, the filming of Eraserhead was haphazard, regularly stopping and starting again. During one such break in 1974, Lynch made The Amputee , a one-shot film about two minutes long. He proposed that he make The Amputee to present to AFI to test two different types of film stock.

[ 20 ] : 28–29 Eraserhead was finally finished in 1976. Lynch said that not a single reviewer of the film understood it as he intended. Filmed in black and white, Eraserhead tells the story of Henry ( Jack Nance ), a quiet young man, living in a dystopian industrial wasteland, whose girlfriend gives birth to a deformed baby whom she leaves in his care. It was heavily influenced by the fearful mood of Philadelphia, and Lynch has called it "my Philadelphia Story ".

[ 7 ] : 56 [ 24 ] Lynch tried to get it entered into the Cannes Film Festival , but while some reviewers liked it, others felt it was awful, and it was not selected for screening. Reviewers from the New York Film Festival also rejected it, but it screened at the Los Angeles Film Festival , where Ben Barenholtz , the distributor of the Elgin Theater , heard about it.

[ 7 ] : 82–83 Barenholtz was very supportive of the movie, helping to distribute it around the United States in 1977.

Eraserhead subsequently became popular on the midnight movie underground circuit, [ 7 ] : 54 and was later called one of the most important midnight movies of the 1970s, along with Night of the Living Dead , El Topo , Pink Flamingos , The Rocky Horror Picture Show , and The Harder They Come .

[ 25 ] Stanley Kubrick said it was one of his all-time favorite films.

[ 7 ] : 77 1980–1989: Populist surrealism [ edit ] After Eraserhead ' s success on the underground circuit, Stuart Cornfeld , an executive producer for Mel Brooks , saw it and recalled, "I was just 100 percent blown away ... I thought it was the greatest thing I'd ever seen. It was such a cleansing experience." [ 7 ] : 88 Brooks viewed Eraserhead , and after coming out of the screening theater, embraced Lynch, declaring, "You're a madman! I love you! You're in." [ 7 ] : 92–93 Cornfeld agreed to help Lynch with his next film, Ronnie Rocket , for which Lynch had already written a script. But Lynch soon realized that Ronnie Rocket , a film that he said is about "electricity and a three-foot guy with red hair", was not going to be picked up by any financiers, and so he asked Cornfeld to find him a script by someone else that he could direct. Cornfeld found four. On hearing the title of the first, The Elephant Man , Lynch chose it.

[ 7 ] : 90–92 The Elephant Man ' s script, by Chris de Vore and Eric Bergren , is based on the true story of Joseph Merrick , a severely deformed man in Victorian London, who was held in a sideshow but later taken under the care of a London surgeon, Frederick Treves . Lynch wanted to make some alterations that would deviate from real events but in his view make a better plot, [ 7 ] : 95 but he needed the permission of Brooks, whose company, Brooksfilms , was responsible for production. The film stars John Hurt as John Merrick (the name changed from Joseph) and Anthony Hopkins as Treves. Filming took place in London. Though surrealistic and in black and white, it has been called "one of the most conventional" of Lynch's films.

[ 20 ] : 29–30 It was a critical and commercial success, earning eight Academy Award nominations, including Best Director and Best Adapted Screenplay .

[ 7 ] : 104 After The Elephant Man ' s success, George Lucas , a fan of Eraserhead , offered Lynch the opportunity to direct the third film in his original Star Wars trilogy, Return of the Jedi . Lynch declined, saying that he had "next door to zero interest" and arguing that Lucas should direct the film himself as the movie should reflect his own vision, not Lynch's.

[ 26 ] [ 24 ] [ 7 ] : 113 Soon, the opportunity to direct another big-budget science fiction epic arose when Dino de Laurentiis of the De Laurentiis Entertainment Group asked Lynch to create a film adaptation of Frank Herbert 's science fiction novel Dune (1965).

[ 7 ] : 113 Lynch agreed, and in doing so was also contractually obliged to produce two other works for the company. He began writing a script based on the novel, initially with both de Vore and Bergren, and then alone when De Laurentiis was unhappy with their ideas.

[ 7 ] : 115 Lynch also helped build some of the sets, attempting to create "a certain look", and particularly enjoyed building the set for the oil planet Giedi Prime , for which he used "steel, bolts, and porcelain".

[ 7 ] : 118 Dune is set in the far future, when humans live in an interstellar empire under a feudal system . The main character, Paul Atreides ( Kyle MacLachlan ), is the son of a nobleman who takes control of the desert planet Arrakis , which grows the rare spice melange , the empire's most highly prized commodity. Lynch was unhappy with the work, later saying: " Dune was a kind of studio film. I didn't have final cut . And, little by little, I was subconsciously making compromises".

[ 7 ] : 120 Much of his footage was removed from the final theatrical cut, dramatically condensing the plot.

[ 7 ] : 116–117 Although De Laurentiis hoped it would be as successful as Star Wars , Dune (1984) was a critical and commercial dud; it had cost $45 million to make, and grossed $27.4 million domestically. Later, Universal Studios released an "extended cut" for syndicated television, containing almost an hour of cutting-room-floor footage and new narration. It did not represent Lynch's intentions, but the studio considered it more comprehensible than the original version. Lynch objected to the changes and had his name struck from the extended cut, which has Alan Smithee credited as the director and "Judas Booth" (a pseudonym Lynch invented, reflecting his feelings of betrayal) as the screenwriter.

[ 27 ] Isabella Rossellini and Kyle MacLachlan in a publicity still for Blue Velvet (1986).

Lynch was still contractually obligated to produce two other projects for De Laurentiis, the first a planned sequel to Dune , which due to the film's failure never went beyond the script stage.

[ 7 ] : 115 The other was a more personal work, based on a script Lynch had been working on for some time. Developing from ideas that Lynch had had since 1973, Blue Velvet was set in Lumberton, North Carolina , and revolves around a college student, Jeffrey Beaumont (MacLachlan), who finds a severed ear in a field. Investigating with the help of his friend Sandy ( Laura Dern ), Jeffrey discovers a criminal gang led by psychopath Frank Booth ( Dennis Hopper ), who has kidnapped the husband and child of singer Dorothy Vallens ( Isabella Rossellini ) and repeatedly rapes her. Lynch called the story "a dream of strange desires wrapped inside a mystery story".

[ 7 ] : 138 Lynch included 1960s pop songs, including Roy Orbison 's " In Dreams " and Bobby Vinton 's " Blue Velvet ", the latter of which largely inspired the film. Lynch said, "It was the song that sparked the movie ... There was something mysterious about it. It made me think about things. And the first things I thought about were lawns—lawns and the neighborhood." [ 7 ] : 134 Other music for the film is by Angelo Badalamenti , who scored most of Lynch's subsequent work.

[ 7 ] : 130–132 De Laurentiis loved the film, and it received support at some of the early specialist screenings, but the preview screenings to mainstream audiences were very poorly received.

[ 7 ] : 148–149 The film was controversial; Roger Ebert wrote that Rossellini "is asked to do things in this film that require real nerve … She is degraded, slapped around, humiliated and undressed in front of the camera." Rossellini responded: "I was an adult. I was 31 or 32. I chose to play the character ...  I think my character was the first time we did an abused woman, a portrait of an abused woman, but also she camouflaged herself behind what she was asked to be, which was sexy and beautiful and singing, and she obeys the order, and is also victimized it. That’s the complexity of Blue Velvet but also the great talent of David Lynch. I thought he did a fantastic film. I love Blue Velvet ." [ 28 ] Blue Velvet was a critical and commercial success, winning the National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Film and earning Lynch his second Academy Award nomination for Best Director.

David Thomson recalls seeing it for the first time: "The occasion stood as the last moment of transcendence I had felt at the movies—until The Piano . What I mean by that is a kind of passionate involvement with both the story and the making of a film, so that I was simultaneously moved by the enactment on the screen and by discovering that a new director had made the medium alive and dangerous again." [ 15 ] Pauline Kael praised Lynch as a "genius naïf" and predicted that he "might turn out to be the first populist surrealist—a Frank Capra of dream logic." She quoted a moviegoer as saying "Maybe I’m sick, but I want to see that again." [ 29 ] 1990–1999: Twin Peaks and film work [ edit ] Lynch at the 1990 Cannes Film Festival Lynch met the television producer Mark Frost and they started working together on a biopic of Marilyn Monroe based on Anthony Summers 's book The Goddess: The Secret Lives of Marilyn Monroe , but it never got off the ground.

[ 7 ] : 156–157 [ 20 ] : 85 While talking in a coffee shop, Lynch and Frost had the idea of a corpse washing up on a lakeshore, and went to work on their third project, first called Northwest Passage and then Twin Peaks (1990–91).

[ 7 ] : 157 A drama set in an eponymous small Washington town where popular high school student Laura Palmer ( Sheryl Lee ) has been murdered, Twin Peaks featured FBI Special Agent Dale Cooper (MacLachlan) as the investigator trying to identify the killer, and discovering many of the townsfolk's secrets; Lynch said, "The project was to mix a police investigation with the ordinary lives of the characters." He later said, "[Mark Frost and I] worked together, especially in the initial stages. Later on we started working more apart." They pitched the series to ABC , which agreed to finance the pilot and eventually commissioned a season comprising seven episodes.

[ 7 ] : 157–159 Richard Corliss wrote: "Long before the series' April premiere, ecstatic critics were priming TV viewers to expect the unexpected. Lynch's two-hour pilot didn't disappoint. It was frantic and lugubrious in turn, a soap opera with strychnine. In one night, the show had hip America hooked." [ 9 ] Lynch directed two of the first season's seven episodes and carefully chose the other episodes' directors.

[ 7 ] : 174–175 He also appeared in several episodes as FBI agent Gordon Cole . The series was a success, with high ratings in the U.S. and many other countries, and soon had a cult following. A second season of 22 episodes went into production, but ABC executives believed that public interest in the show was declining. The network insisted that Lynch and Frost reveal Laura's killer's identity prematurely, which Lynch grudgingly agreed to do, [ 7 ] : 180–181 in what Lynch called one of his biggest professional regrets.

[ 30 ] After identifying the murderer and moving from Thursday to Saturday night, Twin Peaks continued for several more episodes, but was canceled after a ratings drop. Lynch, who disliked the direction that writers and directors took in the later episodes, directed the final episode. He ended it with a cliffhanger (like season one had), later saying, "that's not the ending. That's the ending that people were stuck with." [ 7 ] : 182 Meanwhile, he was also involved in creating various commercials for companies including Yves Saint Laurent , Calvin Klein , Giorgio Armani , and the Japanese coffee company Namoi, which featured a Japanese man searching Twin Peaks for his missing wife.

[ 7 ] : 211–212 1990 was Lynch's annus mirabilis: Wild at Heart won the Palme d'Or at Cannes , and the television series Twin Peaks was proving a smash hit with audiences across the world. The musical/performance piece Industrial Symphony No. 1 , which Lynch had staged with Angelo Badalamenti at the Brooklyn Academy of music, had spawned the album Floating into the Night and launched singer Julee Cruise . Five one-man exhibitions between 1989 and 1991 emphasized Lynch's roots in fine art and painting, and a rash of ads (including a teaser trailer for Michael Jackson 's 'Dangerous' tour) confirmed the demand for the Lynch touch ... In an unlikely scenario for the maker of Eraserhead , Lynch had become an influential and fashionable brand name.

—Christopher Rodley [ 7 ] : 191 While Lynch was working on the first few episodes of Twin Peaks , his friend Monty Montgomery "gave me a book that he wanted to direct as a movie. He asked if I would maybe be executive producer or something, and I said 'That's great, Monty, but what if I read it and fall in love with it and want to do it myself?' And he said, 'In that case, you can do it yourself'." The book was Barry Gifford 's novel Wild at Heart: The Story of Sailor and Lula , about two lovers on a road trip. Lynch felt that it was "just exactly the right thing at the right time. The book and the violence in America merged in my mind and many different things happened." [ 7 ] : 193 With Gifford's support, Lynch adapted the novel into Wild at Heart , a crime and road movie starring Nicolas Cage as Sailor and Laura Dern as Lula.

[ 31 ] Calling its plot a "strange blend" of "a road picture, a love story, a psychological drama and a violent comedy", Lynch departed substantially from the novel, changing the ending and incorporating numerous references to The Wizard of Oz .

[ 7 ] : 193–194, 198 Corliss wrote: " Wild at Heart , which sends a pair of loser lovers (Nicolas Cage and Laura Dern) on a trip into the dark night of the Southern Gothic soul, is a tonic for the senses and an assault on the sensibilities. Heads splatter, skulls explode, biker punks torture folks for the sheer heck of it, and a pair of loopy innocents find excitement in a side trip to hell. Pretty much like Blue Velvet . Yes, it's different, but the same kind of different; Lynch could no longer shock by being shocking. Many critics figured they had solved the mystery of his visual style and thematic preoccupations. Next mystery, please. By August, when the film opened in the U.S., the Lynch mob was more like a lynch mob." [ 9 ] Despite a muted response from American critics and viewers, Wild at Heart won the Palme d'Or at the 1990 Cannes Film Festival .

[ 32 ] When it won the prize, audience members booed Lynch and the film.

[ 33 ] After Wild at Heart ' s success, Lynch returned to the world of the canceled Twin Peaks , this time without Frost, to make a film that was primarily a prequel but also in part a sequel. Lynch said, "I liked the idea of the story going back and forth in time." [ 7 ] : 187 The result, Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me (1992), primarily revolved around the last few days of Laura Palmer's life, was much "darker" in tone than the TV series, with much of the humor removed, and dealt with such topics as incest and murder. Lynch has said the film is about "the loneliness, shame, guilt, confusion and devastation of the victim of incest". The company CIBY-2000 financed Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me , and most of the TV series's cast reprised their roles, though some refused and many were unenthusiastic about the project.

[ 7 ] : 184–187 The film was a commercial failure in the U.S. at the time of its release, but has since experienced a critical reappraisal. Many critics, such as Mark Kermode , have called it Lynch's "masterpiece".

[ 34 ] Meanwhile, Lynch worked on some new television shows. He and Frost created the comedy series On the Air (1992), which was canceled after three episodes aired, and he and Montgomery created the three-episode HBO miniseries Hotel Room (1993) about events that happen in one hotel room on different dates.

[ 20 ] : 82–84 In 1993, Lynch collaborated with Japanese musician Yoshiki on the video for X Japan 's song " Longing ~Setsubou no Yoru~ ". The video was never officially released, but Lynch wrote in his 2018 memoir Room to Dream that "some of the frames are so fuckin' beautiful, you can't believe it." [ 35 ] After his unsuccessful TV ventures, Lynch returned to film. In 1997, he released the non-linear noiresque Lost Highway , which was co-written by Barry Gifford and stars Bill Pullman and Patricia Arquette . The film failed commercially and received a mixed response from critics.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Lynch then began work on a film from a script by Mary Sweeney and John E. Roach, The Straight Story , based on the true story of Alvin Straight ( Richard Farnsworth ), an elderly man from Laurens, Iowa , who goes on a 300-mile journey to visit his sick brother ( Harry Dean Stanton ) in Mount Zion, Wisconsin , by riding lawnmower . Asked why he chose this script, Lynch said, "that's what I fell in love with next", and expressed his admiration of Straight, describing him as "like James Dean , except he's old".

[ 7 ] : 247, 252 Badalamenti scored the film, calling it "very different from the kind of score he's done for [Lynch] in the past".

[ 7 ] : 260 Among the many differences from Lynch's other films, The Straight Story contains no profanity, sex, or violence, and is rated G (general viewing) by the Motion Picture Association of America , which came as "shocking news" to many in the film industry, who were surprised that it "did not disturb, offend or mystify".

[ 7 ] : 245 Le Blanc and Odell write that the plot made it "seem as far removed from Lynch's earlier works as could be imagined, but in fact right from the very opening, this is entirely his film—a surreal road movie".

[ 20 ] : 69 It was also Lynch's only title released by Walt Disney Pictures in the U.S., after studio president Peter Schneider screened the film before its Cannes Film Festival premiere and quickly had Disney acquire the distribution rights. Schneider said it is "a beautiful movie about values, forgiveness and healing and celebrates America. As soon as I saw it, I knew it was a Walt Disney film." [ 38 ] It was named one of the best films of the year by The New York Times ; Janet Maslin wrote: "Somehow it took David Lynch to lead audiences past the ultimate frontier: into a G-rated parable of spirituality and decency, seen from the unfashionable vantage point of old age. Mr. Lynch accomplished the unthinkable by putting Richard Farnsworth, in a devastatingly real and rock-solid performance, on a lawnmower at five miles per hour and still building enough drama and emotion for a great chase. Burned out on the surreal and the grotesque, Mr. Lynch faced down inevitable realities about aging and conscience." [ 39 ] 2000–2009: Mulholland Drive and beyond [ edit ] Lynch (second from left) at the 2001 Cannes Film Festival promoting Mulholland Drive In 1999, Lynch approached ABC again with ideas for a television drama. The network gave Lynch the go-ahead to shoot a two-hour pilot for the series Mulholland Drive , but disputes over content and running time led to the project being shelved indefinitely. With $7 million from the French production company StudioCanal , Lynch completed the pilot as a film, Mulholland Drive . The film, a nonlinear surrealist tale of Hollywood 's dark side, stars Naomi Watts , Laura Harring , and Justin Theroux . It performed relatively well at the box office worldwide and was a critical success, earning Lynch Best Director at the 2001 Cannes Film Festival (shared with Joel Coen for The Man Who Wasn't There ) and Best Director from the New York Film Critics Association. He also received his third Academy Award nomination for Best Director.

[ 40 ] In 2016, the film was named the best film of the 21st century in a BBC poll of 177 film critics from 36 countries.

[ 41 ] Roger Ebert , who had dismissed much of Lynch's earlier work, wrote: "At last his experiment doesn't shatter the test tubes. The movie is a surrealist dreamscape in the form of a Hollywood film noir, and the less sense it makes, the more we can't stop watching it." [ 42 ] With the rising popularity of the Internet, Lynch decided to use it as a distribution channel, releasing several new series he had created exclusively on his website, davidlynch.com, which went online on December 10, 2001.

[ 43 ] In 2002, he created a series of online shorts, DumbLand . Intentionally crude in content and execution, the eight-episode series was later released on DVD.

[ 44 ] The same year, Lynch released a surreal sitcom, Rabbits , about a family of humanoid rabbits. Later, he made his experiments with Digital Video available in the form of the Japanese-style horror short Darkened Room . In 2006, Lynch's feature film Inland Empire was released. At three hours, it is his longest film. Like Mulholland Drive and Lost Highway , it lacks a traditional narrative structure. It stars Laura Dern , Harry Dean Stanton , and Justin Theroux , with cameos by Naomi Watts and Laura Harring as the voices of Suzie and Jane Rabbit, and a performance by Jeremy Irons . Lynch called Inland Empire "a mystery about a woman in trouble". In an effort to promote it, he made appearances with a cow and a placard bearing the slogan "Without cheese there would be no Inland Empire ".

[ 45 ] Lynch in Moscow in 2009 In 2009, Lynch produced a documentary Web series directed by his son Austin Lynch and friend Jason S., Interview Project .

[ 46 ] Interested in working with Werner Herzog , in 2009 Lynch collaborated on Herzog's film My Son, My Son, What Have Ye Done . With a nonstandard narrative, the film is based on a true story of an actor who committed matricide while acting in a production of the Oresteia , and stars Grace Zabriskie .

[ 47 ] In 2009, Lynch had plans to direct a documentary on Maharishi Mahesh Yogi consisting of interviews with people who knew him, [ 48 ] but nothing came of it.

2010–2019: Return to television [ edit ] In 2010, Lynch began making guest appearances on the Family Guy spin-off The Cleveland Show as Gus the Bartender . He had been convinced to appear in the show by its lead actor, Mike Henry , a fan of Lynch who felt that his life had changed after he saw Wild at Heart .

[ 49 ] Lady Blue Shanghai is a 16-minute promotional film written, directed and edited by Lynch for Dior . It was released on the Internet in May 2010.

[ 50 ] Lynch directed a concert by English new wave band Duran Duran on March 23, 2011. The concert was streamed live on YouTube from the Mayan Theater in Los Angeles as the kickoff to the second season of Unstaged: An Original Series from American Express . "The idea is to try and create on the fly, layers of images permeating Duran Duran on the stage", Lynch said. "A world of experimentation and hopefully some happy accidents".

[ 51 ] The animated short I Touch a Red Button Man , a collaboration between Lynch and the band Interpol , played in the background during Interpol's concert at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in April 2011. The short, which features Interpol's song "Lights", was later made available online.

[ 52 ] Lynch (left) with Kyle MacLachlan at the 2017 premiere of Twin Peaks ' s third season It was believed that Lynch was going to retire from the film industry; according to Abel Ferrara , Lynch "doesn't even want to make films any more. I've talked to him about it, OK? I can tell when he talks about it." [ 53 ] But in a June 2012 interview, Lynch said he lacked the inspiration to start a new movie project, but "If I got an idea that I fell in love with, I'd go to work tomorrow".

[ 54 ] In September 2012, he appeared in the three-part "Late Show" arc on FX's Louie as Jack Dahl. In November 2012, Lynch hinted at plans for a new film while attending Plus Camerimage in Bydgoszcz , Poland, saying, "something is coming up. It will happen but I don't know exactly when".

[ 55 ] At Plus Camerimage, Lynch received a lifetime achievement award and the Key to the City from Bydgoszcz's mayor, Rafał Bruski .

[ 56 ] In a January 2013 interview, Laura Dern confirmed that she and Lynch were planning a new project, [ 57 ] [ 58 ] and The New York Times later reported that Lynch was working on the script.

[ 59 ] Idem Paris , a short documentary film about the lithographic process, was released online in February 2013.

[ 60 ] On June 28, 2013, a video Lynch directed for the Nine Inch Nails song " Came Back Haunted " was released.

[ 61 ] He also did photography for the Dumb Numbers 's self-titled album released in August 2013.

[ 62 ] On October 6, 2014, Lynch confirmed via Twitter that he and Frost would start shooting a new, nine-episode season of Twin Peaks in 2015, with the episodes expected to air in 2016 on Showtime .

[ 63 ] Lynch and Frost wrote all the episodes. On April 5, 2015, Lynch announced via Twitter that the project was still alive, but he was no longer going to direct because the budget was too low for what he wanted to do.

[ 64 ] On May 15, 2015, he said via Twitter that he would return to the revival, having sorted out his issues with Showtime.

[ 65 ] Showtime CEO David Nevins confirmed this, announcing that Lynch would direct every episode of the revival and that the original nine episodes had been extended to 18.

[ 66 ] Filming was completed by April 2016.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] The two-episode premiere aired on May 21, 2017.

[ 69 ] Lynch attending the 2017 Cannes Film Festival While doing press for Twin Peaks , Lynch was again asked if he had retired from film and seemed to confirm that he had made his last feature film, responding, "Things changed a lot ... So many films were not doing well at the box office, even though they might have been great films and the things that were doing well at the box office weren't the things that I would want to do".

[ 70 ] Lynch later said that this statement had been misconstrued: "I did not say I quit cinema, simply that nobody knows what the future holds." [ 71 ] 2020–2025: Weather reports and final projects [ edit ] Lynch did weather reports on his now-defunct website in the 2000s.

[ 72 ] He returned to doing weather reports in 2020 from his apartment in Los Angeles, along with two new series, What is David Lynch Working on Today?

, which detailed him making collages, and Today's Number Is...

, in which he picked a random number from 1 to 10 each day from a jar containing ten numbered ping-pong balls. In one of his weather reports, Lynch detailed a dream he had about being a German soldier shot by an American soldier on D-Day .

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] Most of his Weather Reports featured Lynch saying he was "thinking about" songs, including songs by The Beatles , The Rolling Stones , The Everly Brothers , and The Platters . After his final weather report on December 16, 2022, Lynch said in an April 2023 interview that the series, along with What is David Lynch Working on Today?

and Today's Number Is...

, would not return, adding: "Now I can sleep longer in the morning. I had to get up very early to consult the real weather bulletin. In two years I have not missed a single one." [ 75 ] Lynch portrayed director John Ford (pictured, 1973) in Steven Spielberg 's The Fabelmans (2022).

In June 2020, Lynch rereleased his 2002 web series Rabbits on YouTube.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] On July 17, 2020, his store for merchandise released a set of face masks with Lynch's art on them for the COVID-19 pandemic .

[ 78 ] In February 2022, it was announced that Lynch had been cast in Steven Spielberg 's semi-autobiographical film The Fabelmans in a role Variety called "a closely guarded secret". Lynch played John Ford , whom the young Spielberg met, an encounter Spielberg considers formative.

Gabriel LaBelle played Spielberg's alter ego Sammy Fabelman , and Lynch as Ford offers the young man advice on filmmaking.

[ 79 ] Lynch and the cast were nominated for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture .

[ 80 ] J. Hoberman wrote: "Mr. Lynch never made a conventional, crowd-pleasing Hollywood movie. But in 2022, he agreed to a cameo in one: Mr. Spielberg's autobiographical feature The Fabelmans , where the enigmatic if not eldritch Mr. Lynch was cast as John Ford, the maker of westerns and the grand old curmudgeon of American cinema. It was a sentimental gesture that one can only call Lynchian." [ 18 ] Other work [ edit ] Unrealized projects [ edit ] Main article: David Lynch's unrealized projects Lynch worked on a number of projects that never progressed beyond the pre-production stage. Some of them fell into development hell and others were officially canceled.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] The Angriest Dog in the World [ edit ] In 1983, Lynch began writing and drawing a comic strip , The Angriest Dog in the World , that featured unchanging graphics of a tethered dog so angry it could not move, alongside cryptic philosophical references. It was published from 1983 to 1992 in The Village Voice , Creative Loafing , and other tabloid and alternative publications.

[ 7 ] : 109 Around this time Lynch also became interested in photography and traveled to northern England to photograph its degrading industrial landscape.

[ 7 ] : 109–111 The Cowboy and the Frenchman [ edit ] Lynch directed a short film, The Cowboy and the Frenchman (1988), as part of The French as Seen by...

, a series sponsored by the French newspaper Le Figaro . The other directors commissioned for the series were Werner Herzog , Andrzej Wajda , Luigi Comencini , and Jean-Luc Godard .

Industrial Symphony No. 1 [ edit ] While Twin Peaks was in production, the Brooklyn Academy of Music asked Lynch and Badalamenti to create a theatrical piece to be performed twice in 1989 as a part of the New Music America Festival . The result was Industrial Symphony No. 1 : The Dream of the Broken Hearted , which starred frequent Lynch collaborators Laura Dern , Nicolas Cage , and Michael J. Anderson and contained five songs sung by Julee Cruise . Lynch produced a 50-minute video of the performance in 1990.

[ 20 ] : 55–56 Painting [ edit ] Lynch painted So This Is Love in 1992.

Lynch first trained as a painter, and although better known as a filmmaker, continued to paint. He regarded himself as a visual artist equally at home in painting and cinema.

[ 84 ] Throughout his career he lamented what he called the "celebrity painter" problem, which relegated his artwork to the status of a hobby, "like golfing".

[ 85 ] Of his aesthetic and approach, he said: "all my paintings are organic, violent comedies. They have to be violently done and primitive and crude, and to achieve that I try to let nature paint more than I paint." [ 7 ] : 22 Many of his works are very dark in color; Lynch said this was because: I wouldn't know what to do with [color]. Color to me is too real. It's limiting. It doesn't allow too much of a dream. The more you throw black into a color, the more dreamy it gets ... Black has depth. It's like a little egress; you can go into it, and because it keeps on continuing to be dark, the mind kicks in, and a lot of things that are going on in there become manifest. And you start seeing what you're afraid of. You start seeing what you love, and it becomes like a dream.

[ 7 ] : 20 Many of Lynch's paintings contain letters and words. He said: The words in the paintings are sometimes important to make you start thinking about what else is going on in there. And a lot of times, the words excite me as shapes, and something'll grow out of that. I used to cut these little letters out and glue them on. They just look good all lined up like teeth ... sometimes they become the title of the painting.

[ 7 ] : 22 Lynch was the subject of a major art retrospective at the Fondation Cartier in Paris from March 3 to May 27, 2007. The show was titled The Air is on Fire and included paintings, photographs, drawings, alternative films and sound work. New site-specific art installations were created specially for the exhibition. A series of events, including live performances and concerts, accompanied the exhibition.

[ 86 ] Lynch's alma mater, the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts , presented an exhibition of his work called "The Unified Field", which ran from September 12, 2014, to January 2015.

[ 87 ] Lynch was represented by Kayne Griffin Corcoran in Los Angeles, and began exhibiting his paintings, drawings, and photography with the gallery in 2011.

[ 88 ] Lynch considered the 20th-century Irish-born British artist Francis Bacon his "number one kinda hero painter", saying, "Normally I only like a couple of years of a painter's work, but I like everything of Bacon's. The guy, you know, had the stuff." [ 7 ] : 16–17 His favorite photographers included William Eggleston ( The Red Ceiling ), Joel-Peter Witkin and Diane Arbus .

[ 89 ] Music [ edit ] Lynch in 2007 Lynch was involved in several music projects, many of them related to his films, including sound design for some of his films (sometimes alongside collaborators Alan Splet , [ 90 ] Dean Hurley , [ 91 ] and Angelo Badalamenti [ 92 ] ). His album genres included experimental rock , ambient soundscapes and, most recently, avant-garde electropop music. He produced and wrote lyrics for Julee Cruise 's first two albums, Floating into the Night (1989) and The Voice of Love (1993), in collaboration with Badalamenti, who wrote the music and also produced. In 1991, Lynch directed a 30-second teaser trailer for Michael Jackson 's album Dangerous at Jackson's request.

[ 93 ] He also worked on the 1998 Jocelyn Montgomery album Lux Vivens (Living Light), The Music of Hildegard von Bingen .

[ 94 ] Lynch wrote music for Wild at Heart , Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me , Mulholland Drive , and Rabbits . In 2001, he released BlueBob , a blues album performed by Lynch and John Neff. The album is notable for Lynch's unusual guitar playing style. He plays "upside down and backwards, like a lap guitar", and relies heavily on effects pedals.

[ 95 ] Lynch wrote several pieces for Inland Empire , including two songs, "Ghost of Love" and "Walkin' on the Sky", in which he made his public debut as a singer. In 2009, his book-CD set Dark Night of the Soul was released.

[ 96 ] In 2008, he started his own record label, David Lynch MC, which first released Fox Bat Strategy: A Tribute to Dave Jaurequi in early 2009.

[ 97 ] In November 2010, Lynch released two electropop music singles, "Good Day Today" and "I Know", on the independent British label Sunday Best Recordings . Of the songs, he said, "I was just sitting and these notes came and then I went down and started working with Dean [Hurley] and then these few notes, 'I want to have a good day, today' came and the song was built around that".

[ 98 ] The singles were followed by an album, Crazy Clown Time , which was released in November 2011 and described as an "electronic blues album".

[ 99 ] The songs were sung by Lynch, with guest vocals on one track by Karen O of the Yeah Yeah Yeahs , [ 100 ] and composed and performed by Lynch and Hurley.

[ 99 ] All or most of the songs on Crazy Clown Time were put into art-music videos, with Lynch directing the title song's video.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] [ 103 ] [ 104 ] On September 29, 2011, Lynch released This Train with vocalist and longtime musical collaborator Chrystabell on the La Rose Noire label.

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] Lynch's second studio album, The Big Dream , was released in 2013 and included the single " I'm Waiting Here ", with Swedish singer-songwriter Lykke Li .

[ 107 ] The Big Dream ' s release was preceded by TBD716 , an enigmatic 43-second video featured on Lynch's YouTube and Vine accounts.

[ 108 ] For Record Store Day 2014, Lynch released The Big Dream Remix EP , which featured four songs from his album remixed by various artists. This included the track "Are You Sure" remixed by the band Bastille , which is known to have been inspired by Lynch's work for its songs and videos, especially the song " Laura Palmer ".

[ 109 ] In November 2018, a collaborative album by Lynch and Badalamenti, Thought Gang , was released on vinyl and compact disc. The album was recorded around 1993 but not released at the time. Two tracks from it appear on the soundtrack for Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me and three others were used for Twin Peaks: The Return .

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] In May 2019, Lynch provided guest vocals on the track "Fire is Coming" by Flying Lotus . He also co-wrote the track that appears on Flying Lotus's album Flamagra . A video accompanying the song was released on April 17, 2019.

[ 112 ] In May 2021, Lynch produced a track, " I Am the Shaman ", by Scottish artist Donovan . The song was released on May 10, Donovan's 75th birthday. Lynch also directed the accompanying video.

[ 113 ] In August 2024, Lynch released his final album, Cellophane Memories , a collaboration between him and Chrystabell. He also directed videos for two tracks on the album, "Sublime Eternal Love" and "The Answers to the Questions".

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] Design [ edit ] Lynch designed and constructed furniture for his 1997 film Lost Highway , including the small table in the Madison house and the VCR case. In April 1997, he presented a furniture collection at the prestigious Milan Furniture Fair . "Design and music, art and architecture—they all belong together", he said.

[ 116 ] Working with designer Raphael Navot, architectural agency Enia, and light designer Thierry Dreyfus, Lynch conceived and designed a nightclub in Paris, Silencio.

[ 117 ] It opened in October 2011, and is a private members' club, but is free to the public after midnight. Patrons have access to concerts, films, and other performances by artists and guests. Inspired by the club of the same name in Mulholland Drive , the underground space consists of a series of rooms, each dedicated to a certain purpose or atmosphere. "Silencio is something dear to me. I wanted to create an intimate space where all the arts could come together. There won't be a Warhol-like guru, but it will be open to celebrated artists of all disciplines to come here to program or create what they want." [ 118 ] Literature [ edit ] In 2006, Lynch wrote a short book, Catching the Big Fish: Meditation, Consciousness, and Creativity , which describes his creative processes, stories from his career, and the benefits he realized from his practice of Transcendental Meditation . He describes the metaphor behind the title in the introduction: Ideas are like fish.

If you want to catch little fish, you can stay in the shallow water. But if you want to catch the big fish, you've got to go deeper.

Down deep, the fish are more powerful and more pure. They're huge and abstract. And they're very beautiful.

The book weaves a nonlinear autobiography with descriptions of Lynch's experiences during Transcendental Meditation.

[ 119 ] Lynch also narrated it in an audiobook.

Working with Kristine McKenna , Lynch published a biography-memoir hybrid, Room to Dream , in June 2018.

[ 120 ] Website [ edit ] Lynch designed his personal website, a site exclusive to paying members, where he posted short videos, his absurdist series Dumbland , interviews, and other items. The site also featured a daily weather report where Lynch gave a brief description of the weather in Los Angeles, where he resided. He continued to broadcast this report (usually no longer than 30 seconds) on his personal YouTube channel, DAVID LYNCH THEATER , along with "TODAY'S NUMBER", where he drew a random number between one and ten out of a bingo cage.

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] Lynch also created a short film, "Rabbits", for his website.

[ 123 ] Lynch was a coffee drinker and had his own line of special organic blends available for purchase on his website and at Whole Foods .

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] Called "David Lynch Signature Cup", the coffee has been advertised via flyers included with several Lynch-related DVD releases, including Inland Empire and the Gold Box edition of Twin Peaks . The brand's tagline is "It's all in the beans ... and I'm just full of beans", [ 126 ] [ 127 ] a line Justin Theroux 's character says in Inland Empire .

[ 128 ] Personal life [ edit ] Relationships [ edit ] Lynch with Isabella Rossellini at the 1990 Cannes Film Festival .

Lynch had several long-term relationships. In January 1968, he married Peggy Reavey, [ 35 ] with whom he had one child, Jennifer Lynch , a film director.

[ 129 ] They filed for divorce in 1974.

[ 130 ] In June 1977, Lynch married Mary Fisk, with whom he had one child, Austin Jack Lynch, in 1982.

[ 131 ] They separated in 1985 and divorced in 1987.

[ 130 ] Lynch had a relationship with actress Isabella Rossellini and lived with her between 1986 and 1991. In 1992, he and his editor Mary Sweeney had a son, Riley Sweeney Lynch.

[ 132 ] Sweeney also worked as Lynch's producer and co-wrote and produced The Straight Story . The two married in May 2006, but filed for divorce that June.

[ 133 ] In 2009, Lynch married actress Emily Stofle, [ 134 ] who appeared in his 2006 film Inland Empire as well as the 2017 revival of Twin Peaks . The couple had one child, Lula Boginia Lynch, in 2012.

[ 134 ] Stofle filed for divorce in 2023. A divorce settlement agreement was reached on December 20, 2024, but the court had not issued a final divorce decree at the time of Lynch's death.

Political and public views [ edit ] Lynch in 2016 In 2009, Lynch signed a petition in support of director Roman Polanski who, while traveling to a film festival, was detained based on his 1977 arrest for alleged sexual abuse . The petition argued the arrest would undermine the tradition of film festivals as a place for works to be shown "freely and safely", and that arresting filmmakers traveling to neutral countries could open the door "for actions of which no one can know the effects".

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] Lynch said he was "not a political person" and knew little about politics.

[ 137 ] : 103 Describing his political philosophy in 2006, he said, "at that time [the 1990s], I thought of myself as a libertarian . I believed in next to zero government. And I still would lean toward no government and not so many rules, except for traffic lights and things like this. I really believe in traffic regulations." [ 138 ] He continued: "I'm a Democrat now. And I've always been a Democrat, really. But I don't like the Democrats a lot, either, because I'm a smoker, and I think a lot of the Democrats have come up with these rules for non-smoking." [ 138 ] He said he voted for Ronald Reagan in the 1984 presidential election ; in the 2000 presidential election he endorsed the Natural Law Party , which advocated Transcendental Meditation .

[ 139 ] [ 137 ] In the 2012 presidential election he said he would vote for Democratic incumbent Barack Obama .

[ 140 ] In the 2016 U.S. presidential election , Lynch endorsed Bernie Sanders , [ 141 ] whom he described as "for the people".

[ 142 ] He voted for Sanders in the 2016 Democratic primaries [ 143 ] and for Libertarian nominee Gary Johnson in the general election.

[ 144 ] In a June 2018 interview with The Guardian , Lynch said that Donald Trump could go down as "one of the greatest presidents in history because he has disrupted the [country] so much. No one is able to counter this guy in an intelligent way." He added: "Our so-called leaders can't take the country forward, can't get anything done. Like children, they are. Trump has shown all this." [ 143 ] The interviewer clarified that "while Trump may not be doing a good job himself, Lynch thinks, he is opening up a space where other outsiders might." [ 143 ] At a rally later that month, Trump read out sections of the interview, claiming Lynch was a supporter.

[ 145 ] Lynch later clarified on Facebook that his words were taken out of context, saying that Trump would "not have a chance to go down in history as a great president" if he continued on the course of "causing suffering and division" and advising him to "treat all the people as you would like to be treated".

[ 146 ] In one of his daily weather report videos in 2020, Lynch expressed support for Black Lives Matter protests following the murder of George Floyd .

[ 147 ] In a 2022 weather report, he condemned the Russian invasion of Ukraine and addressed Russian president Vladimir Putin directly, telling him there was "no room for this kind of absurdity anymore" and that Putin would reap what he had sown, lifetime after lifetime.

[ 148 ] Lynch was present with other Boy Scouts outside the White House at the inauguration of President John F. Kennedy , which took place on Lynch's 15th birthday.

[ 7 ] : 5 When Kennedy was assassinated in 1963, Lynch was the first in his school to hear of it, as he was working on a display case rather than attending class.

[ 149 ] Transcendental Meditation [ edit ] Main article: David Lynch Foundation Lynch speaking on Transcendental Meditation and the creative process in 2007 [ 150 ] Lynch advocated Transcendental Meditation as a spiritual practice.

[ 151 ] He was initiated into Transcendental Meditation in July 1973, and practiced the technique consistently thereafter.

[ 152 ] [ 153 ] Lynch said he met Maharishi Mahesh Yogi , the founder of the TM movement , for the first time in 1975 at the Spiritual Regeneration Movement center in Los Angeles.

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] He became close with the Maharishi during a month-long "Millionaire's Enlightenment Course" held in 2003, the fee for which was $1 million.

[ 156 ] In July 2005, Lynch launched the David Lynch Foundation for Consciousness-Based Education and Peace , [ 10 ] [ 157 ] established to help finance scholarships for students in middle and high schools who are interested in learning Transcendental Meditation and to fund research on the technique and its effects on learning. Together with John Hagelin and Fred Travis, a brain researcher from Maharishi University of Management (MUM), Lynch promoted his vision on college campuses with a tour that began in September 2005.

[ 158 ] Lynch was on MUM's board of trustees [ 159 ] and hosted an annual "David Lynch Weekend for World Peace and Meditation" there, beginning in 2005.

[ 160 ] The foundation has also funded meditation lessons for veterans and other "at-risk" populations.

[ 161 ] Lynch was working for the building and establishment of seven buildings in which 8,000 salaried people would practice advanced meditation techniques, "pumping peace for the world". He estimated the cost at US$7 billion . As of December 2005, he had spent $400,000 of his money and raised $1 million in donations.

[ 153 ] In December 2006, The New York Times reported that he continued to have that goal.

[ 10 ] Lynch's book Catching the Big Fish (2006) discusses Transcendental Meditation's effect on his creative process. Lynch attended the Maharishi's funeral in India in 2008.

[ 156 ] He told a reporter, "In life, he revolutionized the lives of millions of people. ... In 20, 50, 500 years there will be millions of people who will know and understand what the Maharishi has done." [ 162 ] In 2009, Lynch went to India to film interviews with people who knew the Maharishi as part of a biographical documentary.

[ 163 ] [ 164 ] Lynch dedicating his book Catching the Big Fish in Paris on the occasion of his World Tour in 2007.

In 2009, Lynch organized a benefit concert at Radio City Music Hall for the David Lynch Foundation. On April 4, 2009, the "Change Begins Within" concert featured Paul McCartney , Ringo Starr , Donovan , Sheryl Crow , Eddie Vedder , Moby , Bettye LaVette , Ben Harper , and Mike Love .

[ 165 ] David Wants to Fly is a 2010 documentary by German filmmaker David Sieveking "that follows the path of his professional idol, David Lynch, into the world of Transcendental Meditation (TM)".

[ 166 ] [ 167 ] At the end of the film, Sieveking becomes disillusioned with the TM movement.

[ 168 ] An independent project starring Lynch called Beyond The Noise: My Transcendental Meditation Journey , directed by Dana Farley, who has severe dyslexia and attention deficit disorder, was shown at film festivals in 2011, [ 169 ] including the Marbella Film Festival.

[ 170 ] Filmmaker Kevin Sean Michaels is one of the producers.

[ 171 ] In 2013, Lynch wrote: "Transcendental Meditation leads to a beautiful, peaceful revolution. A change from suffering and negativity to happiness and a life more and more free of any problems." [ 151 ] In a 2019 interview by British artist Alexander de Cadenet , Lynch said: "Here's an experience that utilizes the full brain. That's what it's for. It's for enlightenment, for higher states of consciousness, culminating in the highest state of unity consciousness." [ 172 ] In April 2022, Lynch announced a $500 million transcendental meditation world peace initiative to fund transcendental meditation for 30,000 college students.

[ 173 ] In September 2024, Lynch made his last published broadcast speech at Meditate America 2024. He discussed the Beatles' (particularly John Lennon 's) practice of TM during their visit to India in 1968 and played a cover of " Across the Universe ".

Illness and death [ edit ] In August 2024, Lynch said in an interview that he had been diagnosed with emphysema in 2020 after a lifetime of smoking and had become housebound due to health risks, which he surmised would likely prevent him from directing any new projects.

[ 174 ] [ 175 ] Three months later, he told People that he had quit smoking in 2022, having started when he was eight years old; he said he was reliant on supplemental oxygen for most daily activities and could "hardly walk across a room".

[ 176 ] Lynch also said he could no longer leave his house, meaning that he would only be able to direct remotely. He said a project for Netflix , with working titles Wisteria and Unrecorded Night , had fallen through, but that he would like to see his unrealized projects Antelope Don't Run No More and Snootworld realized.

[ 177 ] [ 178 ] Lynch said that month that he was working on existing projects as much as he could, and that he was in good health except for emphysema, and had no plans to retire.

[ 179 ] In January 2025, Lynch was evacuated from his Los Angeles home due to the Southern California wildfires . These events preceded a terminal decline in his health, [ 180 ] and he died at his daughter's home in Los Angeles on January 15, aged 78.

[ 181 ] His family posted a message reading: There's a big hole in the world now that he's no longer with us. But, as he would say, "Keep your eye on the donut and not on the hole." [ 182 ] His death certificate, publicly reported in February 2025, concluded that the immediate cause of death was cardiac arrest, with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease cited as the underlying cause. Dehydration was also mentioned as a significant contributor.

[ 183 ] The death certificate said he was cremated, with his ashes buried at Hollywood Forever Cemetery .

[ 184 ] Tributes [ edit ] Lynch's collaborators Nicolas Cage , Laura Dern, Kyle MacLachlan, Naomi Watts, and Ray Wise wrote tributes to him.

[ 185 ] [ 186 ] MacLachlan honored Lynch with a tribute in The New York Times.

[ 187 ] He wrote: "I was willing to follow him anywhere because joining him on the journey of discovery, searching and finding together, was the whole point. I stepped out into the unknown because I knew David was floating out there with me... I will miss my dear friend. He has made my world—all of our worlds—both wonderful and strange".

[ 187 ] The WGA announced that MacLachlan would posthumously give Lynch the Laurel Award for Screenwriting Achievement .

[ 188 ] Steven Spielberg wrote of directing Lynch in The Fabelmans : "Here was one of my heroes—David Lynch—playing one of my heroes [...] The world is going to miss such an original and unique voice. His films have already stood the test of time and they always will." [ 189 ] Martin Scorsese wrote a statement that read in part, "He put images on the screen unlike anything that I or anybody else had ever seen—he made everything strange, uncanny, revelatory and new." [ 190 ] Tributes were also paid by Judd Apatow , Mel Brooks , Francis Ford Coppola , Terry Gilliam , James Gunn , Ron Howard , Patton Oswalt , Pedro Pascal , Billy Corgan , Questlove , and Ben Stiller .

[ 191 ] [ 192 ] Critic Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian eulogized Lynch as "the great American surrealist ".

[ 193 ] Critic Richard Brody of The New Yorker wrote, "many films are called revelatory and visionary, but Lynch's films seem made to exemplify these terms", citing his "audacious invention and exquisite realization of symbolic details and uncanny realms".

[ 194 ] Lynch's oft-chosen self-description was "Eagle Scout, Missoula, Montana".

[ 18 ] Memorials [ edit ] Soon after Lynch died, fans began placing flowers beneath the "Bob's Big Boy Statue", a statue of Bob's Big Boy 's titular mascot outside its Burbank location. Lynch was known to enjoy Big Boy's chocolate milkshakes and coffee, and frequented the spot for many years.

[ 195 ] Around the same time, a similar scenario occurred at Twede's Cafe in North Bend, Washington , the original location of the "Double R Diner" in Twin Peaks . As at Big Boy's, flowers, photos, and personal letters were left outside the diner.

[ 196 ] Artistry [ edit ] Style [ edit ] "An academic definition of Lynchian might be that the term 'refers to a particular kind of irony where the very macabre and the very mundane combine in such a way as to reveal the former's perpetual containment within the latter'".

—Writer David Foster Wallace in a 1997 article on David Lynch for Premiere [ 197 ] Lynch's distinctive style blends surrealism with classic Hollywood storytelling and "pulpy" romanticism, [ 198 ] often employing experimental filmmaking techniques alongside elements from commercial genres such as film noir , supernatural horror , soap opera , camp comedy , and erotic thriller .

[ 193 ] His films have been said to evoke a "dreamlike quality of mystery or menace" through striking visual imagery, and frequently combine "surreal or sinister elements with mundane, everyday environments".

[ 199 ] Critic Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian called Lynch "the great American surrealist" and described his subversive narratives as "splitting and swirling in non sequiturs and Escher loops".

[ 193 ] Film analyst Jennifer Hudson wrote, "Like most surrealists, Lynch's language of the unexplained is the fluid language of dreams".

[ 200 ] Ryan Gilbey called Lynch "the greatest cinematic surrealist since [Luis] Buñuel " and "the most original film-maker to emerge in postwar America".

[ 201 ] J. Hoberman wrote that Lynch's work is characterized by "troubling juxtapositions, outlandish non sequiturs and eroticized derangement of the commonplace".

[ 18 ] Hoberman called his approach "more intuitive" than that of his surrealist precursors, and suggested that his art synthesized the disparate styles of Hollywood filmmaker Frank Capra and modernist author Franz Kafka .

[ 18 ] Dennis Lim suggested that Lynch's films "push clichés to their breaking point and find emotion in artifice." [ 202 ] B. Kite of the BFI called Lynch's approach "stylised but not mocking", arguing that Lynch was "singularly brave and direct in his approach to heightened emotion" in an era where most filmmakers would opt for ironic distance.

[ 203 ] Nick De Semlyen of Empire described his films as moving "back and forth between violent chaos and otherworldly beauty", and suggested that "while other filmmakers tried to wrestle order out of chaos, compacting their stories into neat three-act structures, Lynch revelled in the tumult—that feeling that life is a beautiful, terrifying mystery." [ 204 ] Lynch's work inspired the use of the adjective "Lynchian" to describe art or situations reminiscent of his style.

[ 18 ] Phil Hoad of The Guardian called the term Lynchian a "go-to adjective to describe any sniff of the uncanny and esoteric on screen", adding that his "destabilising vision has become a common lens for discerning the truth about the 'normal world'".

[ 205 ] Themes and motifs [ edit ] Lynch refused to publicly explain or assign any specific meaning to his works, preferring that viewers interpret them in their own ways.

[ 206 ] Asked how audiences should approach his films, he said: "You should not be afraid of using your intuition and feel your way through. Have the experience and trust your inner knowing of what it is." [ 207 ] I look at the world and I see absurdity all around me. People do strange things constantly, to the point that, for the most part, we manage not to see it. That's why I love coffee shops and public places—I mean, they're all out there.

—David Lynch [ 7 ] : 199 Many elements recur in Lynch's work; Le Blanc and Odell write, "his films are so packed with motifs, recurrent characters, images, compositions and techniques that you could view his entire output as one large jigsaw puzzle of ideas".

[ 20 ] : 8 Works like Blue Velvet and Twin Peaks depict stories in which "the folksiness of small town America collided with utter depravity, beset by evils from both sides of the white picket fence", while his later "Hollywood trilogy"— Lost Highway , Mulholland Drive , and Inland Empire —explores "the celluloid dreams of Los Angeles [against the] bitter realities and almost cosmic horrors lurking in the hills".

[ 208 ] Elements like red theater curtains, diners, dreams, nightclub singers, and occult-like rituals recur frequently in Lynch's work.

[ 193 ] Another prominent motif is industry , with repeated imagery of "the clunk of machinery, the power of pistons, shadows of oil drills pumping, screaming woodmills and smoke billowing factories".

[ 20 ] : 9–11 Other imagery common in Lynch's work includes flickering electricity or lights, fire, and stages.

[ 20 ] : 9–11 Physical deformity is also found in several of Lynch's films, as is death by head wound. His work frequently depicts a dark, violent criminal underbelly of society, and often contains characters with supernatural or omnipotent qualities.

[ 209 ] In The New Yorker , Dennis Lim concluded that "the primal terror of Lynch’s films is an existential one" and that "the volatility of the self and of reality" is central to his work.

[ 210 ] Lim wrote that "for Lynch, disruption is generative: trauma , the recurring subject of his films, can rupture the fabric of reality".

[ 210 ] Critic Mark Fisher noted that Lynch's works destabilize the hierarchy between distinct levels of reality and fiction:, resulting in a ambiguous ontological situation in which "any apparent reality subsides into a dream".

[ 211 ] Kite wrote that "the central mystery" of Lynch's work is rooted in overlapping "worlds" of consciousness and the resultant "perpetual folding between outside and inside".

[ 203 ] Gilbey wrote that Lynch's work "exposed the horrors lurking beneath apparently placid exteriors, and found beauty in the quotidian, the industrial" while reflecting a "mix of folksy naivety and elusive strangeness".

[ 201 ] Critic Greg Olson wrote that Lynch's work is preoccupied with the "deepest realities" behind surfaces and facades.

[ 212 ] Author David Foster Wallace characterized Lynch's films as deconstructing "the weird irony of the banal".

[ 197 ] Lynch's work reflects a preoccupation with the instability of identity, particularly in female characters.

[ 213 ] He tended to feature his female leads in "split" roles: many of his female characters have multiple, fractured identities.

[ 214 ] [ 215 ] Hoberman identified a duality between "exaggerated, even saccharine innocence" and "depraved evil" in his work, [ 18 ] while Lim emphasized that the good and evil in Lynch's art exist in an ambiguous relationship to each other.

[ 210 ] Lynch's affinity for Eastern spirituality is evident in his films, though it typically manifests in American trappings.

[ 216 ] Joseph Joyce of Angelus wrote, "his work could perhaps properly be understood as the marriage between Western kitsch and Eastern spirituality".

[ 208 ] According to Kite, much of Lynch's work is underpinned by his Advaita Vedanta –inspired philosophy, in which the soul is defined by "light and unity" but forgets its original essence, becoming lost in illusions of isolation, violence, and separateness for some time before awaking to remember its true nature.

[ 203 ] Kite suggested that Lynch could be understood as "a religious or spiritual artist in a loosely categoric sense", and called his worldview "essentially monist " but punctuated by superficial duality and Gnostic conflict.

[ 203 ] Lynch directly invoked the Vedic scriptures known as the Upanishads in several of his films and books; in Twin Peaks: The Return and in his live introductions to Inland Empire , he quotes a passage from an adapted version of the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad : [ 217 ] We are like the spider. We weave our life and then move along in it. We are like the dreamer who dreams and then lives in the dream. This is true for the entire universe.

[ 218 ] [ 219 ] All but two of Lynch's films are set in the United States, and he frequently referenced 1950s and early 1960s U.S. culture despite his works being set in later decades. Bradshaw wrote, "[n]o director ever interpreted the American Dream with more artless innocence than David Lynch", citing his work's juxtaposition of the safety of "the suburban drive and the picket fence" with "escape, danger, adventure, sex and death".

[ 193 ] Joyce wrote, "it's easy to presume that Lynch was cynic. But [...] he really did love Americana ; blue jeans and slicked hair, soda fountains , Roy Orbison and, yes, milkshakes".

[ 208 ] Lynch said: "I like certain things about America and it gives me ideas. When I go around and I see things, it sparks little stories".

[ 7 ] : 18 Of the 1950s, he said, "It was a fantastic decade in a lot of ways ... there was something in the air that is not there any more at all. It was such a great feeling, and not just because I was a kid. It was a really hopeful time, and things were going up instead of going down. You got the feeling you could do anything. The future was bright. Little did we know we were laying the groundwork for a disastrous future." [ 7 ] : 3–5 Influences [ edit ] New York Movie (1939) by Edward Hopper , one of Lynch's favorite painters.

Lynch felt that his work was more similar to that of European filmmakers than American ones, and said that most films that "get down and thrill your soul" are by European directors.

[ 7 ] : 62 He expressed admiration for Federico Fellini , [ 7 ] : 62 Ingmar Bergman , Werner Herzog , Alfred Hitchcock , [ 220 ] Roman Polanski , Jacques Tati , [ 7 ] : 62 Stanley Kubrick , and Billy Wilder . His favorite film, and one he regularly returned to, was Victor Fleming 's The Wizard of Oz .

[ 221 ] He said that Wilder's Sunset Boulevard (1950) was one of his favorite pictures, [ 7 ] : 71 as were "probably all of Bergman’s movies", [ 222 ] Kubrick's Lolita (1962), Fellini's 8½ (1963), Tati's Monsieur Hulot's Holiday (1953), Hitchcock's Rear Window (1954), and Herzog's Stroszek (1977).

[ 7 ] : 21 He also cited Herk Harvey 's Carnival of Souls (1962) and Jerzy Skolimowski 's Deep End (1970) as influences on his work.

[ 223 ] Maya Deren 's 1943 experimental film Meshes of the Afternoon has also been recognized as a possible influence on Lynch.

[ 213 ] Some have suggested that Lynch's love of Hitchcock's Vertigo influenced his use of dual-identity female roles.

[ 214 ] [ 215 ] Edward Hopper and Francis Bacon were two of Lynch's favorite painters.

[ 224 ] Lynch also praised installation artist Edward Kienholz .

[ 225 ] Lynch said his favorite books were Frank Capra 's The Name Above the Title , Fyodor Dostoyevsky 's Crime and Punishment , Robert Henri 's The Art Spirit , Robert Flynn Johnson 's Anonymous Photographs , and Franz Kafka 's The Metamorphosis .

[ 226 ] Recurring collaborators [ edit ] Main article: List of frequent David Lynch collaborators Lynch was noted for his collaborations with various production artists and composers on his films and other productions.

[ 227 ] He frequently worked with composer Angelo Badalamenti, film editor Mary Sweeney , casting director Johanna Ray , and actors Harry Dean Stanton , Jack Nance, Kyle MacLachlan, Catherine Coulson, Laura Dern, Naomi Watts, Isabella Rossellini, and Grace Zabriskie .

Legacy [ edit ] Main article: Cultural impact of David Lynch Lynch was often called a "visionary".

[ 18 ] [ 228 ] [ 229 ] In 2007, a panel of critics convened by The Guardian announced that "after all the discussion, no one could fault the conclusion that David Lynch is the most important film-maker of the current era", [ 230 ] and AllMovie called him "the Renaissance man of modern American filmmaking".

[ 231 ] Film critic Pauline Kael called Lynch "the first populist surrealist".

[ 7 ] : xi Filmography [ edit ] Main article: David Lynch filmography Film [ edit ] Year Title Distributor Ref.

1977 Eraserhead Libra Films [ 232 ] 1980 The Elephant Man Paramount Pictures 1984 Dune Universal Pictures 1986 Blue Velvet De Laurentiis Entertainment Group 1990 Wild at Heart The Samuel Goldwyn Company 1992 Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me New Line Cinema 1997 Lost Highway October Films 1999 The Straight Story Buena Vista Pictures (under the Walt Disney Pictures banner) [ 233 ] 2001 Mulholland Drive Universal Pictures 2006 Inland Empire Absurda, 518 Media [ 234 ] Television [ edit ] Year Title Network Ref.

1990–1991 Twin Peaks ABC [ 232 ] 1992 On the Air [ 137 ] : xxvi 1993 Hotel Room HBO 2017 Twin Peaks Showtime [ 232 ] Awards and nominations [ edit ] Main article: List of accolades received by David Lynch Lynch received multiple awards and nominations, including three Academy Award nominations for Best Director and one for Best Adapted Screenplay . He twice won France's César Award for Best Foreign Film , as well as the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival and the Golden Lion for Lifetime Achievement at the Venice Film Festival . In 2017, The MacDowell Colony awarded Lynch The Edward MacDowell Medal for outstanding contributions to American culture.

[ 235 ] Discography [ edit ] Main article: David Lynch discography Studio albums Crazy Clown Time (2011) The Big Dream (2013) Collaborative albums Lux Vivens (with Jocelyn Montgomery) (1998) BlueBOB (with John Neff) (2001) The Air Is On Fire (with Dean Hurley ) (2007) Polish Night Music (with Marek Zebrowski) (2007) This Train (with Chrystabell ) (2011) Somewhere in the Nowhere (with Chrystabell) (2016) Thought Gang (with Angelo Badalamenti ) (recorded 1992/93) (2018) Cellophane Memories (with Chrystabell) (2024) [ 236 ] [ 237 ] Solo exhibitions [ edit ] 1967: Vanderlip Gallery, Philadelphia [ 238 ] 1983: Puerto Vallarta, Mexico [ 238 ] 1987: James Corcoran Gallery, Los Angeles [ 238 ] 1989: Leo Castelli Gallery, New York [ 238 ] 1990: Tavelli Gallery, Aspen [ 238 ] 1991: Museum of Contemporary Art Tokyo [ 238 ] 1992: Sala Parpallo, Valencia [ 238 ] 1993: James Corcoran Gallery, Los Angeles [ 238 ] 1995: Painting Pavilion, Open Air Museum, Hakone [ 238 ] 1996: Park Tower Hall, Tokyo [ 238 ] 1997: Galerie Piltzer, Paris [ 238 ] 2007: Fondation Cartier pour l'Art Contemporain , Paris [ 239 ] 2008: Epson Kunstbetrieb, Düsseldorf [ 238 ] 2009: Max-Ernst-Museum, Brühl [ 238 ] 2010: Mönchehaus Museum, Goslar [ 238 ] 2010: GL Strand, Copenhagen [ 240 ] 2012: Galerie Chelsea, Sylt [ 241 ] 2012: Galerie Pfefferle, Munich [ 242 ] 2013: Galerie Barbara von Stechow, Frankfurt [ 243 ] 2014: The Photographers' Gallery , London [ 244 ] 2014: Middlesbrough Institute of Modern Art [ 245 ] 2014/15: Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts , Philadelphia [ 246 ] 2015: Queensland Gallery of Modern Art , Brisbane [ 247 ] 2017: Centre of Contemporary Art Znaki Czasu, Toruń , Poland [ 248 ] 2018: Kayne Griffin Corcoran, Los Angeles [ 249 ] 2018/19: Bonnefantenmuseum , Maastricht, The Netherlands [ 250 ] 2019: Home , Manchester, United Kingdom [ 251 ] 2019: Sperone Westwater Gallery, New York [ 252 ] 2021/22: Nikolaj Contemporary Art Center , Copenhagen [ 253 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Attributed to multiple sources.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] References [ edit ] ^ Bradshaw, Peter; Brooks, Xan; Haskell, Molly; Malcolm, Derek; Pulver, Andrew; Rich, B. Ruby; Rose, Steve (November 14, 2003).

"The world's 40 best directors" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved February 9, 2025 .

^ Bradshaw, Peter (January 16, 2025).

"David Lynch: the great American surrealist who made experimentalism mainstream" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved February 9, 2025 .

^ Zacharek, Stephanie (January 16, 2025).

"Why We're Lucky to Have Lived in the Age of David Lynch" .

Time . Retrieved February 9, 2025 .

^ Brody, Richard (January 17, 2025).

"How David Lynch Became an Icon of Cinema" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X . Retrieved February 9, 2025 .

^ Hammond, Pete (January 16, 2025).

"David Lynch Appreciation: A Visionary For All Time" .

Deadline Hollywood . Retrieved February 9, 2025 .

^ Pulver, Andrew (January 16, 2025).

"David Lynch, Twin Peaks and Mulholland Drive director, dies aged 78" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved March 8, 2025 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai aj ak al am an ao ap aq ar as at au av aw ax ay az ba bb bc bd be bf bg bh bi bj bk bl bm bn bo bp bq br bs bt bu Lynch, David; Rodley, Chris (2005).

Lynch on Lynch (revised ed.). New York: Faber and Faber.

ISBN 978-0-571-22018-2 .

^ "David Lynch: "Den här världen är full av hat och ångest" " .

NÖJESGUIDEN .

Archived from the original on June 23, 2020 . Retrieved June 20, 2020 .

^ a b c d Corliss, Richard (October 1, 1990).

"David Lynch: Czar of the Bizarre" .

Time .

^ a b c Williams, Alex (December 31, 2007).

"David Lynch's Shockingly Peaceful Inner Life" .

The New York Times . Retrieved November 29, 2010 .

^ Sadighian, David (October 1, 2005).

"David Lynch thinks we're all lightbulbs. What?" .

Yale Daily News .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2011 . Retrieved November 29, 2010 .

^ "What 'Twin Peaks' creator David Lynch meant to WA" .

The Seattle Times . January 17, 2025 . Retrieved May 8, 2025 .

^ "Visionary filmmaker behind 'Twin Peaks' and 'Eraserhead' David Lynch, who partly grew up in Spokane, dies at 78" .

Spokesman.com . January 16, 2025 . Retrieved May 8, 2025 .

^ a b Lim, Dennis (2015).

David Lynch: The Man From Another Place .

^ a b Thomson, David .

The New Biographical Dictionary of Film . p. 606.

^ "Notable Alumni | Corcoran School of the Arts & Design | The George Washington University" .

corcoran.gwu.edu .

Archived from the original on August 4, 2020 . Retrieved April 22, 2019 .

^ Wolf, Peter (2011).

"Peter'sBio" .

Peter Wolf . Archived from the original on June 15, 2012 . Retrieved August 16, 2012 .

^ a b c d e f g h Hoberman, J.

(January 16, 2025).

"David Lynch Dead: 'Twin Peaks' and 'Mulholland Drive' Director Was 78" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ The Short Films of David Lynch . 2002.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Le Blanc, Michelle ; Odell, Colin (2000).

David Lynch . Harpenden, Hertfordshire: Pocket Essentials.

ISBN 1-903047-06-4 .

^ Blumgart, Jake (September 22, 2014).

"David Lynch in Philly, a City He Feared" .

Vice . Retrieved January 19, 2025 .

^ "David Lynch: "It Can All Be So Beautiful" " .

American Film . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ "David Lynch" .

The Wall Street Journal . July 21, 2012.

Archived from the original on July 25, 2012 . Retrieved July 22, 2012 .

^ a b David Lynch.

"tip Filmjahrbuch Nr. 1 (1985)" [tip Film Yearbook No. 1 (1985)] (Interview). Interviewed by Herman Weigel. Archived from the original on October 11, 2010.

^ "Midnight Movies: From the Margin to the Mainstream" .

IMDb .

^ "David Lynch Meets George Lucas" . February 17, 2010.

Archived from the original on September 11, 2014 . Retrieved December 1, 2014 – via YouTube.

^ Sheen, Erica; Davison, Annette (2004).

The cinema of David Lynch: American dreams, nightmare visions . Wallflower Press.

ISBN 978-1-903364-85-7 .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2020 . Retrieved January 12, 2016 .

^ Lattanzio, Ryan (March 27, 2024).

"Isabella Rossellini Responds to Roger Ebert's 'Blue Velvet' Review" .

Indiewire .

^ Kael, Pauline (September 22, 1986).

"Out There and In Here" .

The New Yorker .

^ "A Slice of Lynch".

Twin Peaks Definitive Gold Box Edition (DVD featurette). 2007.

^ "His dark materials" .

New Statesman .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2017 . Retrieved November 15, 2017 .

^ "Festival de Cannes: Wild at Heart" .

festival-cannes.com .

Archived from the original on January 19, 2012 . Retrieved August 7, 2009 .

^ "10 Films Booed at Cannes That Every Cinephile Should See" .

IndieWire . April 17, 2015 . Retrieved January 20, 2025 .

^ Kermode, Mark (February 8, 2007).

"David Lynch" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on June 21, 2008 . Retrieved October 27, 2009 .

^ a b Lynch, David; McKenna, Kristine.

Room to Dream (First ed.). New York, N.Y. p. 327.

ISBN 9780399589195 .

OCLC 1019843510 .

^ "Lost Highway (1997)" .

The Numbers .

Archived from the original on June 16, 2018 . Retrieved August 3, 2016 .

^ "Lost Highway Reviews" .

Metacritic .

Archived from the original on May 5, 2016 . Retrieved August 3, 2016 .

^ Petrikin, Chris; Dawtrey, Adam (May 10, 1999).

"Disney, Lynch go 'Straight' " .

Variety . Retrieved April 23, 2020 .

^ Maslin, Janet (December 26, 1999).

"1999: THE YEAR IN REVIEW - FILM; Discovering Fresh Ways to See and to Sell" .

The New York Times .

^ "Academy Award Database: Lynch, David" . Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Archived from the original on January 13, 2012 . Retrieved April 23, 2011 .

^ Brown, Mark (August 22, 2016).

"Mulholland Drive leads the pack in list of 21st century's top films" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on August 22, 2016 . Retrieved August 23, 2016 .

^ Ebert, Roger (October 12, 2001).

"Mulholland Drive" .

Chicago Sun-Times .

^ Rivero, Enrique (March 28, 2002).

"Director David Lynch Has Do-It-Himself DVD" .

hive4media.com .

Archived from the original on June 4, 2002 . Retrieved September 10, 2019 .

^ Charney, Leo (January 4, 2006).

"It's Just Lynch" .

Philadelphia Weekly . Review Publishing Limited Partnership. Archived from the original on September 12, 2012 . Retrieved August 16, 2012 .

^ Chonin, Neva (February 7, 2007).

"Lynch dives within" .

San Francisco Chronicle .

Archived from the original on January 18, 2012 . Retrieved March 21, 2011 .

^ Hart, Hugh (May 30, 2009).

"David Lynch's Interview Project Probes American Dreams" .

Wired .

Archived from the original on January 13, 2012 . Retrieved August 30, 2011 .

^ Kay, Jeremy (June 22, 2010).

"Werner Herzog: a killer at the table" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on February 12, 2014 . Retrieved September 1, 2011 .

^ "David Lynch to shoot film about TM guru Maharishi Mahesh Yogi in India" .

Daily News & Analysis . November 18, 2009.

Archived from the original on November 21, 2009 . Retrieved November 29, 2010 .

^ Faye, Denis.

"A Kinder, Gentler Family Guy" . Writers Guild of America, West. Archived from the original on November 30, 2010 . Retrieved November 29, 2010 .

^ Copping, Nicola (May 14, 2010).

"David Lynch's new film for Christian Dior" .

Financial Times . Retrieved July 8, 2017 .

^ Lewis, Dave.

"Watch: David Lynch, Duran Duran team for 'Unstaged' streaming concert" .

HitFix.com .

Archived from the original on March 20, 2011 . Retrieved March 22, 2011 .

^ Emami, Gazelle (July 13, 2011).

"David Lynch/Interpol Collaboration, 'I Touch A Red Button Man' (EXCLUSIVE)" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on October 28, 2011 . Retrieved October 30, 2011 .

^ Leigh, Danny (August 19, 2011).

"Has David Lynch retired, or is it just a bad dream?" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on September 23, 2015 . Retrieved September 7, 2015 .

^ Zeitchik, Steven (June 22, 2012).

"David Lynch says he doesn't have any ideas for a new film" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on July 9, 2012.

^ Rosser, Michael (November 26, 2012).

"David Lynch hints at new film | Diary Blog" .

Screen International .

Top Right Group .

Archived from the original on March 19, 2013 . Retrieved November 26, 2012 .

^ Rosser, Michael (November 25, 2012).

"David Lynch and Keanu Reeves open Plus Camerimage" .

Screen International .

Top Right Group .

Archived from the original on November 28, 2012 . Retrieved November 26, 2012 .

^ Blake, Meredith (January 15, 2013).

"Laura Dern's Enlightened approach" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on January 16, 2013 . Retrieved January 17, 2013 .

^ Weston, Hilary (January 16, 2013).

"David Lynch and Laura Dern Have a Mysterious Project in the Works – Movies" .

BlackBook . Archived from the original on February 13, 2013 . Retrieved January 17, 2013 .

^ Hoffman, Claire (February 22, 2013).

"David Lynch Is Back … as a Guru of Transcendental Meditation" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 22, 2013 . Retrieved November 22, 2020 .

^ Fischer, Russ (February 12, 2013).

"David Lynch Short Film Idem Paris Recalls the Industrial Tone of His Debut" .

/Film .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2013 . Retrieved February 25, 2013 .

^ Blistein, Jon (June 27, 2013).

"Nine Inch Nails Photos Preview 'Came Back Haunted' Clip" .

Rolling Stone .

Archived from the original on June 29, 2013 . Retrieved August 26, 2017 .

^ "Dumb Numbers II, by Dumb Numbers" .

Dumbnumbers.bandcamp.com .

Archived from the original on March 7, 2016 . Retrieved July 31, 2015 .

^ Littleton, Cynthia (October 6, 2014).

"Twin Peaks Revival to Air on Showtime in 2016" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on December 14, 2017 . Retrieved October 6, 2014 .

^ Stedman, Alex (April 5, 2015).

"David Lynch Says He Won't Direct the 'Twin Peaks' Revival" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on October 2, 2017.

^ McCown, Alex (May 15, 2015).

"David Lynch just announced he's rejoined Showtime's Twin Peaks " .

The A.V. Club .

Archived from the original on August 1, 2016 . Retrieved August 3, 2016 .

^ Yaniz, Robert Jr. (August 12, 2015).

" 'Twin Peaks' Revival To Resolve Questions From Previous Seasons" .

Screen Rant .

Archived from the original on August 4, 2016 . Retrieved August 3, 2016 .

^ Andreeva, Nellie (January 12, 2016).

" 'Twin Peaks' Update: Premiere Set For Early 2017, David Lynch Halfway Done" .

Deadline Hollywood .

Archived from the original on August 3, 2016 . Retrieved August 3, 2016 .

^ Andreeva, Nellie (April 25, 2016).

" 'Twin Peaks': Here Is the Full Cast Of David Lynch's Showtime Reboot" .

Deadline Hollywood .

Archived from the original on April 25, 2016 . Retrieved August 3, 2016 .

^ Snyder, Chris (February 10, 2017).

" 'Twin Peaks' is coming back after 25 years – here's everything you need to know about it" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on February 18, 2017 . Retrieved February 17, 2017 .

^ Idato, Michael (May 5, 2017).

"David Lynch on the Return of Twin Peaks and Why He Will Never Make Another Film" .

The Sydney Morning Herald .

Archived from the original on May 28, 2020 . Retrieved April 16, 2020 .

^ Sharf, Zack (May 26, 2017).

"David Lynch Is Not Retiring From Filmmaking After All, But His Future Still Remains Unclear" .

IndieWire .

Archived from the original on August 18, 2020 . Retrieved April 16, 2020 .

^ "David Lynch weather report" . April 2008. Archived from the original on September 20, 2021 – via YouTube.

^ "David Lynch Theater" .

Archived from the original on June 11, 2020 . Retrieved June 11, 2020 – via YouTube.

^ McCarter, Reid (June 8, 2020).

"David Lynch ends daily weather report by recalling dream about being a dying German soldier on D-Day" .

The AV Club .

Archived from the original on June 9, 2020 . Retrieved June 11, 2020 .

^ Pulver, Andrew (April 24, 2023).

" 'It's all in the damn history books': David Lynch rails against the death of cinemas" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved June 9, 2024 .

^ Zhang, Charlie (June 9, 2020).

"David Lynch Shares 2002-Era Web Series 'Rabbits' to YouTube" .

Hypebeast .

Archived from the original on June 11, 2020 . Retrieved June 11, 2020 .

^ England, Rachel (June 10, 2020).

"David Lynch's creepy web series 'Rabbits' is back online" .

Engadget .

Archived from the original on June 11, 2020 . Retrieved June 11, 2020 .

^ Millican, Josh (July 17, 2020).

"David Lynch Now Has Line of Face Masks" .

Dread Central .

Archived from the original on July 19, 2020 . Retrieved July 20, 2020 .

^ Murphy, J. Kim (February 4, 2022).

"David Lynch Joins Cast of Steven Spielberg's 'The Fabelmans' (Exclusive)" .

Variety . Retrieved February 5, 2022 .

^ "SAG Awards Nominations: The Complete List" .

Deadline Hollywood . January 11, 2023 . Retrieved January 21, 2023 .

^ "David Lynch - Unproduced Works" .

LynchNet .

^ Bachman, Mara (June 17, 2020).

"Every Unmade David Lynch Movie" .

Screen Rant . Retrieved November 15, 2023 .

^ Gilchrist, Todd; Saperstein, Pat (January 16, 2025).

"The David Lynch Projects That Never Got Made, From 'Ronnie Rocket' to 'Dune Messiah' and 'Wisteria' " .

Variety .

^ Huijts, Stijn (2018).

David Lynch: Someone is in My House . Munich, London, New York: Prestel. p. 4.

ISBN 9783791387345 .

^ Lynch and McKenna, David and Kristine (2018).

Room to Dream . Edinburgh: Canongate Books. p. 461.

ISBN 9781782118411 .

^ Wyatt, Caroline (March 2, 2007).

"David Lynch's dark arts laid bare" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on February 8, 2010 . Retrieved May 1, 2010 .

^ "David Lynch: The Unified Field" .

pafa.org . October 27, 2014.

Archived from the original on February 25, 2018 . Retrieved May 1, 2017 .

^ " 'I Like Dogs with a Human Head': David Lynch Shows New Paintings in Los Angeles" .

ARTnews . September 7, 2018.

Archived from the original on October 21, 2018 . Retrieved October 20, 2018 .

^ "David Lynch interview: 'There is something so incredibly cosmically magical about curtains' " .

Time Out . January 13, 2014.

Archived from the original on July 29, 2020 . Retrieved April 16, 2020 .

^ "Q&A with David Lynch's Music Collaborator Dean Hurley – Part 2: Being Open Creatively and Knowing When to Walk Away" .

Synchtank . Retrieved June 12, 2024 .

^ Jordan, Randolph.

"Three Soundtrack Albums and a Record Player: A Twin Peaks Music Review (Sort Of)" .

offscreen.com . Retrieved June 12, 2024 .

^ Lynskey, Dorian (March 24, 2017).

" 'Make it like the wind, Angelo': How the Twin Peaks soundtrack came to haunt music for nearly 30 years" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2020 . Retrieved November 25, 2020 .

^ "David Lynch on Michael Jackson and That Crazy Frog From 'Twin Peaks' " .

The New York Times . June 13, 2018 . Retrieved June 13, 2018 .

^ "Lux Vivens: the Music of Hildegard von Bingen Jocelyn Montgomery" .

AllMusic .

Archived from the original on August 27, 2018 . Retrieved August 27, 2022 .

^ "BOSS Users Group magazine Vol. 5, No. 1 Summer 2001" .

Lynchnet.com .

Archived from the original on May 25, 2011 . Retrieved July 6, 2011 .

^ "Music – New Music News, Reviews, Pictures, and Videos" .

Rolling Stone . Archived from the original on February 25, 2010 . Retrieved August 26, 2017 .

^ Rawls, Alex (July 1, 2009).

"Fox Bat Strategy, A Tribute to Dave Jaurequi (Absurda)" .

OffBeat . Retrieved August 18, 2009 .

^ Topping, Alexandra (November 28, 2010).

"The latest offbeat experiment from filmmaker David Lynch: pop singles" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on September 7, 2014 . Retrieved November 30, 2010 .

^ a b Lynch, David (November 11, 2011).

"Music, Not Movies, But Still Exploring Places of Darkness" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 5, 2012 . Retrieved January 30, 2012 .

^ Powell, Mike (November 8, 2011).

"Crazy Clown Time" .

Pitchfork .

Archived from the original on January 17, 2012 . Retrieved January 30, 2012 .

^ David Lynch – Crazy Clown Time (Official Video) . Archived from the original on September 20, 2021 – via YouTube.

^ David Lynch Feat. Karen O – Pinky's Dream (Unofficial Video) . Archived from the original on September 20, 2021 – via YouTube.

^ David Lynch 'Good Day Today' (Official Video) . Archived from the original on September 20, 2021 – via YouTube.

^ David Lynch – So Glad . Archived from the original on September 20, 2021 – via YouTube.

^ Battan, Carrie (September 14, 2011).

"David Lynch Unveils Album Cover Art" .

Pitchfork .

Archived from the original on July 29, 2020 . Retrieved April 16, 2020 .

^ Strauss, Matthew (August 9, 2016).

"David Lynch and Chrysta Bell Team Up for New EP" .

Pitchfork .

Archived from the original on July 29, 2020 . Retrieved April 16, 2020 .

^ Minkser, Evan (June 3, 2013).

"David Lynch Announces New Album, The Big Dream, Shares Track Featuring Lykke Li" .

Pitchfork .

Archived from the original on June 5, 2013 . Retrieved June 3, 2013 .

^ "Video of the day: David Lynch's TBD716" .

Notebook .

Mubi . May 31, 2013.

Archived from the original on June 8, 2013 . Retrieved June 3, 2013 .

^ "David Lynch collaborates with Moby and Bastille for Record Store Day EP – listen" .

NME . March 11, 2014. Archived from the original on April 26, 2014 . Retrieved April 26, 2014 .

^ Blais-Billie, Braudie (September 18, 2018).

"David Lynch and Angelo Badalamenti's Lost '90s Album Is Getting Released" .

Pitchfork .

Archived from the original on September 19, 2018 . Retrieved August 27, 2022 .

^ Bemrose, Bekki.

"Thought Gang Review" .

AllMusic .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2018 . Retrieved August 27, 2022 .

^ Blistein, Jon (April 17, 2019).

"Flying Lotus Previews New Album With Freaky David Lynch Collaboration" .

Rolling Stone .

Archived from the original on June 5, 2019 . Retrieved August 27, 2022 .

^ Cazanov, Jeff (April 16, 2012).

"Donovan is Back!" .

rockcellarmagazine.com . Retrieved December 23, 2021 .

^ Breihan, Tom (June 5, 2024).

"Chrystabell & David Lynch – "Sublime Eternal Love" " .

Stereogum . Retrieved August 2, 2024 .

^ Zilko, Christian (July 9, 2024).

"David Lynch Directs Animated Music Video for His New Song 'The Answers to the Questions' with Chrystabell" .

IndieWire . Retrieved August 2, 2024 .

^ "The City of Absurdity: David Lynch's Furniture" .

Cityofabsurdity.com .

Archived from the original on March 10, 2012 . Retrieved October 16, 2011 .

^ "Silencio by David Lynch" .

Dezeen.com . September 7, 2011.

Archived from the original on December 20, 2016 . Retrieved December 12, 2016 .

^ Gibbons, Fiachra (August 31, 2011).

"Inside David Lynch's Paris nightclub" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on July 29, 2020 . Retrieved December 28, 2020 .

^ Lynch, David (2006).

Catching the Big Fish: Meditation, Consciousness, and Creativity . The Penguin Group. p. 1.

ISBN 978-1-58542-540-2 .

Archived from the original on July 11, 2014 . Retrieved June 14, 2014 .

^ "Book Marks reviews of Room to Dream by David Lynch and Kristine McKenna" .

bookmarks.reviews .

Archived from the original on June 30, 2018 . Retrieved June 29, 2018 .

^ Dawson, Brit (September 29, 2020).

"The mystery of David Lynch's daily lottery" .

Dazed Digital . Retrieved July 8, 2022 .

^ "David Lynch gives a weather report from LA" .

HERO . May 12, 2020 . Retrieved July 8, 2022 .

^ "Rabbits" .

IMDb .

^ "Whole Foods Market® and Filmmaker David Lynch Pour New Signature Coffee Line" .

Newsroom (Press release). Los Angeles, CA: Whole Foods Market. August 20, 2013.

Archived from the original on July 13, 2015 . Retrieved August 22, 2015 .

^ Hollyman, Helen (July 17, 2014).

"David Lynch's Philosophy on Drinking Coffee" .

Vice Munchies .

Archived from the original on August 18, 2017 . Retrieved August 18, 2017 .

^ "David Lynch Signature Cup".

Twin Peaks Definitive Gold Box Edition (Flyer included in DVD Set). 2007.

^ "David Lynch Signature Cup".

Eraserhead (Digitally Remastered) (Flyer included in DVD Set). 2006.

^ Rawson-Jones, Ben (February 14, 2012).

"David Lynch: 10 reasons to worship the Twin Peaks surrealist" .

Digital Spy .

Archived from the original on April 17, 2021 . Retrieved August 22, 2015 .

^ Jones, J.R. (May 3, 2017).

"For David Lynch, nothing was scarier than dear old dad" .

ChicagoReader.com .

Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved October 26, 2020 .

^ a b Marchese, David (June 25, 2018).

"In Conversation: David Lynch" .

Vulture .

Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved October 26, 2020 .

^ Woodward, Richard B. (January 14, 1990).

"A Dark Lens on America" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on June 4, 2010 . Retrieved October 26, 2020 .

^ "Mary Sweeney – 'Baraboo' " .

PBS Wisconsin . April 1, 2011.

Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved October 26, 2020 .

^ Acoymo, Mary Margaret; Keith, Amy Elisa (June 14, 2006).

"David Lynch, Wife Split After 1 Month" .

People .

Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved October 26, 2020 .

^ a b "Director David Lynch and wife welcome first daughter" .

Irish Independent . September 8, 2012.

Archived from the original on October 28, 2020 . Retrieved October 26, 2020 .

^ Shoard, Catherine; agencies (September 29, 2009).

"Release Polanski, demands petition by film industry luminaries" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on January 8, 2018 . Retrieved August 29, 2021 .

^ "Le cinéma soutient Roman Polanski / Petition for Roman Polanski – SACD" .

sacd.fr . June 4, 2012. Archived from the original on June 4, 2012 . Retrieved April 20, 2022 .

^ a b c Barney, Richard A. (2009).

David Lynch: Interviews .

University Press of Mississippi .

ISBN 978-1-60473-236-8 .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2016 . Retrieved January 12, 2016 .

^ a b "Was David Lynch the Original Libertarian Democrat?" .

Reason . December 11, 2006.

Archived from the original on October 25, 2014 . Retrieved October 25, 2014 .

^ Lim, Dennis (June 29, 2018).

"Donald Trump's America and the Visions of David Lynch" .

The New Yorker .

ISSN 0028-792X . Retrieved February 29, 2024 .

^ Lynch, David.

"Reason 52: I Have Noticed Something in Mitt Romney's name" .

90 Days, 90 Reasons . Archived from the original on November 3, 2012 . Retrieved October 26, 2012 .

^ Lynch, David [@DAVID_LYNCH] (March 29, 2016).

"Dear Twtter Friends, YAY! BERNIE SANDERS FOR PRESIDENT!!!" ( Tweet ) . Retrieved March 29, 2016 – via Twitter .

^ Lynch, David [@DAVID_LYNCH] (April 26, 2016).

"Dear Bernie Sanders, You are for the people. Great good luck to you going forward!!!" ( Tweet ) – via Twitter .

^ a b c Carrol, Rory (June 25, 2018).

"David Lynch: 'You gotta be selfish. It's a terrible thing' " .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on June 24, 2018 . Retrieved June 25, 2018 .

^ Peyser, Eve (June 26, 2018).

"No, David Lynch Didn't Actually Praise Trump" .

Vice News .

Archived from the original on April 20, 2020 . Retrieved March 5, 2020 .

^ "Trump jokes David Lynch's career 'is over' as he quotes Guardian interview" . June 26, 2018.

Archived from the original on November 1, 2020 . Retrieved November 5, 2020 – via YouTube.

^ "David Lynch" .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2020 . Retrieved June 26, 2018 – via Facebook.

^ Sharf, Zack (June 3, 2020).

"David Lynch Adds Black Lives Matter Message to Daily Web Series: 'Peace, Justice, No Fear' " . IndieWire.

^ Sharf, Zack (February 25, 2022).

"David Lynch Condemns Putin: 'All This Death and Destruction Will Come Back to Visit You' " .

Variety . Retrieved March 16, 2022 .

^ Lynch & Rodley 2005 , p. 6.

^ "Filmmaker David Lynch explains how to catch big ideas (Lecture)" . KUOW-FM. Archived from the original on May 31, 2011.

^ a b Lynch, David (October 31, 2013).

"David Lynch on meditation: Heaven is a place on earth" .

New Statesman .

Archived from the original on October 31, 2013 . Retrieved November 2, 2013 .

^ Lynch, David (July 3, 2008).

"The pleasure of life grows" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on March 7, 2016 . Retrieved December 11, 2016 .

^ a b Booth, William (December 2, 2005).

"Yogi Bearer" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 10, 2012 . Retrieved August 27, 2022 .

^ Hoffman, Claire (March 12, 2012).

"David Lynch's Guru and His Art" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on March 12, 2012.

^ Kress, Michael.

"David Lynch's Peace Plan" .

BeliefNet.com .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2010 . Retrieved November 29, 2010 .

^ a b Stevens, Jacqueline; Barkham, Patrick (January 27, 2009).

"And now children, it's time for your yogic flying lesson" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on August 12, 2016 . Retrieved December 11, 2016 .

^ "About Us" .

David Lynch Foundation For Consciousness-Based Education and World Peace .

Archived from the original on January 11, 2025.

^ "David Lynch – John Hagelin Tour Inspires Thousands of College Students on East and West Coasts" . Institute of Science, Technology and Public Policy. 2005.

Archived from the original on July 23, 2012 . Retrieved August 16, 2012 .

^ "Filmmaker David Lynch to Give 2016 Commencement Address at Maharishi University of Management" .

Marketwire (Press release). April 18, 2016. Archived from the original on January 28, 2018 . Retrieved January 28, 2018 .

^ Reimer, Emily (October 30, 2009).

"Fourth Annual David Lynch Weekend for World Peace and Meditation Taking Place in Iowa" .

Paste Magazine .

Archived from the original on November 5, 2009 . Retrieved November 15, 2009 .

^ Hackman, Rose (November 4, 2015).

"David Lynch and Katy Perry promote meditation with Carnegie Hall event" .

The Guardian . Retrieved January 17, 2025 .

^ Mukherjee, Krittivas (February 11, 2008).

"West meets East on guru Mahesh Yogi's funeral pyre" .

Reuters . Archived from the original on January 12, 2012 . Retrieved May 7, 2010 .

^ "David Lynch to shoot film about TM guru Maharishi Mahesh Yogi in India" .

Thaindian News . November 18, 2009. Archived from the original on January 27, 2012 . Retrieved May 7, 2010 .

^ Bychawski, Adam (November 18, 2009).

"David Lynch to make film about Beatles guru Maharishi Mahesh Yogi" .

NME . Archived from the original on April 21, 2016.

^ Pareles, Jon (April 4, 2009).

"Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr Reunite at Radio City" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 8, 2009 . Retrieved August 27, 2022 .

^ "German Documentaries 2010" (PDF) .

german-documentaries.de . March 2010. p. 17. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 19, 2011 . Retrieved May 7, 2010 .

The young filmmaker David Sieveking follows the path of his professional idol, David Lynch, into the world of Transcendental Meditation (TM).

^ Simon, Alissa (February 14, 2010).

"Review: 'David Wants to Fly' " .

Variety . Archived from the original on December 29, 2015 . Retrieved April 1, 2022 .

'David Wants to Fly' follows German writer-helmer David Sieveking on his road to enlightenment, a journey that involves David Lynch, various headquarters of the Transcendental Meditation (TM) movement and the icy source of the Ganges.

^ "Für Lynch bin ich ein Feind" ['To Lynch I am an enemy'] (in German). November 1, 2019. Archived from the original on November 1, 2019 . Retrieved July 17, 2022 .

^ "Beyond The Noise" .

David Lynch Foundation . August 24, 2010.

Archived from the original on September 8, 2010 . Retrieved August 24, 2010 .

^ "List of 2011 documentaries" . Marbella Film Festival. 2011. Archived from the original on March 18, 2012.

^ "Beyond the Noise: My Transcendental Meditation Journey" .

IMDb .

^ "Post" .

awakenedartists . February 5, 2020.

Archived from the original on February 20, 2020 . Retrieved February 20, 2020 .

^ Bergeson, Samantha (April 15, 2022).

"David Lynch Launches $500 Million Transcendental Meditation World Peace Initiative" .

IndieWire . Retrieved April 15, 2022 .

^ Stolworthy, Jacob (August 5, 2024).

"David Lynch has emphysema and can no longer 'leave the house' due to Covid fears" .

The Independent . Retrieved August 5, 2024 .

^ Pulver, Andrew (August 5, 2024).

"David Lynch says he is too ill to direct films in person" .

The Guardian . Retrieved August 5, 2024 .

^ Finan, Eileen (November 14, 2024).

"David Lynch Started Smoking at Age 8 — Now He Needs Oxygen to Walk: 'It's a Big Price to Pay' (Exclusive)" .

People .

Archived from the original on January 16, 2025 . Retrieved November 14, 2024 .

^ Petri, Alexandra E. (August 5, 2024).

"David Lynch Says He Has Emphysema" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ Harrison, Scoop (August 5, 2024).

"David Lynch Suffers from Emphysema, No Longer Able to Direct" . Retrieved August 5, 2024 .

^ D'Alessandro, Anthony (August 5, 2024).

"David Lynch Says 'I Will Never Retire' In Response To Health Reports" .

Deadline Hollywood . Retrieved August 5, 2024 .

^ Pedersen, Erik; D'Alessandro, Anthony (January 16, 2025).

"David Lynch Dies: 'Twin Peaks', 'Blue Velvet', 'Elephant Man' & 'Eraserhead' Visionary Was 78" .

Deadline Hollywood .

Archived from the original on January 16, 2025 . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ Oganesyan, Natalie (February 8, 2025).

"David Lynch Cause Of Death Revealed" .

Deadline Hollywood . Retrieved February 8, 2025 .

^ Jack, Lauren (January 17, 2025).

"David Lynch Quotes: 13 of the visionary director's best quotes" .

The Scotsman .

^ Parkel, Inga Parkel (February 7, 2025).

"David Lynch's cause of death revealed" .

The Independent .

ISSN 1741-9743 .

OCLC 185201487 . Archived from the original on February 8, 2025 . Retrieved February 8, 2025 .

^ Harrison, Scoop (February 7, 2025).

"David Lynch's Cause of Death Revealed" .

Consequence .

Archived from the original on February 8, 2025 . Retrieved February 8, 2025 .

^ D'Alessandro, Anthony (January 16, 2025).

"Naomi Watts Says 'Mulholland Drive' Director David Lynch 'Put Me On The Map' " .

Deadline Hollywood .

Archived from the original on January 17, 2025 . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ Zee, Michaela (January 16, 2025).

"Kyle MacLachlan Says 'I Owe My Entire Career' and Life to 'Blue Velvet' and 'Twin Peaks' Director David Lynch; Naomi Watts Says 'My Heart Is Broken' " .

Variety . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ a b MacLachlan, Kyle (January 19, 2025).

"Opinion | Kyle MacLachlan: How David Lynch Invented Me" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved January 29, 2025 .

^ "David Lynch to Posthumously Receive WGAW's 2025 Laurel Award for Screenwriting Achievement" .

www.wga.org . Retrieved January 29, 2025 .

^ Shafer, Ellise (January 16, 2025).

"Steven Spielberg Honors David Lynch as Hollywood Mourns a Film Icon: 'The World Is Going to Miss Such an Original and Unique Voice' " .

Variety .

Archived from the original on January 16, 2025 . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ Bergeson, Samantha (January 16, 2025).

"Kyle MacLachlan, Naomi Watts, Martin Scorsese, and More Pay Tribute to David Lynch: 'He Made Everything Strange, Uncanny, Revelatory, and New' " .

IndieWire . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ Carson, Lexi (January 16, 2025).

"Steven Spielberg, Ron Howard, James Gunn and More Pay Tribute to David Lynch: He 'Inspired So Many of Us' " .

The Hollywood Reporter . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ Morrow, Brendan (January 16, 2025).

"Steven Spielberg, 'Twin Peaks' star Kyle MacLachlan, more remember David Lynch" .

USA Today . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ a b c d e Bradshaw, Peter (January 16, 2025).

"David Lynch: the great American surrealist who made experimentalism mainstream" .

The Guardian . Retrieved January 17, 2025 .

^ Brody, Richard (January 17, 2025).

"How David Lynch Became an Icon of Cinema" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved March 7, 2025 .

^ "Hall of Fame David Lynch - Bob's Big Boy" .

Bobs Net . Retrieved April 14, 2025 .

^ Gorenflo, Grace (January 27, 2025).

"David Lynch fans memorialize him outside Twede's Cafe" .

Snoqualmie Valley Record . Retrieved April 14, 2025 .

^ a b Wallace, David Foster (September 1997).

"David Lynch Keeps His Head" .

Premiere .

^ Sims, David (January 17, 2025).

"David Lynch Was America's Cinematic Poet" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved March 11, 2025 .

^ Oxford English Dictionary .

^ Hudson, Jennifer (Spring 2004). " 'No Hay Banda, and yet We Hear a Band': David Lynch's Reversal of Coherence in Mulholland Drive ".

Journal of Film and Video .

1 (56): 17– 24.

^ a b Gilbey, Ryan (January 17, 2025).

"David Lynch obituary" .

The Guardian . Retrieved March 11, 2025 .

^ Lim, Dennis (2015).

David Lynch: The Man From Another Place.

^ a b c d Kite, B. (November 13, 2019).

"Remain in light: Mulholland Dr. and the cosmogony of David Lynch" .

BFI . Retrieved March 12, 2025 .

^ De Semiyen, Nick (January 17, 2025).

"David Lynch Conjured Cinematic Dreams – And We All Got To Live In Them" .

Empire . Retrieved March 11, 2025 .

^ Hoad, Phil (January 9, 2023).

"Deviant obsessions: how David Lynch predicted our fragmented times" .

The Guardian . Retrieved March 23, 2025 .

^ "David Lynch's Unsolvable Puzzles" .

The New Yorker . February 6, 2025 . Retrieved March 7, 2025 .

^ Kemp, Sam (September 23, 2021).

"David Lynch tells you how to experience his movies" .

Far Out . Retrieved March 11, 2025 .

^ a b c Joyce, Joseph (January 27, 2025).

"What made late filmmaker David Lynch a true believer" .

Angelus . Retrieved April 1, 2025 .

^ Guan, Frank (September 12, 2017).

"What Does David Lynch Have to Say About Race?" .

Vulture .

Archived from the original on November 15, 2017 . Retrieved November 15, 2017 .

^ a b c Lim, Dennis (June 29, 2018).

"Donald Trump's America and the Visions of David Lynch" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved March 11, 2025 .

^ Fisher, Mark.

"Curtains and Holes: David Lynch" .

Onscenes . Retrieved April 9, 2025 .

^ Olson, Greg (2008).

David Lynch: Beautiful Dark . Scarecrow Press.

^ a b Ferrier, Aimee (January 20, 2023).

"Did avant-garde filmmaker Maya Deren inspire David Lynch's movies?" .

Far Out . Retrieved March 7, 2025 .

^ a b "David Lynch watching Vertigo" .

cinearchive.org . Archived from the original on October 14, 2017 . Retrieved October 13, 2017 .

^ a b Cwik, Greg (April 16, 2015).

"9 Great Films Influenced By Alfred Hitchcock's 'Vertigo' " .

IndieWire .

Archived from the original on December 15, 2019 . Retrieved March 12, 2020 .

^ King, Rob E. (2023).

David Lynch and the American West Essays on Regionalism and Indigeneity in Twin Peaks and the Films . MacFarland. p. 2.

^ Cult, Matt (August 15, 2017).

"Eternal Stories from the Upanishads In The Return" .

25YL . Retrieved March 19, 2025 .

^ Guillen, Michael (January 24, 2007).

"Inland Empire—The San Rafael Film Center Q&A With David Lynch" .

Twitch Film . Archived from the original on September 7, 2008 . Retrieved April 21, 2008 .

^ Egenes, Thomas; Reddy, Kumuda (2002).

Eternal Stories from the Upanishads . New Delhi: Smrti Books. p. 71.

ISBN 978-8-18-796707-1 .

^ Lynch, David (October 13, 2007).

"David Lynch Favorites Movies and FilmMakers" (Interview). Interviewed by Diego Schonhals.

Archived from the original on October 18, 2017 . Retrieved September 28, 2017 .

^ Richardson, Amy (January 17, 2025).

"Long live the wizard, David Lynch" .

Los Angeles Times .

^ Russell, Callum (July 15, 2022).

"The movies that David Lynch "oriented" himself on" .

Artforum . Retrieved March 11, 2025 .

^ "Retro Cinema: Carnival of Souls" .

Moviefone . October 12, 2007. Archived from the original on February 18, 2017 . Retrieved February 17, 2017 .

^ Abrams, Bryan (May 8, 2014).

"Mr. Sunshine: David Lynch, Auteur of the Uncanny, Talks Inspiration" .

The Credits . Retrieved March 11, 2025 .

^ Wise, Damon (August 20, 2018).

"Encore: David Lynch Refuses To Explain 'Twin Peaks: The Return' — "Ideas Came, And This Is What They Presented" " .

Deadline . Retrieved April 8, 2025 .

^ Thomas, Lee (October 12, 2022).

"David Lynch named his five favorite books of all time" .

Far Out .

^ "My Beautiful Broken Brain: The woman who 'video-selfied' her stroke" .

The Independent . March 17, 2016.

Archived from the original on March 27, 2018 . Retrieved March 26, 2018 .

^ "David Lynch, visionary filmmaker behind 'Twin Peaks' and 'Mulholland Drive,' dies at 78" .

AP News . January 16, 2025 . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ Galloway, Stephen (January 16, 2025).

"David Lynch, Auteur Drawn to the Dark and the Dreamlike, Dies at 78" .

The Hollywood Reporter . Retrieved January 17, 2025 .

^ "40 best directors" .

The Guardian . London. 2007.

Archived from the original on July 4, 2007 . Retrieved November 29, 2010 .

^ Ankeny, Jason.

"David Lynch: Biography" . AllMovie.

Archived from the original on December 28, 2020 . Retrieved November 29, 2010 .

^ a b c Ankeny, Jason.

"David Lynch movies, photos, movie reviews, filmography, and biography" .

AllMovie .

Archived from the original on June 27, 2012 . Retrieved August 13, 2012 .

^ "The Straight Story (1999)" .

AFI Catalog of Feature Films . Retrieved February 9, 2022 .

^ Goldstein, Gregg (November 16, 2006).

"Lynch set to self-release 'Empire' " .

The Hollywood Reporter . Associated Press . Retrieved December 23, 2021 .

^ Pierce, Meghan (August 14, 2017).

"Filmmaker David Lynch awarded MacDowell Medal" .

UnionLeader.com . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ "David Lynch, Chrystabell Conjure 'Cellophane Memories' " .

Spin . June 5, 2024 . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ Saperstein, Pat (June 5, 2024).

"David Lynch's New Project Is an Album and Music Video With Chrystabell From 'Twin Peaks: The Return' " .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n "David Lynch Biography" .

Artnet .

Archived from the original on March 13, 2016 . Retrieved March 13, 2016 .

^ "David Lynch, The Air is on Fire" .

Fondation Cartier pour l'Art Contemporain .

Archived from the original on October 10, 2018 . Retrieved October 10, 2018 .

^ "Review: David Lynch Art Exhibit in Copenhagen" .

Elephantjournal.com . January 13, 2011.

Archived from the original on December 4, 2014 . Retrieved December 1, 2014 .

^ "Galerie Chelsea zeigt Drucke von David Lynch" .

SHZ . May 26, 2012.

^ "Münchener Kunstherbst: Highlights in 2-D" (PDF) .

Fresko . March 2012. p. 3.

^ "David Lynch Foto-Ausstellung in Frankfurt" (Press release) (in German).

Epson . November 9, 2013 . Retrieved January 17, 2025 .

^ Palladino, Valentina (March 25, 2014).

"David Lynch is fascinated by abandoned factories" .

The Verge .

^ Brown, Mark (December 12, 2014).

"Damn fine coffee and an individual slice of visual art – two sides of David Lynch" .

The Guardian . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ Crimmins, Peter (September 14, 2014).

"PAFA celebrates alum David Lynch with 'Unified Field' " .

WHYY.org .

Archived from the original on May 17, 2018 . Retrieved January 17, 2025 .

^ Zachariah, Lee (March 16, 2015).

"Between Two Worlds: We Saw David Lynch in Brisbane" .

Vice . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ Sharf, Zack (September 21, 2017).

"The Ultimate David Lynch Art Exhibition Opens in November, Featuring 400 Original Works" .

Indiewire . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ Pagel, David (October 26, 2018).

"Review: David Lynch's paintings reveal insecurities of adolescence and maligned misfits" .

Los Angeles Times .

^ Siegal, Nina (March 14, 2019).

"David Lynch's Art Peers Behind the Facade" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ "A Major David Lynch Exhibition Is Coming to the UK" .

Another Man . March 11, 2019.

Archived from the original on July 29, 2020 . Retrieved March 12, 2020 .

^ "Installations – David Lynch – Squeaky Flies in the Mud – 1 November – 21 December 2019 – Exhibitions" . Sperone Westwater Gallery.

Archived from the original on February 12, 2020 . Retrieved March 12, 2020 .

^ Grandetoft, Kasper (July 12, 2021).

"David Lynch to display photos at Nikolaj Kunsthal in September" .

The Copenhagen Post . Retrieved August 8, 2021 .

Bibliography [ edit ] See also: David Lynch bibliography ——; McKenna, Kristine (2018).

Room to Dream . New York: Random House .

ISBN 978-0-399-58919-5 .

David Lynch: The Art of the Real , the website of a 2012 Berlin conference on the artistic work of David Lynch with all lectures in text form.

Cozzolino, Robert; Rockwell, Alethea (2014).

David Lynch: The Unified Field . Oakland: University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0-520-28396-1 .

Nochimson, Martha (1997).

The Passion of David Lynch: Wild at Heart in Hollywood . Austin: University of Texas Press .

ISBN 978-0-292-75566-6 .

Hughes, David (2001).

The Complete Lynch . London: Virgin .

ISBN 978-0-7535-0598-4 .

Woods, Paul A. (2000).

Weirdsville USA: The Obsessive Universe of David Lynch . London: Plexus .

ISBN 978-0-85965-291-9 .

Kaleta, Kenneth C. (1995).

David Lynch . Twayne's filmmakers series. New York: Twayne .

ISBN 978-0-8057-9323-9 .

Johnson, Jeff (2004).

Pervert in the Pulpit: Morality in the Works of David Lynch . Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Company .

ISBN 978-0-7864-1753-7 .

——, ed. (2007).

Snowmen: David Lynch (in French). Göttingen: Steidl.

ISBN 978-3-86521-467-6 .

Olson, Greg (2008).

David Lynch: Beautiful Dark . Filmmakers. Lanham, Md: Scarecrow Press .

ISBN 978-0-8108-5917-3 .

OCLC 212410238 .

Mactaggart, Allister (2010).

The Film Paintings of David Lynch: Challenging Film Theory . Bristol ; Chicago: Intellect .

ISBN 978-1-84150-332-5 .

Fossali, Pierluigi Basso (2006).

Interpretazione Tra Mondi: il Pensiero Figurale di David Lynch (in Italian). Pisa: ETS.

ISBN 978-88-467-1671-2 .

Bertetto, Paolo (2008).

David Lynch (in Italian). Venezia: Marsilio.

ISBN 978-88-317-9393-3 .

Seknadje, Enrique (2010).

David Lynch: Un Cinéma du Maléfique . Camion noir. Rosières-en-Haye: Camion blanc.

ISBN 978-2-35779-086-5 .

Gleyzon, François-Xavier (2010).

David Lynch in Theory . Prague: Univerzita Karlova v Praze .

ISBN 978-80-7308-317-5 .

Chion, Michel; Lynch, David K. (2006).

David Lynch (2nd ed.). London: BFI.

ISBN 978-1-84457-030-0 .

Barzegar, Ebrahim (July 13, 2015).

"Mulholland Drive: An Intertextual Reading" .

CINEJ Cinema Journal .

4 (1): 62– 78.

doi : 10.5195/cinej.2014.114 .

ISSN 2158-8724 .

Barzegar, Ebrahim (November 11, 2016).

"Labyrinths and Illusions in David Lynch's Mulholland Drive and Inland Empire" .

CINEJ Cinema Journal .

5 (2): 168– 188.

doi : 10.5195/cinej.2016.150 .

ISSN 2158-8724 .

External links [ edit ] David Lynch at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website Official YouTube Channel David Lynch at IMDb David Lynch at Moviefone David Lynch discography at Discogs David lynch at International Songwriters Association Bibliography of books and articles about Lynch (archived 2018) via UC Berkeley Media Resources Center v t e David Lynch Early life Filmography Discography Bibliography Accolades Cultural impact Frequent collaborators Unrealized projects Directorial works Feature films Eraserhead (1977) The Elephant Man (1980) Dune (1984) Blue Velvet (1986) Wild at Heart (1990) Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me (1992) Lost Highway (1997) The Straight Story (1999) Mulholland Drive (2001) Inland Empire (2006) Short films Six Men Getting Sick (Six Times) (1967) The Alphabet (1968) The Grandmother (1970) The Amputee (1974) The Cowboy and the Frenchman (1988) Premonition Following an Evil Deed (1995) Darkened Room (2002) Bug Crawls (2007) Boat (2007) Absurda (2007) Lady Blue Shanghai (2010) Idem Paris (2013) What Did Jack Do?

(2017) Music videos " Wicked Game " (1990) " Longing " (1995) " Shot in the Back of the Head " (2009) " Came Back Haunted " (2013) Concert films Industrial Symphony No. 1 (1990) Duran Duran: Unstaged (2011) Television Twin Peaks (1990–1991) On the Air (1992) Hotel Room (1993) DumbLand (2002) Rabbits (2002) Twin Peaks: The Return (2017) Albums Eraserhead (1982) BlueBOB (2001) The Air Is on Fire (2007) Twin Peaks Music: Season Two Music and More (2007) Polish Night Music (2007) Crazy Clown Time (2011) The Big Dream (2013) Thought Gang (2018) Cellophane Memories (2024) Books Images (1994) Catching the Big Fish (2006) The Air Is on Fire (2007) Dark Night of the Soul (2010) Genealogies of Pain (2011) Room to Dream (2018) Awards by film The Elephant Man Blue Velvet Characters created Frank Booth Dale Cooper Laura Palmer Sheriff Harry Truman Shelly Johnson Donna Hayward Audrey Horne Maddy Ferguson Benjamin Horne Phillip Jeffries Bob Windom Earle Mike Leland Palmer Log Lady The Giant The Man from Another Place / The Arm Tommy Hill Bobby Briggs Related Jennifer Lynch (daughter) " In Heaven " Ronnie Rocket The Angriest Dog in the World Lynch on Lynch (1997) Lost Highway (opera) (2003) The Air Is on Fire (art exhibition) Twin Peaks: The Missing Pieces (2014) David Lynch: The Art Life (2016) Blue Velvet Revisited (2016) Lynch/Oz (2022) David Lynch Foundation Awards for David Lynch v t e Academy Honorary Award 1928–1950 Warner Bros.

/ Charlie Chaplin (1928) Walt Disney (1932) Shirley Temple (1934) D. W. Griffith (1935) The March of Time / W. Howard Greene and Harold Rosson (1936) Edgar Bergen / W. Howard Greene / Museum of Modern Art Film Library / Mack Sennett (1937) J. Arthur Ball / Walt Disney / Deanna Durbin and Mickey Rooney / Gordon Jennings , Jan Domela , Devereaux Jennings, Irmin Roberts, Art Smith, Farciot Edouart , Loyal Griggs , Loren L. Ryder , Harry D. Mills, Louis Mesenkop , Walter Oberst / Oliver T. Marsh and Allen Davey / Harry Warner (1938) Douglas Fairbanks / Judy Garland / William Cameron Menzies / Motion Picture Relief Fund ( Jean Hersholt , Ralph Morgan , Ralph Block , Conrad Nagel ) / Technicolor SA (1939) Bob Hope / Nathan Levinson (1940) Walt Disney , William Garity , John N. A. Hawkins, and the RCA Manufacturing Company / Leopold Stokowski and his associates / Rey Scott / British Ministry of Information (1941) Charles Boyer / Noël Coward / Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (1942) George Pal (1943) Bob Hope / Margaret O'Brien (1944) Republic Studio, Daniel J. Bloomberg , and the Republic Studio Sound Department / Walter Wanger / The House I Live In / Peggy Ann Garner (1945) Harold Russell / Laurence Olivier / Ernst Lubitsch / Claude Jarman Jr.

(1946) James Baskett / Thomas Armat , William Nicholas Selig , Albert E. Smith , and George Kirke Spoor / Bill and Coo / Shoeshine (1947) Walter Wanger / Monsieur Vincent / Sid Grauman / Adolph Zukor (1948) Jean Hersholt / Fred Astaire / Cecil B. DeMille / The Bicycle Thief (1949) Louis B. Mayer / George Murphy / The Walls of Malapaga (1950) 1951–1975 Gene Kelly / Rashomon (1951) Merian C. Cooper / Bob Hope / Harold Lloyd / George Mitchell / Joseph M. Schenck / Forbidden Games (1952) 20th Century-Fox Film Corporation / Bell & Howell Company / Joseph Breen / Pete Smith (1953) Bausch & Lomb Optical Company / Danny Kaye / Kemp Niver / Greta Garbo / Jon Whiteley / Vincent Winter / Gate of Hell (1954) Samurai I: Musashi Miyamoto (1955) Eddie Cantor (1956) Society of Motion Picture and Television Engineers / Gilbert M. "Broncho Billy" Anderson / Charles Brackett / B. B. Kahane (1957) Maurice Chevalier (1958) Buster Keaton / Lee de Forest (1959) Gary Cooper / Stan Laurel / Hayley Mills (1960) William L. Hendricks / Fred L. Metzler / Jerome Robbins (1961) William J. Tuttle (1964) Bob Hope (1965) Yakima Canutt / Y. Frank Freeman (1966) Arthur Freed (1967) John Chambers / Onna White (1968) Cary Grant (1969) Lillian Gish / Orson Welles (1970) Charlie Chaplin (1971) Charles S. Boren / Edward G. Robinson (1972) Henri Langlois / Groucho Marx (1973) Howard Hawks / Jean Renoir (1974) Mary Pickford (1975) 1976–2000 Margaret Booth (1977) Walter Lantz / Laurence Olivier / King Vidor / Museum of Modern Art Department of Film (1978) Hal Elias / Alec Guinness (1979) Henry Fonda (1980) Barbara Stanwyck (1981) Mickey Rooney (1982) Hal Roach (1983) James Stewart / National Endowment for the Arts (1984) Paul Newman / Alex North (1985) Ralph Bellamy (1986) Eastman Kodak Company / National Film Board of Canada (1988) Akira Kurosawa (1989) Sophia Loren / Myrna Loy (1990) Satyajit Ray (1991) Federico Fellini (1992) Deborah Kerr (1993) Michelangelo Antonioni (1994) Kirk Douglas / Chuck Jones (1995) Michael Kidd (1996) Stanley Donen (1997) Elia Kazan (1998) Andrzej Wajda (1999) Jack Cardiff / Ernest Lehman (2000) 2001–present Sidney Poitier / Robert Redford (2001) Peter O'Toole (2002) Blake Edwards (2003) Sidney Lumet (2004) Robert Altman (2005) Ennio Morricone (2006) Robert F. Boyle (2007) Lauren Bacall / Roger Corman / Gordon Willis (2009) Kevin Brownlow / Jean-Luc Godard / Eli Wallach (2010) James Earl Jones / Dick Smith (2011) D. A. Pennebaker / Hal Needham / George Stevens Jr.

(2012) Angela Lansbury / Steve Martin / Piero Tosi (2013) Jean-Claude Carrière / Hayao Miyazaki / Maureen O'Hara (2014) Spike Lee / Gena Rowlands (2015) Jackie Chan / Lynn Stalmaster / Anne V. Coates / Frederick Wiseman (2016) Charles Burnett / Owen Roizman / Donald Sutherland / Agnès Varda (2017) Marvin Levy / Lalo Schifrin / Cicely Tyson (2018) David Lynch / Wes Studi / Lina Wertmüller (2019) Samuel L. Jackson / Elaine May / Liv Ullmann (2021) Euzhan Palcy / Diane Warren / Peter Weir (2022) Angela Bassett / Mel Brooks / Carol Littleton (2023) Quincy Jones / Juliet Taylor (2024) Debbie Allen / Tom Cruise / Wynn Thomas (2025) v t e BAFTA Award for Best Film 1940s The Best Years of Our Lives (1947) Hamlet (1948) Bicycle Thieves (1949) 1950s All About Eve (1950) La Ronde (1951) The Sound Barrier (1952) Forbidden Games (1953) The Wages of Fear (1954) Richard III (1955) Gervaise (1956) The Bridge on the River Kwai (1957) Room at the Top (1958) Ben-Hur (1959) 1960s The Apartment – Billy Wilder (1960) Ballad of a Soldier – Grigori Chukhrai / The Hustler – Robert Rossen (1961) Lawrence of Arabia (1962) Tom Jones (1963) Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb (1964) My Fair Lady (1965) Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?

– Mike Nichols (1966) A Man for All Seasons – Fred Zinnemann (1967) The Graduate – Mike Nichols (1968) Midnight Cowboy – John Schlesinger (1969) 1970s Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid (1970) Sunday Bloody Sunday (1971) Cabaret (1972) Day for Night (1973) Lacombe, Lucien (1974) Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore (1975) One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1976) Annie Hall – Charles H. Joffe and Jack Rollins (1977) Julia – Richard Roth (1978) Manhattan (1979) 1980s The Elephant Man – David Lynch (1980) Chariots of Fire – David Puttnam (1981) Gandhi – Richard Attenborough (1982) Educating Rita – Lewis Gilbert (1983) The Killing Fields – David Puttnam (1984) The Purple Rose of Cairo – Woody Allen and Robert Greenhut (1985) A Room with a View – James Ivory and Ismail Merchant (1986) Jean de Florette – Claude Berri (1987) The Last Emperor – Bernardo Bertolucci and Jeremy Thomas (1988) Dead Poets Society – Peter Weir , Steven Haft , Paul Junger Witt , and Tony Thomas (1989) 1990s Goodfellas – Martin Scorsese , Robert Chartoff , and Irwin Winkler (1990) The Commitments – Alan Parker , Lynda Myles , and Roger Randall-Cutler (1991) Howards End – James Ivory and Ismail Merchant (1992) Schindler's List – Steven Spielberg , Branko Lustig , and Gerald R. Molen (1993) Four Weddings and a Funeral – Mike Newell and Duncan Kenworthy (1994) Sense and Sensibility – Ang Lee and Lindsay Doran (1995) The English Patient – Anthony Minghella and Saul Zaentz (1996) The Full Monty – Peter Cattaneo and Uberto Pasolini (1997) Shakespeare in Love – Donna Gigliotti , Marc Norman , David Parfitt , Harvey Weinstein , and Edward Zwick (1998) American Beauty – Bruce Cohen and Dan Jinks (1999) 2000s Gladiator – David Franzoni , Branko Lustig , and Douglas Wick (2000) The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring – Peter Jackson , Barrie M. Osborne , Tim Sanders , and Fran Walsh (2001) The Pianist – Robert Benmussa, Roman Polanski , and Alain Sarde (2002) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King – Peter Jackson , Barrie M. Osborne , and Fran Walsh (2003) The Aviator – Sandy Climan , Charles Evans Jr.

, Graham King , and Michael Mann (2004) Brokeback Mountain – Diana Ossana and James Schamus (2005) The Queen – Andy Harries , Christine Langan , and Tracey Seaward (2006) Atonement – Tim Bevan , Eric Fellner , and Paul Webster (2007) Slumdog Millionaire – Christian Colson (2008) The Hurt Locker – Kathryn Bigelow , Mark Boal , Nicolas Chartier , and Greg Shapiro (2009) 2010s The King's Speech – Iain Canning , Emile Sherman , and Gareth Unwin (2010) The Artist – Thomas Langmann (2011) Argo – Ben Affleck , George Clooney , and Grant Heslov (2012) 12 Years a Slave – Dede Gardner , Anthony Katagas , Jeremy Kleiner , Steve McQueen , and Brad Pitt (2013) Boyhood – Richard Linklater and Cathleen Sutherland (2014) The Revenant – Steve Golin , Alejandro G. Iñárritu , Arnon Milchan , Mary Parent , and Keith Redmon (2015) La La Land – Fred Berger , Jordan Horowitz , and Marc Platt (2016) Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri – Graham Broadbent , Peter Czernin , and Martin McDonagh (2017) Roma – Nicolás Celis , Alfonso Cuarón , and Gabriela Rodríguez (2018) 1917 – Pippa Harris , Callum McDougall, Sam Mendes , and Jayne-Ann Tenggren (2019) 2020s Nomadland – Mollye Asher, Dan Janvey, Frances McDormand , Peter Spears , and Chloé Zhao (2020) The Power of the Dog – Jane Campion , Iain Canning , Roger Frappier , Tanya Seghatchian , and Emile Sherman (2021) All Quiet on the Western Front – Malte Grunert (2022) Oppenheimer – Christopher Nolan , Charles Roven , and Emma Thomas (2023) Conclave – Tessa Ross , Juliette Howell , and Michael A. Jackman (2024) v t e Boston Society of Film Critics Award for Best Director Roman Polanski (1980) Steven Spielberg (1981) Steven Spielberg (1982) Paolo Taviani and Vittorio Taviani (1983) Bertrand Tavernier (1984) John Huston (1985) David Lynch / Oliver Stone (1986) Stanley Kubrick (1987) Stephen Frears (1988) Woody Allen (1989) Martin Scorsese (1990) Jonathan Demme (1991) Robert Altman (1992) Steven Spielberg (1993) Quentin Tarantino (1994) Ang Lee (1995) Mike Leigh (1996) Curtis Hanson (1997) John Boorman (1998) David O. Russell (1999) Cameron Crowe (2000) David Lynch (2001) Roman Polanski (2002) Sofia Coppola (2003) Zhang Yimou (2004) Ang Lee (2005) Martin Scorsese (2006) Julian Schnabel (2007) Gus Van Sant (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) David Fincher (2010) Martin Scorsese (2011) Kathryn Bigelow (2012) Steve McQueen (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) Todd Haynes (2015) Damien Chazelle (2016) Paul Thomas Anderson (2017) Lynne Ramsay (2018) Bong Joon-ho (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Ryusuke Hamaguchi (2021) Todd Field (2022) Jonathan Glazer (2023) Sean Baker (2024) v t e Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Director 1946–1975 René Clément (1946) René Clément (1949) Luis Buñuel (1951) Christian-Jaque (1952) Jules Dassin / Sergei Vasilyev (1955) Sergei Yutkevich (1956) Robert Bresson (1957) Ingmar Bergman (1958) François Truffaut (1959) Yuliya Solntseva (1961) Liviu Ciulei (1965) Sergei Yutkevich (1966) Ferenc Kósa (1967) Vojtěch Jasný / Glauber Rocha (1969) John Boorman (1970) Miklós Jancsó (1972) Michel Brault / Costa-Gavras (1975) 1976–2000 Ettore Scola (1976) Nagisa Ōshima (1978) Terrence Malick (1979) Werner Herzog (1982) Robert Bresson / Andrei Tarkovsky (1983) Bertrand Tavernier (1984) André Téchiné (1985) Martin Scorsese (1986) Wim Wenders (1987) Fernando Solanas (1988) Emir Kusturica (1989) Pavel Lungin (1990) Joel Coen (1991) Robert Altman (1992) Mike Leigh (1993) Nanni Moretti (1994) Mathieu Kassovitz (1995) Joel Coen (1996) Wong Kar-wai (1997) John Boorman (1998) Pedro Almodóvar (1999) Edward Yang (2000) 2001–present Joel Coen / David Lynch (2001) Paul Thomas Anderson / Im Kwon-taek (2002) Gus Van Sant (2003) Tony Gatlif (2004) Michael Haneke (2005) Alejandro González Iñárritu (2006) Julian Schnabel (2007) Nuri Bilge Ceylan (2008) Brillante Mendoza (2009) Mathieu Amalric (2010) Nicolas Winding Refn (2011) Carlos Reygadas (2012) Amat Escalante (2013) Bennett Miller (2014) Hou Hsiao-hsien (2015) Olivier Assayas / Cristian Mungiu (2016) Sofia Coppola (2017) Paweł Pawlikowski (2018) Dardenne brothers (2019) Leos Carax (2021) Park Chan-wook (2022) Tran Anh Hung (2023) Miguel Gomes (2024) Kleber Mendonça Filho (2025) v t e Chicago Film Critics Association Award for Best Director Robert Zemeckis (1988) Spike Lee (1989) Martin Scorsese (1990) Jonathan Demme (1991) Robert Altman (1992) Steven Spielberg (1993) Quentin Tarantino (1994) Oliver Stone (1995) Joel Coen (1996) Curtis Hanson (1997) Terrence Malick (1998) Sam Mendes (1999) Steven Soderbergh (2000) David Lynch (2001) Todd Haynes (2002) Peter Jackson (2003) Clint Eastwood (2004) David Cronenberg (2005) Martin Scorsese (2006) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007) Danny Boyle (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) David Fincher (2010) Terrence Malick (2011) Kathryn Bigelow (2012) Steve McQueen (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) George Miller (2015) Barry Jenkins (2016) Christopher Nolan (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Bong Joon-ho (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert (2022) Christopher Nolan (2023) RaMell Ross (2024) v t e Golden Lion for Lifetime Achievement Luis Buñuel (1969) Orson Welles (1970) John Ford / Marcel Carné / Ingmar Bergman (1971) Charlie Chaplin / Anatoli Golovnya / Billy Wilder (1972) Alessandro Blasetti / Luis Buñuel / Frank Capra / George Cukor / Jean-Luc Godard / Alexander Kluge / Akira Kurosawa / Michael Powell / Satyajit Ray / King Vidor / Sergei Yutkevich / Cesare Zavattini (1982) Michelangelo Antonioni (1983) Federico Fellini (1985) Paolo and Vittorio Taviani (1986) Luigi Comencini / Joseph L. Mankiewicz (1987) Joris Ivens (1988) Robert Bresson (1989) Miklós Jancsó / Marcello Mastroianni (1990) Mario Monicelli / Gian Maria Volonté (1991) Francis Ford Coppola / Jeanne Moreau / Paolo Villaggio (1992) Claudia Cardinale / Robert De Niro / Roman Polanski / Steven Spielberg (1993) Suso Cecchi d'Amico / Ken Loach / Al Pacino (1994) Woody Allen / Giuseppe De Santis / Goffredo Lombardo / Ennio Morricone / Alain Resnais / Martin Scorsese / Alberto Sordi / Monica Vitti (1995) Robert Altman / Vittorio Gassman / Dustin Hoffman / Michèle Morgan (1996) Gérard Depardieu / Stanley Kubrick / Alida Valli (1997) Warren Beatty / Sophia Loren / Andrzej Wajda (1998) Jerry Lewis (1999) Clint Eastwood (2000) Éric Rohmer (2001) Dino Risi (2002) Dino De Laurentiis / Omar Sharif (2003) Manoel de Oliveira / Stanley Donen (2004) Hayao Miyazaki / Stefania Sandrelli (2005) David Lynch (2006) Tim Burton (2007) Ermanno Olmi (2008) John Lasseter (2009) John Woo (2010) Marco Bellocchio (2011) Francesco Rosi (2012) William Friedkin (2013) Thelma Schoonmaker / Frederick Wiseman (2014) Bertrand Tavernier (2015) Jean-Paul Belmondo / Jerzy Skolimowski (2016) Jane Fonda / Robert Redford (2017) David Cronenberg / Vanessa Redgrave (2018) Pedro Almodóvar / Julie Andrews (2019) Ann Hui / Tilda Swinton (2020) Roberto Benigni / Jamie Lee Curtis (2021) Catherine Deneuve / Paul Schrader (2022) Liliana Cavani / Tony Leung Chiu-wai (2023) Sigourney Weaver / Peter Weir (2024) Kim Novak / Werner Herzog (2025) v t e Laurel Award for Screenwriting Achievement 1950s Sonya Levien (1952) Dudley Nichols (1953) Robert Riskin (1954) Julius Epstein & Philip Epstein and Albert Hackett & Frances Goodrich (1955) Charles Brackett & Billy Wilder (1956) John Lee Mahin (1957) Nunnally Johnson (1958) Norman Krasna (1959) 1960s George Seaton (1960) Philip Dunne (1961) Joseph L. Mankiewicz (1962) John Huston (1963) Sidney Buchman (1964) Isobel Lennart (1965) Richard Brooks (1966) Casey Robinson (1967) Carl Foreman (1968) Dalton Trumbo (1969) 1970s James Poe (1970) Ernest Lehman (1971) William Rose (1972) Paddy Chayefsky (1973) Preston Sturges (1974) Michael Wilson (1975) Samson Raphaelson (1976) Edward Anhalt (1977) Neil Simon (1978) Billy Wilder & I. A. L. Diamond (1979) 1980s Ben Hecht (1980) Paul Osborn (1981) Lamar Trotti (1982) Melville Shavelson , Jack Rose , Norman Panama , and Melvin Frank (1983) William Goldman (1984) Waldo Salt (1985) Woody Allen (1986) Irving Ravetch & Harriet Frank Jr.

(1987) Ring Lardner Jr.

(1988) Donald Ogden Stewart (1989) 1990s Alvin Sargent (1990) Frank Pierson (1991) Horton Foote (1992) Ruth Prawer Jhabvala (1993) Charles Bennett (1994) Daniel Taradash (1995) Robert Towne (1996) Bo Goldman (1997) Paul Schrader (1998) Jean-Claude Carrière (1999) 2000s Betty Comden and Adolph Green (2000) Blake Edwards (2001) Mel Brooks (2002) John Michael Hayes (2003) David Mamet (2004) Lawrence Kasdan (2005) Robert Benton (2006) Budd Schulberg (2007) No Award (2008) Barry Levinson (2009) 2010s Steven Zaillian (2010) Eric Roth (2011) Tom Stoppard (2012) Paul Mazursky (2013) Harold Ramis (2014) Elaine May (2015) Oliver Stone (2016) James L. Brooks (2017) Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel (2018) Nancy Meyers (2019) 2020s No Award (2020) No Award (2021) Charlie Kaufman (2022) Walter Hill (2023) David Lynch (2024) v t e Life Career Award Fritz Lang (1976) Samuel Z. Arkoff (1977) Christopher Lee (1979) Gene Roddenberry (1980) William Shatner (1980) John Agar (1981) Ray Harryhausen (1982) Martin B. Cohen (1983) Vincent Price (1986) Leonard Nimoy (1987) Roger Corman (1988) Ray Walston (1990) Arnold Schwarzenegger (1992) David Lynch (1993) Alfred Hitchcock (1994) Steve Reeves (1994) Whit Bissell (1994) Joel Silver (1995) Richard Fleischer (1995) Sean Connery (1995) Wes Craven (1995) Albert R. Broccoli (1996) Edward R. Pressman (1996) Harrison Ford (1996) Dino De Laurentiis (1997) John Frankenheimer (1997) Sylvester Stallone (1997) James Coburn (1998) James Karen (1998) Michael Crichton (1998) Nathan Juran (1999) Dick Van Dyke (2000) George Barris (2000) Brian Grazer (2001) Robert Englund (2001) Drew Struzan (2002) Stan Lee (2002) Kurt Russell (2003) Sid and Marty Krofft (2003) Blake Edwards (2004) Stephen J. Cannell (2005) Tom Rothman (2005) Robert Halmi (2008) Lance Henriksen (2009) Irvin Kershner (2010) Bert Gordon (2011) Michael Biehn (2011) Frank Oz (2012) James Remar (2012) Jonathan Frakes (2013) Malcolm McDowell (2014) Nichelle Nichols (2016) Lee Majors (2017) Michael Gruskoff (2019/2020) Kathryn Leigh Scott (2021/2022) Jodie Foster (2022/2023) v t e National Society of Film Critics Award for Best Director 1966–2000 Michelangelo Antonioni (1966) Ingmar Bergman (1967) Ingmar Bergman (1968) François Truffaut (1969) Ingmar Bergman (1970) Bernardo Bertolucci (1971) Luis Buñuel (1972) François Truffaut (1973) Francis Ford Coppola (1974) Robert Altman (1975) Martin Scorsese (1976) Luis Buñuel (1977) Terrence Malick (1978) Woody Allen / Robert Benton (1979) Martin Scorsese (1980) Louis Malle (1981) Steven Spielberg (1982) Paolo Taviani and Vittorio Taviani (1983) Robert Bresson (1984) John Huston (1985) David Lynch (1986) John Boorman (1987) Philip Kaufman (1988) Gus Van Sant (1989) Martin Scorsese (1990) David Cronenberg (1991) Clint Eastwood (1992) Steven Spielberg (1993) Quentin Tarantino (1994) Mike Figgis (1995) Lars von Trier (1996) Curtis Hanson (1997) Steven Soderbergh (1998) Mike Leigh (1999) Steven Soderbergh (2000) 2001–present Robert Altman (2001) Roman Polanski (2002) Clint Eastwood (2003) Zhang Yimou (2004) David Cronenberg (2005) Paul Greengrass (2006) Paul Thomas Anderson (2007) Mike Leigh (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) David Fincher (2010) Terrence Malick (2011) Michael Haneke (2012) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) Todd Haynes (2015) Barry Jenkins (2016) Greta Gerwig (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Greta Gerwig (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Ryusuke Hamaguchi (2021) Charlotte Wells (2022) Jonathan Glazer (2023) Payal Kapadia (2024) v t e Online Film Critics Society Award for Best Director James Cameron (1997) Steven Spielberg (1998) Sam Mendes (1999) Darren Aronofsky (2000) David Lynch (2001) Peter Jackson (2002) Peter Jackson (2003) Michel Gondry (2004) David Cronenberg (2005) Martin Scorsese (2006) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007) Christopher Nolan (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) David Fincher (2010) Terrence Malick (2011) Paul Thomas Anderson (2012) Alfonso Cuarón (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) George Miller (2015) Barry Jenkins (2016) Christopher Nolan (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Bong Joon-ho (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert (2022) Christopher Nolan (2023) Coralie Fargeat (2024) v t e Online Film Critics Society Award for Best Original Screenplay Paul Thomas Anderson (1997) Andrew Niccol (1998) Charlie Kaufman (1999) Cameron Crowe (2000) Alejandro Amenábar / David Lynch (2001) Todd Haynes (2002) Sofia Coppola (2003) Charlie Kaufman (2004) George Clooney and Grant Heslov (2005) Guillermo del Toro (2006) Diablo Cody (2007) Jim Reardon and Andrew Stanton (2008) Quentin Tarantino (2009) Christopher Nolan (2010) Woody Allen (2011) Wes Anderson and Roman Coppola (2012) Spike Jonze (2013) Wes Anderson (2014) Tom McCarthy and Josh Singer (2015) Taylor Sheridan (2016) Jordan Peele (2017) Boots Riley (2018) Bong Joon-ho and Han Jin-won (2019) Emerald Fennell (2020) Michael Sarnoski and Vanessa Block (2021) Martin McDonagh (2022) David Hemingson (2023) Sean Baker (2024) v t e San Diego Film Critics Society Award for Best Director Joel Coen (1996) James Cameron (1997) John Madden (1998) David Lynch (1999) Cameron Crowe (2000) Terry Zwigoff (2001) Jill Sprecher (2002) Peter Jackson (2003) Clint Eastwood (2004) Bennett Miller (2005) Clint Eastwood (2006) Paul Thomas Anderson (2007) Danny Boyle (2008) Quentin Tarantino (2009) Darren Aronofsky (2010) Nicolas Winding Refn (2011) Ben Affleck (2012) Alfonso Cuarón (2013) Dan Gilroy (2014) George Miller (2015) David Mackenzie (2016) Greta Gerwig (2017) Debra Granik (2018) Benny and Josh Safdie (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Daniel Kwan and Daniel Scheinert (2022) Martin Scorsese (2023) Denis Villeneuve (2024) v t e Saturn Award for Best Guest Starring Role on Television Merged Jimmy Smits (2008) Leonard Nimoy (2009) Richard Dreyfuss / Joe Manganiello (2010) Tom Skerritt (2011) Yvonne Strahovski (2012) Robert Forster (2013) Wentworth Miller (2014) William Shatner (2015) Jeffrey Dean Morgan (2016) David Lynch (2017) Jeffrey Dean Morgan (2018/2019) Jon Cryer (2019/2020) Jennifer Tilly / Hayden Christensen (2021/2022) Paul Wesley (2022/2023) Mark Hamill (2023/2024) v t e Toronto Film Critics Association Award for Best Director Atom Egoyan (1997) Steven Spielberg (1998) Paul Thomas Anderson (1999) Steven Soderbergh (2000) David Lynch (2001) Paul Thomas Anderson (2002) Peter Jackson (2003) Michel Gondry (2004) David Cronenberg (2005) Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne / Stephen Frears (2006) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen (2007) Jonathan Demme (2008) Kathryn Bigelow (2009) David Fincher (2010) Terrence Malick (2011) Paul Thomas Anderson (2012) Alfonso Cuarón (2013) Richard Linklater (2014) Todd Haynes (2015) Maren Ade (2016) Greta Gerwig (2017) Alfonso Cuarón (2018) Bong Joon-ho (2019) Chloé Zhao (2020) Jane Campion (2021) Charlotte Wells (2022) Jonathan Glazer (2023) RaMell Ross (2024) v t e Cannes Film Festival jury presidents 1946–1975 Georges Huisman (1946) Georges Huisman (1947) Georges Huisman (1949) André Maurois (1951) Maurice Genevoix (1952) Jean Cocteau (1953) Jean Cocteau (1954) Marcel Pagnol (1955) Maurice Lehmann (1956) André Maurois (1957) Marcel Achard (1958) Marcel Achard (1959) Georges Simenon (1960) Jean Giono (1961) Tetsurō Furukaki (1962) Armand Salacrou (1963) Fritz Lang (1964) Olivia de Havilland (1965) Sophia Loren (1966) Alessandro Blasetti (1967) André Chamson (1968) Luchino Visconti (1969) Miguel Ángel Asturias (1970) Michèle Morgan (1971) Joseph Losey (1972) Ingrid Bergman (1973) René Clair (1974) Jeanne Moreau (1975) 1976–2000 Tennessee Williams (1976) Roberto Rossellini (1977) Alan J. Pakula (1978) Françoise Sagan (1979) Kirk Douglas (1980) Jacques Deray (1981) Giorgio Strehler (1982) William Styron (1983) Dirk Bogarde (1984) Miloš Forman (1985) Sydney Pollack (1986) Yves Montand (1987) Ettore Scola (1988) Wim Wenders (1989) Bernardo Bertolucci (1990) Roman Polanski (1991) Gérard Depardieu (1992) Louis Malle (1993) Clint Eastwood (1994) Jeanne Moreau (1995) Francis Ford Coppola (1996) Isabelle Adjani (1997) Martin Scorsese (1998) David Cronenberg (1999) Luc Besson (2000) 2001–present Liv Ullmann (2001) David Lynch (2002) Patrice Chéreau (2003) Quentin Tarantino (2004) Emir Kusturica (2005) Wong Kar-wai (2006) Stephen Frears (2007) Sean Penn (2008) Isabelle Huppert (2009) Tim Burton (2010) Robert De Niro (2011) Nanni Moretti (2012) Steven Spielberg (2013) Jane Campion (2014) Joel and Ethan Coen (2015) George Miller (2016) Pedro Almodóvar (2017) Cate Blanchett (2018) Alejandro González Iñárritu (2019) Spike Lee (2021) Vincent Lindon (2022) Ruben Östlund (2023) Greta Gerwig (2024) Juliette Binoche (2025) v t e Venice Film Festival jury presidents 1935–1968 Giuseppe Volpi (1935) Giuseppe Volpi (1936) Giuseppe Volpi (1937) Giuseppe Volpi (1938) Giuseppe Volpi (1939) Vinicio Marinucci (1947) Luigi Chiarini (1948) Mario Gromo (1949) Mario Gromo (1950) Mario Gromo (1951) Mario Gromo (1952) Eugenio Montale (1953) Ignazio Silone (1954) Mario Gromo (1955) John Grierson (1956) René Clair (1957) Jean Grémillon (1958) Luigi Chiarini (1959) Marcel Achard (1960) Filippo Sacchi (1961) Luigi Chiarini (1962) Arturo Lanocita (1963) Mario Soldati (1964) Carlo Bo (1965) Giorgio Bassani (1966) Alberto Moravia (1967) Guido Piovene (1968) 1980–2000 Suso Cecchi d'Amico (1980) Italo Calvino (1981) Marcel Carné (1982) Bernardo Bertolucci (1983) Michelangelo Antonioni (1984) Krzysztof Zanussi (1985) Alain Robbe-Grillet (1986) Irene Papas (1987) Sergio Leone (1988) Andrei Smirnov (1989) Gore Vidal (1990) Gian Luigi Rondi (1991) Dennis Hopper / Jiří Menzel (1992) Peter Weir (1993) David Lynch (1994) Jorge Semprún (1995) Roman Polanski (1996) Jane Campion (1997) Ettore Scola (1998) Emir Kusturica (1999) Miloš Forman (2000) 2001–present Nanni Moretti (2001) Gong Li (2002) Mario Monicelli (2003) John Boorman (2004) Dante Ferretti (2005) Catherine Deneuve (2006) Zhang Yimou (2007) Wim Wenders (2008) Ang Lee (2009) Quentin Tarantino (2010) Darren Aronofsky (2011) Michael Mann (2012) Bernardo Bertolucci (2013) Alexandre Desplat (2014) Alfonso Cuarón (2015) Sam Mendes (2016) Annette Bening (2017) Guillermo del Toro (2018) Lucrecia Martel (2019) Cate Blanchett (2020) Bong Joon-ho (2021) Julianne Moore (2022) Damien Chazelle (2023) Isabelle Huppert (2024) Alexander Payne (2025) v t e Transcendental Meditation Programs History of Transcendental Meditation Maharishi Peace Palace Maharishi Vedic Approach to Health Transcendental Meditation in education Transcendental Meditation technique Organizations David Lynch Foundation (US) Global Country of World Peace Maharishi Heaven on Earth Development Natural Law Party Natural Law Party of Canada Natural Law Party (United States) Natural Law Party (Trinidad and Tobago) Transcendental Meditation movement Education Maharishi Institute of Management (IN) Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Vedic University (IN) Maharishi School (UK) Maharishi School of the Age of Enlightenment (US) Maharishi University of Management and Technology (IN) Maharishi International University (US) Maharishi Vidya Mandir Schools (IN) People Bevan Morris Brahmananda Saraswati David Lynch David Orme-Johnson Deepak Chopra John Hagelin Nancy Cooke de Herrera Maharishi Mahesh Yogi Nancy Lonsdorf Prudence Farrow Tony Nader The Beatles In Bangor In India Places Fairfield, Iowa (US) Golden Domes (US) Hararit (IL) Kolleg St. Ludwig (NL) Maharishi Vedic City, Iowa (US) Media Catching the Big Fish David Wants to Fly KSCI TM and Cult Mania Transcendence: Healing and Transformation Through Transcendental Meditation Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz RKD Artists Museum of Modern Art Photographers' Identities FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=David_Lynch&oldid=1306533544 " Categories : David Lynch 1946 births 2025 deaths 20th-century American male musicians 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American screenwriters 21st-century American male musicians 21st-century American male writers 21st-century American screenwriters 21st-century American memoirists Academy Honorary Award recipients AFI Conservatory alumni American comic strip cartoonists American experimental filmmakers American experimental musicians American film producers American founders American furniture designers American horror film directors American libertarians American lyricists American male painters American male screenwriters American male television actors American male voice actors American music video directors American people of Finnish descent American people of Swedish descent American philanthropists American rock musicians American surrealist artists American television directors Animators from Montana Artists from Missoula, Montana Burials at Hollywood Forever Cemetery California Democrats Cannes Film Festival Award for Best Director winners César Award winners Counterculture of the 1970s Counterculture of the 1980s Counterculture of the 1990s Counterculture of the 2000s Counterculture of the 2010s Counterculture of the 2020s Deaths from emphysema Directors of Palme d'Or winners European Film Awards winners (people) Film directors from Los Angeles Film directors from Montana Founders of charities George Washington University Corcoran School alumni Golden Lion for Lifetime Achievement recipients Male actors from Los Angeles Male actors from Montana Male actors from Philadelphia Musicians from Los Angeles Musicians from Missoula, Montana Musicians from Philadelphia Officers of the Legion of Honour Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine Arts alumni People from Missoula, Montana Postmodernist filmmakers Respiratory disease deaths in California Sacred Bones Records artists School of the Museum of Fine Arts at Tufts alumni Screenwriters from California Screenwriters from Montana Surrealist filmmakers Television producers from California Television producers from Pennsylvania American television show creators Tobacco-related deaths Transcendental Meditation exponents Writers from Los Angeles Writers from Missoula, Montana Writers from Philadelphia Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from March 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from January 2025 Articles with hAudio microformats Biography with signature Articles with hCards CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 07:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents David Lynch 85 languages Add topic

