Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 1.1 Cystic Fibrosis Foundation 2 Criticism of venture philanthropy in education 3 See also 4 Notes and references Toggle the table of contents Venture philanthropy 7 languages العربية Башҡортса Deutsch Eesti Français Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Impact investment used for philanthropy Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Venture philanthropy is a type of impact investment that takes concepts and techniques from venture capital finance and business management and applies them to achieving philanthropic goals.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The term was first used in 1969 by John D. Rockefeller III to describe an imaginative and risk-taking approach to philanthropy that may be undertaken by charitable organizations.

[ 3 ] Examples [ edit ] In the year 2000, the Chicago Public Education Fund became the only venture philanthropy in the United States focused on a single urban school district, which served as a catalyst and strategic investment partner for Mayor Richard M. Daley and four Chicago Public Schools (CPS) administrations.

[ 4 ] Other examples of this type of venture philanthropy are New Profit Inc.

, the Robin Hood Foundation , Tipping Point Community , Cure Alzheimer's Fund , The Redstone Acceleration & Innovation Network (TRAIN) initiative from FasterCures , [ 5 ] the Asian Venture Philanthropy Network (AVPN), Social Ventures Australia (SVA) in Australia, [ 6 ] the danone communities, [ 2 ] and the European Venture Philanthropy Association (EVPA).

Cystic Fibrosis Foundation [ edit ] In the late 1990s the Bethesda-based Cystic Fibrosis Foundation (CFF), wanting to take more direct action toward finding treatments for cystic fibrosis (CF) beyond its traditional approach of funding basic research at universities, invested in a small California biotechnology firm to help fund the discovery and development of the drug that twenty years later (January 2012) was approved as Kalydeco .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Unlike other drugs that were available that just address symptoms of CF, the drug candidate was intended to address the underlying cause of CF.

[ 7 ] The company in which CFF invested was Aurora Biosciences ; CFF provided $30 million for Aurora to identify and develop up to three drug candidates.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] The unusual nature of the arrangement was widely noted.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] In 2001, Aurora was acquired by Vertex Pharmaceuticals , [ 13 ] but CFF continued to fund development of the CF drug candidates. That funding eventually grew to $150 million, [ 13 ] much of which was raised for the CFF by Joe O’Donnell, a Boston businessman whose son died of CF.

[ 14 ] When Vertex started selling Kalydeco, it priced it at about $300,000 a year and promised to provide it free to anyone in the US who was uninsured or whose insurance would not cover it. It justified the price—one of the highest in the world for any drug—by explaining that on the one hand, that it can only treat about 4% of CF patients, or about 3,000 people worldwide; as it was only approved for adults and children six and older, there are only about 2,400 people eligible to receive it; with that few people, it needed a high price in order to pay for the research to create it as well as its other programs, which include a drug candidate that could treat many more people with CF. It also pointed out the strong efficacy of the drug, and laid out the costs of managing CF that would be saved for people that the drug could treat; those costs include repeated hospitalizations and lung transplants.

[ 15 ] Nonetheless the high price led to sharp criticism of Vertex and the CFF.

[ 7 ] [ 15 ] Twenty-nine physicians and scientists working with people with cystic fibrosis wrote to the CEO of Vertex Pharmaceuticals to plead for lower prices.

[ 16 ] CFF made the investment in exchange for a promise of royalties paid on sales of any drug it funded that made it to market; in 2014 it sold the future royalty stream to Royalty Pharma , a royalty fund investment company, for $3.3 billion, and said that it would use the funds to invest yet more in research and clinical trials for cystic fibrosis treatments.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] In the course of working out the deal with Aurora in 2000, CFF included a clause in the agreement that allowed them to take control of the intellectual property if Aurora stopped developing any drug that had been discovered. CFF struck a similar agreement with the company, Altus Pharmaceuticals, to fund development of a recombinant enzyme that could treat pancreatic disease in people with cystic fibrosis. When Altus reported to CFF that it did not have funds to continue developing the drug, CFF seized control of the asset and eventually licensed it to Alnara Pharmaceuticals, which developed the drug further and was acquired by Eli Lilly in 2010.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Criticism of venture philanthropy in education [ edit ] UW-Madison Professor Emeritus Kenneth Zeichner wrote a paper criticizing the role of the NewSchools Venture Fund [ 19 ] in bringing deregulation and market -based practices into schools in the US .

[ 20 ] Lois Weiner writing in Jacobin criticized teachers' unions for taking money from the Gates Foundation .

[ 21 ] Others have argued that venture philanthropy often suffers from a lack of accountability, with projects prioritized more for their measurable metrics than for genuine long-term change, leading to a cycle of publicity-driven initiatives, in particular in education, that fail to address the underlying systemic issues facing society.

[ 22 ] See also [ edit ] Effective altruism Impact investment Philanthrocapitalism Notes and references [ edit ] ^ " 'Venture philanthropy' creating a buzz - Business - Forbes.com | NBC News" .

NBC News . October 21, 2014. Archived from the original on 2014-10-21.

^ a b Leborgne-Bonassié, Marie; Coletti, Michele; Sansone, Giuliano (2019). "What do venture philanthropy organisations seek in social enterprises?".

Business Strategy and the Development .

2 (4): 349– 357.

doi : 10.1002/bsd2.66 .

ISSN 2572-3170 .

S2CID 197889487 .

^ Helmut K. Anheier; Stefan Toeple, eds. (2009-11-24).

International Encyclopedia of Civil Society . Springer. p. 1606.

ISBN 9780387939964 .

^ "Janet Knupp" .

Chicago Public Education Fund . Retrieved 2019-06-24 .

^ Faster Cures May 7, 2015 Press release: Venture philanthropy gains steam, pushes promising science through to patients ^ "Social Ventures Australia | Insights and action to alleviate disadvantage" .

Social Ventures Australia . Retrieved 2019-06-18 .

^ a b c Brady Dennis (2 July 2015), "Are risks worth the rewards when nonprofits act like venture capitalists?" , Washington Post , retrieved 19 July 2015 ^ a b Beall R. Straight talk with... Robert Beall. Interviewed by Elie Dolgin. Nat Med. 2012 Mar 6;18(3):335.

PMID 22395687 ^ a b Marshall E. Disease Group Invests in Do-It-Yourself Drugs. Science. 2000 Jun 9;288(5472):1715b-7b.

PMID 17836682 ^ a b Staff, Bioprocessing Online. June 5, 2000 Aurora Biosciences Receives Funding from the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation ^ Matt Fleisher-Black for Corporate Counsel. June 2002.

Patient, Heal Thyself ^ a b Lauren Arcuri Ware for the Robb Report.  April 1, 2014 Venture Philanthropy: A New Driver for Research ^ a b c Andrew Pollack for the New York Times. Nov 19, 2014 Deal by Cystic Fibrosis Foundation Raises Cash and Some Concern ^ Brian McGrory for the Boston Globe. Feb 09, 2012 Driven by loss, father inspires tireless pursuit of a cure ^ a b Barry Werth  for MIT Technology Review. October 22, 2013 A Tale of  Two Drugs ^ David M. Orenstein; Paul M. Quinton; Brian P. O'Sullivan; Carlos E. Milla; Mark Pian; et al. (9 July 2012), Letter to Jeff Leiden, CEO of Vertex Pharmaceuticals (PDF) , archived from the original (PDF) on 14 July 2015 , retrieved 19 July 2015 ^ "Alnara's Late-Stage Pancreatic Enzyme Drives Lilly Acquisition" .

BioWorld . July 6, 2010.

^ Ledford, H (20 July 2011). "Charities seek cut of drug royalties".

Nature .

475 (7356): 275– 6.

doi : 10.1038/475275a .

PMID 21776052 .

S2CID 205066131 .

^ "NewSchools Venture Fund" .

NewSchools Venture Fund .

^ Staff, UW-Madison School of Education News June 20, 2014 Paper co-authored by Zeichner examines growing role of venture philanthropy ^ Lois Weiner for The Jacobin. September, 2013 This Labor Day, Thank a Teacher: Teacher unions offer our best shot at revitalizing the labor movement ^ Ugazio, Giuseppe; Maricic, Milos, eds. (2025).

The Routledge handbook of artificial intelligence and philanthropy . Abingdon, Oxon ; New York, NY: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-032-74301-1 .

v t e Effective altruism Concepts Aid effectiveness Charity assessment Demandingness objection Disability-adjusted life year Disease burden Distributional cost-effectiveness analysis Earning to give Equal consideration of interests Incremental cost-effectiveness ratio Longtermism Marginal utility Moral circle expansion Psychological barriers to effective altruism Quality-adjusted life year Utilitarianism Venture philanthropy Key figures Sam Bankman-Fried Liv Boeree Nick Bostrom Hilary Greaves Holden Karnofsky William MacAskill Dustin Moskovitz Yew-Kwang Ng Toby Ord Derek Parfit Kelsey Piper Peter Singer Brian Tomasik Cari Tuna Eliezer Yudkowsky Organizations 80,000 Hours Against Malaria Foundation Animal Charity Evaluators Animal Ethics Centre for Effective Altruism Centre for Enabling EA Learning & Research Center for High Impact Philanthropy Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Development Media International Evidence Action Faunalytics Fistula Foundation Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Founders Pledge GiveDirectly GiveWell Giving Multiplier Giving What We Can Good Food Fund The Good Food Institute Good Ventures The Humane League Mercy for Animals Machine Intelligence Research Institute Malaria Consortium Open Philanthropy Raising for Effective Giving Sentience Institute Unlimit Health Wild Animal Initiative Focus areas Biotechnology risk Climate change Cultured meat Economic stability Existential risk from artificial general intelligence Global catastrophic risk Global health Global poverty Intensive animal farming Land use reform Life extension Malaria prevention Mass deworming Neglected tropical diseases Risk of astronomical suffering Wild animal suffering Literature Doing Good Better The End of Animal Farming Famine, Affluence, and Morality The Life You Can Save Living High and Letting Die The Most Good You Can Do Practical Ethics The Precipice Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies What We Owe the Future Events Effective Altruism Global v t e High wealth Concepts Capital accumulation Overaccumulation Economic inequality Wealth distribution Income distribution Consumption distribution History of economic inequality International inequality Elite Oligarchy Overclass Plutocracy Plutonomy Broligarchy Primitive accumulation of capital Upper class Nouveau riche (new money) Vieux riche (old money) Luxury goods Veblen goods Conspicuous consumption Conspicuous leisure Luxury beliefs People Billionaire Captain of industry High-net-worth individual Magnate Business Millionaire Oligarch Business Russian Ukrainian Robber baron Wealth Concentration Distribution Effect Geography Inheritance Dynastic Estate planning Management National Paper Religion Tax Lists People Forbes list of billionaires List of centibillionaires Female billionaires Richest royals Wealthiest Americans Wealthiest families Organizations Largest companies by revenue Largest corporate profits and losses Largest corporations by market capitalization Largest financial services companies by revenue Largest manufacturing companies by revenue Largest software companies by revenue Largest technology companies by revenue Religious organizations Charities Philanthropists Universities Endowment size Number of billionaire alumni Other Cities by number of billionaires Countries by number of billionaires Countries by total wealth Countries by wealth inequality Wealth inequality in the United States Income inequality in the United States Most expensive items by category Wealthiest animals Related Diseases of affluence Affluenza Acquired situational narcissism Argumentum ad crumenam Prosperity theology Philanthropy Gospel of Wealth The Giving Pledge Philanthrocapitalism Venture philanthropy Sayings The rich get richer and the poor get poorer Socialism for the rich and capitalism for the poor Too big to fail Media Das Kapital Plutus Greek god of wealth Superclass List The Theory of the Leisure Class Wealth The Wealth of Nations Category by country Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Venture_philanthropy&oldid=1303312825 " Categories : Philanthropy Social finance Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 06:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Venture philanthropy 7 languages Add topic

