Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Writings 2 References 3 Sources 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Alcinous (philosopher) 13 languages Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 پښتو Português Русский Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2nd-century Greek philosopher Alcinous ( Greek : Ἀλκίνοος Alkinoos ) was a Middle Platonist philosopher .  He probably lived in the 2nd century AD, [ 1 ] although nothing is known about his life.

[ 2 ] He is the author of The Handbook of Platonism , an epitome of Middle Platonism intended as a manual for teachers. He has, at times, been identified by some scholars with the 2nd century Middle Platonist Albinus .

Writings [ edit ] Alcinous is the author of work called The Handbook of Platonism ( Ἐπιτομὴ τῶν Πλάτωνος δογμάτων , also Διδασκαλικὸς τῶν Πλάτωνος δογμάτων ; Latin : De doctrina Platonis ), one of the few surviving works from the Middle Platonist period (c. 90 BC – 250 AD).  The book contains 36 chapters which cover topics ranging from logic to physics to ethics.  It is thought to have been intended as a manual, not for students of Platonism, but for its teachers.  The treatise is written in the esoteric manner typical of the Corpus Aristotelicum , and it often appropriates popular concepts from other philosophical schools—in particular the Peripatetic and Stoic schools—which could be seen as having been prefigured in the works of Plato.

Alcinous's handbook has been dated to the middle of the 2nd century AD.

[ 1 ] In 1879 the German scholar Jacob Freudenthal argued that Alcinous was really the philosopher Albinus , the teacher of Galen the physician. This theory remained largely unchallenged until 1974, when John Whittaker made a fresh case convincingly reaffirming Alcinous's authenticity.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Alcinous held the world and its animating soul to be eternal.

[ 5 ] This soul of the universe was not created by God , but, to use the image of Alcinous, it was awakened by him as from a profound sleep, and turned towards himself, "that it might look out upon intellectual things and receive forms and ideas from the divine mind." [ 5 ] It was the first of a succession of intermediate beings between God and man.

[ 6 ] The idea proceeded immediately from the mind of God, and were the highest object of our intellect; the "form" of matter, the types of sensible things, having a real being in themselves.

[ 7 ] He differed from the earlier Platonists in confining the ideas to general laws: it seemed an unworthy notion that God could conceive an idea of things artificial or unnatural, or of individuals or particulars, or of any thing relative.

[ 8 ] He seems to have aimed at harmonizing the views of Plato and Aristotle on the ideas , as he distinguished them from the eidos , forms of things, which he allowed were inseparable: a view which seems necessarily connected with the doctrine of the eternity and self-existence of matter.

[ 9 ] God, the first fountain of the ideas , could not be known as he is: it is but a faint notion of him we obtain from negations and analogies: his nature is equally beyond our power of expression or conception.

[ 10 ] Below him are a series of beings ( daimones ) [ 11 ] who superintend the production of all living things, and hold intercourse with men. The human soul passes through various transmigrations, thus connecting the series with the lower classes of being, until it is finally purified and rendered acceptable to God.

[ 12 ] His system is understood as a synthesis of Plato and Aristotle, with some elements borrowed from the East, and perhaps derived from a study of the Pythagorean system , which experienced a revival of sorts concomitant to that which produced Middle Platonism.

References [ edit ] ^ a b "Alcinous fits most comfortably into a period bounded by the writings of Plutarch on the one hand, and Galen and Alexander of Aphrodisias on the other, with Apuleius , Albinus , Atticus , Numenius , the Peripatetic Aspasius , ... and Maximus of Tyre as approximate contemporaries." John Dillon, 1993, Alcinous, The Handbook of Platonism , page xiii. Oxford.

^ Schmitz, Leonhard (1867).

"Alcinous (3)" . In William Smith (ed.).

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology . Vol. 1. Boston: Little, Brown and Company . pp.

102– 103. Archived from the original on 2007-10-28.

^ John Whittaker, (1974), Parisinus Graecus 1962 and the Writings of Albinus , Phoenix 28, 320–354, 450–456.

^ "Bryn Mawr Classical Review 94.10.14" . Archived from the original on 2001-05-04 . Retrieved 2007-10-10 .

^ a b Alcinous, Handbook , 14.3.

^ Alcinous, Handbook , 14.6–7, 15.1.

^ Alcinous, Handbook , 9.1.

^ Alcinous, Handbook , 9.2.

^ Alcinous, Handbook , 9.3.

^ Alcinous, Handbook , 10.4–6.

^ Alcinous, Handbook , 15.1.

^ Alcinous, Handbook , 16.1–2.

Sources [ edit ] John M. Dillon , Alcinous, The Handbook of Platonism , 1993, Oxford.

ISBN 0-19-823607-7 Dirk Baltzly, " The Virtues and 'Becoming Like God': Alcinous to Proclus ", in Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy, Volume XXVI , David Sedley (ed), (Oxford: 2004).

John Whittaker, " Numenius and Alcinous on the First Principle ", Phoenix 32: 144–154 (1978).

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1870). "Alcinous (3)".

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology .

External links [ edit ] The Introduction of Alcinous to the Doctrines of Plato translated by George Burges Free public domain audiobook version of The Introduction of Alcinous to the Doctrines of Plato translated by George Burges Apocrypha public domain audiobook at LibriVox . Collection includes Alcinous.

George Burges , translator (1855).

v t e Platonists Ancient Academics Old Plato Aristotle Eudoxus Philip of Opus Aristonymus Coriscus and Erastus of Scepsis Demetrius of Amphipolis Euaeon of Lampsacus Heraclides and Python of Aenus Hestiaeus of Perinthus Lastheneia of Mantinea Timolaus of Cyzicus Speusippus Axiothea of Phlius Heraclides Ponticus Menedemus of Pyrrha Xenocrates Crantor Polemon Crates of Athens Skeptics Middle Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus New Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Dio of Alexandria Middle Platonists Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Anonymous Theaetetus Commentator Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Justin Martyr Gaius Albinus Alcinous Alexander Peloplaton Apuleius Atticus Maximus of Tyre Numenius of Apamea Ammonius Saccas Longinus Clement of Alexandria Origen Origen the Pagan Calcidius Neoplatonists Plotinus Students Amelius Porphyry of Tyre Iamblichus Sopater Eustathius of Cappadocia Sosipatra Aedesius Dexippus Chrysanthius Theodorus of Asine Julian Salutius Maximus of Ephesus Eusebius of Myndus Priscus of Epirus Antoninus Hypatia Gaius Marius Victorinus Augustine Macrobius Boethius Academy Plutarch of Athens Asclepigenia Hierocles Syrianus Hermias Aedesia Proclus Marinus Isidore Ammonius Hermiae Asclepiodotus Hegias Zenodotus Agapius Damascius Simplicius Priscian John Philoponus Olympiodorus David the Invincible Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Medieval John Scotus Eriugena Al-Farabi Anselm Peter Abelard Bernard Gilbert Thierry Henry of Ghent Bonaventure Theodoric of Freiberg Meister Eckhart Berthold of Moosburg Paul of Venice Modern Renaissance Florentine Academy Plethon Marsilio Ficino Cristoforo Landino Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Giordano Bruno Blaise Pascal Cambridge Ralph Cudworth Henry More Anne Conway Thomas Taylor Emanuel Swedenborg Josiah Royce Aleksei Losev Contemporary Analytic Gottlob Frege Bertrand Russell Kurt Gödel Roderick Chisholm W. V. O. Quine Jan Łukasiewicz Crispin Wright Edward N. Zalta Continental Edmund Husserl Leo Strauss Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Spain Croatia Greece Academics CiNii People DDB Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alcinous_(philosopher)&oldid=1279117731 " Categories : 2nd-century Romans 2nd-century Greek philosophers Deist philosophers Middle Platonists Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM Articles with LibriVox links Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 6 March 2025, at 17:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alcinous (philosopher) 13 languages Add topic

