Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Prehistory and Pre-Columbian Peru 2.2 Conquest and colonial period 2.3 Independence 2.4 19th century 2.5 20th century 2.6 21st century 3 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 3.1 Climate 3.2 Wildlife 4 Government and politics Toggle Government and politics subsection 4.1 Allegations of corruption in politics 4.2 Administrative divisions 4.3 Foreign relations 4.4 Military and law enforcement 5 Economy Toggle Economy subsection 5.1 Mining 5.2 Agriculture 5.3 Tourism 5.4 Industry 6 Infrastructure Toggle Infrastructure subsection 6.1 Transport 6.2 Energy 6.3 Healthcare 7 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 7.1 Ethnic groups 7.2 Language 7.3 Religion 7.4 Education 7.5 Toponyms 8 Culture Toggle Culture subsection 8.1 Visual arts 8.1.1 Pre-Columbian art 8.1.2 Colonial art 8.2 Literature 8.3 Cuisine 8.4 Music 8.5 Cinema 8.6 Sport 9 See also 10 Notes and references Toggle Notes and references subsection 10.1 Explanatory notes 10.2 Citations 11 Bibliography 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Peru 263 languages Acèh Адыгабзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Anarâškielâ अंगिका Ænglisc Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu अवधी Avañe'ẽ Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali Bamanankan বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Basa Banyumasan Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Bislama Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chamoru ChiShona ChiTumbuka Corsu Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Davvisámegiella Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski डोटेली Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara Eʋegbe فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego Gĩkũyũ ગુજરાતી 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Ирон IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Коми Kongo Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Кырык мары Ladin Ladino ລາວ Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala La .lojban.

Luganda Lombard Magyar Madhurâ Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan Олык марий Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pangasinan Pangcah پنجابی ပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏ Papiamentu پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Română Romani čhib Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya Gagana Samoa संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Sardu Scots Seediq Seeltersk Sesotho sa Leboa Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça တႆး Tayal తెలుగు Tetun ไทย Тоҷикӣ Lea faka-Tonga Tsetsêhestâhese Türkçe Türkmençe Удмурт Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro Walon Wayuunaiki 文言 West-Vlams Winaray Wolof 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Betawi Ghanaian Pidgin Jaku Iban Kumoring Yerwa Kanuri ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 10°S 76°W ﻿ / ﻿ 10°S 76°W ﻿ / -10; -76 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Country in South America This article is about the country. For other uses, see Peru (disambiguation) .

Republic of Peru República del Perú ( Spanish ) Co-official names [ a ] Quechua : Piruw Ripuwlika Aymara : Piruwxa Ripuwlika Flag Coat of arms Motto: " Firme y feliz por la unión " (Spanish) "Firm and Happy for the Union" Anthem: " Himno Nacional del Perú " (Spanish) "National Anthem of Peru" March: " Marcha de Banderas " (Spanish) "March of Flags" National seal Gran Sello del Estado (Spanish) Great Seal of the State Location of Peru (dark green) Capital and largest city Lima 12°2.6′S 77°1.7′W ﻿ / ﻿ 12.0433°S 77.0283°W ﻿ / -12.0433; -77.0283 Official languages Spanish Co-official languages [ b ] Quechua Aymara Other Indigenous languages Ethnic groups (2017) [ c ] 60.20% mixed 25.75% native 5.89% White 3.57% Black 0.16% East Asian 1.10% other 3.32% no answer Religion (2017 [ d ] ) [ 1 ] 94.5% Christianity 76.0% Catholicism 18.5% other Christian 5.1% no religion 0.4% other Demonym(s) Peruvian Government Unitary semi-presidential republic [ 2 ] [ 3 ] • President Dina Boluarte • First Vice President Vacant • Prime Minister Eduardo Arana Ysa • President of Congress Eduardo Salhuana Legislature Congress of the Republic Independence from Spain • Declared 28 July 1821 • Consolidated 9 December 1824 • Recognized 14 August 1879 Area • Total 1,285,216 [ 4 ] [ 5 ] km 2 (496,225 sq mi) ( 19th ) • Water (%) 0.41 Population • 2023 estimate 34,352,720 [ 5 ] ( 43rd ) • Density 23/km 2 (59.6/sq mi) ( 197th ) GDP ( PPP ) 2025 estimate • Total $643.05 billion [ 6 ] ( 47th ) • Per capita $18,689 [ 6 ] ( 99th ) GDP (nominal) 2025 estimate • Total $303.3 billion [ 6 ] ( 47th ) • Per capita $8,814 [ 6 ] ( 86th ) Gini (2022) 40.2 [ 7 ] medium inequality HDI (2023) 0.794 [ 8 ] high ( 79th ) Currency Peruvian sol ( PEN ) Time zone UTC −05:00 ( PET ) Date format dd/mm/yyyy ( CE ) Calling code +51 ISO 3166 code PE Internet TLD .pe Peru , [ e ] officially the Republic of Peru , [ f ] is a country in western South America . It is bordered to the north by Ecuador and Colombia , to the east by Brazil , to the southeast by Bolivia , to the south by Chile , and to the south and west by the Pacific Ocean. Peru is a megadiverse country , with habitats ranging from the arid plains of the Pacific coastal region in the west, to the peaks of the Andes mountains extending from the north to the southeast of the country, to the tropical Amazon basin rainforest in the east with the Amazon River .

[ 10 ] Peru has a population of over 32 million, and its capital and largest city is Lima . At 1,285,216 km 2 (496,225 sq mi), Peru is the 19th largest country in the world , and the third largest in South America .

Peruvian territory was home to several cultures during the ancient and medieval periods, and has one of the longest histories of civilization of any country, tracing its heritage back to the 10th millennium BCE Caral–Supe civilization , the earliest civilization in the Americas and considered one of the cradles of civilization . Notable succeeding cultures and civilizations include the Nazca culture , the Wari and Tiwanaku empires, the Kingdom of Cusco , and the Inca Empire , the largest known state in the pre-Columbian Americas. The Spanish Empire conquered the region in the 16th century and Charles V established a viceroyalty with the official name of the Kingdom of Peru that encompassed most of its South American territories, with its capital in Lima .

[ 11 ] Higher education started in the Americas with the official establishment of the National University of San Marcos in Lima in 1551.

Peru formally proclaimed independence from Spain in 1821, and following the military campaigns of Bernardo O'Higgins , José de San Martín , and Simón Bolívar , as well as the decisive battle of Ayacucho , it completed its independence in 1824 . In the ensuing years, the country first suffered from political instability until a period of relative economic and political stability began due to the exploitation of guano that ended with the War of the Pacific (1879–1884). Throughout the 20th century, Peru grappled with political and social instability, including the internal conflict between the state and guerrilla groups, interspersed with periods of economic growth. Implementation of Plan Verde [ 12 ] [ 13 ] shifted Peru towards neoliberal economics under the authoritarian rule of Alberto Fujimori and Vladimiro Montesinos in the 1990s, with the former's political ideology of Fujimorism leaving a lasting imprint on the country's governance that continues to present day.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] The 2000s marked economic expansion and poverty reduction, but the subsequent decade revealed long-existing sociopolitical vulnerabilities , exacerbated by a political crisis instigated by Congress and the COVID-19 pandemic , precipitating the period of unrest beginning in 2022 .

[ 16 ] The sovereign state of Peru is a representative democratic republic divided into 25 regions . Its main economic activities include mining , manufacturing , agriculture and fishing, along with other growing sectors such as telecommunications and biotechnology .

[ 17 ] The country forms part of The Pacific Pumas , a political and economic grouping of countries along Latin America's Pacific coast that share common trends of positive growth, stable macroeconomic foundations, improved governance and an openness to global integration. Peru ranks high in social freedom ; [ 18 ] it is an active member of the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation , the Pacific Alliance , the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-Pacific Partnership and the World Trade Organization ; and is considered as a middle power .

[ 19 ] Peru's population includes Mestizos , Amerindians , Europeans , Africans and Asians . The main spoken language is Spanish , although a significant number of Peruvians speak Quechuan languages , Aymara , or other Indigenous languages . This mixture of cultural traditions has resulted in a wide diversity of expressions in fields such as art , cuisine , literature , and music . Peru has recently gained international recognition for its vibrant gastronomy, blending Indigenous, Spanish, African, and Asian influences. Lima is now considered a global culinary capital, home to award-winning restaurants like Central and Maido.

[ 20 ] Etymology The name of the country may be derived from Birú , the name of a local ruler who lived near the Bay of San Miguel , Panama City, in the early 16th century.

[ 21 ] Spanish conquistadors , who arrived in 1522, believed this was the southernmost part of the New World .

[ 22 ] When Francisco Pizarro invaded the regions farther south, they came to be designated Birú or Perú .

[ 23 ] An alternative history is provided by the contemporary writer Inca Garcilaso de la Vega , son of an Inca princess and a conquistador. He said the name Birú was that of a common Amerindian who was happened upon by the crew of a ship on an exploratory mission for governor Pedro Arias Dávila and went on to relate more instances of misunderstandings due to the lack of a common language.

[ 24 ] The Spanish crown gave the name legal status with the 1529 Capitulación de Toledo , which designated the newly encountered Inca Empire as the province of Peru.

[ 25 ] In 1561, the rebel Lope de Aguirre declared himself the "Prince" of an independent Peru, which was cut short by his arrest and execution. Under Spanish rule, the country adopted the denomination Viceroyalty of Peru , which became the Peruvian Republic from its independence until 1979 , when it adopted its current name of Republic of Peru .

[ 26 ] History Main article: History of Peru See also: Periodization of pre-Columbian Peru , Agricultural history of Peru , and Economic history of Peru Prehistory and Pre-Columbian Peru Main articles: Pre-Columbian Peru and Andean civilizations Remains of a Caral/Norte Chico pyramid in the arid Supe Valley The earliest evidences of human presence in Peruvian territory have been dated to approximately 12,500 BCE in the Huaca Prieta settlement.

[ 27 ] Andean societies were based on agriculture, using techniques such as irrigation and terracing ; camelid husbandry and fishing were also important. Organization relied on reciprocity and redistribution because these societies had no notion of market or money. The oldest known complex society in Peru, the Caral-Supe civilization , flourished along the coast of the Pacific Ocean between 3,000 and 1,800 BCE.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] These early developments were followed by archaeological cultures that developed mostly around the coastal and Andean regions throughout Peru. The Cupisnique culture which flourished from around 1000 to 200 BCE [ 30 ] along what is now Peru's Pacific coast was an example of early pre- Inca culture .

Moche earrings depicting warriors, made of turquoise and gold (1–800 CE) The Chavín culture that developed from 1500 to 300 BCE was probably more of a religious than a political phenomenon, with their religious center in Chavín de Huantar .

[ 31 ] After the decline of the Chavin culture around the beginning of the 1st century CE, a series of localized and specialized cultures rose and fell, both on the coast and in the highlands, during the next thousand years. On the coast, these included the civilizations of the Paracas , Nazca , Wari , and the more outstanding Chimu and Moche .

The Moche, who reached their apogee in the first millennium CE, were renowned for their irrigation system which fertilized their arid terrain, their sophisticated ceramic pottery, their lofty buildings, and clever metalwork.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] The Chimu were the great city builders of pre-Inca civilization; as a loose confederation of walled cities scattered along the coast of northern Peru, the Chimu flourished from about 1140 to 1450.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Their capital was at Chan Chan outside of modern-day Trujillo .

[ 34 ] In the highlands, both the Tiahuanaco culture, near Lake Titicaca in both Peru and Bolivia, [ 36 ] and the Wari culture, near the present-day city of Ayacucho , developed large urban settlements and wide-ranging state systems between 500 and 1000 CE.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] The citadel of Machu Picchu , an iconic symbol of pre-Columbian Peru In the 15th century, the Incas emerged as a powerful state which, in the span of a century, formed the largest empire in the pre-Columbian Americas with their capital in Cusco .

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] The Incas of Cusco originally represented one of the small and relatively minor ethnic groups, the Quechuas . Gradually, as early as the thirteenth century, they began to expand and incorporate their neighbors. Inca expansion was slow until about the middle of the fifteenth century, when the pace of conquest began to accelerate, particularly under the rule of the emperor Pachacuti .

[ 42 ] Under his rule and that of his son, Topa Inca Yupanqui , the Incas came to control most of the Andean region, with a population of 9 to 16 million inhabitants under their rule. Pachacuti also promulgated a comprehensive code of laws to govern his far-flung empire, while consolidating his absolute temporal and spiritual authority as the God of the Sun who ruled from a magnificently rebuilt Cusco.

[ 43 ] From 1438 to 1533, the Incas used a variety of methods, from conquest to peaceful assimilation, to incorporate a large portion of western South America, centered on the Andean mountain ranges, from southern Colombia to northern Chile, between the Pacific Ocean in the west and the Amazon rainforest in the east. The official language of the empire was Quechua , [ 44 ] although hundreds of local languages and dialects were spoken. The Inca referred to their empire as Tawantinsuyu which can be translated as "The Four Regions" or "The Four United Provinces." Many local forms of worship persisted in the empire, most of them concerning local sacred Huacas , but the Inca leadership encouraged the worship of Inti , the sun god and imposed its sovereignty above other cults such as that of Pachamama .

[ 45 ] The Incas considered their King, the Sapa Inca , to be the " child of the sun ." [ 46 ] [ 47 ] Conquest and colonial period Main articles: Spanish conquest of Peru and Viceroyalty of Peru Los funerales de Atahualpa (1867) by Luis Montero.

Atahualpa was the last Sapa Inca , executed by the Spaniards on 29 August 1533.

Atahualpa (or Atahuallpa), the last Sapa Inca , became emperor when he defeated and executed his older half-brother Huáscar in a civil war sparked by the death of their father, [ 48 ] Inca Huayna Capac. In December 1532, a party of conquistadors (supported by the Chankas , Huancas , Cañaris and Chachapoyas as Indian auxiliaries ) led by Francisco Pizarro defeated and captured the Inca Emperor Atahualpa in the Battle of Cajamarca .

[ 49 ] After years of preliminary exploration and military conflicts, it was the first step in a long campaign that took decades of fighting but ended in Spanish victory and colonization of the region known as the Viceroyalty of Peru with its capital at Lima , which was then known as "La Ciudad de los Reyes" (The City of Kings). The conquest of Peru led to spin-off campaigns throughout the viceroyalty as well as expeditions towards the Amazon Basin as in the case of Spanish efforts to quell Amerindian resistance. The last Inca resistance was suppressed when the Spaniards annihilated the Neo-Inca State in Vilcabamba in 1572.

The Indigenous population dramatically collapsed overwhelmingly due to epidemic diseases introduced by the Spanish as well as exploitation and socio-economic change.

[ 50 ] Viceroy Francisco de Toledo reorganized the country in the 1570s with gold and silver mining as its main economic activity and Amerindian forced labor as its primary workforce. With the discovery of the great silver and gold lodes at Potosí (present-day Bolivia) and Huancavelica , the viceroyalty flourished as an important provider of mineral resources. Peruvian bullion provided revenue for the Spanish Crown and fueled a complex trade network that extended as far as Europe and the Philippines. The commercial and population exchanges between Latin America and Asia undergone via the Manila Galleons transiting through Acapulco, had Callao at Peru as the furthest endpoint of the trade route in the Americas.

[ 51 ] In relation to this, Don Sebastian Hurtado de Corcuera , governor of Panama was also responsible for settling Zamboanga City in the Philippines by employing Peruvian soldiers and colonists.

[ 52 ] African slaves were added to the labor population to expand the workforce. The expansion of a colonial administrative apparatus and bureaucracy paralleled the economic reorganization.

With the conquest started the spread of Christianity in South America; most people were forcefully converted to Catholicism , with Spanish clerics believing like Puritan divines of English colonies later that the Native Peoples "had been corrupted by the Devil, who was working "through them to frustrate" their foundations.

[ 53 ] It only took a generation to convert the population. They built churches in every city and replaced some of the Inca temples with churches, such as the Coricancha in the city of Cusco. The church employed the Inquisition , making use of torture to ensure that newly converted Catholics did not stray to other religions or beliefs, and monastery schools, educating girls, especially of the Inca nobility and upper class, "until they were old enough either to profess [to become a nun] or to leave the monastery and assume the role ('estado') in the Christian society that their fathers planned to erect" in Peru.

[ 54 ] Peruvian Catholicism follows the syncretism found in many Latin American countries, in which religious native rituals have been integrated with Christian celebrations.

[ 55 ] In this endeavor, the church came to play an important role in the acculturation of the Natives, drawing them into the cultural orbit of the Spanish settlers.

Túpac Amaru II By the 18th century, declining silver production and economic diversification greatly diminished royal income. In response, the Crown enacted the Bourbon Reforms , a series of edicts that increased taxes and partitioned the Viceroyalty . The new laws provoked Túpac Amaru II's rebellion and other revolts, all of which were suppressed. As a result of these and other changes, the Spaniards and their creole successors came to monopolize control over the land, seizing many of the best lands abandoned by the massive native depopulation. However, the Spanish did not resist the Portuguese expansion of Brazil across the meridian. The Treaty of Tordesillas was rendered meaningless between 1580 and 1640 while Spain controlled Portugal . The need to ease communication and trade with Spain led to the split of the viceroyalty and the creation of new viceroyalties of New Granada and Rio de la Plata at the expense of the territories that formed the Viceroyalty of Peru ; this reduced the power, prominence and importance of Lima as the viceroyal capital and shifted the lucrative Andean trade to Buenos Aires and Bogotá , while the fall of the mining and textile production accelerated the progressive decay of the Viceroyalty of Peru.

Eventually, the viceroyalty would dissolve, as with much of the Spanish empire, when challenged by national independence movements at the beginning of the nineteenth century. These movements led to the formation of the majority of modern-day countries of South America in the territories that at one point or another had constituted the Viceroyalty of Peru.

[ 56 ] The conquest and colony brought a mix of cultures and ethnicities that did not exist before the Spanish conquered the Peruvian territory. Even though many of the Inca traditions were lost or diluted, new customs, traditions and knowledge were added, creating a rich mixed Peruvian culture.

[ 55 ] Two of the most important Indigenous rebellions against the Spanish were that of Juan Santos Atahualpa in 1742, and Rebellion of Túpac Amaru II in 1780 around the highlands near Cuzco.

[ 57 ] Independence Main article: Peruvian War of Independence The Battle of Ayacucho was decisive in ensuring Peruvian independence.

In the early 19th century, while most South American nations were swept by wars of independence , Peru remained a royalist stronghold. As the elite vacillated between emancipation and loyalty to the Spanish monarchy, independence was achieved only after the occupation by military campaigns of José de San Martín and Simón Bolívar .

The economic crises, the loss of power of Spain in Europe, the war of independence in North America , and Native uprisings all contributed to a favorable climate to the development of emancipation ideas among the C riollo population in South America. However, the Criollo oligarchy in Peru enjoyed privileges and remained loyal to the Spanish Crown. The liberation movement started in Argentina where autonomous juntas were created as a result of the loss of authority of the Spanish government over its colonies.

After fighting for the independence of the Viceroyalty of Rio de la Plata, José de San Martín created the Army of the Andes and crossed the Andes in 21 days. Once in Chile, he joined forces with Chilean army General Bernardo O'Higgins and liberated the country in the battles of Chacabuco and Maipú in 1818.

[ 58 ] On 7 September 1820, a fleet of eight warships arrived in the port of Paracas under the command of General José de San Martín and Thomas Cochrane , who was serving in the Chilean Navy. Immediately on 26 October, they took control of the town of Pisco . San Martín settled in Huacho on 12 November, where he established his headquarters while Cochrane sailed north and blockaded the port of Callao in Lima. At the same time in the north, Guayaquil was occupied by rebel forces under the command of Gregorio Escobedo. Because Peru was the stronghold of the Spanish government in South America, San Martín's strategy to liberate Peru was to use diplomacy. He sent representatives to Lima urging the Viceroy that Peru be granted independence, however, all negotiations proved unsuccessful.

San Martín proclaiming the independence of Peru. Painting by Juan Lepiani .

The Viceroy of Peru, Joaquín de la Pazuela named José de la Serna commander-in-chief of the loyalist army to protect Lima from the threatened invasion by San Martín. On 29 January, de la Serna organized a coup against de la Pazuela, which was recognized by Spain and he was named Viceroy of Peru. This internal power struggle contributed to the success of the liberating army. To avoid a military confrontation, San Martín met the newly appointed viceroy, José de la Serna, and proposed to create a constitutional monarchy , a proposal that was turned down. De la Serna abandoned the city, and on 12 July 1821, San Martín occupied Lima and declared Peruvian independence on 28 July 1821. He created the first Peruvian flag.

Upper Peru (present-day Bolivia) remained as a Spanish stronghold until the army of Simón Bolívar liberated it three years later. José de San Martín was declared Protector of Peru. Peruvian national identity was forged during this period, as Bolivarian projects for a Latin American Confederation floundered and a union with Bolivia proved ephemeral.

[ 59 ] Simón Bolívar launched his campaign from the north, liberating the Viceroyalty of New Granada in the Battles of Carabobo in 1821 and Pichincha a year later. In July 1822, Bolívar and San Martín gathered in the Guayaquil Conference . Bolívar was left in charge of fully liberating Peru while San Martín retired from politics after the first parliament was assembled. The newly founded Peruvian Congress named Bolívar dictator of Peru, giving him the power to organize the military.

With the help of Antonio José de Sucre , they defeated the larger Spanish army in the Battle of Junín on 6 August 1824 and the decisive Battle of Ayacucho on 9 December of the same year, consolidating the independence of Peru and Upper Peru. Upper Peru was later established as Bolivia. During the early years of the Republic, endemic struggles for power between military leaders caused political instability.

[ 60 ] 19th century Once independence was proclaimed, San Martín assumed military-political command of the free departments of Peru, under the title of Protector, according to a decree given on August 3, 1821. The works of the Protectorate contributed to the creation of the National Library (in favor of knowledge), the approval of the National Anthem, and the abolition of the mita (in favor of the indigenous people). On December 27, 1821, San Martín created three ministries: Ministry of State and Foreign Affairs, committing Juan García del Río; Ministry of War and Navy , to Bernardo de Monteagudo; and Ministry of Finance, to Hipólito Unanue.

From the 1840s to the 1860s Peru enjoyed a period of stability under the presidency of Ramón Castilla , through increased state revenues from guano exports.

[ 61 ] In 1864, a Spanish expedition occupied the Chincha Islands (guano producers) and unleashed an international incident with great consequences in Peruvian internal politics, which led to a coup d'état against President Juan Antonio Pezet , Mariano's government. Peru, with the help of Bolivia , Chile and Ecuador , sent a declaration of war on Spain. After the battle of Callao on May 2, 1866, the Spanish Navy withdrew from Peru. The government of José Balta was lavish in infrastructure works (construction of the Central Railway) although the first signs of excess government spending were already perceived. By the 1870s the guano resources had been depleted, the country was heavily indebted, and political in-fighting was again on the rise.

[ 62 ] The Battle of Angamos , during the War of the Pacific By 1859, some 41,000 Peruvians had died in the constant civil wars that shook the country since 1829. Thanks to the money from the sale of guano, Peru began to modernize with different public works such as railways; the civil and military bureaucracy grew; The indigenous people stopped paying tribute and the slaves achieved their freedom; The migration policy of Germans, Austrians, Irish and Italians began.

On April 5, 1879, Chile declared war on Peru, unleashing the Pacific War. The casus belli was the confrontation between Bolivia and Chile over a tax problem in which Peru was compromised by the Treaty of Defensive Alliance signed with Bolivia in 1873. However, Peruvian historiography is unanimous in maintaining that the deep cause of this war was Chile's ambition to take over the nitrate and guano territories of southern Peru. In the first stage of the war, the naval campaign, the Peruvian navy repelled the Chilean attack until October 8, 1879, the day in which the naval combat of Angamos was fought, where the Chilean navy with its ships Cochrane, Blanco Encalada, Loa and Covadonga cornered the monitor Huáscar , the main ship of the Peruvian navy commanded by Admiral AP Miguel Grau, who died in the fray and since then became Peru's greatest hero.

In 1879 Peru entered the War of the Pacific , which lasted until 1884.

Bolivia invoked its alliance with Peru against Chile. The Peruvian Government tried to mediate the dispute by sending a diplomatic team to negotiate with the Chilean government, but the committee concluded that war was inevitable. Peruvian historiography is unanimous in maintaining that the deep cause of this war was Chile's ambition to take over the nitrate and guano territories of southern Peru and Bolivia.

Battle of Arica , painted by Juan Lepiani Almost five years of war ended with the loss of the department of Tarapacá and the provinces of Tacna and Arica , in the Atacama region.

Francisco Bolognesi and Miguel Grau are both renowned heros of the war. Originally Chile committed to a referendum for the cities of Arica and Tacna to be held years later, to self determine their national affiliation. However, Chile refused to apply the Treaty, and neither of the countries could determine the statutory framework. The War of the Pacific was the bloodiest war Peru has fought in. After the War of the Pacific, an extraordinary effort of rebuilding began. The government started to initiate a number of social and economic reforms to recover from the damage of the war. Political stability was achieved only in the early 1900s.

20th century The signing of the Rio Protocol in January 1942 Internal struggles after the war were followed by a period of stability under the Civilista Party , which lasted until the onset of the authoritarian regime of Augusto B. Leguía . The Great Depression caused the downfall of Leguía, renewed political turmoil, and the emergence of the American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA).

[ 63 ] The rivalry between this organization and a coalition of the elite and the military defined Peruvian politics for the following three decades. A final peace treaty in 1929, signed between Peru and Chile called the Treaty of Lima , returned Tacna to Peru. Between 1932 and 1933, Peru was engulfed in a year-long war with Colombia over a territorial dispute involving the Amazonas Department and its capital Leticia .

In 1941 Peru and Ecuador fought the Ecuadorian–Peruvian War , after which the Rio Protocol sought to formalize the boundary between those two countries. In a military coup on 29 October 1948, General Manuel A. Odría became president. Odría's presidency was known as the Ochenio . He came down hard on APRA, momentarily pleasing the oligarchy and all others on the right, but followed a populist course that won him great favor with the poor and lower classes. A thriving economy allowed him to indulge in expensive but crowd-pleasing social policies. At the same time, however, civil rights were severely restricted and corruption was rampant throughout his regime. Odría was succeeded by Manuel Prado Ugarteche . However, widespread allegations of fraud prompted the Peruvian military to depose Prado and install a military junta, via a coup d'état led by Ricardo Pérez Godoy . Godoy ran a short transitional government and held new elections in 1963, which were won by Fernando Belaúnde Terry who assumed presidency until 1968. Belaúnde was recognized for his commitment to the democratic process.

Military Junta of 1968 On 3 October 1968 another coup d'état led by a group of officers led by General Juan Velasco Alvarado brought the army to power with the aim of applying a doctrine of "social progress and integral development", nationalist and reformist, influenced by the Comisión Económica para América Latina y el Caribe ( CEPAL ), i.e. the                     “United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean” theses on dependence and underdevelopment. Six days after the golpe, Velasco proceeded to nationalize the International Petroleum Corporation (IPC), the North American company that exploited Peruvian oil, and then launched a reform of the state apparatus, an agrarian reform. It was the biggest agrarian reform ever undertaken in Latin America: it abolished the latifunda system and modernized agriculture through a more equitable redistribution of land (90% of the peasants formed cooperatives or agricultural societies of social interest). Land was to be owned by those who cultivated it, and large landowners were expropriated. The only large properties allowed were cooperatives.

Between 1969 and 1976, 325,000 families received land from the state with an average size of 73.6 acres (29.8 hectares). The "revolutionary government" also planned massive investments in education, elevated the Quechua language – spoken by nearly half the population but hitherto despised by the authorities – to a status equivalent to that of Spanish and established equal rights for natural children. Peru wished to free itself from any dependence and carried out a third-world foreign policy. The United States responded with commercial, economic and diplomatic pressure. In 1973 Peru seemed to triumph over the financial blockade imposed by Washington by negotiating a loan from the International Development Bank to finance its agricultural and mining development policy. The relations with Chile became very tense after the coup d'état of the general Pinochet . General Edgardo Mercado Jarrin (Prime Minister and Commander-in-Chief of the Army) and Admiral Guillermo Faura Gaig (Minister of the Navy) both escaped assassination attempts within weeks of each other. In 1975 General Francisco Morales Bermúdez Cerruti seized power and broke with the policies of his predecessor. His regime occasionally participated in Operation Condor in collaboration with other American military dictatorships.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] President Alan García 's economic policies distanced Peru from international markets further, resulting in lower foreign investment in the country.

[ 66 ] After the country experienced chronic inflation , in mid-1985, the Peruvian sol was replaced by the inti , which itself was replaced by the nuevo sol in July 1991 (the new sol had a cumulative value of one billion old soles). At the end of the 1980s, the per capita annual income of Peruvians fell to $720 (below the level of 1960) and Peru's GDP dropped 20%, with national reserves running a $900 million deficit. The economic turbulence of the time acerbated social tensions in Peru and partly contributed to the rise of violent rebel rural insurgent movements, like Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path) and MRTA , which caused great havoc throughout the country.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] President Alberto Fujimori during his first term The Peruvian armed forces, frustrated with the inability of the García administration to handle the nation's crises, drafted the Plan Verde , which involved the genocide of impoverished and indigenous Peruvians, the control or censorship of the media in Peru , and the establishment of a neoliberal economy controlled by a military junta .

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] Alberto Fujimori assumed the presidency in 1990 and, according to the head of the National Intelligence Service (SIN) Rospigliosi, an understanding was established between Fujimori, Vladimiro Montesinos , and some of the military officers involved in Plan Verde to abide by the military's demands prior to Fujimori's inauguration.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] Fujimori would go on to adopt many of the policies outlined in Plan Verde, which led to a precitious drop in inflation from 7,650% at the start of 1990 to 139% in 1991 and 57% in 1992.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 73 ] When Fujimori faced opposition to his reform efforts, he dissolved Congress, suspending the judiciary, arresting several opposition leaders and assuming full powers in the auto-golpe ("self-coup") of 5 April 1992.

[ 76 ] [ 73 ] [ 77 ] He then revised the constitution, called new congressional elections, and implemented substantial economic reform, including privatization of numerous state-owned companies, creation of an investment-friendly climate, and sound management of the economy. Nonetheless, these policies did not benefit the poorest much, and inequality persisted despite Fujimori's economic achievements.

[ 75 ] [ 78 ] Fujimori's administration was dogged by insurgent groups, most notably Shining Path, which carried out attacks across the country throughout the 1980s and 1990s. Fujimori cracked down on the insurgents and was successful in largely quelling them by the late 1990s, but the fight was marred by atrocities committed by both the Peruvian security forces and the insurgents: the Barrios Altos massacre and La Cantuta massacre by Government paramilitary groups, and the bombings of Tarata and Frecuencia Latina by Sendero Luminoso. Fujimori would also broaden the definition of terrorism in an effort to criminalize as many actions possible to persecute left-wing political opponents.

[ 14 ] Using the terruqueo , a fearmongering tactic that was used to accuse opponents of terrorism, Fujimori established a cult of personality by portraying himself as a hero and made left-wing ideologies an eternal enemy in Peru.

[ 14 ] Those incidents subsequently came to symbolize the human rights violations committed in the last years of violence.

[ 79 ] His Programa Nacional de Población , 'National Population Program' also resulted with the forced sterilization of at least 300,000 poor and indigenous women.

[ 74 ] [ 80 ] [ 81 ] In early 1995, once again Peru and Ecuador clashed in the Cenepa War , but in 1998 the governments of both nations signed a peace treaty that clearly demarcated the international boundary between them. In November 2000, Fujimori resigned from office and went into a self-imposed exile, initially avoiding prosecution for human rights violations and corruption charges by the new Peruvian authorities.

[ 82 ] 21st century See also: Peruvian political crisis (2016–present) and Peruvian protests (2022–2023) Peru tried to fight corruption while sustaining economic growth at the start of the 21st century, [ 82 ] though Fujimorism held power over much of Peruvian society through maintaining control of institutions and legislation created in the 1993 constitution, which was written by Fujimori and his supporters without opposition participation.

[ 14 ] In spite of human rights progress since the time of insurgency, many problems are still visible and show the continued marginalization of those who suffered through the violence of the Peruvian conflict.

[ 83 ] A caretaker government presided over by Valentín Paniagua took on the responsibility of conducting new presidential and congressional elections. Afterwards Alejandro Toledo became president in 2001 to 2006. On 28 July 2006, former president Alan García became President of Peru after winning the 2006 elections . In 2006, Alberto Fujimori's daughter, Keiko Fujimori , entered Peru's political arena to continue her father's legacy and espouse Fujimorism.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] [ 86 ] In May 2008, Peru became a member of the Union of South American Nations . In April 2009, former president Alberto Fujimori was convicted of human rights violations and sentenced to 25 years in prison for his role in killings and kidnappings by the Grupo Colina death squad during his government's battle against leftist guerrillas in the 1990s.

[ 87 ] During the presidencies of Ollanta Humala , Pedro Pablo Kuczynski and Martín Vizcarra , the right-wing Congress led by Keiko Fujimori obstructed much of the actions performed by the presidents.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] On 5 June 2011, Ollanta Humala was elected president, with his cabinet being successfully censured by the Fujimorist Congress.

[ 90 ] Beginning with Pedro Pablo Kuczynski , Congress used broadly interpreted impeachment wording in the 1993 Constitution of Peru that allowed impeachment of the president without cause [ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] [ 94 ] to place pressure on the president, forcing him to resign in 2018 amid various controversies surrounding his administration. Vice president Martín Vizcarra then assumed office in March 2018 with generally favorable approval ratings as he led the anti-corruption constitutional referendum movement.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] The COVID-19 pandemic resulted with Peru experiencing the highest death rate from COVID-19 in the world, exposing much of the inequality that persisted since the Fujimori administration [ 78 ] and triggering an economic crisis that led to Vizcara's removal from the presidency by Congress .

[ 97 ] Widely seen as a coup by Congress, its head, the newly seated President Manuel Merino , faced protests across the country, and after five days, Merino resigned from the presidency.

[ 98 ] Merino was replaced by President Francisco Sagasti , who led a provisional, centrist government, and enforced many of Vizcarra's former policies.

[ 99 ] Elections were held on 11 April 2021, and Pedro Castillo of the Free Peru party won the first round, followed closely by Keiko Fujimori, with right-wing parties allied with Fujimori maintaining positions in Congress.

[ 100 ] Demonstrations in Lima during the 2022–2023 Peruvian political protests On 28 July 2021, Pedro Castillo was sworn in as the new president of Peru after a narrow win in a tightly contested run-off election.

[ 101 ] That same year, Peru celebrated the bicentenary of independence .

[ 102 ] Castillo faced multiple impeachment votes during his presidency from the right-wing controlled Congress and on 7 December 2022, just hours before Congress was set to begin a third impeachment effort , Castillo tried to prevent this by attempting to dissolve the opposition-controlled legislature and create an "exceptional emergency government." In response, Congress quickly held an emergency session on the same day, during which it voted 101–6 (with 10 abstentions) to remove Castillo from office and replace him with Vice President Dina Boluarte . She became the country's first female president.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] Castillo was arrested after trying to flee to the Mexican embassy and was charged with the crime of rebellion.

[ 105 ] The Boluarte government proved unpopular as she allied herself with the right-wing Congress and the military, betraying her constituents.

[ 16 ] [ 106 ] This resentment led to the 2022–2023 Peruvian political protests , which sought the removal of Boluarte and Congress, immediate general elections and the writing of a new constitution. Authorities responded to the protests violently, with the Ayacucho massacre and Juliaca massacre occurring at this time, resulting with the most violence experienced in the nation in over two decades.

[ 16 ] The strong response by the political elite in Lima raised concerns that they sought to establish an authoritarian or civilian-military government .

[ 16 ] [ 106 ] [ 107 ] Geography Main article: Geography of Peru Top to bottom: Manu National Park in the Amazon , Alpamayo mountain peak, Paracas National Reserve , Chachani volcanic complex.

Vinicunca , also known as the Rainbow Mountain in Cuzco Peru is located on the central western coast of South America facing the Pacific Ocean. It lies wholly in the Southern Hemisphere , its northernmost extreme reaching to 1.8 minutes of latitude or about 3.3 km (2.1 mi) south of the equator , covers 1,285,216 km 2 (496,225 sq mi) of western South America. It borders Ecuador and Colombia to the north, Brazil to the east, Bolivia to the southeast, Chile to the south, and the Pacific Ocean to the west. The Andes run parallel to the Pacific Ocean; they define the three regions traditionally used to describe the country geographically.

[ 108 ] The costa (coast), to the west, is a narrow, largely arid plain except for valleys created by seasonal rivers. The sierra (highlands) is the region of the Andes; it includes the Altiplano plateau as well as the highest peak of the country, the 6,768 m (22,205 ft) Huascarán .

[ 109 ] The third region is the selva (jungle), a wide expanse of flat terrain covered by the Amazon rainforest that extends east. Almost 60 percent of the country's area is located within this region.

[ 110 ] The country has fifty-four hydrographic basins, fifty-two of which are small coastal basins that discharge their waters into the Pacific Ocean. The final two are the endorheic basin of Lake Titicaca , and the Amazon basin, which empties into the Atlantic Ocean. Both are delimited by the Andes mountain range. The Amazon basin is particularly noteworthy as it is the source of the Amazon, which at 6,872 km (4,270 mi), is the longest river in the world, and covers 75% of Peruvian territory. Peru contains 4% of the planet's freshwater.

Most Peruvian rivers originate in the peaks of the Andes and drain into one of three basins . Those that drain toward the Pacific Ocean are steep and short, flowing only intermittently. Tributaries of the Amazon River have a much larger flow, and are longer and less steep once they exit the sierra . Rivers that drain into Lake Titicaca are generally short and have a large flow.

[ 111 ] Peru's longest rivers are the Ucayali , the Marañón , the Putumayo , the Yavarí , the Huallaga , the Urubamba , the Mantaro , and the Amazon.

[ 112 ] The largest lake in Peru , Lake Titicaca between Peru and Bolivia high in the Andes, is also the largest of South America.

[ 113 ] The largest reservoirs , all in the coastal region of Peru, are the Poechos , Tinajones, San Lorenzo, and El Fraile reservoirs.

[ 114 ] Climate Main article: Climate of Peru Köppen–Geiger climate classification map for Peru Although Peru is located entirely in the tropics , the combination of tropical latitude, mountain ranges, topography variations, and two ocean currents ( Humboldt and El Niño ) gives Peru a large diversity of climates. Elevations above sea level in the country range from −37 to 6,778 m (−121 to 22,238 ft) and precipitation ranges from less than 20 mm (0.79 in) annually in desert areas to more than 8,000 mm (310 in) in tropical rainforest areas.

Due to its geography, Peru can be divided into three main climates. The unbroken and relatively slim coastal region has moderate temperatures, low precipitation, and high humidity, except for its warmer, wetter northern reaches.

[ 115 ] In the mountain region, which covers almost a third of the country, rain is frequent in summer, and temperature and humidity diminish with altitude up to the frozen peaks of the Andes.

[ 116 ] The Peruvian Amazon , covering more than half of the total area of Peru, is characterized by heavy rainfall and high temperatures, except for its southernmost part, which has cold winters and seasonal rainfall.

[ 117 ] Wildlife Main article: Wildlife of Peru Andean cock-of-the-rock , Peru's national bird Because of its varied geography and climate, Peru has a high biodiversity with 21,462 species of plants and animals reported as of 2003, 5,855 of them endemic , [ 118 ] and is one of the megadiverse countries.

Peru has over 1,800 species of birds (120 endemic ), over 500 species of mammals , over 300 species of reptiles, and over 1,000 species of freshwater fishes .

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] The hundreds of mammals include rare species like the puma , jaguar and spectacled bear . The birds of Peru produce large amounts of guano , an economically important export. The Pacific holds large quantities of sea bass , flounder , anchovies , tuna , crustaceans , and shellfish , and is home to many sharks, sperm whales , and whales.

[ 121 ] The invertebrate fauna is far less inventoried; at least beetles (Coleoptera) have been surveyed in the "Beetles of Peru" project, led by Caroline S. Chaboo, University of Nebraska, USA and this revealved more than 12,000 documented and many new species for Peru.

[ 122 ] Peru also has an equally diverse flora . The coastal deserts produce little more than cacti , apart from hilly fog oases and river valleys that contain unique plant life.

[ 123 ] The Highlands above the tree-line known as puna is home to bushes, cactus , drought-resistant plants such as ichu , and the largest species of bromeliad – the spectacular Puya raimondii .

The cloud-forest slopes of the Andes sustain moss , orchids , and bromeliads, and the Amazon rainforest is known for its variety of trees and canopy plants.

[ 121 ] Peru had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 8.86/10, ranking it 14th globally out of 172 countries.

[ 124 ] Government and politics Main articles: Government of Peru and Politics of Peru Palacio de Gobierno , in Lima Peru is a unitary semi-presidential republic with a multi-party system.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The country has maintained a liberal democratic system under its 1993 Constitution , which replaced a constitution that leaned the government to a federation to authorize more power to the president.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] It is also a unitary republic , in which the central government holds the most power and can create administrative divisions . The Peruvian system of government combines elements derived from the political systems of the United States (a written constitution , an autonomous Supreme court , and a presidential system ) and the People's Republic of China (a unicameral congress, a premier and ministry system ).

[ 127 ] The Peruvian government is separated into three branches: Legislature: the unicameral Congress of Peru , consisting of 130 members of Congress (on a basis of population), the president of Congress, and the Permanent Commission; [ 128 ] Executive: the president, the Council of Ministers , which in practice controls domestic legislation and serve as a Cabinet to the president, consisting of the prime minister and 18 ministers of the state; Judiciary: the Supreme Court of Peru , also known as the Royal Audencia of Lima , composed of 18 justices including a supreme justice, along with 28 superior courts , 195 trial courts , and 1,838 district courts .

Under its constitution, the president of Peru is both head of state and government and is elected to a five-year term without immediate reelection.

[ 129 ] The president appoints ministers who oversee the 18 ministries of the state, including the prime minister , into the Cabinet .

[ 130 ] The constitution designates minimal authority to the prime minister, who presides over cabinet meetings in which ministers advise the president and acts as a spokesperson on behalf of the executive branch .

[ 131 ] The president is also able to pose questions of confidence to the Congress of Peru, and consequently order the dissolution of congress , done in 1992 by Alberto Fujimori and in 2019 by Martín Vizcarra .

[ 132 ] In the Congress of Peru there are 130 members, from 25 administrative divisions , determined by respective population and elected to five-year terms.

[ 133 ] Bills are proposed by the executive and legislative powers and become law through a plurality vote in Congress.

[ 134 ] The judiciary is nominally independent, [ 135 ] though political intervention into judicial matters has been common throughout history.

[ 136 ] The Congress of Peru can also pass a motion of no confidence , censure ministers, as well as initiate impeachments and convict executives.

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] Due to broadly interpreted impeachment wording in the 1993 Constitution of Peru , the legislative branch can impeach the president without cause, effectively making the executive branch subject to Congress.

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] [ 94 ] In recent history, the legislative body has passed semi-successful impeachment and two successful impeachments; Alberto Fujimori resigned prior to removal in 2000, Pedro Pablo Kuczynski resigned in 2018, Martín Vizcarra was removed from office in 2020 and Pedro Castillo was removed in 2022.

[ 139 ] Following a ruling in February 2023 by the Constitutional Court of Peru , whose members are elected by Congress, judicial oversight of the legislative body was also removed by the court, essentially giving Congress absolute control of Peru's government.

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] The Congress of Peru , in Lima Peru's electoral system uses compulsory voting for citizens from the age of 18 to 70, including dual-citizens and Peruvians abroad.

[ 142 ] Members of Congress are directly elected by constituents in respective districts through proportional voting . The president is elected in a general election, along with the vice president , through a majority in a two-round system .

[ 143 ] Elections are observed and organized by the National Jury of Elections , National Office of Electoral Processes , and the National Registry of Identification and Civil Status .

[ 144 ] Peru uses a multi-party system for congressional and general elections. Major groups that have formed governments, both on a federal and legislative level, are parties that have historically adopted economic liberalism , progressivism , right-wing populism (specifically Fujimorism ), nationalism , and reformism .

[ 145 ] The most recent general election was held on 11 April 2021 and resulted in Free Peru winning the most seats in Congress, although it fell well short of a majority.

[ 146 ] A presidential runoff between Pedro Castillo and Keiko Fujimori took place on 5 June 2021 and resulted in the victory of Castillo.

[ 147 ] Allegations of corruption in politics Main article: Corruption in Peru Many Peruvian presidents have been removed from office or imprisoned on allegations of corruption from the 1990s into the 2020s. Alberto Fujimori was serving a 25-year prison sentence for commanding death squads that killed civilians in a counterinsurgency campaign during his tenure (1990–2000). He was later also found guilty of corruption. Former president Alan García (1985–1990 and 2006–2011) killed himself in April 2019 when Peruvian police arrived to arrest him over allegations he participated in the Odebrecht bribery scheme. Former president Alejandro Toledo is accused of allegedly receiving bribes from Brazilian construction firm Odebrecht during his government (2001–2006). Former president Ollanta Humala (2011–2016) is also under investigation for allegedly receiving bribes from Odebrecht during his presidential election campaign. Humala's successor Pedro Pablo Kuczynski (2016–2018) remains under house arrest while prosecutors investigate him for favoring contracts with Odebrecht. Former president Martín Vizcarra (2018–2020) was controversially ousted by Congress after media reports alleged he had received bribes while he was a regional governor years earlier.

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] Corruption is also widespread throughout Congress as legislators use their office for parliamentary immunity and other benefits, despite a large majority of Peruvians disapproving of Congress and its behavior.

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] Administrative divisions Madre de Dios Cusco San Martín Tumbes Lambayeque Amazonas Piura La Libertad Áncash Huánuco Ucayali Cajamarca Pasco Lima Junín Loreto Apurímac Arequipa Pacific Ocean Ayacucho Puno Bolivia Tacna Chile Colombia Ecuador Lake Titicaca C. p. of Callao Brazil Regional Government of Lima Metropolitan Municipality of Lima Ica Huancavelica Moquegua Gulf of Guayaquil Clickable map of the regions of Peru Main article: Administrative divisions of Peru Peru is divided into 26 units: 24 departments , the Constitutional Province of Callao and the Province of Lima (LIM) – which is independent of any region and serves as the country's capital .

[ 152 ] Under the constitution, the 24 departments plus Callao Province have an elected "regional" [ g ] government composed of the regional governor and the regional council .

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] The governor constitutes the executive body , proposes budgets , and creates decrees, resolutions, and regional programs.

[ 155 ] The Regional Council, the region's legislative body , debates and votes on budgets, supervises regional officials, and can vote to remove the governor, deputy governor, or any member of the council from office. The regional governor and the Regional Council serve a term of four years, without immediate reelection. These governments plan regional development, execute public investment projects, promote economic activities, and manage public property.

[ 156 ] [ 157 ] Provinces such as Lima are administered by a municipal council , headed by a mayor.

[ 158 ] The goal of devolving power to regional and municipal governments was among others to improve popular participation. NGOs played an important role in the decentralization process and still influence local politics.

[ 159 ] [ 160 ] Some areas of Peru are defined as metropolitan areas which overlap district areas. The largest of them, the Lima metropolitan area , is the seventh- largest metropolis in the Americas .

Foreign relations Main article: Foreign relations of Peru The headquarters of the Andean Community is located in Lima.

Over recent decades, Peru's foreign relations has historically been dominated by close ties with the United States and Asia, [ 161 ] particularly through the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC), the World Trade Organization , the Pacific Alliance , Mercosur , and the Organization of American States (OAS).

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] Peru is an active member of several regional trade blocs and is one of the founding members of the Andean Community of Nations . It is also a member of international organizations such as the OAS and the United Nations .

[ 164 ] Javier Pérez de Cuéllar , a celebrated Peruvian diplomat, served as United Nations Secretary General from 1981 to 1991.

Peru planned to be fully integrated into the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) by 2021, attributing its economic success and efforts to strengthen institutions as meeting factors to be a part of the OECD.

[ 165 ] [ 166 ] Peru is a member of the World Trade Organization , and has pursued multiple major free trade agreements, most recently the Peru–United States Free Trade Agreement , the China–Peru Free Trade Agreement , the European Union Free Trade Agreement , free trade agreements with Japan, and many others.

[ 167 ] [ 168 ] Peru maintains an integrated relationship with other South American nations, and is a member of various South American intergovernmental agreements, more recently the Organization of American States , Mercosur , the Andean Community of Nations, the Pacific Alliance , and the APEC . Peru has historically experienced stressed relations with Chile , including the Peru v Chile international court resolution and the Chilean-Peruvian maritime dispute , but the two countries have agreed to work in improving relations.

[ 169 ] Peru has participated in taking a leading role in addressing the crisis in Venezuela through the establishment of the Lima Group .

[ 170 ] Peru is the 99th most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index .

[ 171 ] Military and law enforcement Main article: Peruvian Armed Forces Peruvian marines in the VRAEM in 2019 Peru has the fourth largest military in Latin America. Peru's armed forces – the Armed Forces of Peru – comprise the Peruvian Navy (MGP), the Peruvian Army (EP), and the Peruvian Air Force (FAP), in total numbering 392,660 personnel (including 120,660 regulars and 272,000 reservists) as of 2020.

[ 172 ] Their primary mission is to safeguard the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of the country.

[ 173 ] Their functions are separated by branch: The Peruvian Army is made up of the Chief of Staff, two Control Bodies, two Support Bodies, five Military Regions and six Command Rooms.

The Peruvian Air Force was officially created on 20 May 1929, with the name of Peruvian Aviation Corps. Its main function is to serve as the country's air defense . It also participates in social support campaigns for hard-to-reach populations, organizes air bridges during disasters, and participates in international peace missions . Its four major air bases are located in the cities of Piura , Callao , Arequipa and Iquitos .

The Peruvian Navy is in charge of the country's maritime, river, and lake defense. It is made up of 26,000 sailors. Personnel are divided into three levels: superior personnel, junior personnel and seafarers.

The military is governed by both the commander in chief , Ministry of Defense , and Joint Command of the Armed Forces (CCFFAA). The CCFFAA has subordinates to the Operational Commands and Special Commands, with which it carries out the military operations that are required for the defense and the fulfillment of the tasks that the executive power provides.

[ 174 ] Conscription was abolished in 1999 and replaced by voluntary military service .

[ 175 ] The National Police of Peru is often classified as a part of the armed forces. However, it has a distinct organizational structure and a purely civilian mandate. Its training and operations, particularly over the past two decades as an anti-terrorist unit, have imbued it with distinctly military traits, leading to its portrayal as a de facto fourth military branch with substantial land, sea, and air capabilities, and a work force of around 140,000 individuals.The Peruvian armed forces report through the Ministry of Defense, while the National Police of Peru reports through the Ministry of Interior.

[ 176 ] [ 173 ] Since the end of the crisis in Peru in 2000, the federal government has significantly reduced annual spending in defense.

[ 177 ] In the 2016–2017 budget, defense spending has constituted 1.1% of GDP ($2.3 billion), the second lowest spending relative to GDP in South America following Argentina.

[ 178 ] More recently, the Armed Forces of Peru have been used in civil defense . In 2020, Peru used its military personnel and even reservists to enforce the strict quarantine measures placed during the COVID-19 pandemic .

[ 179 ] Economy Main article: Economy of Peru The San Isidro District in Lima , the financial centre of Peru The economy of Peru is the 48th largest in the world (ranked by Purchasing Power Parity (PPP) ), [ 180 ] and the income level is classified as upper middle by the World Bank.

[ 181 ] Peru is, as of 2011 [update] , one of the world's fastest-growing economies owing to an economic boom experienced during the 2000s.

[ 182 ] It has an above-average Human Development Index (HDI) of 0.76 which has seen steady improvement over the years leading up to 2024, which has seen another 0.007 points improvement.

[ 183 ] Historically, the country's economic performance has been tied to exports, which provide hard currency to finance imports and external debt payments.

[ 184 ] Although they have provided substantial revenue, self-sustained growth and a more egalitarian distribution of income have proven elusive.

[ 185 ] According to 2015 data, 19.3% of its total population is poor, including 9% that lives in extreme poverty.

[ 186 ] Inflation in 2012 was the lowest in Latin America at only 1.8%, but increased in 2013 as oil and commodity prices rose; as of 2014 [update] it stands at 2.5%, [ 187 ] and 8.6% in 2023.

[ 188 ] The unemployment rate was 3.6% in 2012.

Lima Stock Exchange Building Peruvian economic policy has varied widely over the past decades.

[ clarify ] The 1968–1975 government of Juan Velasco Alvarado introduced radical reforms, which included agrarian reform , the expropriation of foreign companies, the introduction of an economic planning system , and the creation of a large state-owned sector. These measures failed to achieve their objectives of income redistribution and the end of economic dependence on developed nations .

[ 189 ] Despite these results, most reforms were not reversed until the 1990s, when the liberalizing government of Alberto Fujimori ended price controls , protectionism , restrictions on foreign direct investment , and most state ownership of companies.

[ 190 ] As of 2010 [update] Services account for 53% of Peruvian gross domestic product, followed by manufacturing (22.3%), extractive industries (15%), and taxes (9.7%).

[ 191 ] Recent economic growth had been fueled by macroeconomic stability, improved terms of trade , and rising investment and consumption.

[ 192 ] Trade was expected to increase further after the implementation of a free trade agreement with the United States signed on 12 April 2006.

[ 193 ] Peru's main exports were copper, gold, zinc, textiles, and fish meal; its major trade partners were the United States, China, Brazil, and Chile.

[ 194 ] Informal workers represent, in 2019, 70% of the labour market according to the National Institute of Statistics and Informatics (INEI). In 2016, almost three million children and adolescents worked in the informal sector.

[ 195 ] Mining Yanacocha Mine The country is heavily dependent on mining for the export of raw materials, which represented 61.3% of exports in 2023.

[ 196 ] In 2019, the country was the world's second largest producer of copper [ 197 ] and zinc , [ 198 ] eighth largest producer of gold , [ 199 ] third largest producer of lead , [ 200 ] the fourth largest producer of tin , [ 201 ] the fifth largest producer of boron , [ 202 ] and the fourth largest producer of molybdenum [ 203 ] – not to mention gas and of oil. In 2023, it was the third largest producer of silver globally.

[ 204 ] The country has an expectant competitive position in global mining, maintaining mining leadership in Latin America and a solid mining history and trajectory little industrialized; Peru suffers from the international variation of commodity prices.

[ 205 ] The Yanacocha mine in Cajamarca is the main source of gold extraction in Peru. It is considered the largest gold mine in South America and the second largest in the world. In 2005, 3,333,088 ounces (94,491,500 g) of gold were produced. An indicator of mining growth can be seen in mining exports, having grown from US$1,447 million in 1990 [ 206 ] to US$39,639 million in 2023.

[ 196 ] Agriculture Quinoa Peru is the world's largest producer of quinoa and maca , one of the 5 largest producers of avocado , blueberry , artichoke and asparagus , one of the 10 largest producers in the world of coffee and cocoa , and one of the 15 largest producers in the world of potato and pineapple , also having a considerable production of grape , sugarcane , rice , banana , maize and cassava ; its agriculture is considerably diversified. In livestock, Peru is one of the 20 largest producers of chicken meat in the world.

[ 207 ] According to a report by the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) published in August 2022, half of Peru's population is moderately food insecure (16.6 million people), and more than 20% (6.8 million people), are severely food insecure: they go without food for a whole day, or even several days.

[ 208 ] [ 209 ] The director of FAO Peru stresses that "this is the great paradox of a country that has enough food for its population. Peru is a net producer of food and one of the major agro-exporting powers in the region. Food insecurity is due to high social inequality and low wages, with Peru's minimum wage being one of the lowest in South America and a large informal sector. According to the FAO, the small farmers themselves suffer from hunger. Poorly paid, they also suffer from the impacts of climate change and face the problem of drug trafficking on their land and mining activity that exhausts the soil." [ 208 ] [ 209 ] Tourism Main article: Tourism in Peru Huacachina , in Ica , the only natural oasis in South America Tourism constitutes the third largest industry in Peru, behind fishing and mining. Tourism is mainly directed towards archaeological monuments, as it has more than one hundred thousand archaeological sites. According to a study by the Peruvian government, the satisfaction rate of tourists after visiting Peru is 94%. Peru has become one of the largest tourist destinations in the Americas and is the fastest growing industry in the country, growing annually at a rate of 25% over the last five years, the highest growth rate of any other country in South America.

Tourism has an impact of 7% of Peru's GDP, it is regulated and stimulated by the Commission for the Promotion of Peru for Exports and Tourism under the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism. For this reason, in 2011 Marca Perú was created, which is an initiative of the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism in association with Peruvian companies and startups to promote the purchase and consumption of products created in the country. The pillars of this initiative are: exports, tourism and investments. Tourism employs 11% of the country's economically active population (484 000 direct jobs and 340,000 indirect jobs), most of them in hospitality and transportation. Peru is known to be perfect for cultural, eco, adventure, gastronomic, beach, and luxury travel.

Choquequirao , Incan ruins in Cusco The places most visited by tourists are the cities of Lima and its historic center, Cusco , which is characterized by its Inca and colonial architecture but its main attractions are the Sacred Valley of the Incas and Machu Picchu . Other famous places in Cusco include Qorikancha , Ollantaytambo , Písac and many more.

Arequipa is also a large tourist destination, for the historic center, also for the Colca Canyon and finally Puno through Lake Titicaca . The main tourist circuit of the country is the southern circuit, which includes cities such as; Ica , Nazca , Pisco , Paracas, Ayacucho , Puerto Maldonado and others with architectural, cultural and natural attractions. The second most important route is the Callejón de Huaylas , in the department of Áncash, headquarters of adventure tourism and the main point of reference for New Andean gastronomy. Peru has 14 World Heritage Sites and 11 national parks.

Peru has many other tourist routes. Among these are those of the Mantaro River valley with the city of Huancayo as one of its axis, and the Tarma Valley as another axis, which in turn is the entrance to the central jungle and the northern city of Trujillo where Chan Chan is located, the largest adobe citadel in the world,  the traditional spa of Huanchaco and the Huacas del Sol and de la Luna belonging to the Chimú culture .

Chiclayo , Piura and the rainforest city Iquitos are also very popular destinations. According to the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Tourism, the visit of foreign tourists increased by 7% during 2015 and would have generated US$3.5 billion in foreign currency for the country.

Industry The World Bank lists the top producing countries each year, based on the total value of production. According to the 2019 list, Peru has the 50th most valuable industry in the world ($28.7 billion).

[ 210 ] In 2011 and 2016 Peru was the world's largest supplier of fishmeal .

[ 211 ] It is also the world's leading producer of alpaca wool, and the most important exporter of cotton textile garments in Latin America, and due to its natural wealth, it is an excellent place for the development of the polymer industry worldwide. The country is in a stage of economic growth and it is expected, in light of the agreements and treaties signed in free trade areas, to become one of the most attractive South American nations for developing business.

Infrastructure Transport Highway in Ica Peru's road network in 2021 consisted of 175,589 km (109,106 mi) of highways, with 29,579 km (18,380 mi) paved.

[ 212 ] Some highways in the country that stand out are the Pan American Highway and Interoceanic Highway . In 2016, the country had 827 km (514 mi) of duplicated highways , and was investing in more duplications: the plan was to have 2,634 km (1,637 mi) in 2026.

[ 213 ] The country's rail network is small: in 2018, the country only had 1,939 km (1,205 mi) of railways.

[ 214 ] Peru has important international airports such as Lima , Cuzco and Arequipa . The 10 busiest airports in South America in 2017 were São Paulo-Guarulhos (Brazil), Bogotá (Colombia), São Paulo-Congonhas (Brazil), Santiago (Chile), Lima (Peru), Brasília (Brazil), Rio de Janeiro (Brazil), Buenos Aires-Aeroparque (Argentina), Buenos Aires-Ezeiza (Argentina) and Minas Gerais (Brazil).

[ 215 ] Multiple airport expansions are currently under construction across Peru, the two main ones being the Jorge Chávez International Airport and Chinchero International Airport .

Jorge Chávez International Airport , the largest in Peru, is undergoing an expansion that includes the construction of a new runway, control tower and a new terminal, along with new hotels, logistical buildings and cargo sector. Altogether, they make up the Ciudad Aeropuerto, Airport City. It will allow transit of 40 million passengers every year and will be completed in December 2024. Another ambitious airport project is the Chinchero International Airport in Cusco . The new airport is set to replace the old Alejandro Velasco Astete International Airport and help passengers bypass a stop in Lima by introducing international routes.

Port of Callao Peru has important ports in Callao , Ilo and Matarani . The 15 most active ports in South America in 2018 were: Port of Santos (Brazil), Port of Bahia de Cartagena (Colombia), Callao (Peru), Guayaquil (Ecuador), Buenos Aires (Argentina), San Antonio (Chile), Buenaventura (Colombia), Itajaí (Brazil), Valparaíso (Chile), Montevideo (Uruguay), Paranaguá (Brazil), Rio Grande (Brazil), São Francisco do Sul (Brazil), Manaus (Brazil) and Coronel (Chile).

[ 216 ] The Port of Callao is currently the largest port in Peru, but will soon be overtaken by the Port of Chancay , a joint project between China and Peru in Chancay , north of Lima . When completed, the port will become the largest in Latin America.

[ 217 ] Officially inaugurated on November 14, 2024, the Port of Chancay is a key gateway for trade between South America and Asia, significantly reducing shipping time across the Pacific.

[ 218 ] Energy Dam on the Urubamba River in 2013 The electricity sector has experienced notable improvements in recent years. The number of homes with electric lighting grew from 82% in 2007 to 94.2% in 2016, while the quality and effectiveness of service provision also improved. Current electricity generation capacity is evenly divided between thermal energy and hydroelectric energy sources. The National Interconnected Electrical System supplies 85% of the connected population, with several isolated systems that cover the rest of the country. Peruvian electricity production totalled 5.1 TWh in the month of October 2022. Of these, 52% came from hydroelectric plants, 38.3% from thermoelectric plants (which use oil, gas and coal) and 9.7% of renewable energy plants like: wind, solar, and others.

[ 219 ] In 2021, Peru had, in terms of installed renewable electricity, 5,490 MW in hydropower (34th largest in the world), 409 MW in wind power (49th largest in the world), 336 MW in solar power (62nd largest in the world), and 185 MW in biomass.

[ 220 ] Healthcare Hospital of Tarapoto Main articles: Health in Peru and Healthcare system According to the Pan American Health Organization , life expectancy for men is 72.6 years, while for women it is 77.9 years. Infant mortality is eighteen per thousand births, having been reduced 76% from 1990 to 2011.

[ 221 ] The main causes of death of Peruvians are neoplasm , influenza and pneumonia , bacterial diseases, ischemic heart diseases and cerebrovascular diseases. According to the 2017 Population and Housing Censuses, 75.5% of the population has some type of health insurance, that is, 22,173,663 people, despite this, 24.5% of the population does not have any type of insurance.

[ 222 ] Demographics Main articles: Demographics of Peru and Peruvian people Population density, 2000 With a population of 33,396,698 inhabitants according to estimates and projections of the National Institute of Statistics and Informatics until the year 2022, Peru is the fourth most populous country in South America .

[ 223 ] Its population density is 25.79 inhabitants per square kilometre (66.8/sq mi) and its annual growth rate is 1.1%. 58.8% of the Peruvian population lives on the coast, 27% in the mountains, and 14.2% in the jungle. In 2020, 27 million Peruvians lived in urban areas, which represents 80% of the population. Peru had a population of seven million residents in 1940; between 1950 and 2000, the demographic growth rate of Peru declined from 2.6% to 1.6%, with the population being expected to reach approximately 42 million in 2050.

[ 224 ] [ 225 ] As of 2017 [update] , 79.3% lived in urban areas and 20.7% in rural areas.

[ 226 ] Major cities include the Lima metropolitan area (home to over 9.8 million people), Arequipa , Trujillo , Chiclayo , Piura , Iquitos , Cusco , Chimbote , and Huancayo ; all reported more than 250,000 inhabitants in the 2007 census .

[ 227 ] Arequipa is Peru's second largest city, with an estimated population of 1,177,000, while Trujillo is the third largest city with 1,048,000. There are 15 known uncontacted Amerindian tribes in Peru.

[ 228 ] Peru has a life expectancy of 75.0 years (72.4 for males and 77.7 for females) according to the latest data for the year 2016 from the World Bank .

[ 229 ] The economically active population is equivalent to 53.78% of the total population, or about 17,830,500 inhabitants. The largest cities are located on the coast, such as Sullana, Piura, Chiclayo, Trujillo, Chimbote, Lima and Ica. In the mountains, the cities of Arequipa, Cusco, Huancayo, Cajamarca and Juliaca stand out. Finally, in the jungle, Iquitos is the most important, followed by Pucallpa , Tarapoto , Moyobamba and Tingo María.

Largest cities or towns in Peru National Institute of Statistics and Informatics - INEI (Estimated 2024) [ 230 ] Rank Name Region Pop.

Rank Name Region Pop.

1 Lima Lima 10,213,900 ( Metro pop.

) 11 Ica Ica 362,400 2 Arequipa Arequipa 1,177,200 ( Metro pop.

) 12 Juliaca Puno 341,700 3 Trujillo La Libertad 1,048,800 ( Metro pop.

) 13 Tacna Tacna 327,800 4 Chiclayo Lambayeque 615,700 ( Metro pop.

) 14 Ayacucho Ayacucho 261,200 5 Piura Piura 586,300 15 Cajamarca Cajamarca 254,300 6 Huancayo Junín 563,400 16 Huánuco Huánuco 242,400 7 Cusco Cusco 490,900 17 Chincha Alta Ica 222,500 8 Iquitos Loreto 458,300 18 Sullana Piura 209,200 9 Pucallpa Ucayali 428,700 19 Huacho Lima 192,100 10 Chimbote Ancash 410,300 20 Tarapoto San Martín 178,800 Ethnic groups Racial groups in Peru (2017 census) [ 231 ] Mestizos (60.2%) Indigenous (25.8%) Whites (5.89%) Blacks (3.57%) East Asians (0.16%) Others (4.42%) Peru is a multiethnic nation formed by successive waves of different peoples over five centuries.

Amerindians inhabited Peruvian territory for several millennia before the Spanish conquest in the 16th century; according to historian Noble David Cook , their population decreased from nearly 5–9 million in the 1520s to around 600,000 in 1620 mainly because of infectious diseases .

[ 232 ] The 2017 census for the first time included a question on ethnic self-identification. According to the results, 60.2% of the people identified themselves as mestizo , 22.3% identified themselves as Quechua , 5.9% identified themselves as white , 3.6% identified themselves as black , 2.4% identified themselves as Aymara , 2.3% identified themselves as other ethnic groups, and 3.3% did not declare their ethnicity.

[ 233 ] In the different stages of Peru's history, ethnic composition has varied, with a continuous decline in the Amerindian proportion, due to multiple socioeconomic and sociocultural factors, birth controls, high mortality rates, exclusion, among others. The country tends towards a slow generalized miscegenation of all ethnic segments that began from the beginning of the colonial period to the present day. Because the majority of the Peruvian population has become mestizo, some feel a superiority complex towards the natives of the mountains and the jungle, either because they do not pronounce a word properly, or simply because they do not know how to read a text well, leading to a kind of racism towards them.

During the Viceroyalty of Peru , Spaniards and Africans arrived in large numbers, mixing widely with each other and with the native population, mainly on the coast (the mountains and the jungle maintained a very little mixed indigenous majority). After independence there was European immigration from Spain, Italy, England, France, and Germany, along with the Middle East.

[ 234 ] Peru freed its black slaves in 1854.

[ 235 ] Chinese and Japanese arrived in the 1850s as laborers following the end of slavery, and have since become a major influence in Peruvian society.

[ 236 ] The first Croatian immigrants came to Peru in 1573 from Dubrovnik.

[ 237 ] Quechua travelers in the Andes In recent decades, Peruvian emigration figures have shown a marked growth and currently more than 10% of Peruvians are residing outside the country. This migratory movement has been accentuated since the year 2000, the official figure of Peruvian emigrants is 2,444,634 from 1990 to 2011. This without considering the descendant population, and the illegal floating population that is essentially found in neighboring countries. It is estimated that in the last 82 years, more than 3.5 million Peruvians emigrated from the country. With respect to the main countries of destination for Peruvian emigrants between 1990 and 2011, these were: the United States (31.5%), Spain (16%), Argentina (14.3%), Italy (10.1%), Chile (8.8%), Japan (4.1%) and Venezuela (3.8%). 75% of Peruvian emigrants are between 19 and 49 years old, with a slight majority of women. For the most part, Peruvian emigration is a labor migration.

[ citation needed ] Throughout its history, Peru has received migrations from Europe (mainly Spain and Italy; and to a lesser extent from France, United Kingdom, and from other Central European countries and Southern), sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia (China and Japan). It currently receives a large number of Venezuelan immigrants, who are escaping the economic crisis that their country is suffering.

[ citation needed ] From 2016, the flow of Venezuelans to Peru increased, going from 6615 residents in that year to around 820,000 until mid-June 2019, being the most important migratory wave of the 21st century in the country. Peru is home to the second largest number of Venezuelan immigrants after Colombia.

[ 238 ] Language Main article: Languages of Peru Casa de Osambela , headquarters of the Academia Peruana de la Lengua (APL) in Lima According to the Peruvian Constitution of 1993, Peru's official languages are Spanish and, in areas where they predominate, Quechua and other Indigenous languages. Spanish is spoken natively by 82.6% of the population, and coexists with several native languages, of which the most important is the Quechuan languages , spoken by 16.92% of the population, 1.7% Aymara and 0.8% speaking another native language. In the urban areas of the country, especially in the coastal region, monolingualism of Spanish predominates; while in many rural areas of the country, particularly in the Amazon, multilingual populations dominate.

[ 239 ] Spanish language is used by the government and is the mainstream language of the country, which is used by the media and in educational systems and commerce. Amerindians who live in the Andean highlands speak Quechua and Aymara and are ethnically distinct from the diverse Indigenous groups who live on the eastern side of the Andes and in the tropical lowlands adjacent to the Amazon basin .

[ 240 ] Peru's distinct geographical regions are mirrored in a language divide between the coast where Spanish is more predominant over the Amerindian languages, and the more diverse traditional Andean cultures of the mountains and highlands. The Indigenous populations east of the Andes speak various languages and dialects. Some of these groups still adhere to traditional Indigenous languages, while others have been almost completely assimilated into the Spanish language. There has been an increasing and organized effort to teach Quechua in public schools in the areas where Quechua is spoken. In the Peruvian Amazon, numerous Indigenous languages are spoken, including Asháninka , Bora , and Aguaruna .

[ 240 ] Religion Main article: Religion in Peru Basilica Cathedral of Arequipa Roman Catholicism has been the predominant faith in Peru for centuries, albeit religious practices have a high degree of syncretism with Indigenous traditions.

[ 241 ] Two of its universities, Pontifical Catholic University of Peru and Universidad Católica San Pablo, are among the country's five top universities.

[ 242 ] As of the 2017 census, 76% of the population over 12 years old described themselves as Catholic ; 14.1% as Evangelical ; 4.8% as Protestant, Jewish, Latter-day Saints , and Jehovah's Witnesses ; and 5.1% as nonreligious.

[ 243 ] In 2025, naturalized Peruvian citizen Cardinal Robert Francis Prevost became Pope Leo XIV .

[ 244 ] Amerindian religious traditions continue to play a major role in the beliefs of Peruvians. Catholic festivities like Corpus Christi , Holy Week and Christmas sometimes blend with Amerindian traditions. Pre-Columbian Amerindian festivities remain widespread; Inti Raymi , an ancient Inca festival, is still celebrated, especially in rural communities.

[ citation needed ] The majority of towns, cities, and villages have their own official church or cathedral and patron saint . The two saints of Peru are Rose of Lima , the first Saint of the Americas, and Martin de Porres . The largest cathedral in Peru is the Metropolitan Cathedral of Lima . Other notable churches and cathedrals are the Cusco Cathedral Basilica Cathedral of Arequipa and the Basilica of Santo Domingo .

[ citation needed ] Education Main article: Education in Peru National University of San Marcos located in Lima , the oldest university in the Americas In Peru, education is under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Education , which is in charge of formulating, implementing and supervising the national education policy. According to the Political Constitution of Peru, education is compulsory and free in public schools for the initial, primary and secondary levels.

[ 245 ] [ 246 ] It is also free in public universities for students who have satisfactory academic performance and pass the admission exams. Most of the schools in Peru are private and religious . Peru's literacy rate is estimated at 92.9% as of 2007; this rate is lower in rural areas (80.3%) than in urban areas (96.3%).

[ 247 ] Education is divided into different levels: Initial education corresponds to the period between zero and five years of age, and is in charge of cribs whose purpose is to provide children with the stimulation required for their comprehensive development and the gardens that offer technical-pedagogical activities. Primary education begins with the first cycle, made up of the first and second grades. The entry age for children is six years old. This level begins in the first grade and ends in the sixth grade of primary school. Secondary education consists of five years, from first to fifth year. Then comes higher education that can be technical, productive, technological or university. To enter universities it is essential to take an admission exam, although the difficulty of this depends on the requirements of the university.

Peru is home to one of the oldest institutions of higher learning in the New World. The National University of San Marcos , founded on 12 May 1551, during the Viceroyalty of Peru , is the first officially established and the oldest continuously functioning university in the Americas.

[ 248 ] The University of San Marcos is known to be the best in Peru and among the best in South America.

Toponyms Many of the Peruvian toponyms have Indigenous sources. In the Andes communities of Ancash , Cusco and Puno , Quechua or Aymara names are overwhelmingly predominant. Their Spanish-based orthography, however, is in conflict with the normalized alphabets of these languages. According to Article 20 of Decreto Supremo No 004-2016-MC (Supreme Decree) which approves the Regulations to Law 29735, published in the official newspaper El Peruano on 22 July 2016, adequate spellings of the toponyms in the normalized alphabets of the Indigenous languages must progressively be proposed with the aim of standardizing the naming used by the National Geographic Institute (Instituto Geográfico Nacional, IGN) . The National Geographic Institute realizes the necessary changes in the official maps of Peru.

[ 249 ] Culture Main article: Culture of Peru 11th-century textile doll, Chancay culture , Walters Art Museum . Dolls are frequently found in the tombs of ancient Peru.

[ 250 ] Peruvian culture is primarily rooted in Iberian and Andean traditions, [ 251 ] though it has also been influenced by various European, Asian, and African ethnic groups.

Peruvian artistic traditions date back to the elaborate pottery, textiles, jewelry, and sculpture of Pre-Inca cultures . The Incas maintained these crafts and made architectural achievements including the construction of Machu Picchu .

Baroque dominated colonial art, though modified by Native traditions.

[ 252 ] During this period, most art focused on religious subjects; the numerous churches of the era and the paintings of the Cusco School are representative.

[ 253 ] Arts stagnated after independence until the emergence of Indigenismo in the early 20th century.

[ 254 ] Since the 1950s, Peruvian art has been eclectic and shaped by both foreign and local art currents.

Visual arts Main article: Peruvian art Peruvian art has its origin in the Andean civilizations . These civilizations arose in the territory of modern Peru before the arrival of the Spanish . Peruvian art incorporated European elements after the Spanish conquest and continued to evolve throughout the centuries up to the modern day.

[ citation needed ] Pre-Columbian art This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Peru" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Peru's earliest artwork came from the Cupisnique culture, which was concentrated on the Pacific coast, and the Chavín culture, which was largely north of Lima between the Andean mountain ranges of the Cordillera Negra and the Cordillera Blanca . Decorative work from this era, approximately the 9th century BCE, was symbolic and religious in nature. The artists worked with gold, silver, and ceramics to create a variety of sculptures and relief carvings. These civilizations were also known for their architecture and wood sculptures.

The Paracas Cavernas and Paracas Necropolis cultures developed on the south coast of Peru between the 9th century BCE and the 2nd century CE. Paracas Cavernas produced complex polychrome and monochrome ceramics with religious representations. Burials from the Paracas Necropolis also yielded complex textiles, many produced with sophisticated geometric patterns. The 3rd century BCE saw the flowering of the urban culture, Moche , in the Lambayeque region. The Moche culture produced architectural works, such as the Huacas del Sol y de la Luna and the Huaca Rajada of Sipán . They were experts at cultivation in terraces and hydraulic engineering and produced original ceramics, textiles, pictorial and sculptural works. Another urban culture, the Wari civilization , flourished between the 8th and 12th centuries in Ayacucho . Their centralized town planning was extended to other areas, such as Pachacamac , Cajamarquilla and Wari Willka . Between the 9th and 13th centuries CE, the military urban Tiwanaku empire rose by the borders of Lake Titicaca . Centered around a city of the same name in modern-day Bolivia, the Tiwanaku introduced stone architecture and sculpture of a monumental type. These works of architecture and art were made possible by the Tiwanaku's developing bronze , which enabled them to make the necessary tools.

Urban architecture reached a new height between the 14th and 15th centuries in the Chimú Culture . The Chimú built the city of Chan Chan in the valley of the Moche River , in La Libertad . The Chimú were skilled goldsmiths and created remarkable works of hydraulic engineering . The Inca Civilization , which united Peru under its hegemony in the centuries immediately preceding the Spanish conquest, incorporated into their own works a great part of the cultural legacy of the civilizations which preceded it. Important relics of their artwork and architecture can be seen in cities like Cusco , architectural remains like Sacsayhuamán and Machu Picchu and stone pavements that united Cusco with the rest of the Inca Empire.

Colonial art Main articles: Peruvian colonial architecture and Cusco School Saint Joseph and the Christ Child , Anonymous, Colonial Cusco Painting School , 17th–18th century Peruvian sculpture and painting began to define themselves from the ateliers founded by monks, who were strongly influenced by the Sevillian Baroque School. In this context, the stalls of the Cathedral choir, the fountain of the Main Square of Lima both by Pedro de Noguera , and a great part of the colonial production were registered. The first center of art established by the Spanish was the Cuzco School that taught Quechua artists European painting styles.

Diego Quispe Tito (1611–1681) was one of the first members of the Cuzco school and Marcos Zapata (1710–1773) was one of the last.

[ 255 ] Painting of this time reflected a synthesis of European and Indigenous influences, as is evident in the portrait of prisoner Atahualpa, by D. de Mora or in the canvases of the Italians Mateo Pérez de Alesio and Angelino Medoro, the Spaniards Francisco Bejarano and J. de Illescas and the Creole J. Rodriguez.

During the 17th and 18th centuries, the Baroque and Rococo styles, with their heavy ornamentation and predominantly curved lines, also dominated the fields of architecture and plastic arts , as for example on the walls of the Monastery of San Francisco in Lima.

Literature Main article: Peruvian literature Peruvian literature refers not only to literature produced in the modern Republic of Peru, but also literature produced in the Viceroyalty of Peru during the colonial period, and to oral traditions created by diverse ethnic groups living in what is now Peru during the pre-Columbian period , such as the Quechua , the Aymara and the Chanka people.

Cesar Vallejo , Peru's most famous poet Spaniards introduced writing in the 16th century; colonial literary expression included chronicles and religious literature . Some of the first chroniclers were writers and soldiers who were responsible for producing official transcripts of military expeditions. There was also a small group of non-official chroniclers or personal diarists who provided unique personal insights on the effort to subdue and colonize the region. For the most part, these chroniclers all wrote from the perspective of Spanish conquistadores , whose mission was to "civilize" and "reveal the true faith" to the native peoples of Peru. Among the official Spanish chroniclers were Francisco Xerez , personal secretary of Pizarro, who wrote the Verdadera relación de la conquista del Perú y provincia del Cuzco llamada la Nueva Castilla (The True Narrative of the Conquest of Peru and of Cuzco Province, Otherwise Known as New Castile), in 1534. Indigenous chroniclers were also known, such as Titu Cusi Yupanqui who, after familiarizing himself with Spanish culture, wrote Relación de cómo los españoles entraron en Pirú y el subceso que tuvo Mango Inca en el tiempo en que entre ellos vivió (The Narrative of How the Spaniards Entered Piru and Mango Inca's Experiences while Living Among Them) in 1570.

After independence, Costumbrism and Romanticism became the most common literary genres, as exemplified in the works of Ricardo Palma .

[ 256 ] The early 20th century's Indigenismo movement was led by such writers as Ciro Alegría [ 257 ] and José María Arguedas .

[ 258 ] The avant-garde movement of the late 19th and early 20th centuries saw the establishment of magazines Colónida and Amauta , the latter founded in 1926 by the prominent socialist essayist José Carlos Mariátegui . The influential poet César Vallejo , who was one of its collaborators, wrote modernist and often politically engaged verse in the 1920s and 1930s. Modern Peruvian literature is recognized thanks to authors such as Nobel laureate Mario Vargas Llosa , a leading member of the Latin American Boom .

[ 259 ] Cuisine Main article: Peruvian cuisine Ceviche is a popular lime-marinated seafood dish which originated in Peru.

Because of the Spanish expedition and discovery of America, explorers started the Columbian exchange which included unknown food in the Old World, including potatoes, tomatoes, and maize. Modern Indigenous Peruvian food often includes corn, potatoes, and chilies . There are now more than 3,000 kinds of potatoes grown on Peruvian terrain, according to Peru's Instituto Peruano de la Papa .

[ 260 ] Modern Peruvian cuisine blends Amerindian and Spanish food with strong influences from Chinese, African, Arab, Italian, and Japanese cooking.

[ 261 ] Common dishes include anticuchos , ceviche , and pachamanca . Peru's varied climate allows the growth of diverse plants and animals good for cooking.

[ 262 ] Peru is known to have one of the best cuisines in the world. The capital, Lima, is home to Central Restaurante , which is one of the World's Best Restaurants and serves various Peruvian dishes from each geographical part of the country, the Costa (coast), Sierra (mountains) and Selva (rainforest).

Peruvian cuisine reflects local practices and ingredients – including influences from the Indigenous population such as the Inca and cuisines introduced by colonizers and immigrants. Without the familiar ingredients from their home countries, immigrants modified their traditional cuisines by using ingredients available in Peru. The four traditional staples of Peruvian cuisine are corn , potatoes and other tubers , Amaranthaceaes ( quinoa , kañiwa and kiwicha ) and legumes ( beans and lupins ). Staples brought by the Spanish include rice, wheat, and meats (beef, pork, and chicken). Many traditional foods – such as quinoa , kiwicha , chili peppers , and several roots and tubers have increased in popularity in recent decades, reflecting a revival of interest in Native Peruvian foods and culinary techniques. It is also common to see traditional cuisines being served with a modern flair in towns like Cusco , where tourists come to visit. Chef Gastón Acurio has become well known for raising awareness of local ingredients.

Music Main article: Peruvian music Marinera Norteña Peruvian music has Andean , Spanish , and African roots.

[ 263 ] In pre-Columbian times, musical expressions varied widely in each region; the quena and the tinya were two common instruments.

[ 264 ] Spaniards introduced new instruments, such as the guitar and the harp, which led to the development of crossbred instruments like the charango .

[ 265 ] African contributions to Peruvian music include its rhythms and the cajón , a percussion instrument.

Peruvian folk dances include marinera , tondero , zamacueca , diablada and huayno .

[ 266 ] Peruvian music is dominated by the national instrument , the charango . The charango is a member of the lute family of instruments and was invented during colonial times by musicians imitating the Spanish vihuela . In the Canas and Titicaca regions, the charango is used in courtship rituals, symbolically invoking mermaids with the instrument to lure the woman to the male performers. Until the 1960s, the charango was denigrated as an instrument of the rural poor. After the revolution in 1959, which built the Indigenismo movement (1910–1940), the charango was popularized among other performers. Variants include the walaycho , chillador , chinlili , and the larger and lower-tuned charangon .

While the Spanish guitar is widely played, so too is the Spanish-in-origin bandurria . Unlike the guitar, it has been transformed by Peruvian players over the years, changing from a 12-string, 6-course instrument to one having 12 to 16 strings in a mere four courses. Violins and harps , also of European origin, are also played. A very famous instrument from Peru is the pan flute , dating back to Incan times. It is made of hollow bamboo tubes and is widely played in the Peruvian Andes.

The country also has some rock and pop singers and bands of great acceptance, both nationally and internationally such as: Susan Ochoa, Anna Carina , Jean Paul Strauss, Leslie Shaw , Raúl Romero, Gian Marco and Pedro Suárez-Vértiz , winners of awards such as the Latin Grammy Awards and Orgullosamente Latino Award . Peru is also the country that saw the birth of Los Saicos , considered the first garage rock and protopunk band in the world. Other famous Peruvian rock bands include Arena Hash , Nosequien y Los Nosecuantos , Frágil , Amen , and Mar de Copas .

Cinema Award-winning filmmaker Claudia Llosa While the Peruvian film industry has not been nearly as prolific as that of some other Latin American countries, some Peruvian movies have enjoyed regional success. Historically, the cinema of Peru began in Iquitos in 1932 with Antonio Wong Rengifo (alongside a significant early film billboard from 1900) due to the rubber boom and the influx of foreigners bringing technology to the city. This led to the development of an extensive and distinctive filmography, characterized by a style different from the films produced in the capital, Lima .

Peru also produced the first animated 3-D film in Latin America, Piratas en el Callao . This film is set in the historical port city of Callao , which during colonial times had to defend itself against attacks by Dutch and British privateers seeking to undercut Spain's trade with its colonies. The film was produced by the Peruvian company Alpamayo Entertainment, which made a second 3-D film one year later: Dragones: Destino de Fuego .

In February 2006, the film Madeinusa , produced as a joint venture between Peru and Spain and directed by Claudia Llosa , was set in an imaginary Andean village and describes the stagnating life of Madeinusa performed by Magaly Solier and the traumas of post-civil war Peru.

Llosa, who drew inspiration from elements of Gabriel García Márquez 's magic realism , won an award at the Rotterdam Film Festival . Llosa's second feature, The Milk of Sorrow ("La Teta Asustada"), was nominated for the 82nd Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Picture, the first Peruvian film in the academy's history to be nominated. The film won the Golden Bear at the 59th Berlin International Film Festival .

Sport Main article: Sport in Peru Estadio Nacional del Perú in 2021 The idea of sport dates back to the arrival of the Spanish in the 16th century, though many games and other native forms of entertainment predated the colonial era. More recently, the American ideology of physical education linked to commercialization has had widespread appeal. Sports in the country are divided into several sports federations (one for each sports practice) that are under the tutelage of the highest state entity to regulate their practice, the Peruvian Sports Institute (IPD). Most of the sports federations are based in the Villa Deportiva Nacional in Lima. Peru's largest stadium is Estadio Monumental "U" which has a capacity of over 80,000, making it the second largest stadium in South America. The country's national stadium is the Estadio Nacional . Peru has hosted various sporting events, such as the 2004 Copa América , 2005 FIFA U-17 World Championship , 2013 and 2024 Bolivarian Games , and the largest sporting event held by the country, the 2019 Pan American Games . The national sport of Peru is Paleta frontón , which has developed in the 16th century in Lima.

Football is the most popular and widely practiced sport in the country. The Peruvian Primera División is the most important club tournament in the nation. The men's team has had some important performances on the world stage. They participated in the FIFA World Cup five times. Likewise, they have been champions of the Copa América on two occasions, in 1939 and 1975 , and impressed at the 1936 Summer Olympics before going home after withdrawing from a walkover given to Austria in the quarter-final.

Teófilo Cubillas is considered Peru's greatest footballer. At the club level, Universitario stands out with the runner-up in the Copa Libertadores in 1972 and Sporting Cristal also with the runner-up in 1997. The only Peruvian clubs with international titles are Cienciano, which won the 2003 Recopa Sudamericana and the 2004 Recopa Sudamericana , and Universitario, champion of the 2011 U-20 Copa Libertadores .

Other popular sports in Peru are volleyball , surfing and karate . Peru has won multiple gold, silver, and bronze medals at the Pan American Games . The Peru women's national volleyball team was one of the dominant teams in the 1980s and 90s and won the silver medal at the 1988 Summer Olympics , losing to the Soviet Union 3–2 after having led by a wide margin. Peru has usually been very good at surfing and volleyball.

See also Peru portal Outline of Peru Notes and references Explanatory notes ^ In Peru, other languages have been officially recognized as legitimate autochthonous languages , which are co-official alongside Spanish in those areas where they predominate.

Quechua : Piruw Ripuwlika Aymara : Piruwxa Ripuwlika ^ In those areas where they predominate.

^ The 2017 National Census included, for the first time, a question of ethnic self-identification that was addressed to people aged 12 and over considering elements such as their ancestry, their customs and their family origin to visualize and better understand the cultural reality of the country.

^ The question about religion included in the 2017 National Census was addressed to people aged 12 and over.

^ / p ə ˈ r uː / ⓘ pə- ROO ; Spanish: Perú [peˈɾu] ; Quechua : Piruw [pɪɾʊw] ; [ 9 ] Aymara : Piruw [pɪɾʊw] ^ Spanish : República del Perú ⓘ ^ The government in each department is referred to as "regional" governments despite being departments.

Citations ^ "Perú: Perfil Sociodemográfico" (PDF) .

Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática . p. 231.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 February 2020 . Retrieved 27 September 2018 .

^ a b Shugart, Matthew Søberg (September 2005).

"Semi-Presidential Systems: Dual Executive and Mixed Authority Patterns" (PDF) .

Graduate School of International Relations and Pacific Studies . Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 August 2008 . Retrieved 31 August 2017 .

^ a b Shugart, Matthew Søberg (December 2005).

"Semi-Presidential Systems: Dual Executive And Mixed Authority Patterns" .

French Politics .

3 (3): 323– 351.

doi : 10.1057/palgrave.fp.8200087 .

ISSN 1476-3427 .

OCLC 6895745903 .

Only in Latin America have all new democracies retained a pure presidential form, except for Peru (president-parliamentary) and Bolivia (assembly-independent).

^ "Peru" . Central Intelligence Agency. 27 February 2023.

Archived from the original on 10 January 2021 . Retrieved 24 February 2023 – via CIA.gov.

^ a b United Nations.

"Population, including UN projections, 2023" .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2023 . Retrieved 25 February 2023 .

^ a b c d "World Economic Outlook Database, October 2023 Edition. (Peru)" .

International Monetary Fund . 10 October 2023.

Archived from the original on 29 October 2023 . Retrieved 12 October 2023 .

^ "Gini Index" .

World Bank .

Archived from the original on 3 March 2024 . Retrieved 12 March 2024 .

^ "Human Development Report 2023/24" .

United Nations Development Programme . 13 March 2024.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 March 2024 . Retrieved 13 March 2024 .

^ Quechua name used by government of Peru is Perú (see Quechua-language version of Peru Parliament website Archived 30 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine and Quechua-language version of Peru Constitution but common Quechua name is Piruw ^ "Perú: País megadiverso" [Peru: Megadiverse country] (PDF) (in Spanish). Servicio Nacional de Áreas Naturales Protegidas. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 June 2014.

^ Wilmer Angel, Aguilar Pereda (2019).

"Establecimiento y organización del virreinato del Perú" .

Universidad Nacional de Trujillo .

Archived from the original on 19 March 2024 . Retrieved 19 March 2024 .

^ Back, Michele; Zavala, Virginia (2018).

Racialization and Language: Interdisciplinary Perspectives From Perú .

Routledge . pp.

286– 291.

Archived from the original on 4 August 2021 . Retrieved 4 August 2021 .

At the end of the 1980s, a group of military elites secretly developed an analysis of Peruvian society called El cuaderno verde . This analysis established the policies that the following government would have to carry out in order to defeat Shining Path and rescue the Peruvian economy from the deep crisis in which it found itself.

El cuaderno verde was passed onto the national press in 1993, after some of these policies were enacted by President Fujimori.

^ Alfredo Schulte-Bockholt (2006). "Chapter 5: Elites, Cocaine, and Power in Colombia and Peru".

The politics of organized crime and the organized crime of politics: a study in criminal power . Lexington Books. pp.

114– 118.

ISBN 978-0-7391-1358-5 .

important members of the officer corps, particularly within the army, had been contemplating a military coup and the establishment of an authoritarian regime, or a so-called directed democracy. The project was known as 'Plan Verde', the Green Plan. ... Fujimori essentially adopted the Green Plan and the military became a partner in the regime. ... The self-coup, of April 5, 1992, dissolved the Congress and the country's constitution and allowed for the implementation of the most important components of the Green Plan ^ a b c d Villalba, Fernando Velásquez (2022).

"A Totalidade Neoliberal-Fujimorista: Estigmatização e Colonialidade No Peru Contemporâneo" .

Revista Brasileira de Ciências Sociais .

37 (109) e3710906.

doi : 10.1590/3710906/2022 .

ISSN 0102-6909 .

S2CID 251877338 .

terruqueo, ou seja, a construção artificial, racista e conveniente de um inimigo sociopolítico para deslegitimar formas de protesto social ^ Asensio, Raúl; Camacho, Gabriela; González, Natalia; Grompone, Romeo; Pajuelo Teves, Ramón; Peña Jimenez, Omayra; Moscoso, Macarena; Vásquez, Yerel; Sosa Villagarcia, Paolo (August 2021).

El Profe: Cómo Pedro Castillo se convirtió en presidente del Perú y qué pasará a continuación (in Spanish) (1 ed.).

Lima, Peru : Institute of Peruvian Studies . p. 92.

ISBN 978-612-326-084-2 .

Archived from the original on 5 November 2022 . Retrieved 17 November 2021 .

^ a b c d Banda, Gonzalo (12 January 2023).

"At Peru Protests' Epicenter, Rage—And a Sense of Betrayal" .

Americas Quarterly .

Archived from the original on 12 January 2023 . Retrieved 15 January 2023 .

^ David E. Castro Garro.

"Módulo de capacitación en recursos genéticos y bioseguridad" [Training module on genetic resources and biosafety] (PDF) (in Spanish).

Ministerio de Ambiente de la República de Perú . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 April 2018.

^ "Freedom in the World 2017 – Populists and Autocrats: The Dual Threat to Global Democracy" Archived 27 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine by Freedom House , 31 January 2017 ^ McKercher, B. J. C. (2012).

Routledge Handbook of Diplomacy and Statecraft . Routledge.

ISBN 9781136664366 .

Archived from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 30 May 2020 .

a Middle Power like Peru lack the diplomatic and other resources...

^ "A guide to Lima: South America's culinary capital" .

Travel . 23 May 2025 . Retrieved 23 May 2025 .

^ Porras Barrenechea, Raúl.

El nombre del Perú . Lima: Talleres Gráficos P.L. Villanueva, 1968, p. 83.

^ Raúl Porras Barrenechea, El nombre del Perú , p. 84.

^ Raúl Porras Barrenechea, El nombre del Perú , p. 86.

^ Vega, Garcilasco, Commentarios Reales de los Incas , Editorial Mantaro, Lima, ed. 1998. pp. 14–15. First published in Lisbon in 1609.

^ Raúl Porras Barrenechea, El nombre del Perú , p. 87.

^ Article I , Constitution of Peru , 1979 ^ Dillehay, Tom D. (2017).

Where the Land Meets the Sea . University of Texas Press. p. 4.

ISBN 9781477311493 .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2020 . Retrieved 30 December 2019 .

^ "The Ancient Andes" .

History Guild . Retrieved 18 May 2025 .

^ "UNESCO" .

whc.unesco.org . Retrieved 18 May 2025 .

^ Cordy-Collins, Alana (1992). "Archaism or Tradition?: The Decapitation Theme in Cupisnique and Moche Iconography".

Latin American Antiquity .

3 (3): 206– 220.

doi : 10.2307/971715 .

JSTOR 971715 .

S2CID 56406255 .

^ "Chavin (Archaeological Site)" . UNESCO. Archived from the original on 8 May 2016 . Retrieved 27 July 2014 .

^ Beck, Roger B.; Black, Linda; Krieger, Larry S.; Naylor, Phillip C.; Shabaka, Dahia Ibo (1999).

World History: Patterns of Interaction . Evanston, IL: McDougal Littell.

ISBN 0-395-87274-X .

^ "Mochica culture, pre-Inca in northern Peru" .

Sobre Peru . 11 September 2009. Archived from the original on 29 June 2016.

^ a b Keatinge, Richard W.; Conrad, Geoffrey W. (1983). "Imperialist expansion in Peruvian prehistory: Chimu administration of a conquered territory".

Journal of Field Archaeology .

10 (3): 255– 283.

doi : 10.1179/009346983791504246 .

^ "UNESCO 2" .

whc.unesco.org . Retrieved 18 May 2025 .

^ Blom, Deborah E.; Janusek, John W. (2004). "Making Place: Humans as Dedications in Tiwanaku".

World Archaeology .

36 : 123– 141.

doi : 10.1080/0043824042000192623 .

S2CID 154741300 .

^ Pre-Inca Cultures Archived 3 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine . countrystudies.us.

^ "UNESCO 3" .

whc.unesco.org . Retrieved 18 May 2025 .

^ Rowe, John (1948). "The Kingdom of Chimor".

Acta Americana .

^ Dunnell, Tony (11 May 2019).

"Ten Interesting Facts About The Inca Empire" .

SA Vacations . Retrieved 18 May 2025 .

^ The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica. "Pachacuti Inca Yupanqui". Encyclopedia Britannica, 1 Apr. 2024, https://www.britannica.com/biography/Pachacuti-Inca-Yupanqui . Accessed 18 May 2025 ^ Demarest, Arthur Andrew; Conrad, Geoffrey W. (1984).

Religion and Empire: The Dynamics of Aztec and Inca Expansionism . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

57– 59.

ISBN 0-521-31896-3 .

^ Peru The Incas Archived 3 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ Torero Fernández de Córdoba, Alfredo. (1970) "Lingüística e historia de la Sociedad Andina", Anales Científicos de la Universidad Agraria, VIII, 3–4, págs. 249–251. Lima: UNALM.

^ "The Inca – All Empires" .

www.allempires.com . Archived from the original on 20 January 2012.

^ "The Inca" at the Wayback Machine (archived 10 November 2009) The National Foreign Language Center at the University of Maryland.

29 May 2007. Retrieved 27 July 2014.

^ "Inca: Empire, Religion & Civilization" .

HISTORY . 11 March 2015 . Retrieved 18 May 2025 .

^ Lavallé, Bernard (2004), "7 El fin de Atahualpa" , Francisco Pizarro : Biografía de una conquista , Travaux de l'IFEA (in Spanish), Lima: Institut français d’études andines, pp.

123– 139, ISBN 978-2-8218-2650-2 , archived from the original on 19 March 2024 , retrieved 19 March 2024 ^ "Battle of Cajamarca | Summary | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com .

Archived from the original on 4 February 2021 . Retrieved 19 March 2024 .

^ Lovell, W. George (1992). " 'Heavy Shadows and Black Night': Disease and Depopulation in Colonial Spanish America".

Annals of the Association of American Geographers .

82 (3): 426– 443.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8306.1992.tb01968.x .

JSTOR 2563354 .

^ Schottenhammer, Angela (2019).

"Connecting China with the Pacific World?" .

Orientierungen. Zeitschrift zur Kultur Asiens : 144.

ISSN 0936-4099 .

Archived from the original on 27 May 2021 . Retrieved 27 May 2021 .

The wreck excavation could prove that European style jewelry was being made in the Philippines. Some 56 intact storage jars were discovered. Investigations revealed that they had come from kilns in South China, Cochin China (Vietnam), and Siam (Thailand), and one was of Spanish design. The archaeology of the Nuestra Señora de la Concepción, consequently, also provides us with intriguing new insights into the trans-Pacific trade connection and the commodities involved. Each time a galleon arrived at Acapulco, a market, la feria, was organized. This attracted all kinds of people such as Indian peddlers, Mexican and Peruvian merchants, soldiers, the king's officials, and friars, as well as a few Chinese and some Filipinos. From Acapulco, the goods were transported into the hinterlands, into Mexico City, and various other places, including Peru. The Peruvian port at that time was Callao and the Ciudad de los Reyes, that is Lima, the capital of the Viceroyalty of Peru. Generally speaking, much of what was not sold (rezagos) directly in Acapulco was redirected towards Peru. Peruvian ships, mainly loaded with silver, mercury, cacao from Guayaquil, and Peruvian wines, sailed to ports along the Mexican and Guatemalan coasts, returning with Asian goods and leftover cargo from the galleon ships. Besides Callao and Guayaquil, Paita was also frequently a port of call.

^ "Second book of the second part of the Conquests of the Filipinas Islands, and chronicle of the religious of our Father, St. Augustine" .

Zamboanga City History .

Archived from the original on 28 February 2021 . Retrieved 18 February 2021 .

He (Governor Don Sebastían Hurtado de Corcuera) brought a great reenforcement of soldiers, many of them from Perú, as he made his voyage to Acapulco from that kingdom.

^ Russell Bourne, Gods of War, Gods of Peace (New York: Harcourt Books, 2002), 7–9.

^ Kathryn Burns, Colonial Habits (Durham and London: Duke University Press, 1999), 15–40.

^ a b Conquest and Colony of Peru.

"Conquest and Colony of Peru" .

discover-peru.org .

Archived from the original on 18 August 2016 . Retrieved 28 July 2014 .

^ "Peru" .

countrystudies.us . Archived from the original on 3 November 2016 . Retrieved 27 July 2014 .

^ "Túpac Amaru II" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 3 June 2019 . Retrieved 10 July 2018 .

^ Scheina, 2003, Latin America's Wars: The Age of the Caudillo, 1791–1899 , p. 58.

^ Gootenberg (1991) p. 12.

^ Discover Peru (Peru cultural society).

War of Independence Archived 21 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 28 July 2014 ^ Gootenberg (1993) pp. 5–6.

^ Gootenberg (1993) p. 9.

^ Klarén, Peter (2000).

Peru: society and nationhood in the Andes . New York: Oxford University Press, pp. 262–276, ISBN 0195069285 .

^ "Francisco Morales Bermudez, ex-Peruvian military ruler, dies at 100" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on 16 July 2022.

^ Brands, Hal (15 September 2010). "The United States and the Peruvian Challenge, 1968–1975".

Diplomacy & Statecraft .

21 (3).

Taylor & Francis : 471– 490.

doi : 10.1080/09592296.2010.508418 .

S2CID 154119414 .

^ "Welcome, Mr. Peruvian President: Why Alan García is no hero to his people" .

Council on Hemispheric Affairs . 2 June 2010.

Archived from the original on 18 April 2019 . Retrieved 18 April 2019 .

^ a b Leonard, Thomas M. (2013).

Encyclopedia of the Developing World . Taylor and Francis. p. 685.

ISBN 9781135205157 .

The inflation rate in 1990 was 7,650%.... President Fujimori immediately implemented a program of severe austerity and privatization programs. The economic shock therapy hit the poor the hardest, but brought inflation down to 139% in 1991 and 57% in 1992.

^ a b Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1992 . ECLAC. 31 December 1992. p. 31.

ISBN 9789210601191 .

Archived from the original on 27 April 2023 . Retrieved 19 March 2023 .

^ Luis Rossell, Historias gráficas de la violencia en el Perú, 1980–1984, 2008 ^ Rospigliosi, Fernando (1996).

Las Fuerzas Armadas y el 5 de abril: la percepción de la amenaza subversiva como una motivación golpista . Lima: Instituto de Estudios Peruanos. pp.

46– 47.

^ Gaussens, Pierre (2020).

"The forced serilization of indigenous population in Mexico in the 1990s" .

Canadian Journal of Bioethics .

3 (3): 180+.

doi : 10.7202/1073797ar .

S2CID 234586692 .

a government plan, developed by the Peruvian army between 1989 and 1990s to deal with the Shining Path insurrection, later known as the 'Green Plan', whose (unpublished) text expresses in explicit terms a genocidal intention ^ Burt, Jo-Marie (September–October 1998). "Unsettled accounts: militarization and memory in postwar Peru".

NACLA Report on the Americas .

32 (2).

Taylor & Francis : 35– 41.

doi : 10.1080/10714839.1998.11725657 .

the military's growing frustration over the limitations placed upon its counterinsurgency operations by democratic institutions, coupled with the growing inability of civilian politicians to deal with the spiraling economic crisis and the expansion of the Shining Path, prompted a group of military officers to devise a coup plan in the late 1980s. The plan called for the dissolution of Peru's civilian government, military control over the state, and total elimination of armed opposition groups. The plan, developed in a series of documents known as the "Plan Verde," outlined a strategy for carrying out a military coup in which the armed forces would govern for 15 to 20 years and radically restructure state-society relations along neoliberal lines.

^ a b c Alfredo Schulte-Bockholt (2006). "Chapter 5: Elites, Cocaine, and Power in Colombia and Peru".

The politics of organized crime and the organized crime of politics: a study in criminal power . Lexington Books. pp.

114– 118.

ISBN 978-0-7391-1358-5 .

important members of the officer corps, particularly within the army, had been contemplating a military coup and the establishment of an authoritarian regime, or a so-called directed democracy. The project was known as 'Plan Verde', the Green Plan. ... Fujimori essentially adopted the 'Plan Verde,' and the military became a partner in the regime. ... The autogolpe, or self-coup, of April 5, 1992, dissolved the Congress and the country's constitution and allowed for the implementation of the most important components of the 'Plan Verde.' ^ a b Rospigliosi, Fernando (1996).

Las Fuerzas Armadas y el 5 de abril: la percepción de la amenaza subversiva como una motivación golpista . Lima, Peru: Instituto de Estudios Peruanos. pp.

28– 40.

^ a b Avilés, William (Spring 2009). "Despite Insurgency: Reducing Military Prerogatives in Colombia and Peru".

Latin American Politics and Society .

51 (1).

Cambridge University Press : 57– 85.

doi : 10.1111/j.1548-2456.2009.00040.x .

S2CID 154153310 .

^ Cameron, Maxwell A. (June 1998). "Latin American Autogolpes: Dangerous Undertows in the Third Wave of Democratisation".

Third World Quarterly .

19 (2).

Taylor & Francis : 228.

doi : 10.1080/01436599814433 .

the outlines for Peru's presidential coup were first developed within the armed forces before the 1990 election. This Plan Verde was shown to President Fujimorti after the 1990 election before his inauguration. Thus, the president was able to prepare for an eventual self-coup during the first two years of his administration ^ "El "Plan Verde" Historia de una traición" .

Oiga .

647 . 12 July 1993.

Archived from the original on 8 October 2021 . Retrieved 8 January 2022 .

^ a b Mitrovic, Mijail (30 December 2021).

"At the fabric of history: Peru's political struggle under (and against) the pandemic" .

Dialectical Anthropology .

45 (4): 431– 446.

doi : 10.1007/s10624-021-09634-5 .

PMC 8716181 .

PMID 34980936 .

^ Black, Jan (2018).

Latin America Its Problems and Its Promise: A Multidisciplinary Introduction . Taylor and Francis. p. 355.

ISBN 9780429974694 .

Archived from the original on 27 April 2023 . Retrieved 19 March 2023 .

In September 1992, a small, elite squad within Peru's antiterrorist police (established under Garcia) captured the Shining Path leader, Abimael Guzman. Within the next few weeks, using information in Guzman's hideout, police arrested more than 1,000 suspected guerillas. During the next few years, the Shining Path was decimated.

^ Gaussens, Pierre (2020).

"The forced serilization of indigenous population in Mexico in the 1990s" .

Canadian Journal of Bioethics .

3 (3): 180+.

doi : 10.7202/1073797ar .

S2CID 234586692 .

a government plan, developed by the Peruvian army between 1989 and 1990s to deal with the Shining Path insurrection, later known as the 'Green Plan', whose (unpublished) text expresses in explicit terms a genocidal intention ^ Back, Michele; Zavala, Virginia (2018).

Racialization and Language: Interdisciplinary Perspectives From Perú .

Routledge . pp.

286– 291.

Archived from the original on 4 August 2021 . Retrieved 4 August 2021 .

At the end of the 1980s, a group of military elites secretly developed an analysis of Peruvian society called El cuaderno verde . This analysis established the policies that the following government would have to carry out in order to defeat Shining Path and rescue the Peruvian economy from the deep crisis in which it found itself.

El cuaderno verde was passed onto the national press in 1993, after some of these policies were enacted by President Fujimori. ... It was a program that resulted in the forced sterilization of Quechua-speaking women belonging to rural Andean communities. This is an example of 'ethnic cleansing' justified by the state, which claimed that a properly controlled birth rate would improve the distribution of national resources and thus reduce poverty levels. ... The Peruvian state decided to control the bodies of 'culturally backward' women, since they were considered a source of poverty and the seeds of subversive groups ^ a b "Peru" .

The Economist . 17 October 2007. Archived from the original on 10 April 2008.

^ White, Gavin David (2009).

"Displacement, decentralisation and reparation in post-conflict Peru" .

Forced Migration Review . Archived from the original on 15 October 2017 . Retrieved 2 July 2017 .

^ Ortiz de Zárate, Roberto (6 June 2016).

"Keiko Fujimori Higuchi" .

Barcelona Centre for International Affairs .

Archived from the original on 9 December 2022 . Retrieved 21 February 2021 .

^ "Fujimori 'to run for presidency' " . BBC. 20 September 2004.

Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 13 February 2016 .

^ Forero, Juan (9 April 2006).

"Fujimori's Daughter Polishes Her Jailed Father's Image on the Road to Congress in Peru" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 4 October 2020 . Retrieved 3 June 2021 .

^ "Peru's Fujimori sentenced to 25 years prison" .

Reuters . 7 April 2009.

Archived from the original on 12 April 2009 . Retrieved 10 July 2018 .

^ Flannery, Nathaniel Parish.

"Political Risk Analysis: How Will Peru's Economy Perform In 2017?" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on 9 December 2022 . Retrieved 9 December 2022 .

^ "The Political Limits of Presidential Impeachment: Lessons from Latin America" .

German Institute for Global and Area Studies . 2021.

Archived from the original on 9 December 2022 . Retrieved 9 December 2022 .

^ "Peru's Prime Minister Ana Jara deposed over spy row" .

BBC . BBC News. 31 March 2015.

Archived from the original on 20 August 2017 . Retrieved 19 August 2017 .

^ a b Asensio, Raúl; Camacho, Gabriela; González, Natalia; Grompone, Romeo; Pajuelo Teves, Ramón; Peña Jimenez, Omayra; Moscoso, Macarena; Vásquez, Yerel; Sosa Villagarcia, Paolo (2021).

El Profe: Cómo Pedro Castillo se convirtió en presidente del Perú y qué pasará a continuación (in Spanish) (1 ed.).

Lima, Peru : Institute of Peruvian Studies . p. 92.

ISBN 978-612-326-084-2 .

Archived from the original on 5 November 2022 . Retrieved 17 November 2021 .

^ a b Taj, Mitra (7 December 2021).

" 'Too many mistakes': Peru's president threatened with impeachment after shaky start" .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on 10 December 2022 . Retrieved 13 December 2021 .

^ a b "Peru's Keiko Fujimori backs long-shot effort to impeach President Castillo" .

Reuters . 19 November 2021.

Archived from the original on 29 November 2021 . Retrieved 13 December 2021 .

^ a b Tegel, Simeon (15 October 2021).

"Can Pedro Castillo Save His Presidency?" .

Foreign Policy .

Archived from the original on 15 October 2021 . Retrieved 13 December 2021 .

^ Tegel, Simeon (12 August 2018).

"Corruption scandals have ensnared 3 Peruvian presidents. Now the whole political system could change" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 9 November 2020 . Retrieved 17 August 2018 .

^ "Peru's Vizcarra Begins Presidency With 57 Pct Approval Rating" .

U.S. News & World Report . 15 April 2018.

Archived from the original on 16 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 April 2018 .

^ "Peruvian Congress votes to impeach President Martín Vizcarra" .

BBC News . 10 November 2020.

Archived from the original on 28 August 2021 . Retrieved 17 August 2021 .

^ "Peru's President Merino resigns after deadly crackdown on protesters" .

BBC News . 16 November 2020.

Archived from the original on 3 October 2021 . Retrieved 17 August 2021 .

^ "Francisco Sagasti sworn in as interim Peruvian leader" .

BBC News . 18 November 2020.

Archived from the original on 16 November 2020 . Retrieved 17 August 2021 .

^ "Pedro Castillo declared president-elect of Peru" .

BBC News . 20 July 2021.

Archived from the original on 13 August 2021 . Retrieved 17 August 2021 .

^ "Peru: Pedro Castillo sworn in as president" .

DW.com . 28 July 2021.

Archived from the original on 13 August 2021 . Retrieved 17 August 2021 .

^ "The bicentennial of Peru's independence: A historic opportunity" .

The Jakarta Post .

Archived from the original on 20 January 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2022 .

^ "Peru's President Accused of Coup After Move to Dissolve Congress" .

Bloomberg.com . 7 December 2022.

Archived from the original on 8 December 2022 . Retrieved 8 December 2022 .

^ "Peru's President Pedro Castillo replaced by Dina Boluarte after impeachment" .

BBC News . 7 December 2022.

Archived from the original on 8 December 2022 . Retrieved 8 December 2022 .

^ "Peru president removed from office and charged with 'rebellion' after alleged coup attempt" .

The Guardian . 8 December 2022.

Archived from the original on 7 December 2022 . Retrieved 8 December 2022 .

^ a b "Daniel Encinas: "Dina Boluarte ha hecho una coalición con fuerzas que no ganaron la elección" " .

La Republica (in Spanish). 2 January 2023.

Archived from the original on 16 January 2023 . Retrieved 12 January 2023 .

^ "Perú Libre presentará moción de interpelación contra ministro del Interior" .

La Republica (in Spanish). 4 January 2023.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2023 . Retrieved 12 January 2023 .

^ Chaboo, C.S. & A. Catenazzi. 2015. Beetles (Coleoptera) of Peru: A survey of the Families. Biogeography. Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society 88(02):140–143.

^ Andes Handbook, Huascarán Archived 8 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine . 2 June 2002.

^ Instituto de Estudios Histórico–Marítimos del Perú, El Perú y sus recursos: Atlas geográfico y económico , p. 16.

^ Instituto de Estudios Histórico–Marítimos del Perú, El Perú y sus recursos: Atlas geográfico y económico , p. 31.

^ Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática, Perú: Compendio Estadístico 2005 , p. 21.

^ Grove, Matthew J; Baker, Paul A; Cross, Scott L; Rigsby, Catherine A; Seltzer, Geoffrey O (2003). "Application of Strontium Isotopes to Understanding the Hydrology and Paleohydrology of the Altiplano, Bolivia-Peru".

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

194 ( 1– 3): 281– 297.

Bibcode : 2003PPP...194..281G .

doi : 10.1016/S0031-0182(03)00282-7 .

^ Oficina nacional de evaluación de recursos naturales (previous INRENA).

"Inventario nacional de lagunas y represamientos" (PDF) .

INRENA . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 June 2007 . Retrieved 3 March 2008 .

^ Instituto de Estudios Histórico–Marítimos del Perú, El Perú y sus recursos: Atlas geográfico y económico , pp. 24–25.

^ Instituto de Estudios Histórico–Marítimos del Perú, El Perú y sus recursos: Atlas geográfico y económico , pp. 25–26.

^ Instituto de Estudios Histórico–Marítimos del Perú, El Perú y sus recursos: Atlas geográfico y económico , pp. 26–27.

^ Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática, Perú: Compendio Estadístico 2005 , p. 50.

^ "Peru Wildlife: Portal for information about wildlife and ecotourism in Peru" .

www.peruwildlife.info . Archived from the original on 17 May 2008 . Retrieved 28 November 2016 .

^ Ortega, H., Hidalgo, M., Correa, E., Espino, J., Chocano, L., Trevejo, G., ... & Quispe, R. (2012). Lista anotada de los peces de aguas continentales del Peru. Estado actual del conocimiento, distribución, usos y aspectos de conservación. Lima, Perú: Ministerio del Ambiente ^ a b "Peru: Wildlife" . Select Latin America. Archived from the original on 26 February 2010 . Retrieved 16 September 2009 .

^ Chaboo, C.S. 2015. Beetles (Coleoptera) of Peru: A survey of the Families. Part I. Overview. Journal of the Kansas Entomological Society 88(02):135–139.

^ Dillon, Michael O.

"The solanaceae of the lomas formations of coastal Peru and Chile" (PDF) .

sacha.org .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 July 2007 . Retrieved 28 November 2016 .

^ Grantham, H. S.; et al. (2020).

"Anthropogenic modification of forests means only 40% of remaining forests have high ecosystem integrity – Supplementary Material" .

Nature Communications .

11 (1): 5978.

Bibcode : 2020NatCo..11.5978G .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-020-19493-3 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 7723057 .

PMID 33293507 .

^ "Peru: Government" .

globaledge.msu.edu .

Archived from the original on 15 July 2020 . Retrieved 11 March 2020 .

^ Andrade, Guilherme Trivellato (21 April 2017).

From Promise to Delivery: Organizing the Government of Peru to Improve Public Health Outcomes (Thesis).

Archived from the original on 17 July 2020 . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ Fernandini, Patrick Wieland; Sousa, Ronnie Farfan (2015).

"Overview of the different levels of government" .

The Distribution of Powers and Responsibilities Affecting Forests, Land Use, and Redd+ Across Levels and Sectors in Peru : 1– 12.

Archived from the original on 26 July 2020 . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ Serra, Diego (30 August 2019).

"Defending bicameralism and equalising powers: The case of Peru" .

Constitutional Reform of National Legislatures . pp.

142– 162.

doi : 10.4337/9781788978644.00016 .

ISBN 9781788978644 .

S2CID 203215051 .

Archived from the original on 15 July 2020 . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ Constitución Política del Perú , Article No. 112.

^ Constitución Política del Perú , Article No. 122.

^ Hildebrancht, Martha (2003).

El Habla Culta (o lo que debiera serlo) . Lima. p. 37.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Tegel, Simeon.

"Peru's president dissolved Congress. Then Congress suspended the president" .

Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 21 February 2020 . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ Constitución Política del Perú , Article No. 90.

^ Constitución Política del Perú , Articles No. 107–108.

^ Constitución Política del Perú , Article No. 146.

^ Clark, Jeffrey.

Building on quicksand . Retrieved 24 July 2007.

^ "Reglamento del Congreso de la Republica" .

www2.congreso.gob.pe .

Archived from the original on 15 July 2020 . Retrieved 11 March 2020 .

^ Lee, Sang Hoon; Magallanes, José Manuel; Porter, Mason A. (1 March 2017).

"Time-dependent community structure in legislation cosponsorship networks in the Congress of the Republic of Peru" .

Journal of Complex Networks .

5 (1): 127– 144.

arXiv : 1510.01002 .

doi : 10.1093/comnet/cnw004 .

ISSN 2051-1310 .

S2CID 15837465 .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2021 . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ "Under fire Peru president resigns" .

BBC News . 22 March 2018.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2020 . Retrieved 11 March 2020 .

^ Romero, César (28 February 2023).

"Tribunal Constitucional falla a favor del Congreso, que tendrá un poder absoluto y sin control judicial" .

La República (in Spanish).

Archived from the original on 16 March 2023 . Retrieved 2 March 2023 .

^ Romero, César (25 February 2023).

"El Tribunal Constitucional está destruyendo el régimen democrático del país" .

La República (in Spanish).

Archived from the original on 25 February 2023 . Retrieved 2 March 2023 .

^ Brennan, Jason; Hill, Lisa (2014).

Compulsory Voting: For and Against . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-107-04151-6 .

Archived from the original on 9 August 2020 . Retrieved 30 May 2020 .

^ Constitución Política del Perú , Article No. 31.

^ "Peru: Sistemas Electorales / Electoral Systems" .

pdba.georgetown.edu .

Archived from the original on 9 January 2020 . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ (in Spanish) Congreso de la República del Perú, Grupos Parlamentarios Archived 29 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 27 August 2011.

^ "Elections Show Fissures in Peru's Political Institutions" .

Finch Ratings . 14 April 2021.

Archived from the original on 7 June 2021 . Retrieved 19 July 2021 .

^ Aquino, Marco (20 July 2021).

"Peru socialist Castillo confirmed president after lengthy battle over results" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 20 July 2021 . Retrieved 3 November 2021 .

^ "The curious case of Peru's persistent president-to-prison politics" .

The Week .

Archived from the original on 22 November 2021 . Retrieved 22 November 2021 .

^ "Peru's presidential lineup: graft probes, suicide and impeachment" .

Reuters . 15 November 2020.

Archived from the original on 22 November 2021 . Retrieved 22 November 2021 .

^ Dennis, Claire (23 August 2017).

"Another Top Peru Politician Embroiled in Odebrecht Scandal" .

InSight Crime .

Archived from the original on 15 December 2022 . Retrieved 15 December 2022 .

^ "El misterio del harakiri | IDL Reporteros" .

IDL Reporteros . 11 December 2022.

Archived from the original on 28 January 2023 . Retrieved 15 December 2022 .

^ Pozo Díaz, Hildebrando Castro (August 2008).

"Existen regiones en nuestro pais" (PDF) .

Congreso de la Republica de Peru .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 March 2020 . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ Ley N° 27867, Ley Orgánica de Gobiernos Regionales , Article No. 11.

^ "Gobierno del Perú" .

www.gob.pe (in Spanish).

Archived from the original on 19 June 2020 . Retrieved 12 March 2020 .

^ Dickovick, J. Tyler (1 January 2007).

"Municipalization as Central Government Strategy: Central-Regional–Local Politics in Peru, Brazil, and South Africa" .

Publius: The Journal of Federalism .

37 (1): 1– 25.

doi : 10.1093/publius/pjl012 .

ISSN 0048-5950 .

Archived from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ Ley N° 27867, Ley Orgánica de Gobiernos Regionales , Article No. 10.

^ Schönwälder, Gerd (2002).

Linking Civil Society and the State: Urban Popular Movements, the Left, and Local Government in Peru, 1980–1992 . Penn State Press.

ISBN 978-0-271-02379-3 .

Archived from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 18 November 2020 .

^ Ley N° 27867, Ley Orgánica de Gobiernos Regionales , Article No. 66.

^ Monika Huber; Wolfgang Kaiser (February 2013).

"Mixed Feelings" . dandc.eu.

Archived from the original on 7 July 2018 . Retrieved 8 May 2013 .

^ Pique, Ricardo (1 May 2019).

"Higher pay, worse outcomes? The impact of mayoral wages on local government quality in Peru" .

Journal of Public Economics .

173 : 1– 20.

doi : 10.1016/j.jpubeco.2019.01.005 .

ISSN 0047-2727 .

S2CID 14763370 .

Archived from the original on 16 July 2021 . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ Costa, Eduardo Ferrero (1987). "Peruvian Foreign Policy: Current Trends, Constraints and Opportunities".

Journal of Interamerican Studies and World Affairs .

29 (2): 55– 78.

doi : 10.2307/166073 .

ISSN 0022-1937 .

JSTOR 166073 .

^ St John, Ronald Bruce (1992).

The foreign policy of Peru . Boulder: Lynne Rienner, ISBN 1555873049 , pp. 223–224.

^ Lincoln, Jennie K.; Ferris, Elizabeth G. (2019).

The Dynamics Of Latin American Foreign Policies: Challenges For The 1980s . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-000-31605-6 .

Archived from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 18 November 2020 .

^ Blanco-Jiménez, M., Parra-Irineo, G., González-González, N. and Tavizon-Salazar, A. (30 May 2019). "Pacific Alliance: Political, Economic, and Commercial Implications".

Regional Integration in Latin America . Vol. 1. pp.

1– 12.

doi : 10.1108/978-1-78973-159-020191001 .

ISBN 978-1-78973-160-6 .

S2CID 181395804 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Alonso Morán de Romaña (25 January 2018).

"Productivity provides the key to Peru's bid for OECD membership" .

LSE Latin America and Caribbean .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2020 . Retrieved 29 March 2020 .

^ "Peru's OECD member status bid likely to succeed" .

andina.pe (in Spanish). 2 July 2014.

Archived from the original on 29 March 2020 . Retrieved 29 March 2020 .

^ "The treaties of free trade (FTA) and exports of aggro-industrial products in Peru" .

Socrates .

7 (1 and 2). 2019.

ISSN 2347-2146 .

Archived from the original on 18 February 2020 . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ Shaffer, Gregory; Winters, L. Alan (April 2017).

"FTA Law in WTO Dispute Settlement: Peru–Additional Duty and the Fragmentation of Trade Law" .

World Trade Review .

16 (2): 303– 326.

doi : 10.1017/S1474745616000550 .

ISSN 1474-7456 .

^ BBC News (4 November 2005), Peru–Chile border row escalates Archived 15 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 16 May 2007.

^ Global Affairs Canada-Affaires Mondiales Canada (29 August 2019).

"Lima Group statement" .

GAC .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2020 . Retrieved 29 March 2020 .

^ "2024 Global Peace Index" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 August 2024 . Retrieved 18 August 2024 .

^ "Ránking ubica al Perú como la cuarta Fuerza Armada más poderosa de Latinoamérica" .

RPP (in Spanish). 29 July 2017.

Archived from the original on 17 July 2020 . Retrieved 31 March 2020 .

^ a b Williams, James L. (1972). "Revolution from Within: Changing Military Perspectives in Peru".

Naval War College Review .

25 (2): 43– 60.

ISSN 0028-1484 .

JSTOR 44639763 .

^ Ministerio de Defensa, Libro Blanco de la Defensa Nacional . Ministerio de Defensa, 2005, 90.

^ Ley N° 27178, Ley del Servicio Militar , Articles No. 29, 42 and 45.

^ Vásquez, George L. (1994). "The Peruvian Army in War and Peace: 1980–1992".

Journal of Third World Studies .

11 (2): 100– 116.

ISSN 8755-3449 .

JSTOR 45197485 .

^ Weber, Cynthia (1990). "Representing Debt: Peruvian Presidents Belaunde's and Garcia's Reading/Writing of Peruvian Debt".

International Studies Quarterly .

34 (3): 353– 365.

doi : 10.2307/2600575 .

ISSN 0020-8833 .

JSTOR 2600575 .

^ "Military expenditure (% of GDP) – Peru | Data" .

data.worldbank.org .

Archived from the original on 15 July 2020 . Retrieved 31 March 2020 .

^ "Peru calls up 10,000 army reserves to enforce quarantine" .

Reuters . 1 April 2020.

Archived from the original on 6 April 2020 . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ Peru Archived 23 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine . CIA, The World Factbook ^ The World Bank, Data by country: Peru Archived 8 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved on 1 October 2011.

^ BBC (31 July 2012), Peru country profile Archived 5 November 2016 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Peru" .

Human Development Reports . United Nations. 2016.

Archived from the original on 28 December 2017 . Retrieved 7 January 2018 .

^ Thorp, p. 4.

^ Thorp, p. 321.

^ "Overview" .

Archived from the original on 29 December 2017 . Retrieved 2 January 2018 .

^ "Peru and the IMF" .

International Monetary Fund .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2014 . Retrieved 27 July 2014 .

^ Montero, Juan Carlos Pérez (1 March 2023).

"Perú registró una inflación de 0,43% en febrero de 2023" .

Finanzas Digital (in Spanish).

Archived from the original on 4 March 2023.

^ Thorp, pp. 318–319.

^ Sheahan, John (1999).

Searching for a better society: the Peruvian economy from 1950 . University Park: The Pennsylvania State University Press. p. 157.

ISBN 0271018720 .

^ 2006 figures.

(in Spanish) Banco Central de Reserva, Memoria 2006 Archived 9 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine , p. 204. Retrieved 27 December 2010.

^ (in Spanish) Banco Central de Reserva, Memoria 2006 Archived 9 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine , pp. 15, 203. Retrieved 27 December 2010.

^ Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, United States and Peru Sign Trade Promotion Agreement , 12 April 2006. Retrieved 27 December 2010.

^ 2006 figures.

(in Spanish) Banco Central de Reserva, Memoria 2006 Archived 9 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine , pp. 60–61. Retrieved 27 December 2010.

^ "Capítulo 4 La Informalidad y la Fuerza de Trabajo" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 March 2023 . Retrieved 4 March 2023 .

^ a b "PRODUCCIÓN CUPRÍFERA AUMENTÓ UN 12.7% EN 2023 Y EL PERÚ SE MANTIENE COMO EL SEGUNDO MAYOR PRODUCTOR DE COBRE DEL MUNDO" .

Sociedad de Comercio Exterior del Perú (in Spanish).

Archived from the original on 16 September 2024 . Retrieved 13 August 2024 .

^ "Copper" (PDF) .

Mineral Commodity Summaries . USGS. January 2021.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ "Zinc" (PDF) .

Mineral Commodity Summaries . USGS. January 2021.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ "Gold" (PDF) .

Mineral Commodity Summaries . USGS. January 2021.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ "Lead" (PDF) .

Mineral Commodity Summaries . USGS. January 2021.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 May 2021.

^ "Tin" (PDF) .

Mineral Commodity Summaries . USGS. January 2021.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 August 2021.

^ USGS Boron Production Statistics Archived 18 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine (PDF) ^ USGS Molybdenum Production Statistics Archived 9 October 2022 at Ghost Archive (PDF) ^ "USGS Silver Production Statistics" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 December 2024 . Retrieved 23 December 2024 .

^ "Duas opções: direita ou direita – Le Monde Diplomatique" .

diplomatique.org.br . 6 June 2016.

Archived from the original on 12 July 2022 . Retrieved 12 July 2022 .

^ "II. SECTOR EXTERNO" (PDF) .

bcrp.gob.pe (in Spanish). 31 December 1990. p. 32.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 August 2024 . Retrieved 13 August 2024 .

^ "Agriculture in Peru, by FAO" .

Archived from the original on 16 October 2020 . Retrieved 12 July 2022 .

^ a b "Food crisis deepens in Peru, more than half of the population lacks enough to eat" .

Atalayar . December 2022.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2023.

^ a b "In Peru, half the population lacks food security" . 22 January 2023.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2023 . Retrieved 4 March 2023 .

^ "Manufacturing, value added (current US$) | Data" .

data.worldbank.org .

Archived from the original on 7 January 2020 . Retrieved 12 July 2022 .

^ "Peru prepara indústria pesqueira para enfrentar mudança climática" .

GZH . 12 July 2016.

Archived from the original on 12 July 2022 . Retrieved 12 July 2022 .

^ "Estadística – Infraestructura de Transportes – Infraestructura Vial" .

www.gob.pe .

Archived from the original on 26 March 2022 . Retrieved 12 July 2022 .

^ "Visión de desarrolo de la infraestructura vial" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 July 2022 . Retrieved 12 July 2022 .

^ "Estadística – Infraestructura de Transportes – Infraestructura Ferroviaria" .

www.gob.pe .

Archived from the original on 22 October 2022 . Retrieved 12 July 2022 .

^ Andrade, Artur Luiz (29 October 2018).

"Brasil tem 9 dos maiores aeroportos da América Latina" .

Portal PANROTAS .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2021 . Retrieved 12 July 2022 .

^ "actividad portuaria de América Latina y el Caribe 2018" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 January 2021 . Retrieved 12 July 2022 .

^ "With Peru port project, China gains a foothold in America's backyard" .

NBC News . 15 November 2023.

Archived from the original on 9 May 2024 . Retrieved 9 May 2024 .

^ Codings.

"THE PORT OF CHANCAY AND CHINA'S EVOLVING BRI" .

orcasia.org . Retrieved 23 May 2025 .

^ "Peru Electricity Production, 1978 – 2023 | CEIC Data" .

www.ceicdata.com .

Archived from the original on 26 January 2023 . Retrieved 26 January 2023 .

^ "Renewable Capacity Statistics 2022" (PDF) .

IRENA .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 19 May 2022 .

^ "Core Indicators, Health Situation in the America's" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 June 2023 . Retrieved 9 May 2024 .

^ "Perfil Sociodemografico" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 February 2020 . Retrieved 27 September 2018 .

^ "El Perú tiene una población de 31 millones 488 mil 625 habitantes" [Peru has a population of 31 million 488 thousand 625 inhabitants].

www.inei.gob.pe (in Spanish). INEI. 11 July 2016.

Archived from the original on 2 February 2017 . Retrieved 7 January 2018 .

^ Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática, Perú: Estimaciones y Proyecciones de Población, 1950–2050 , pp. 37–38, 40.

^ "First results of the Peruvian population census conducted last year" .

The Peru Telegraph . 26 June 2018.

Archived from the original on 10 July 2018 . Retrieved 10 July 2018 .

^ "Perú: Perfil Sociodemográfico" (PDF) .

Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática . p. 16.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 February 2020 . Retrieved 27 September 2018 .

^ Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática, Perfil sociodemográfico del Perú , p. 24.

^ " Isolated Peru tribe threatened by outsiders . USAToday.com. 31 January 2012 ^ "Life expectancy at birth, total (years) | Data" .

data.worldbank.org .

Archived from the original on 26 August 2018 . Retrieved 25 August 2018 .

^ " "Situación de la Población Peruana, 2024. Una mirada de la diversidad étnica" (PDF) .

Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática . p. 20.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 August 2024 . Retrieved 3 August 2024 .

^ "2017 Peruvian census" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 February 2020 . Retrieved 27 September 2018 .

^ Cook, Noble David (1982) Demographic collapse: Indian Peru, 1520–1620 . Cambridge University Press. p. 114.

ISBN 0521239958 .

^ "Perú: Perfil Sociodemográfico" (PDF) .

Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática . p. 214.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 February 2020 . Retrieved 27 September 2018 .

^ Vázquez, Mario (1970) "Immigration and mestizaje in nineteenth-century Peru", pp. 79–81 in Race and class in Latin America . Columbia Univ. Press.

ISBN 0-231-03295-1 ^ " Peru apologises for abuse of African-origin citizens Archived 19 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine ". BBC News. 29 November 2009 ^ Mörner, Magnus (1967), Race mixture in the history of Latin America , p. 131.

^ "Peru izabrao predsjednicu peruansko-hrvatskog prijateljstva" .

www.index.hr (in Croatian).

Archived from the original on 21 September 2024 . Retrieved 21 September 2024 .

^ Ap, Agencia (14 June 2019).

"Miles de venezolanos ingresan a Perú antes que entre en vigencia requisito de visa humanitaria | Mundo | Gestion" .

Gestion . Archived from the original on 14 June 2019 . Retrieved 23 September 2024 .

^ "Perú: Perfil Sociodemográfico" (PDF) .

Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática . p. 198.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 February 2020 . Retrieved 27 September 2018 .

^ a b (in Spanish) Resonancias.org Archived 7 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine – Aboriginal languages of Peru ^ Budde, Michael L. (2 September 2016).

Beyond the Borders of Baptism: Catholicity, Allegiances, and Lived Identities . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-4982-0473-6 .

^ World University Ranking 2023, Times Higher Education, https://www.times Archived 27 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine highereducation.com > world-ranking ^ "Catholicism and evangelism: the two most common religions in Latin America" .

Statista . 26 October 2022.

Archived from the original on 19 November 2022 . Retrieved 18 November 2022 .

^ Collyns, Dan (8 May 2025).

" 'The pope is Peruvian': elation in country where pontiff served as bishop" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 9 May 2025 . Retrieved 9 May 2025 .

^ Peru Archived 23 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine . CIA, The World Factbook ^ Constitución Política del Perú , Article No. 17.

^ Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática, Perfil sociodemográfico del Perú , p. 93.

^ Samaké, Cynthia LeCount (5 April 2019).

Textile Traveler's Guide to Peru & Bolivia . Schiffer + ORM.

ISBN 978-1-5073-0253-8 .

Archived from the original on 19 February 2025 . Retrieved 17 January 2025 .

^ "Decreto Supremo que aprueba el Reglamento de la Ley N° 29735, Ley que regula el uso, preservación, desarrollo, recuperación, fomento y difusión de las lenguas originarias del Perú, Decreto Supremo N° 004-2016-MC" .

Archived from the original on 29 October 2017 . Retrieved 10 July 2017 .

^ "Textile Doll" .

Walters Art Museum site .

Archived from the original on 4 June 2023 . Retrieved 3 August 2023 .

^ Belaunde, Víctor Andrés (1983).

Peruanidad . Lima: BCR, p. 472.

^ Bailey, pp. 72–74.

^ Bailey, p. 263.

^ Lucie-Smith, Edward (1993).

Latin American art of the 20th century Archived 20 August 2016 at the Wayback Machine . London: Thames and Hudson, ISBN 0500203563 , pp. 76–77, 145–146.

^ Bayón, Damián (1998). "Art, c. 1920–c. 1980". In: Leslie Bethell (ed.), A cultural history of Latin America . Cambridge: University of Cambridge, ISBN 0521626269 , pp. 425–428.

^ Martin, "Literature, music and the visual arts, c. 1820–1870", pp. 37–39.

^ Martin, "Narrative since c. 1920", pp. 151–152.

^ Martin, "Narrative since c. 1920", pp. 178–179.

^ Martin, "Narrative since c. 1920", pp. 186–188.

^ "7 Things You Need to Know about Peruvian Cuisine" .

MICHELIN Guide .

Archived from the original on 4 February 2019 . Retrieved 4 February 2019 .

^ Custer, pp. 17–22.

^ Custer, pp. 25–38.

^ Romero, Raúl (1999). "Andean Peru". In: John Schechter (ed.), Music in Latin American culture: regional tradition . New York: Schirmer Books, pp. 385–386.

^ Olsen, Dale (2002).

Music of El Dorado: the ethnomusicology of ancient South American cultures . Gainesville: University Press of Florida, ISBN 0813029201 , pp. 17–22.

^ Turino, Thomas (1993). "Charango". In: Stanley Sadie (ed.), The New Grove Dictionary of Musical Instruments , vol. I. New York: MacMillan Press Limited. p. 340.

ISBN 0333378784 .

^ Romero, Raúl (1985). "La música tradicional y popular". In: Patronato Popular y Porvenir, La música en el Perú . Lima: Industrial Gráfica, pp. pp. 243–245, 261–265.

Bibliography Bailey, Gauvin Alexander.

Art of colonial Latin America . London: Phaidon, 2005.

ISBN 0714841579 .

Constitución Política del Perú . 29 December 1993.

Custer, Tony.

The Art of Peruvian Cuisine . Lima: Ediciones Ganesha, 2003.

ISBN 9972920305 .

Garland, Gonzalo . "Perú Siglo XXI", series of 11 working papers describing sectorial long-term forecasts, Grade, Lima, Peru, 1986–1987.

Garland, Gonzalo. Peru in the 21st Century: Challenges and Possibilities in Futures: the Journal of Forecasting, Planning, and Policy , Volume 22, No. 4, Butterworth-Heinemann, London, England, May 1990.

Gootenberg, Paul. (1991) Between silver and guano: commercial policy and the state in postindependence Peru . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0691023425 .

Gootenberg, Paul. (1993) Imagining development: economic ideas in Peru's "fictitious prosperity" of Guano, 1840–1880 . Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 0520082907 .

Higgins, James (editor).

The Emancipation of Peru: British Eyewitness Accounts , 2014. Online at jhemanperu Archived 21 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine Instituto de Estudios Histórico–Marítimos del Perú.

El Perú y sus recursos: Atlas geográfico y económico . Lima: Auge, 1996.

Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática.

" Perú: Compendio Estadístico 2005 " (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 March 2007.

(8.31 MB) . Lima: INEI, 2005.

Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática.

Perfil sociodemográfico del Perú . Lima: INEI, 2008.

Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática.

Perú: Estimaciones y Proyecciones de Población, 1950–2050 . Lima: INEI, 2001.

Ley N° 27178, Ley del Servicio Militar DOC . 28 September 1999.

Ley N° 27867, Ley Ley Orgánica de Gobiernos Regionales . 16 November 2002.

Martin, Gerald. "Literature, music and the visual arts, c. 1820–1870". In: Leslie Bethell (ed.), A cultural history of Latin America . Cambridge: University of Cambridge, 1998, pp. 3–45.

Martin, Gerald. "Narrative since c. 1920". In: Leslie Bethell (ed.), A cultural history of Latin America . Cambridge: University of Cambridge, 1998, pp. 133–225.

Porras Barrenechea, Raúl.

El nombre del Perú . Lima: Talleres Gráficos P.L. Villanueva, 1968.

Scheina, Robert (2003), Latin America's Wars: The Age of the Caudillo, 1791–1899 , Brassey's, ISBN 978-1-57488-450-0 Thorp, Rosemary, and Geoffrey Bertram.

Peru 1890–1977: growth and policy in an open economy . New York: Columbia University Press, 1978.

ISBN 0231034334 Further reading Akers, Charles Edmond; Edmundson, George (1911).

"Peru" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 21 (11th ed.). pp.

264– 278.

Economy (in Spanish) Banco Central de Reserva.

Cuadros Anuales Históricos Archived 1 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine .

(in Spanish) Instituto Nacional de Estadística e Informática.

Perú: Perfil de la pobreza por departamentos, 2004–2008 . Lima: INEI, 2009.

Concha, Jaime. "Poetry, c. 1920–1950". In: Leslie Bethell (ed.), A cultural history of Latin America . Cambridge: University of Cambridge, 1998, pp. 227–260.

External links Peru at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Country Profile from BBC News Peru .

The World Factbook .

Central Intelligence Agency .

World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Peru PeruLinks web directory; Archived 15 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine Wikimedia Atlas of Peru (In Spanish) Web portal of the Peruvian Government Geographic data related to Peru at OpenStreetMap v t e Peru articles History Timeline Ancient cultures Inca Empire Spanish conquest Neo-Inca State Viceroyalty War of Independence Guano Era War of the Pacific Colombia–Peru War Ecuadorian–Peruvian War Internal conflict Political crisis By topic Demographic Economic Geography Cities Climate Earthquakes Mountains Natural regions Protected areas Rivers Wildlife World Heritage Sites Politics Censorship Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights LGBT Law enforcement Military Political parties Regions and provinces Economy Agriculture Central Bank Companies Sol (currency) Electricity Stock Exchange Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Abortion Crime Demographics Education Health Irrigation Languages List of Peruvians Prostitution Public holidays Religion Squatting Water resources management Water supply and sanitation Culture Architecture Art Cinema Cuisine Llama Literature Machu Picchu Media Music Religion Sport Symbols Outline Index Category Portal v t e Inca Empire History Sapa Inca Kingdom of Cusco History of Cusco Inca Empire Chanka–Inca War Colla-Inca War Chimor–Inca War Invasion of Chile Inca Civil War Spanish conquest Ransom Room Neo-Inca State Inca society Aclla Amauta Ayllu Chasqui Mitma Ñusta Panakas Warachikuy Inca agriculture aqueducts army cuisine education Inca religion Inca mythology Apu Coricancha Inti Raymi Mama Killa Manco Cápac Pacha Kamaq Pariacaca Supay Urcuchillay Vichama Viracocha Willka Raymi Inca mathematics Quipu Yupana Links to related articles v t e Countries and dependencies of South America Sovereign states Entire Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela In part France French Guiana Dependencies Falkland Islands / South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands UK v t e Union of South American Nations Members Full members Bolivia Guyana Suriname Venezuela Suspended members Argentina Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Paraguay Peru Uruguay Summits 2004 2008 2009 Ecuador 2009 Argentina 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Topics Cusco Declaration Constitutive Treaty President Pro Tempore Secretary General Bank of the South South American Parliament Initiative for Infrastructure Integration of South America Council of South American Defense Related Mercosur Andean Community v t e Andean Community of Nations Members Bolivia Colombia Ecuador Peru Associate members Argentina Brazil Chile Paraguay Uruguay Venezuela Observers Mexico Panama v t e Pacific Alliance Members Member states Chile Colombia Mexico Peru Associate members Australia Canada New Zealand Singapore v t e Mercosur · Mercosul (Southern Common Market) Politics Treaty of Asunción Protocol of Ouro Preto Visa policies Members Full members Argentina Bolivia Brazil Paraguay Uruguay Venezuela (suspended) Associated states Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Peru Suriname Observers Mexico New Zealand Institutions President pro tempore Parliament Currencies Argentine peso Brazilian real Paraguayan guaraní Uruguayan peso Venezuelan bolívar Integration Citizenship Vehicle registration plates Relations European Union v t e Organization of American States (OAS) Members Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Bahamas Barbados Belize Bolivia Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Costa Rica Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Panama Paraguay Peru Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Suriname Trinidad and Tobago United States Uruguay Venezuela Organization General Assembly Secretariat for Political Affairs Secretariat for Integral Development Secretariat for Multidimensional Security Inter-American Commission of Women Inter-American Commission on Human Rights Inter-American Telecommunication Commission Inter-American Court of Human Rights Pan American Union Building Politics Charter Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man American Convention on Human Rights Pan-American Conference Summit of the Americas Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Taiwan Croatia Chile Argentina Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Geographic MusicBrainz area Academics CiNii Artists KulturNav Victoria People Trove UK Parliament Other IdRef 2 Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA SNAC Yale LUX 10°S 76°W ﻿ / ﻿ 10°S 76°W ﻿ / -10; -76 NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐847s2
Cached time: 20250817043652
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.117 seconds
Real time usage: 3.572 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 24277/1000000
Revision size: 227081/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 740647/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 93746/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 71/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 863690/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.871/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22412103/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2935.387      1 -total
 46.91% 1376.946      2 Template:Reflist
 19.81%  581.516     99 Template:Cite_web
 12.44%  365.229      1 Template:Infobox_country
  8.93%  261.987     31 Template:Cite_journal
  5.82%  170.943     24 Template:Cite_book
  4.40%  129.264      1 Template:Peru_topics
  4.32%  126.884      1 Template:Country_topics
  4.11%  120.705     22 Template:Cite_news
  4.03%  118.236      1 Template:Sister_project_links Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:170691:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043652 and revision id 1305848182. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peru&oldid=1305848182 " Categories : Peru Andean Community Countries in South America Former Spanish colonies Member states of the United Nations Republics Countries and territories where Spanish is an official language States and territories established in 1821 Cradle of civilization CPTPP Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Articles containing Aymara-language text Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Spanish-language text Pages with Spanish IPA Pages with Quechua IPA Pages with Aymara IPA Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1: unfit URL CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template other archives CS1 Croatian-language sources (hr) Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use dmy dates from March 2024 Articles containing Quechua-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2011 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2019 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2010 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2017 Pages using largest cities with unknown parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Articles needing additional references from June 2025 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Pages using Sister project links with default search Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 12:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peru 263 languages Add topic

