Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Columnists 3 Reception 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Townhall 1 language Afrikaans Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American politically conservative mass media company For a municipality's chief administrative building, see Town hall . For other uses, see Town Hall (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Townhall" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Townhall Type of site Conservative news, analysis, opinion website, videos, podcasts and radio news service Available in English Owners The Heritage Foundation (1995–2005) Independent (2005–2006) Salem Media Group (2006–present) Editor Editor: Katie Pavlich Political Editor: Guy Benson President Jonathan Garthwaite, Publisher URL townhall .com Commercial Yes Registration Optional, required to comment Launched March 2, 1995 ; 30 years ago ( 1995-03-02 ) [ 1 ] Current status Online Townhall is an American conservative website, print magazine and radio news service.

Katie Pavlich is Editor. Previously published by The Heritage Foundation , it is now owned and operated by Salem Communications . The website features more than 80 columns (both syndicated and exclusive) by a variety of writers and commentators.  The website also publishes news articles from the Associated Press .

Townhall also provides five minute radio newscasts around the clock, detailing national and world news items.

[ 2 ] These newscasts air at the beginning of each hour on many Salem-owned radio stations and on Salem Radio Network affiliates , as well as on Sirius XM Patriot Channel 125 .

History [ edit ] Townhall was founded on March 2, 1995, as one of the first conservative internet communities. In 2005, Townhall.com split off from The Heritage Foundation .

In May 2006, Salem Communications acquired Townhall.com and relaunched the site with the addition of podcasts of Salem's network and local talk shows, blogs run by Salem talk show hosts and the ability for any user to set up a blog on the Townhall.com network.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The website provides an extensive selection of opinion columns and news items presented from a conservative viewpoint.

[ 5 ] In January 2008, Townhall.com launched Townhall Magazine , a monthly conservative news magazine. In addition to exclusive content for the magazine, Townhall Magazine carries contributions from Townhall.com readers.

[ 6 ] Columnists [ edit ] Townhall.com features commentary by various conservative columnists and guest commentary by politicians.

[ 7 ] Guest contributors have included Eric Trump , Donald Trump Jr ., and Lara Trump .

Reception [ edit ] In November 2021, a study by the Left-Wing Center for Countering Digital Hate described Townhall as being among "ten fringe publishers" that together were responsible for nearly 70 percent of Facebook user interactions with content that denied climate change . Facebook disputed the study's methodology.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ "TownHall.com WHOIS, DNS, & Domain Info - DomainTools" .

WHOIS . Retrieved April 28, 2016 .

^ "Breaking News – Latest World, US, Science, Entertainment, Election, Technology News and Current Events" .

Townhall . Retrieved May 15, 2016 .

^ "Salem Communications to Acquire Townhall.com; Salem Expands News Talk Radio Platform into New Media with Addition of Leading Conservative Opinion Website." , The Free Library , 2014. Retrieved on March 4, 2015.

^ Andrew Romano, "The Right: The Next Big Thing?" , Newsweek , July 2, 2006.

^ Stephen Koff, "Republican presidential candidates talk to these conservative media outlets. Here's why." The Plain Dealer , June 1, 2015.

^ Townhall Magazine , "premier issue", January 2008.

^ "Conservative Columnists with Political News Commentary, Analysis" .

Townhall . Retrieved December 22, 2018 .

^ Porterfield, Carlie (November 2, 2021).

"Breitbart Leads Climate Change Misinformation On Facebook, Study Says" .

Forbes . Retrieved November 3, 2021 .

^ "The Toxic Ten: How ten fringe publishers fuel 69% of digital climate change denial" .

Center for Countering Digital Hate . November 2, 2021 . Retrieved November 3, 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Katie Pavlich's bio and reporting on Townhall.com v t e Salem Media Group AM radio stations KBJD KCBQ KDIA KDIZ KDOW KDYA KDZR KFAX KFIA KGNW KGU KHCM KHNR KKOL KKMS KKNT KLUP KNTH KNUS KPAM KPDQ KPRZ KPXQ KRKS KRLA KSKY KSLR KTIE KTKZ KTNO KTRB KXXT KYCR KZNT WAVA WDTK WDWD WEZE WFIL WGKA WHK WHKW WIND WLCC WLQV WLSS WLTA WMCA WMYM WNIV WNTP WNYM WORL WPGP WPIT WRFD WRHC WROL WTBN WTLN WTWD WWFE WWRC WWTC WYLL FM radio stations KDAR KDIS-FM KDXE KGFT KGU-FM KHCM-FM KKHT-FM KKLA-FM KKOL-FM KPDQ-FM KRKS-FM KRYP KWRD-FM WAVA-FM WORD-FM WTOH Satellite radio stations FamilyTalk Salem Radio Network Singing News Radio The Word In Praise Townhall Media Hot Air PJ Media RedState Townhall Twitchy Salem Web Network CCMmagazine.com Christianity.com Crosswalk.com Godtube.com Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Townhall&oldid=1304664982 " Categories : American conservative websites American political blogs Climate change denial Digital mass media companies Internet properties established in 1995 Salem Media Group properties The Heritage Foundation publications Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2021 All articles needing additional references Use mdy dates from January 2019 This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 11:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Townhall 1 language Add topic

