Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Plot 2 Connection to other works 3 Reception 4 References Toggle the table of contents Burning Chrome 7 languages Español Français Italiano Română Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Short story by William Gibson "Burning Chrome" Short story by William Gibson Country Canada Language English Genre(s) Cyberpunk Publication Published in Omni , Burning Chrome Publication date July 1982 Chronology " The Belonging Kind " " Red Star, Winter Orbit " " Burning Chrome " is a science fiction short story by American-Canadian writer William Gibson , first published in Omni in July 1982. Gibson first read the story at a science fiction convention in Denver, Colorado in the autumn of 1981, to an audience of four people, among them Bruce Sterling (who Gibson later said "completely got it").

[ 1 ] It was nominated for a Nebula Award in 1983 [ 2 ] and collected with the rest of Gibson's early short fiction in a 1986 volume of the same name .

Plot [ edit ] Bobby Quine, a "console cowboy", and his partner-in-crime Automatic Jack, a hardware expert, are hackers who, despite their skills and experience, have never landed a really big score. There are rumours going around that Bobby is getting too old for the scene, and losing his touch - until he picks up a new girl, Rikki, at the local hacker bar. Jack, the narrator of the story, goes to the Finn's pawn shop in New York in search of something that will give them an edge. The Finn sells him a stolen program that Jack later identifies as a Russian military " ice-breaker " virus for penetrating matrix security. Meanwhile, Bobby has been looking for a target, and settles on Chrome, the notorious, Mob-affiliated owner of the House of Blue Lights, a meatpuppet brothel. Jack is horrified by the idea of such a dangerous hit, but realizes that the ice-breaker program would give them the edge they need to pull it off.

After six weeks of preparation, the burn goes off without a hitch, and they completely empty out Chrome's Zurich bank accounts. Miles, a streetfighter Jack hired to take care of Rikki in case things went wrong, calls Jack to tell him he lost her when she went into the House of Blue Lights, and that everything there is in a state of chaos. Jack realizes that Rikki, who has always loved simstim , had been working there in order to save up for a pair of high-end cybernetic eye implants, just like the eyes of her favourite simstim star. Bobby, who professed to love her, but only saw her as his "luck" and never really took interest in her as a person, had gotten busy with planning the heist and never noticed. Rikki leaves for Hollywood, but Jack calls the airline and changes it for a first-class ticket to Chiba City , where she can better pursue her dream of being a star. She never uses the return ticket he buys her, and he never sees her again: not face to face, and not on a poster advertising the latest simstim idols.

Connection to other works [ edit ] The story was one of the first of Gibson's to be set in the Sprawl, and functioned as a conceptual prototype for Gibson's Sprawl trilogy of novels.

[ 3 ] Bobby Quine is mentioned in Neuromancer as one of the mentors of the protagonist. The Finn, a recurring character in Gibson's Sprawl trilogy, makes his first appearance in this story as a minor figure. The events of the story are referenced in Count Zero , the second entry of the Sprawl trilogy.

Reception [ edit ] The word " cyberspace ", coined by Gibson, was first used in this story, in reference to the "mass consensual hallucination " in computer networks .

[ 4 ] One line from the story—"... the street finds its own uses for things"—has become a widely quoted aphorism for describing the sometimes unexpected uses to which users can put technologies (for example, hip-hop DJs ' reinvention of the turntable, which transformed turntables from a medium of playback into one of production).

Gibson wrote a screenplay for a film adaptation to be directed by Kathryn Bigelow , but the project did not come to fruition.

[ 5 ] The BBC did an hour-long version of the story, first broadcast on BBC Radio 7 (now BBC Radio 4 Extra ) on 19 October 2007 and read by Adam Sims.

References [ edit ] ^ Mark Neale (director), William Gibson (subject) (2000).

No Maps for These Territories (Documentary). Docurama.

^ The Locus Index to SF Awards .

Archived February 7, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ^ Wills, David (1995).

Prosthesis . Stanford: Stanford University Press. p. 83.

ISBN 978-0-8047-2459-3 .

^ Prucher, Jeff (2007).

"cyberspace" .

Brave New Words: The Oxford Dictionary of Science Fiction . Oxford University Press. p. 31.

ISBN 978-0-19-530567-8 .

OCLC 76074298 .

^ Gibson, William (May 1994).

"William Gibson Interviewed by Giuseppe Salza" (Interview). Interviewed by Giuseppe Salza. Cannes. Archived from the original on 2011-10-11 . Retrieved 2007-10-28 .

v t e William Gibson List of works List of awards and nominations Novels Sprawl trilogy Neuromancer (1984) Count Zero (1986) Mona Lisa Overdrive (1988) Bridge trilogy Virtual Light (1993) Idoru (1996) All Tomorrow's Parties (1999) Blue Ant trilogy Pattern Recognition (2003) Spook Country (2007) Zero History (2010) Jackpot series The Peripheral (2014) Agency (2020) Other The Difference Engine (with Bruce Sterling ) (1990) Archangel (2016) Short stories " Fragments of a Hologram Rose " " Johnny Mnemonic " " The Gernsback Continuum " " Hinterlands " " New Rose Hotel " " The Belonging Kind " " Burning Chrome " " Red Star, Winter Orbit " " The Winter Market " " Dogfight " " Skinner's Room " Burning Chrome collection Nonfiction Agrippa (A Book of the Dead) " Disneyland with the Death Penalty " No Maps for These Territories Distrust That Particular Flavor Television " Kill Switch " " First Person Shooter " Characters Molly Millions Bobby Newmark Rei Toei Cayce Pollard Hubertus Bigend Story elements Cyberspace Megacorporation Locative art Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics Raygun Gothic Derivative works Neuromancer video game Johnny Mnemonic film New Rose Hotel film Node Magazine William Gibson: A Literary Companion The Peripheral TV series Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Burning_Chrome&oldid=1284168146 " Categories : 1982 short stories Cyberpunk short stories Science fiction short stories Short stories by William Gibson Works originally published in Omni (magazine) Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 April 2025, at 00:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Burning Chrome 7 languages Add topic

