Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Function Toggle Function subsection 1.1 Pinocytosis and ATP 2 Etymology and pronunciation 3 Non-specific, adsorptive pinocytosis 4 Macropinocytosis Toggle Macropinocytosis subsection 4.1 Inhibitors 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Pinocytosis 38 languages العربية বাংলা Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Қазақша Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mode of endocytosis to bring small particles into a cell Pinocytosis In cellular biology , pinocytosis , otherwise known as fluid endocytosis and bulk-phase pinocytosis , is a mode of endocytosis in which small molecules dissolved in extracellular fluid are brought into the cell through an invagination of the cell membrane , resulting in their containment within a small vesicle inside the cell. These pinocytotic vesicles then typically fuse with early endosomes to hydrolyze (break down) the particles.

[ citation needed ] Pinocytosis is variably subdivided into categories depending on the molecular mechanism and the fate of the internalized molecules.

Function [ edit ] In humans, this process occurs primarily for absorption of fat droplets. In endocytosis the cell plasma membrane extends and folds around desired extracellular material, forming a pouch that pinches off creating an internalized vesicle. The invaginated pinocytosis vesicles are much smaller than those generated by phagocytosis . The vesicles eventually fuse with the lysosome, whereupon the vesicle contents are digested.

[ 1 ] Pinocytosis involves a considerable investment of cellular energy in the form of ATP.

[ 1 ] Pinocytosis and ATP [ edit ] Pinocytosis is used primarily for clearing extracellular fluids (ECF) and as part of immune surveillance.

[ 2 ] In contrast to phagocytosis , it generates very small amounts of ATP from the wastes of alternative substances such as lipids (fat) [ citation needed ] . Unlike receptor-mediated endocytosis , pinocytosis is nonspecific in the substances that it does transport: the cell takes in surrounding fluids, including all solutes present.

[ 1 ] Etymology and pronunciation [ edit ] The word pinocytosis ( / ˌ p ɪ n ə s aɪ ˈ t oʊ s ɪ s , ˌ p aɪ -, - n oʊ -, - s ə -/ [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] ) uses combining forms of pino- + cyto- + -osis , all Neo-Latin from Greek , reflecting píno , to drink, and cytosis . The term was proposed by W. H. Lewis in 1931.

[ 6 ] Non-specific, adsorptive pinocytosis [ edit ] Non-specific, adsorptive pinocytosis is a form of endocytosis , a process in which small particles are taken in by a cell by splitting off small vesicles from the cell membrane.

[ 7 ] Cationic proteins bind to the negative cell surface and are taken up via the clathrin -mediated system, thus the uptake is intermediate between receptor-mediated endocytosis and non-specific, non-adsorptive pinocytosis.  The clathrin-coated pits occupy about 2% of the surface area of the cell and only last about a minute, with an estimated 2500 leaving the average cell surface each minute.  The clathrin coats are lost almost immediately, and the membrane is subsequently recycled to the cell surface.

Macropinocytosis [ edit ] Macropinocytosis is a clathrin-independent endocytic mechanism that can be activated in practically all animal cells, resulting in uptake. In most cell types, it does not occur continuously but rather is induced for a limited time in response to cell-surface receptor activation by specific cargoes, including growth factors , ligands of integrins , and apoptotic cell remnants. These ligands activate a complex signaling pathway, resulting in a change in actin dynamics and the formation of cell-surface protrusions of filopodia and lamellopodia , commonly called ruffles . When ruffles collapse back onto the membrane, large fluid-filled endocytic vesicles form called macropinosomes , which can transiently increase the bulk fluid uptake of a cell by up to tenfold. Macropinocytosis is a solely degradative pathway: macropinosomes acidify and then fuse with late endosomes or endolysosomes, without recycling their cargo back to the plasma membrane.

[ 8 ] Some bacteria and viruses have evolved to induce macropinocytosis as a mechanism for entering host cells. Some of these can stop the degradation processes in order to survive inside the macropinosome, which may transform into smaller and long-lasting vacuoles containing the viruses or bacteria (some of which may replicate inside), or simply escape through the wall of the macropinosome when inside. For example, the gut pathogen Salmonella typhimurium injects toxins into the host cell in order to induce macropinocytosis as a form of uptake, inhibits the degradation of the macropinosome, and forms a salmonella-containing vacuole, or SCV, wherein it can replicate.

[ 9 ] Inhibitors [ edit ] Virapinib See also [ edit ] Caveolae Phagocytosis Receptor-mediated endocytosis References [ edit ] ^ a b c Guo, Lily.

"Pinocytosis - What Is It, How It Occurs, and More" .

Osmosis from Elsevier . Elsevier . Retrieved 25 December 2022 .

^ Abbas, Abul, et al. "Basic Immunology: Functions and Disorders of the Immune System." 5th ed. Elsevier, 2016. p.69 ^ "Pinocytosis" .

Lexico UK English Dictionary .

Oxford University Press . Archived from the original on 2019-12-23.

^ "Pinocytosis" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 2016-01-22 .

^ "Pinocytosis" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d . Retrieved 2016-01-22 .

^ Rieger, R.; Michaelis, A.; Green, M.M. 1991.

Glossary of Genetics. Classical and Molecular (Fifth edition). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, [1] .

^ Alberts, Johnson, Lewis, Raff, Roberts, Walter: "Molecular Biology of the Cell", Fourth Edition, Copyright 2002 P.748 ^ Alberts, Bruce (2015).

Molecular biology of the cell (Sixth ed.). New York, NY. p. 732.

ISBN 978-0-8153-4432-2 .

OCLC 887605755 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Pollard, Thomas D.; Earnshaw, William C.; Lippincott-Schwartz, Jennifer; Johnson, Graham T., eds. (2017-01-01), "Chapter 22 - Endocytosis and the Endosomal Membrane System" , Cell Biology (Third Edition) , Elsevier, pp.

377– 392, doi : 10.1016/B978-0-323-34126-4.00022-0 , ISBN 978-0-323-34126-4 , retrieved 2022-04-12 Campbell, Reece, Mitchell: "Biology", Sixth Edition, Copyright 2002 P. 151 Marshall, Ben,  Incredible Biological Advancements of the 20th Century, Copyright 2001 p. 899 Alrt, Pablo, Global Society Harvard study, copyright 2003 p. 189 Brooker, Robert: "Biology", Second Edition, Copyright 2011 p. 116 Cherrr, Malik, The Only Edition, Copyright 2012, p. 256 Abbas, Abul, et al. "Basic Immunology: Functions and Disorders of the Immune System." 5th ed. Elsevier, 2016. p. 69 v t e Membrane transport Mechanisms for chemical transport through biological membranes Passive transport Simple diffusion (or non- mediated transport ) Facilitated diffusion Osmosis Channels Carriers Active transport Uniporter Symporter Antiporter Primary active transport Secondary active transport Cytosis Endocytosis Efferocytosis Non-specific, adsorptive pinocytosis Phagocytosis Pinocytosis Potocytosis Receptor-mediated endocytosis Transcytosis Exocytosis Degranulation Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pinocytosis&oldid=1301173848 " Category : Cellular processes Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2022 This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 13:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pinocytosis 38 languages Add topic

