Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work 2 Citations and footnotes 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Dionysodorus 7 languages Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Magyar Română Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek mathematician (c. 250 BC – 190 BC) This article is about the 3rd century BC mathematician. For the 5th century sophist, see Dionysodorus (sophist) . For the 1st century AD mathematician, see Dionysodorus of Amisene .

Dionysodorus of Caunus ( Ancient Greek : Διονυσόδωρος ὁ Καύνειος , c. 250 BC – c. 190 BC) was an ancient Greek mathematician .

Life and work [ edit ] Little is known about the life of Dionysodorus.

Pliny the Elder writes about a Dionysodorus who measured the Earth's circumference, however he is probably the one from Melos and different both from the one from Caunus and from Dionysodorus of Amisene ; Strabo differentiates between the latter two mathematicians.

[ 1 ] Dionysodorus is remembered for solving the cubic equation by means of the intersection of a rectangular hyperbola and a parabola .

[ 2 ] Eutocius credits Dionysodorus with the method of cutting a sphere into a given ratio, as described by him.

[ 3 ] Heron mentions a work by Dionysauras entitled On the Tore , in which the volume of a torus is calculated and found to be equal to the area of the generating circle multiplied by the circumference of the circle created by tracing the center of the generating circle as it rotates about the torus's axis of revolution. Dionysodorus used Archimedes ' methods to prove this result.

[ 1 ] It is also likely that this Dionysodorus was the inventor of a conical sundial .

[ 1 ] Pliny's mentioning tells of an inscription placed on his tomb, addressed to the world above, stating that he had been to the centre of the Earth and found it 42 thousand stadia distant.

[ 4 ] Pliny calls this a striking instance of Greek vanity; but this figure compares well with the modern measurement.

Citations and footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b c "Dionysodorus biography" .

mathshistory.st-andrews.ac.uk . Retrieved 2023-04-13 .

^ Heath (1921) ^ Eutocius, Comment on book ii. prop. 5, of the Sphere and Cylinder of Archimedes ^ Pliny, Hist. Nat.

ii. 109 References [ edit ] T. L. Heath , A History of Greek Mathematics II (Oxford, 1921).

Netz, Reviel.

The Transformations of Mathematics in the Early Mediterranean World . Cambridge University Press, 2004.

ISBN 0-521-82996-8 . Pags. 29-39.

External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Dionysodorus" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Authority control databases International VIAF Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dionysodorus&oldid=1292918715 " Categories : 250s BC births 190s BC deaths Ancient Greek geometers Ancient Greeks in Caria 3rd-century BC Greek mathematicians 2nd-century BC Greek mathematicians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 29 May 2025, at 15:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dionysodorus 7 languages Add topic

