Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and meaning 2 Western philosophy Toggle Western philosophy subsection 2.1 Realism 2.2 Anti-realism 2.3 Being 2.4 Perception 2.5 Abstract objects and mathematics 2.6 Properties 2.7 Time and space 2.8 Possible worlds 2.9 Theories of everything (TOE) and philosophy 2.10 Phenomenology 2.11 Skeptical hypotheses 3 Non-western philosophy Toggle Non-western philosophy subsection 3.1 Hindu philosophy 3.2 Jain philosophy 4 Physical sciences Toggle Physical sciences subsection 4.1 Scientific realism 4.2 Realism and locality in physics 4.2.1 Role of "observation" in quantum mechanics 4.3 Multiverse 4.4 Cyclic theories 4.5 Anthropic principle 4.6 Personal and collective reality 4.7 Scientific theories of everything 5 Technology Toggle Technology subsection 5.1 Media 5.2 Virtual reality and cyberspace 5.3 "RL" in internet culture 6 World views 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Reality 120 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ अंगिका العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu अवधी Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Bosanski Буряад Català Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Kabɩyɛ ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar मैथिली Македонски മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qırımtatarca Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Volapük Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sum or aggregate of all that is real or existent Not to be confused with Realty .

For other uses, see Reality (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Reality" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Hubble Ultra-Deep Field image of distant galaxies illustrates the challenge of defining "reality": the light from these stars was emitted billions of years ago and many of these stars have moved, merged, or evolved since then.

Reality is the sum or aggregate of everything in existence ; everything that is not imaginary . Different cultures and academic disciplines conceptualize it in various ways.

Philosophical questions about the nature of reality, existence, or being are considered under the rubric of ontology , a major branch of metaphysics in the Western intellectual tradition. Ontological questions also feature in diverse branches of philosophy , including the philosophy of science , religion , mathematics , and logic . These include questions about whether only physical objects are real (e.g., physicalism ), whether reality is fundamentally immaterial (e.g., idealism ), whether hypothetical unobservable entities posited by scientific theories exist (e.g., scientific realism ), whether God exists, whether numbers and other abstract objects exist, and whether possible worlds exist.

Etymology and meaning The word reality is a borrowing from the Middle French realité and the post-Classical Latin realitas . According to the Oxford English Dictionary , it first appeared in English in 1513. The first definition given is "Real existence; what is real rather than imagined or desired; the aggregate of real things or existences; that which underlies and is the truth of appearances or phenomena". (A second sense, now obsolete, refers to real property .) [ 1 ] Western philosophy Philosophy addresses two different aspects of the topic of reality: the nature of reality itself, and the relationship between the mind (as well as language and culture) and reality.

On the one hand, ontology is the study of being, and the central topic of the field is couched, variously, in terms of being, existence, "what is", and reality. The task in ontology is to describe the most general categories of reality and how they are interrelated. If a philosopher wanted to proffer a positive definition of the concept "reality", it would be done under this heading. As explained above, some philosophers draw a distinction between reality and existence. In fact, many analytic philosophers today tend to avoid the term "real" and "reality" in discussing ontological issues. But for those who would treat "is real" the same way they treat "exists", one of the leading questions of analytic philosophy has been whether existence (or reality) is a property of objects. It has been widely held by analytic philosophers that it is not a property at all, though this view has lost some ground in recent decades.

On the other hand, particularly in discussions of objectivity that have feet in both metaphysics and epistemology, philosophical discussions of "reality" often concern the ways in which reality is, or is not, in some way dependent upon (or, to use fashionable jargon , "constructed" out of) mental and cultural factors such as perceptions, beliefs, and other mental states, as well as cultural artifacts, such as religions and political movements , on up to the vague notion of a common cultural world view , or Weltanschauung .

Realism The view that there is a reality independent of any beliefs, perceptions, etc., is called realism . More specifically, philosophers are given to speaking about "realism about " this and that, such as realism about universals or realism about the external world. Generally, where one can identify any class of object, the existence or essential characteristics of which is said not to depend on perceptions, beliefs, language, or any other human artifact, one can speak of "realism about " that object.

A correspondence theory of knowledge about what exists claims that "true" knowledge of reality represents accurate correspondence of statements about and images of reality with the actual reality that the statements or images are attempting to represent. For example, the scientific method can verify that a statement is true based on the observable evidence that a thing exists. Many humans can point to the Rocky Mountains and say that this mountain range exists, and continues to exist even if no one is observing it or making statements about it.

Anti-realism One can also speak of anti -realism about the same objects.

Anti-realism is the latest in a long series of terms for views opposed to realism. Perhaps the first was idealism , so called because reality was said to be in the mind, or a product of our ideas .

Berkeleyan idealism is the view, propounded by the Irish empiricist George Berkeley , that the objects of perception are actually ideas in the mind. In this view, one might be tempted to say that reality is a "mental construct"; this is not quite accurate, however, since, in Berkeley's view, perceptual ideas are created and coordinated by God. By the 20th century, views similar to Berkeley's were called phenomenalism . Phenomenalism differs from Berkeleyan idealism primarily in that Berkeley believed that minds, or souls, are not merely ideas nor made up of ideas, whereas varieties of phenomenalism, such as that advocated by Russell , tended to go farther to say that the mind itself is merely a collection of perceptions, memories, etc., and that there is no mind or soul over and above such mental events . Finally, anti-realism became a fashionable term for any view which held that the existence of some object depends upon the mind or cultural artifacts. The view that the so-called external world is really merely a social, or cultural, artifact, called social constructionism , is one variety of anti-realism.

Cultural relativism is the view that social issues such as morality are not absolute, but at least partially cultural artifact . Potentially the most extreme form of anti-realism is solipsism — the belief that oneself is the only thing in existence.

Being The nature of being is a perennial topic in metaphysics. For instance, Parmenides taught that reality was a single unchanging Being, whereas Heraclitus wrote that all things flow. The 20th-century philosopher Heidegger thought previous philosophers have lost sight of the question of Being (qua Being) in favour of the questions of beings (existing things), so he believed that a return to the Parmenidean approach was needed. An ontological catalogue is an attempt to list the fundamental constituents of reality. The question of whether or not existence is a predicate has been discussed since the Early Modern period, not least in relation to the ontological argument for the existence of God . Existence, that something is, has been contrasted with essence , the question of what something is.
Since existence without essence seems blank, it associated with nothingness by philosophers such as Hegel. Existential nihilism represents an extremely negative view of being, the absolute a positive one.

Perception The question of direct or "naïve" realism , as opposed to indirect or "representational" realism , arises in the philosophy of perception and of mind out of the debate over the nature of conscious experience ; [ 2 ] [ 3 ] the epistemological question of whether the world we see around us is the real world itself or merely an internal perceptual copy of that world generated by neural processes in our brain.

Naïve realism is known as direct realism when developed to counter indirect or representative realism, also known as epistemological dualism , [ 4 ] the philosophical position that our conscious experience is not of the real world itself but of an internal representation, a miniature virtual-reality replica of the world.

Timothy Leary coined the influential term Reality Tunnel , by which he means a kind of representative realism . The theory states that, with a subconscious set of mental filters formed from their beliefs and experiences, every individual interprets the same world differently, hence "Truth is in the eye of the beholder". His ideas influenced the work of his friend Robert Anton Wilson .

Abstract objects and mathematics The status of abstract entities, particularly numbers, is a topic of discussion in mathematics.

In the philosophy of mathematics, the best known form of realism about numbers is Platonic realism , which grants them abstract, immaterial existence. Other forms of realism identify mathematics with the concrete physical universe.

Anti-realist stances include formalism and fictionalism .

Some approaches are selectively realistic about some mathematical objects but not others.

Finitism rejects infinite quantities.

Ultra-finitism accepts finite quantities up to a certain amount.

Constructivism and intuitionism are realistic about objects that can be explicitly constructed, but reject the use of the principle of the excluded middle to prove existence by reductio ad absurdum .

The traditional debate has focused on whether an abstract (immaterial, intelligible) realm of numbers has existed in addition to the physical (sensible, concrete) world. A recent development is the mathematical universe hypothesis , the theory that only a mathematical world exists, with the finite, physical world being an illusion within it.

An extreme form of realism about mathematics is the mathematical multiverse hypothesis advanced by Max Tegmark . Tegmark's sole postulate is: All structures that exist mathematically also exist physically . That is, in the sense that "in those [worlds] complex enough to contain self-aware substructures [they] will subjectively perceive themselves as existing in a physically 'real' world".

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The hypothesis suggests that worlds corresponding to different sets of initial conditions, physical constants, or altogether different equations should be considered real. The theory can be considered a form of Platonism in that it posits the existence of mathematical entities, but can also be considered a mathematical monism in that it denies that anything exists except mathematical objects.

Properties Main article: Problem of universals The problem of universals is an ancient problem in metaphysics about whether universals exist. Universals are general or abstract qualities, characteristics, properties , kinds or relations , such as being male/female, solid/liquid/gas or a certain colour, [ 7 ] that can be predicated of individuals or particulars or that individuals or particulars can be regarded as sharing or participating in. For example, Scott, Pat, and Chris have in common the universal quality of being human or humanity .

The realist school claims that universals are real – they exist and are distinct from the particulars that instantiate them. There are various forms of realism. Two major forms are Platonic realism and Aristotelian realism .

[ 8 ] Platonic realism is the view that universals are real entities and they exist independent of particulars.

Aristotelian realism , on the other hand, is the view that universals are real entities, but their existence is dependent on the particulars that exemplify them.

Nominalism and conceptualism are the main forms of anti-realism about universals.

Time and space Main article: Philosophy of space and time A traditional realist position in ontology is that time and space have existence apart from the human mind.

Idealists deny or doubt the existence of objects independent of the mind. Some anti-realists whose ontological position is that objects outside the mind do exist, nevertheless doubt the independent existence of time and space.

Kant , in the Critique of Pure Reason , described time as an a priori notion that, together with other a priori notions such as space , allows us to comprehend sense experience . Kant denies that either space or time are substance , entities in themselves, or learned by experience; he holds rather that both are elements of a systematic framework we use to structure our experience. Spatial measurements are used to quantify how far apart objects are, and temporal measurements are used to quantitatively compare the interval between (or duration of) events . Although space and time are held to be transcendentally ideal in this sense, they are also empirically real , i.e. not mere illusions.

Idealist writers such as J. M. E. McTaggart in The Unreality of Time have argued that time is an illusion.

As well as differing about the reality of time as a whole, metaphysical theories of time can differ in their ascriptions of reality to the past , present and future separately.

Presentism holds that the past and future are unreal, and only an ever-changing present is real.

The block universe theory, also known as Eternalism, holds that past, present and future are all real, but the passage of time is an illusion. It is often said to have a scientific basis in relativity .

The growing block universe theory holds that past and present are real, but the future is not.

Time, and the related concepts of process and evolution are central to the system-building metaphysics of A. N. Whitehead and Charles Hartshorne .

Possible worlds Main article: Possible world The term "possible world" goes back to Leibniz's theory of possible worlds, used to analyse necessity, possibility , and similar modal notions .

Modal realism is the view, notably propounded by David Kellogg Lewis , that all possible worlds are as real as the actual world. In short: the actual world is regarded as merely one among an infinite set of logically possible worlds, some "nearer" to the actual world and some more remote. Other theorists may use the Possible World framework to express and explore problems without committing to it ontologically. Possible world theory is related to alethic modal logic : a proposition is necessary if it is true in all possible worlds, and possible if it is true in at least one. The many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics is a similar idea in science.

Theories of everything (TOE) and philosophy Main article: Theory of everything (philosophy) The philosophical implications of a physical TOE are frequently debated. For example, if philosophical physicalism is true, a physical TOE will coincide with a philosophical theory of everything.

The "system building" style of metaphysics attempts to answer all the important questions in a coherent way, providing a complete picture of the world.

Plato and Aristotle could be said to be early examples of comprehensive systems. In the early modern period (17th and 18th centuries), the system-building scope of philosophy is often linked to the rationalist method of philosophy, that is the technique of deducing the nature of the world by pure a priori reason. Examples from the early modern period include the Leibniz 's Monadology , Descartes 's Dualism , Spinoza 's Monism .

Hegel 's Absolute idealism and Whitehead 's Process philosophy were later systems.

Other philosophers do not believe its techniques can aim so high. Some scientists think a more mathematical approach than philosophy is needed for a TOE, for instance Stephen Hawking wrote in A Brief History of Time that even if we had a TOE, it would necessarily be a set of equations. He wrote, "What is it that breathes fire into the equations and makes a universe for them to describe?" [ 9 ] Phenomenology On a much broader and more subjective level, [ specify ] private experiences, curiosity, inquiry, and the selectivity involved in personal interpretation of events shapes reality as seen by one and only one person [ 10 ] and hence is called phenomenological . While this
form of reality might be common to others as well, it could at times also be so unique to oneself as to never be experienced or agreed upon by anyone else. Much of the kind of experience deemed spiritual occurs on this level of reality.

[ 11 ] Phenomenology is a philosophical method developed in the early years of the twentieth century by Edmund Husserl (1859–1938) and a circle of followers at the universities of Göttingen and Munich in Germany. Subsequently, phenomenological themes were taken up by philosophers in France, the United States, and elsewhere, often in contexts far removed from Husserl's work.

The word phenomenology comes from the Greek phainómenon , meaning "that which appears", and lógos , meaning "study". In Husserl's conception, phenomenology is primarily concerned with making the structures of consciousness, and the phenomena which appear in acts of consciousness, objects of systematic reflection and analysis. Such reflection was to take place from a highly modified " first person " viewpoint, studying phenomena not as they appear to "my" consciousness, but to any consciousness whatsoever. Husserl believed that phenomenology could thus provide a firm basis for all human knowledge , including scientific knowledge , and could establish philosophy as a "rigorous science".

[ 12 ] Husserl's conception of phenomenology has been criticised and developed by his student and assistant Martin Heidegger (1889–1976), by existentialists like Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1908–1961) and Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980), and by other philosophers, such as Paul Ricoeur (1913–2005), Emmanuel Levinas (1906–1995), and Dietrich von Hildebrand (1889–1977).

[ 13 ] Skeptical hypotheses A brain in a vat that believes it is walking Skeptical hypotheses in philosophy suggest that reality could be very different from what we think it is; or at least that we cannot prove it is not. Examples include: The " Brain in a vat " hypothesis is cast in scientific terms. It supposes that one might be a disembodied brain kept alive in a vat, and fed false sensory signals. This hypothesis is related to the Matrix hypothesis below.

The " Dream argument " of Descartes and Zhuangzi supposes reality to be indistinguishable from a dream.

Descartes' Evil demon is a being "as clever and deceitful as he is powerful, who has directed his entire effort to misleading me." The five minute hypothesis (or omphalos hypothesis or Last Thursdayism ) suggests that the world was created recently together with records and traces indicating a greater age.

Diminished reality refers to artificially diminished reality, not due to limitations of sensory systems but via artificial filters .

[ 14 ] The Matrix hypothesis or Simulated reality hypothesis suggest that we might be inside a computer simulation or virtual reality . Related hypotheses may also involve simulations with signals that allow the inhabitant species in virtual or simulated reality to perceive the external reality.

Non-western philosophy Hindu philosophy Main article: Vedanta Hindu philosophy , particularly the Vedic tradition , includes a number of subtly different and nuanced perspectives about the nature of reality and unified consciousness [ 15 ] They are as follows (order irrelevant): Advaita – non-dualism Tattvavada ( Dvaita ) – dualism Dvaitadvaita – dualistic non-dualism Bhedabheda – difference and non-difference Vishishtadvaita – qualified non-dualism Suddhadvaita – pure non-dualism Achintya-Bheda-Abheda – inconceivable difference and non-difference Dvaitadvaita Vedanta - natural identity-in-difference Akshar Purushottam Darshan - multiple eternal realities Jain philosophy Main article: Tattva (Jainism) Jain philosophy postulates that seven tattva (truths or fundamental principles) constitute reality.

[ 16 ] These seven tattva are: [ 17 ] Jīva – The soul which is characterized by consciousness.

Ajīva – The non-soul.

Asrava – Influx of karma .

Bandha – The bondage of karma.

Samvara – Obstruction of the inflow of karmic matter into the soul.

Nirjara – Shedding of karmas.

Moksha – Liberation or Salvation, i.e. the complete annihilation of all karmic matter (bound with any particular soul).

Physical sciences Scientific realism Scientific realism is, at the most general level, the view that the world (the universe) described by science (perhaps ideal science) is the real world, as it is, independent of what we might take it to be. Within philosophy of science , it is often framed as an answer to the question "how is the success of science to be explained?" The debate over what the success of science involves centers primarily on the status of entities that are not directly observable discussed by scientific theories . Generally, those who are scientific realists state that one can make reliable claims about these entities (viz., that they have the same ontological status) as directly observable entities, as opposed to instrumentalism . The most used and studied scientific theories today state more or less the truth.

Realism and locality in physics Main article: Principle of locality Realism in the sense used by physicists does not equate to realism in metaphysics.

[ 18 ] The latter is the claim that the world is mind-independent: that even if the results of a measurement do not pre-exist the act of measurement, that does not require that they are the creation of the observer. Furthermore, a mind-independent property does not have to be the value of some physical variable such as position or momentum . A property can be dispositional (or potential), i.e. it can be a tendency: in the way that glass objects tend to break, or are disposed to break, even if they do not actually break. Likewise, the mind-independent properties of quantum systems could consist of a tendency to respond to particular measurements with particular values with ascertainable probability. Such an ontology would be metaphysically realistic, without being realistic in the physicist's sense of "local realism" (which would require that a single value be produced with certainty).

A closely related term is counterfactual definiteness (CFD), used to refer to the claim that one can meaningfully speak of the definiteness of results of measurements that have not been performed (i.e. the ability to assume the existence of objects, and properties of objects, even when they have not been measured).

Local realism is a significant feature of classical mechanics, of general relativity , and of classical electrodynamics ; but not quantum mechanics . In a work now called the EPR paradox , Einstein relied on local realism to suggest that hidden variables were missing in quantum mechanics. However, John S. Bell subsequently showed that the predictions of quantum mechanics are inconsistent with hidden variables, a result known as Bell's theorem . The predictions of quantum mechanics have been verified: Bell's inequalities are violated. This means either particles have no definite positions independent of observation (no realism) or distant measurements can affect each other (no locality) or both. Different interpretations of quantum mechanics violate different parts of local realism.

[ 19 ] : 117 The transition from "possible" to "actual" is a major topic of quantum physics , with related theories including quantum darwinism .

Role of "observation" in quantum mechanics See also: Quantum decoherence The quantum mind –body problem refers to the philosophical discussions of the mind–body problem in the context of quantum mechanics. Since quantum mechanics involves quantum superpositions , which are not perceived by observers , some interpretations of quantum mechanics place conscious observers in a special position.

The founders of quantum mechanics debated the role of the observer, and of them, Wolfgang Pauli and Werner Heisenberg believed that quantum mechanics expressed the observers knowledge and when an experiment was completed the additional knowledge should be incorporated in the wave function, an effect that came to be called state reduction or collapse . This point of view, which was never fully endorsed by Niels Bohr , was denounced as mystical and anti-scientific by Albert Einstein . Pauli accepted the term, and described quantum mechanics as lucid mysticism .

[ 20 ] Heisenberg and Bohr always described quantum mechanics in logical positivist terms. Bohr also took an active interest in the philosophical implications of quantum theories such as his complementarity , for example.

[ 21 ] He believed quantum theory offers a complete description of nature, albeit one that is simply ill-suited for everyday experiences – which are better described by classical mechanics and probability. Bohr famously avoided any characterization of "reality".

[ 22 ] : 163 Eugene Wigner reformulated the " Schrödinger's cat " thought experiment as " Wigner's friend " and proposed that the consciousness of an observer is the demarcation line which precipitates collapse of the wave function, independent of any realist interpretation. Commonly known as " consciousness causes collapse ", this controversial interpretation of quantum mechanics states that observation by a conscious observer is what makes the wave function collapse. However, this is a minority view among quantum philosophers, considering it a misunderstanding.

[ 23 ] There are other possible solutions to the " Wigner's friend " thought experiment, which do not require consciousness to be different from other physical processes. Moreover, Wigner shifted to those interpretations in his later years.

[ 24 ] Multiverse The multiverse is the hypothetical set of multiple possible universes (including the historical universe we consistently experience) that together comprise everything that exists: the entirety of space , time, matter , and energy as well as the physical laws and constants that describe them. The term was coined in 1895 by the American philosopher and psychologist William James .

[ 25 ] In the many-worlds interpretation (MWI), one of the mainstream interpretations of quantum mechanics , there are an infinite number of universes and every possible quantum outcome occurs in at least one universe, albeit there is a debate as to how real the (other) worlds are .

The structure of the multiverse, the nature of each universe within it and the relationship between the various constituent universes, depend on the specific multiverse hypothesis considered. Multiverses have been hypothesized in cosmology , physics, astronomy , religion, philosophy, transpersonal psychology and fiction, particularly in science fiction and fantasy. In these contexts, parallel universes are also called "alternative universes", "quantum universes", "interpenetrating dimensions", "parallel dimensions", "parallel worlds", "alternative realities", "alternative timelines", and "dimensional planes", among others.

Cyclic theories This section is an excerpt from Multiverse § Cyclic theories .

[ edit ] In several theories, there is a series of, in some cases infinite , self-sustaining cycles – typically a series of Big Crunches (or Big Bounces ). However, the respective universes do not exist at once but are forming or following in a logical order or sequence, with key natural constituents potentially varying between universes (see § Anthropic principle ).

Some cyclic theories postulate continuous expansion of the universe across cycles to ensure entropy growth, but they have been shown not be truly cyclic in time.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] In any case these types of scientific hypotheses do not fundamentally alter concepts of the ultimate origin of reality such as the cosmological argument .

[ 29 ] A theist can argue for perpetual divine creation or for an unmoved mover responsible for the first universe in the sequence.

[ 30 ] Anthropic principle This paragraph is an excerpt from Anthropic principle .

[ edit ] In cosmology and philosophy of science , the anthropic principle , also known as the observation selection effect, is the proposition that the range of possible observations that could be made about the universe is limited by the fact that observations are only possible in the type of universe that is capable of developing observers in the first place. Proponents of the anthropic principle argue that it explains why the universe has the age and the fundamental physical constants necessary to accommodate intelligent life. If either had been significantly different, no one would have been around to make observations. Anthropic reasoning has been used to address the question as to why certain measured physical constants take the values that they do, rather than some other arbitrary values, and to explain a perception that the universe appears to be finely tuned for the existence of life.

Personal and collective reality White matter tracts within a human brain, as visualized by MRI tractography Each individual has a different view of reality , with different memories and personal history, knowledge, personality traits and experience.

[ 31 ] This system, mostly referring to the human brain , affects cognition and behavior and into this complex new knowledge , memories, [ 32 ] information, thoughts and experiences are continuously integrated.

[ 33 ] [ additional citation(s) needed ] The connectome – neural networks/wirings in brains – is thought to be a key factor in human variability in terms of cognition or the way we perceive the world (as a context) and related features or processes.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] Sensemaking is the process by which people give meaning to their experiences and make sense of the world they live in.

Personal identity is relating to questions like how a unique individual is persisting through time.

Sensemaking and determination of reality also occurs collectively, which is investigated in social epistemology and related approaches. From the collective intelligence perspective, the intelligence of the individual human (and potentially AI entities) is substantially limited and advanced intelligence emerges when multiple entities collaborate over time.

[ 37 ] [ additional citation(s) needed ] Collective memory is an important component of the social construction of reality [ 38 ] and communication and communication-related systems, such as media systems, may also be major components (see #Technology ) .

Philosophy of perception raises questions based on the evolutionary history of humans' perceptual apparatuses, particularly or especially individuals' physiological senses , described as "[w]e don't see reality—we only see what was useful to see in the past", partly suggesting that "[o]ur species has been so successful not in spite of our inability to see reality but because of it".

[ 39 ] Scientific theories of everything A theory of everything (TOE) is a putative theory of theoretical physics that fully explains and links together all known physical phenomena, and predicts the outcome of any experiment that could be carried out in principle . The theory of everything is also called the final theory .

[ 40 ] Many candidate theories of everything have been proposed by theoretical physicists during the twentieth century, but none have been confirmed experimentally. The primary problem in producing a TOE is that general relativity and quantum mechanics are hard to unify. This is one of the unsolved problems in physics .

Initially, the term "theory of everything" was used with an ironic connotation to refer to various overgeneralized theories. For example, a great-grandfather of Ijon Tichy , a character from a cycle of Stanisław Lem 's science fiction stories of the 1960s, was known to work on the "General Theory of Everything". Physicist John Ellis [ 41 ] claims to have introduced the term into the technical literature in an article in Nature in 1986.

[ 42 ] Over time, the term stuck in popularizations of quantum physics to describe a theory that would unify or explain through a single model the theories of all fundamental interactions and of all particles of nature: general relativity for gravitation, and the standard model of elementary particle physics – which includes quantum mechanics – for electromagnetism, the two nuclear interactions, and the known elementary particles.

Current candidates for a theory of everything include string theory , M theory , and loop quantum gravity .

Technology Media See also: § Personal and collective reality , and § Belief studies Media – such as news media , social media , websites including Wikipedia , [ 43 ] and fiction [ 44 ] – shape individuals' and society's perception of reality (including as part of belief and attitude formation) [ 44 ] and are partly used intentionally as means to learn about reality. Various technologies have changed society's relationship with reality such as the advent of radio and TV technologies.

Research investigates interrelations and effects, for example aspects in the social construction of reality.

[ 45 ] A major component of this shaping and representation of perceived reality is agenda, selection and prioritization – not only (or primarily) the quality, tone and types of content – which influences, for instance, the public agenda.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] Disproportional news attention for low-probability incidents – such as high-consequence accidents – can distort audiences' risk perceptions with harmful consequences.

[ 48 ] Various biases such as false balance , public attention dependence reactions like sensationalism and domination by "current events", [ 49 ] as well as various interest-driven uses of media such as marketing can also have major impacts on the perception of reality.

Time-use studies found that e.g. in 2018 the average U.S. American "spent around eleven hours every day looking at screens".

[ 50 ] Virtual reality and cyberspace Virtual reality (VR) is a computer-simulated environment that can simulate physical presence in places in the real world, as well as in imaginary worlds.

Reality-virtuality continuum The virtuality continuum is a continuous scale ranging between the completely virtual, a virtuality, and the completely real: reality. The reality–virtuality continuum therefore encompasses all possible variations and compositions of real and virtual objects. It has been described as a concept in new media and computer science , but in fact it could be considered a matter of anthropology . The concept was first introduced by Paul Milgram.

[ 51 ] The area between the two extremes, where both the real and the virtual are mixed, is the so-called mixed reality . This in turn is said to consist of both augmented reality , where the virtual augments the real, and augmented virtuality , where the real augments the virtual.

Cyberspace , the world's computer systems considered as an interconnected whole, can be thought of as a virtual reality; for instance, it is portrayed as such in the cyberpunk fiction of William Gibson and others.

Second Life and MMORPGs such as World of Warcraft are examples of artificial environments or virtual worlds (falling some way short of full virtual reality) in cyberspace.

"RL" in internet culture On the Internet, " real life " refers to life in the real world. It generally references life or consensus reality , in contrast to an environment seen as fiction or fantasy, such as virtual reality, lifelike experience, dreams , novels, or movies. Online, the acronym "IRL" stands for "in real life", with the meaning "not on the Internet".

[ 52 ] Sociologists engaged in the study of the Internet have determined that someday, a distinction between online and real-life worlds may seem "quaint", noting that certain types of online activity, such as sexual intrigues, have already made a full transition to complete legitimacy and "reality".

[ 53 ] The abbreviation "RL" stands for "real life". For example, one can speak of "meeting in RL" someone whom one has met in a chat or on an Internet forum . It may also be used to express an inability to use the Internet for a time due to "RL problems". A related abbreviation is "AFK", which stands for "away from keyboard", [ 54 ] signifying that one is (at least temporarily) choosing to disengage themselves from the virtual world so as to focus preferentially on the real one.

World views Further information: World view A common colloquial usage would have reality mean "perceptions, beliefs, and attitudes toward reality", as in "My reality is not your reality." This is often used just as a colloquialism indicating that the parties to a conversation agree, or should agree, not to quibble over deeply different conceptions of what is real. For example, in a religious discussion between friends, one might say (attempting humor), "You might disagree, but in my reality, everyone goes to heaven." Reality can be defined in a way that links it to worldviews or parts of them (conceptual frameworks): Reality is the totality of all things, structures (actual and conceptual), events (past and present) and phenomena, whether observable or not. It is what a world view (whether it be based on individual or shared human experience) ultimately attempts to describe or map.

A worldview (also world-view) or Weltanschauung is said to be the fundamental cognitive orientation of an individual or society encompassing the whole of the individual's or society's knowledge , culture , and point of view .

[ 55 ] However, when two parties view the same real world phenomenon, their world views may differ, one including elements that the other does not.

A worldview can include natural philosophy ; fundamental, existential, and normative postulates; or themes, values, emotions, and ethics.

[ 56 ] Certain ideas from physics, philosophy, sociology, literary criticism , and other fields shape various theories of reality. One such theory is that there simply and literally is no reality beyond the perceptions or beliefs we each have about reality.

[ 57 ] Such attitudes are summarized in popular statements, such as "Perception is reality" or "Life is how you perceive reality" or "reality is what you can get away with" ( Robert Anton Wilson ), and they indicate anti-realism – that is, the view that there is no objective reality, whether acknowledged explicitly or not.

Many of the concepts of science and philosophy are often defined culturally and socially . This idea was elaborated by Thomas Kuhn in his book The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962).

The Social Construction of Reality , a book about the sociology of knowledge written by Peter L. Berger and Thomas Luckmann , was published in 1966. It explained how knowledge is acquired and used for the comprehension of reality. Out of all the realities, the reality of everyday life is the most important one since our consciousness requires us to be completely aware and attentive to the experience of everyday life.

See also Alternate history Consciousness Extended modal realism Fact Hyperreality Modal realism Potentiality and actuality References ^ OED staff. "Reality (noun)".

Oxford English Dictionary . Oxford University Press . Retrieved 4 April 2025 .

^ Lehar, Steve. (2000).

The Function of Conscious Experience: An Analogical Paradigm of Perception and Behavior Archived 2015-10-21 at the Wayback Machine , Consciousness and Cognition .

^ Lehar, Steve. (2000).

Naïve Realism in Contemporary Philosophy Archived 2012-08-11 at the Wayback Machine , The Function of Conscious Experience .

^ Lehar, Steve.

Representationalism Archived 2012-09-05 at the Wayback Machine ^ Tegmark, Max (February 2008). "The Mathematical Universe".

Foundations of Physics .

38 (2): 101– 150.

arXiv : 0704.0646 .

Bibcode : 2008FoPh...38..101T .

doi : 10.1007/s10701-007-9186-9 .

S2CID 9890455 .

^ Tegmark (1998), p. 1.

^ Loux, Michael J. (2001). "The Problem of Universals" in Metaphysics: Contemporary Readings , Michael J. Loux (ed.), N.Y.: Routledge, pp. 3–13, [4] ^ Price, H. H.

(1953). "Universals and Resemblance", Ch. 1 of Thinking and Experience , Hutchinson's University Library, among others, sometimes uses such Latin terms.

^ as quoted in [Artigas, The Mind of the Universe , p.123] ^ "Present-time consciousness",
Francisco J. Varela, Journal of Consciousness Studies 6 (2-3):111-140 (1999) ^ For the concept of "levels of reality", compare: Ioannidis, Stavros; Vishne, Gal; Hemmo, Meir; Shenker, Orly , eds. (8 June 2022).

Levels of Reality in Science and Philosophy: Re-examining the Multi-level Structure of Reality . Jerusalem Studies in Philosophy and History of Science. Cham, Zug: Springer Nature.

ISBN 9783030994259 . Retrieved 31 May 2024 .

^ Kockelmans, Joseph (2001).

Edmund Husserl's phenomenology (2 ed.).

Purdue University Press. pp.

311– 314.

ISBN 1-55753-050-5 .

^ Crowell, Steven Galt (2001).

Husserl, Heidegger, and the space of meaning: paths toward transcendental phenomenology .

Northwestern University Press. p. 160.

ISBN 0-8101-1805-X .

^ Mori, Shohei; Ikeda, Sei; Saito, Hideo (28 June 2017).

"A survey of diminished reality: Techniques for visually concealing, eliminating, and seeing through real objects" .

IPSJ Transactions on Computer Vision and Applications .

9 (1): 17.

doi : 10.1186/s41074-017-0028-1 .

ISSN 1882-6695 .

S2CID 21053932 .

^ Shankara's Crest Jewel of Discrimination .

ISBN 9780874810387 .

^ Jain, S. A. (1992).

Reality . Jwalamalini Trust. p. 6.

^ Jain, S. A. (1992).

Reality . Jwalamalini Trust. p. 7.

^ Norsen, Travis (26 February 2007). "Against 'Realism' ".

Foundations of Physics .

37 (3): 311– 340.

arXiv : quant-ph/0607057 .

Bibcode : 2007FoPh...37..311N .

doi : 10.1007/s10701-007-9104-1 .

S2CID 15072850 .

^ Nielsen, Michael A.; Chuang, Isaac L. (2000).

Quantum Computation and Quantum Information .

Cambridge University Press . pp.

112– 113.

ISBN 978-0-521-63503-5 .

^ Marin, Juan Miguel (2009). " 'Mysticism' in quantum mechanics: the forgotten controversy".

European Journal of Physics .

30 (4): 807– 822.

Bibcode : 2009EJPh...30..807M .

doi : 10.1088/0143-0807/30/4/014 .

S2CID 122757714 .

link , summarized here [1] .

Archived 2011-06-06 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Honner, John (2005). "Niels Bohr and the Mysticism of Nature".

Zygon: Journal of Religion & Science .

17– 3 : 243– 253.

^ Symposium On The Foundations Of Modern Physics 1987 - The Copenhagen Interpretation 60 Years After The Como Lecture. (1988). Singapore: World Scientific Publishing Company.

^ Schlosshauer, M.; Koer, J.; Zeilinger, A. (2013). "A Snapshot of Foundational Attitudes Toward Quantum Mechanics".

Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part B: Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics .

44 (3): 222– 230.

arXiv : 1301.1069 .

Bibcode : 2013SHPMP..44..222S .

doi : 10.1016/j.shpsb.2013.04.004 .

S2CID 55537196 .

^ Michael Esfeld, (1999), Essay Review: Wigner's View of Physical Reality Archived 2014-02-01 at the Wayback Machine , published in Studies in History and Philosophy of Modern Physics, 30B, pp. 145–154, Elsevier Science Limited.

^ James, William, The Will to Believe , 1895; and earlier in 1895, as cited in OED 's new 2003 entry for "multiverse": "1895 W. JAMES in Internat. Jrnl. Ethics 6 10 Visible nature is all plasticity and indifference, a multiverse, as one might call it, and not a universe." ^ Kinney, William H.; Stein, Nina K. (2022-06-01).

"Cyclic cosmology and geodesic completeness" .

Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics .

2022 (6): 011.

arXiv : 2110.15380 .

Bibcode : 2022JCAP...06..011K .

doi : 10.1088/1475-7516/2022/06/011 .

ISSN 1475-7516 .

^ Cain, Fraser (August 11, 2022).

"Even a Cyclical Universe Needed to Come From Somewhere" .

Universe Today . Self-published . Retrieved 11 June 2025 .

^ Hsu, Charlotte (August 4, 2022).

"Do 'bouncing universes' have a beginning?" .

UB News Center . University of Buffalo . Retrieved 11 June 2025 .

^ Reichenbach, Bruce (Apr 16, 2024).

"Cosmological Argument" . In Zalta, Edward N.; Uri Nodelman (eds.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2024 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 11 June 2025 .

^ Halvorson, Hans; Kragh, Helge (Nov 16, 2021).

"Cosmology and Theology" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2021 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 11 June 2025 .

^ Savin-Baden, Maggi; Burden, David (1 April 2019).

"Digital Immortality and Virtual Humans" .

Postdigital Science and Education .

1 (1): 87– 103.

doi : 10.1007/s42438-018-0007-6 .

ISSN 2524-4868 .

S2CID 149797460 .

^ van Kesteren, Marlieke T. R.; Rignanese, Paul; Gianferrara, Pierre G.; Krabbendam, Lydia; Meeter, Martijn (16 March 2020).

"Congruency and reactivation aid memory integration through reinstatement of prior knowledge" .

Scientific Reports .

10 (1): 4776.

Bibcode : 2020NatSR..10.4776V .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-020-61737-1 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 7075880 .

PMID 32179822 .

^ "Understanding reality through algorithms" .

MIT News | Massachusetts Institute of Technology .

Archived from the original on 6 November 2022 . Retrieved 6 November 2022 .

^ Popova, Maria (28 March 2012).

"The Connectome: A New Way To Think About What Makes You You" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 31 March 2012 . Retrieved 6 November 2022 .

^ Seung, Sebastian (2012).

Connectome: How the Brain's Wiring Makes Us Who We Are . HMH.

ISBN 978-0547508177 .

^ "Quest for the connectome: scientists investigate ways of mapping the brain" .

The Guardian . 7 May 2012.

Archived from the original on 6 November 2022 . Retrieved 6 November 2022 .

^ Peeters, Marieke M. M.; van Diggelen, Jurriaan; van den Bosch, Karel; Bronkhorst, Adelbert; Neerincx, Mark A.; Schraagen, Jan Maarten; Raaijmakers, Stephan (1 March 2021).

"Hybrid collective intelligence in a human–AI society" (PDF) .

AI & Society .

36 (1): 217– 238.

doi : 10.1007/s00146-020-01005-y .

ISSN 1435-5655 .

S2CID 220050285 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 3 September 2023 . Retrieved 3 September 2023 .

^ Luckmann, Thomas (February 2008). "On Social Interaction and the Communicative Construction of Personal Identity, Knowledge and Reality".

Organization Studies .

29 (2): 277– 290.

doi : 10.1177/0170840607087260 .

ISSN 0170-8406 .

S2CID 145106025 .

^ Draaisma, Douwe (April 2017).

"Perception: Our useful inability to see reality" .

Nature .

544 (7650): 296.

Bibcode : 2017Natur.544..296D .

doi : 10.1038/544296a .

S2CID 4400770 .

^ Weinberg (1993) ^ Ellis, John (2002).

"Physics gets physical (correspondence)" .

Nature .

415 (6875): 957.

Bibcode : 2002Natur.415..957E .

doi : 10.1038/415957b .

PMID 11875539 .

^ Ellis, John (1986). "The Superstring: Theory of Everything, or of Nothing?".

Nature .

323 (6089): 595– 598.

Bibcode : 1986Natur.323..595E .

doi : 10.1038/323595a0 .

S2CID 4344940 .

^ McDowell, Zachary J.; Vetter, Matthew A. (2022).

Wikipedia and the Representation of Reality . Taylor & Francis.

doi : 10.4324/9781003094081 .

hdl : 20.500.12657/50520 .

ISBN 978-1003094081 .

S2CID 238657838 .

Archived from the original on 2023-03-07 . Retrieved 2023-09-03 .

^ a b Prentice, D.; Gerrig, R. (1999). "Exploring the boundary between fiction and reality". In S. Chaiken; Y. Trope (eds.).

Dual-process theories in social psychology . The Guilford Press. pp.

529– 546.

Archived from the original on 2022-11-06 . Retrieved 2023-09-03 .

^ Gamson, William A.; Croteau, David; Hoynes, William; Sasson, Theodore (1992).

"Media Images and the Social Construction of Reality" .

Annual Review of Sociology .

18 : 373– 393.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.so.18.080192.002105 .

ISSN 0360-0572 .

JSTOR 2083459 .

Archived from the original on 2022-11-06 . Retrieved 2023-09-03 .

^ McCombs, Maxwell E.; Shaw, Donald L. (1972). "The Agenda-Setting Function of Mass Media".

Public Opinion Quarterly .

36 (2): 176.

doi : 10.1086/267990 .

^ McCombs, Maxwell; Reynolds, Amy (2009). "How the news shapes our civic agenda and News Influence on Our Pictures of the World".

Media Effects . Routledge. pp.

17– 32.

doi : 10.4324/9780203877111-7 .

ISBN 978-0203877111 .

Archived from the original on 2022-11-06 . Retrieved 2023-09-03 .

^ van der Meer, Toni G. L. A.; Kroon, Anne C.; Vliegenthart, Rens (20 July 2022).

"Do News Media Kill? How a Biased News Reality can Overshadow Real Societal Risks, The Case of Aviation and Road Traffic Accidents" .

Social Forces .

101 (1): 506– 530.

doi : 10.1093/sf/soab114 .

^ "How the news took over reality" .

The Guardian . 3 May 2019.

Archived from the original on 6 November 2022 . Retrieved 6 November 2022 .

^ Gorvett, Zaria.

"How the news changes the way we think and behave" .

BBC .

Archived from the original on 6 November 2022 . Retrieved 6 November 2022 .

^ Milgram, Paul; Takemura, H.; Utsumi, A.; Kishino, F. (1994).

"Augmented Reality: A class of displays on the reality-virtuality continuum" (PDF) .

Proceedings of Telemanipulator and Telepresence Technologies . Telemanipulator and Telepresence Technologies. pp.

2351– 2434. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2006-10-04 . Retrieved 2007-03-15 .

^ "IRL – Definition by AcronymFinder" .

www.acronymfinder.com .

Archived from the original on 2011-06-28 . Retrieved 2021-05-14 .

^ Slater, Don (2002). "Social Relationships and Identity On-line and Off-line". In Livingstone, Sonia ; Lievrouw, Leah (eds.).

Handbook of New Media: Social Shaping and Consequences of ICTs . Sage Publications Incorporated. pp.

533– 543.

ISBN 0-7619-6510-6 .

^ "Dictionary entry for 'afk' " .

Cambridge Dictionary . Cambridge University Press . Retrieved 11 June 2025 .

^ Funk, Ken (2001-03-21).

"What is a Worldview?" . Retrieved 2019-12-10 .

^ Palmer, Gary B. (1996).

Toward A Theory of Cultural Linguistics . University of Texas Press. p. 114.

ISBN 978-0-292-76569-6 .

^ Guyer, Paul; Horstmann, Rolf-Peter (2023).

"Idealism" . In Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2023 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 2025-05-14 .

External links Reality at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Miller, Alexander.

"Realism" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

C.D. Broad on Reality Phenomenology Online: Materials discussing and exemplifying phenomenological research The Matrix as Metaphysics by David Chalmers v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Worldview Related terms Basic beliefs / Beliefs Collective consciousness / Collective unconscious Conceptual system Context Conventional wisdom Conventions Cultural movement Epic poetry / National epics / World folk-epics Facts and factoids Framing Ideology Life stance Lifestyle Memes / Memeplex Mental model Metanarrative Mindset Norms Paradigm Philosophical theory Point of view Presuppositions Primal world beliefs Reality tunnel Schemata School of thought Set Social reality Theory of everything Umwelt Value system Aspects Biases Academic Attentional Attitude polarization Belief Cognitive list Collective narcissism Confirmation Congruence Cryptomnesia Cultural Ethnocentrism Filter bubble Homophily In-group favoritism Magical thinking Media Observational error Observer-expectancy Selective exposure Selective perception Self-deception Self-fulfilling prophecy Clever Hans effect placebo effect wishful thinking Status quo Stereotyping ethnic Change and maintenance Activism Argument Argumentum ad populum Attitude change Brainwashing Censorship Charisma Circular reporting Cognitive dissonance Critical thinking Crowd manipulation Cultural dissonance Deprogramming Echo chamber Education religious values Euphemism Excommunication Fearmongering Historical revisionism negationism Ideological repression Indoctrination Manipulation (psychology) Media manipulation Media regulation Missionaries Moral entrepreneurship Persuasion Polite fiction Political engineering Propaganda Propaganda model Proselytism Psychological warfare Religious conversion forced Religious persecution Religious uniformity Revolutions Rhetoric Self-censorship Social change Social control Social engineering Social influence Social progress Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Woozle effect Culture Anthropology cultural social Calendars Ceremonies Coronations Cross-cultural psychology Cultural psychology Doctrine Employment / Serfdom / Slavery Families Funerals / Burial Games Holidays Hygiene ritual Identity (philosophy) cultural Institutions Liminality Liturgy Marriage Myth and ritual Oaths Pilgrimages Play Rites of passage secular Rituals Social class / Social status / Caste Symbols Symbolic boundaries Worship Groupthink Abilene paradox Bandwagon effect Collectives Collective behavior animal Collective effervescence Collective intelligence Conformity Consensus theory Crowd psychology Cults Culture-bound syndromes Deindividuation Doublethink Emergence Emotional contagion Entitativity False consensus effect Folie à deux Group action Group cohesiveness Group dynamics Group emotion Group polarization Groupshift Herd behavior Holism Hysterical contagion Information cascade In-group and out-group Invisible hand Lynching Majoritarianism / Mob rule Mass action Mass psychogenic illness Milieu control Mobbing Moral panic Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Political correctness Pseudoconsensus Scapegoating Self-organization Social action Social behavior Social emotions Social exclusion Social facilitation animal Social group Social proof Social psychology Sociology Spontaneous order Status quo Stigmergy Swarm behaviour System justification Viral phenomena Knowledge Axioms tacit assumptions Conceptual framework Epistemology outline Evidence anecdotal scientific Explanations Faith fideism Gnosis Intuition Meaning-making Memory Meta-knowledge Methodology Observation Observational learning Perception Reasoning fallacious logic Revelation Testimony Tradition folklore Truth consensus theory criteria World disclosure Metaphysics Ætiology Afterlife Anima mundi Causality Concepts Consciousness mind–body problem Cosmogony Cosmology religious Creation myth Deities existence Destiny Eschatology Everything / Nothing Evolution Existence Fiction / Nonfiction Free will Future History Ideas Idios kosmos Illusions Incarnation Information Intelligence Magic Matter Miracles Mythology comparative National mythoi Nature philosophical Ontology Origin myths political Otherworlds axes mundi Physics natural philosophy Problem of evil Reality Souls Spirit Supernature Teleology Theology Time Unobservables Value Aesthetic taste Aesthetic Almsgiving / Charity Altruism Autonomy Beauty Codes of conduct Comedy Common good Conscience Consent Creativity Disgust Duty Economics Ecstasy emotional religious Elegance Emotions Aesthetic Entertainment Eroticism Ethics Étiquette Family values Food and drink prohibitions unclean animals Golden Rule Guilt / Culpability Happiness Harmony Honour Human rights Judgement Justice Law jurisprudence religious Liberty political freedom Love Magnificence Maxims Meaning of life Morality public Obligations Peace Piety Praxeology Principles Punishment Qualities Repentance Reverence Rights Sexuality ethics Sin Social stigma Stewardship Styles Sublime, The Suffering Sympathy Taboo Theodicy Trust Unspoken rules Virtues and Vices Works of art Wrongdoing Examples Attitudes Misanthropy Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Economic and political ideologies Anarchism Authoritarianism Capitalism Christian democracy Collectivism Colonialism Communalism Communism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Distributism Environmentalism Extremism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Globalism Green politics Imperialism Individualism Industrialisation Intellectualism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Masculism Militarism Monarchism Nationalism Pacifism Progressivism Radicalism Reformism Republicanism Sentientism Social democracy Socialism Utilitarianism Veganism Religions African traditional religions Baháʼí Buddhism Caodaism Cheondoism Chinese folk religion Christianity Eastern Orthodox Church Ethnic religions Hinduism Hòa Hảo Islam Jainism Judaism Korean shamanism Modern paganism Rastafari Secularity / Irreligion / Agnosticism / Atheism Shinto Sikhism Spiritism Taoism Tenrikyo Unitarian Universalism Zoroastrianism Schools of philosophy Agriculturalism Aristotelianism Atomism Averroism Cartesianism Cārvāka Collectivism Confucianism / New Confucianism Critical theory Cynicism Cyrenaics Determinism Dualism Eleatics Empiricism Epicureanism Eretrian school Existentialism Fatalism Foundationalism Hedonism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Historicism / New historicism Holism Humanism / Renaissance humanism Idealism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Individualism Ionian Kantianism / Neo-Kantianism Kokugaku Legalism Logicians Materialism Megarian school Modernism / Postmodernism Mohism Monism Natural law Naturalism (Chinese) Naturalism (Western) Nihilism Peripatetic Phenomenology Platonism / Neoplatonism Pluralism Positivism Pragmatism Pre-Socratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism / Neopythagoreanism Rationalism Reductionism Scholasticism / Neo-scholasticism Sentientism Social constructionism Sophism Spinozism Stoicism Structuralism / Post-structuralism Thomism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism Yangism v t e Modern spirituality Spirituality Outline of spirituality Category:Spirituality Concepts Afterlife Akashic records Ātman Awakening Bodhi Chakra Consciousness Cosmogony Cosmology Creation myths Deity Dharma Ekam Emanationism Enlightenment Epigenesis Eschatology Eternal return Eternity Ethic of reciprocity Existence God Guru Inner peace Involution Jihad Karma Kevala jnana Lataif-e-Sitta Meaning of life Metaphysics Mind's eye Moksha Nature Nirvana Paranormal Parapsychology Planes of existence Prophecy Qi Reality Reincarnation Revelation Salvation Samadhi Satguru Satori Shabda Śūnyatā Soul Spirit Spiritual evolution Spiritual possession Supernatural Synchronicity Tao Tattvas Yana Yuga Practices Ahimsa Aikido Altruism Ancestor worship Asceticism Astrology Bearing testimony Being born again Bhajan Bhakti Blessing Celibacy Channelling Chanting Contemplation Dhikr Embodiment Entheogen Exorcism Faith healing Fasting Glossolalia Hymn Iconolatry Japa Kinomichi Koan practice Magick Mantra Meditation Martyrdom Ministering Miracles Monasticism Muraqabah Nonresistance Nonviolence Pacifism Pilgrimage Prayer Qawwali Qigong Religious ecstasy Religious music Repentance Revivalism Ritual Sacrament Sacrifice Sādhanā Sahaj Marg Sainthood Self-realization Shamanism Simple living Simran Supplication Sufi whirling Tai chi Theophany Theosis Tithing Vegetarianism Veneration Vipassanā Wabi-sabi Wearing vestments Worship Yoga Zazen Belief systems Advaita Anthroposophy Darshana Deism Eutheism, dystheism, and maltheism Gnosticism Henotheism Hermeticism Kabbalah Kathenotheism Martinism Modern paganism Monotheism Monolatry Mysticism Neoplatonism Nondualism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Religion Rosicrucianism Spiritualism Sufism Taoism Theism Thelema Theosophy Transcendentalism Vedanta Texts A Course in Miracles Akilathirattu Ammanai Bible Book of Mormon The Cloud of Unknowing Dhammapada Hindu scripture Guru Granth Sahib I Ching Liber AL vel Legis Quran Sufi texts Tao Te Ching Torah The Urantia Book Zhuangzi Virtues Awareness Charity Compassion Empathy Faith Forgiveness Gratitude Honesty Hope Intuition Kindness Love Mercy Mettā Moral courage Patience Seven virtues Wisdom Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐26kt6
Cached time: 20250817222714
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.284 seconds
Real time usage: 1.592 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6436/1000000
Revision size: 60634/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 378890/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4311/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 21/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 228196/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.802/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25694445/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1233.492      1 -total
 34.16%  421.395      1 Template:Reflist
 13.99%  172.575     17 Template:Cite_book
 10.52%  129.822      3 Template:Excerpt
 10.27%  126.664      2 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  9.74%  120.170     17 Template:Cite_journal
  9.14%  112.796      1 Template:Philosophy_topics
  7.85%   96.853      2 Template:Lang
  6.08%   75.050      1 Template:Sister_project_links
  4.93%   60.829      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:43854:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817222714 and revision id 1305890350. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reality&oldid=1305890350 " Categories : Reality Concepts in metaphysics Concepts in epistemology Concepts in logic Concepts in metaphilosophy Concepts in the philosophy of language Concepts in the philosophy of science Ontology Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of technology Concepts in the philosophy of mind Concepts in social philosophy Realism Quantum measurement Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Articles needing additional references from April 2025 All articles needing additional references Articles containing German-language text Articles needing more detailed references Articles with excerpts Articles needing additional references from November 2022 Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 17:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reality 120 languages Add topic

