Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Popularization 2 Cultural and geographic meaning 3 Territories and regions conventionally included in the Far East 4 Cities 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Far East 96 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Arpetan Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kurdî Кыргызча Кырык мары Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy მარგალური Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Vahcuengh Vèneto Tiếng Việt Wolof 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geographical term for eastern Asia For other uses, see Far East (disambiguation) .

Far East Location of the Far East, geographically defined Chinese name Traditional Chinese 遠東 Simplified Chinese 远东 Literal meaning Far East Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Yuǎn Dōng Bopomofo ㄩㄢˇ ㄉㄨㄥ Wade–Giles Yüan 3 Tung 1 Tongyong Pinyin Yuǎn Dong IPA [ɥɛ̀n tʊ́ŋ] Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Yúhn Dūng Jyutping Jyun5 Dung1 IPA [jyn˩˧ tʊŋ˥] Southern Min Hokkien POJ Óan-tong Tâi-lô Uán-tong Burmese name Burmese အရှေ့ဖျား ဒေသ IPA [ʔəʃḛbjá dèθa̰] Vietnamese name Vietnamese alphabet Viễn Đông Chữ Hán 遠東 Thai name Thai ตะวันออกไกล RTGS Tawan-ok Klai Korean name Hangul 극동 Hanja 極東 Transcriptions Revised Romanization Geuk Dong McCune–Reischauer Kŭk Tong Mongolian name Mongolian Cyrillic Алс Дорнод Als Dornod Japanese name Kanji 極東 Hiragana きょくとう Katakana キョクトウ Transcriptions Revised Hepburn Kyokutō Kunrei-shiki Kyokutô Malay name Malay تيمور جا ء وه Timur Jauh Indonesian name Indonesian Timur Jauh Filipino name Tagalog ᜃᜐᜒᜎᜅᜈᜈ᜔ Kasilanganan ᜐᜒᜎᜅᜈᜈ᜔ Silanganan ( poetic ) ᜋᜎᜌᜓᜅ᜔ ᜐᜒᜎᜅᜈ᜔ Malayong Silangan (literal) Uyghur name Uyghur شەرقىي ئاسىيا Şerqiy Asiya Шәрқий Асия ‎ Tamil name Tamil தூர கிழக்கு Tūra Kiḻakku Portuguese name Portuguese Extremo Oriente Russian name Russian Дальний Восток IPA: [ˈdalʲnʲɪj vɐˈstok] Romanization Dál'niy Vostók Lao name Lao ຕາເວັນອອກໄກ Taven-ok kai Khmer name Khmer ចុងបូព៌ា Chong Bopea Tetum name Tetum Dok Lorosa'e The Far East is the geographical region that encompasses the easternmost portion of the Asian continent, including North , East and Southeast Asia .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] South Asia is sometimes also included in the definition of the term.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In modern times, the term Far East has widely fallen out of use and been substituted by Asia–Pacific , [ 5 ] while the terms Middle East and Near East , although now pertaining to different territories, are still commonly used today.

The term first came into use in European geopolitical discourse in the 15th century, particularly the British , denoting the Far East as the "farthest" of the three "Easts", beyond the Near East and the Middle East .

[ 6 ] Likewise, during the Qing dynasty of the 19th and early 20th centuries, the term " Tàixī ( 泰西 )" – i.e., anything further west than the Arab world – was used to refer to the Western countries.

Since the mid-20th century, the term has mostly gone out of use for the region in international mass media outlets due to its perceived Eurocentric connotations.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] North Asia is sometimes excluded due to cultural and ethnic differences.

[ 10 ] The term is still used in Russia to refer to its sparsely populated easternmost regions (being "far" in this case from the political, economic and cultural centres, Moscow and Saint Petersburg ).

Popularization [ edit ] Among Western Europeans, prior to the colonial era , Far East referred to anything further east than the Middle East. In the 16th century, King John III of Portugal called India a "rich and interesting country in the Far East [ 11 ] ( Extremo Oriente )." The term was popularized during the period of the British Empire as a blanket term for lands to the east of British India .

In pre- World War I European geopolitics, Near East referred to the relatively nearby lands of the Ottoman Empire , Middle East denoted north-western Southern Asian region and Central Asia , and the Far East meant countries along the western Pacific Ocean and eastern Indian Ocean. Many European languages have analogous terms, such as the French ( Extrême-Orient ), Spanish ( Extremo Oriente ), Portuguese ( Extremo Oriente ), Italian ( Estremo Oriente ), German ( Ferner Osten ), Polish ( Daleki Wschód ), Norwegian ( Det fjerne Østen ) and Dutch ( Verre Oosten ).

Cultural and geographic meaning [ edit ] Significantly, the term evokes cultural as well as geographic separation; the Far East is not just geographically distant, but also culturally exotic. It never refers, for instance, to the culturally Western nations of Australia and New Zealand, which lie even farther to the east of Europe than East Asia itself. This combination of cultural and geographic subjectivity was well illustrated in 1939 by Robert Menzies , a Prime Minister of Australia . Reflecting on his country's geopolitical situation with the onset of war , Menzies commented that: "The problems of the Pacific are different. What Great Britain calls the Far East is to us the near north." [ 12 ] Far East , in its usual sense, is comparable to terms such as the Orient ( Latin for "East"), Eastern world , or simply the East , all of which may refer, broadly, to East and South-East Asia in general. Occasionally, albeit more in the past, the Russian Far East and South Asia have been deemed to be part of the Far East.

Commenting on such terms, John K. Fairbank and Edwin O. Reischauer (both professors of East Asian Studies at Harvard University ) wrote, in East Asia: The Great Tradition : When Europeans traveled far to the east to reach Cathay , Japan and the Indies , they naturally gave those distant regions the general name 'Far East.' Americans who reached China, Japan and Southeast Asia by sail and steam across the Pacific could, with equal logic, have called that area the 'Far West.' For the people who live in that part of the world, however, it is neither 'East' nor 'West' and certainly not 'Far.' A more generally acceptable term for the area is 'East Asia,' which is geographically more precise and does not imply the outdated notion that Europe is the center of the civilized world.

[ 9 ] Today, the term remains in the names of some longstanding institutions, including the Far Eastern Federal University in Vladivostok , Far Eastern University in Manila , the Far East University in South Korea, and Far East , the periodical magazine of the Missionary Society of St. Columban . Furthermore, the United States and United Kingdom have historically incorporated Far East in the names of several military units and commands in the region, such as the British Royal Navy 's Far East Fleet , for instance.

Territories and regions conventionally included in the Far East [ edit ] Name of region [ 13 ] and territory, with flag Area (km 2 ) Population Population density (per km 2 ) Capital Forms of government Currency Official languages North Asia Russia [ 14 ] [ 15 ] 13,100,000 37,600,000 2.6 Moscow [ 16 ] Federal semi-presidential republic Ruble Russian and 27 other co-official languages East Asia China [ 17 ] 9,598,094 [ 18 ] 1,371,821,094 [ 19 ] 145.0 Beijing One-party socialist republic Yuan (Renminbi) Chinese (Mandarin) [ 20 ] Hong Kong [ 21 ] 1,108 7,448,900 6,777.0 Hong Kong Special administrative region of the People's Republic of China Hong Kong dollar Chinese, [ 22 ] English Japan 377,973 126,440,000 334.0 Tokyo Parliamentary democracy , Constitutional monarchy Yen None [ 23 ] Macau [ 24 ] 115.3 653,100 21,340.0 Macau Special administrative region of the People's Republic of China Pataca Chinese, [ 22 ] Portuguese Mongolia 1,566,000 3,081,677 1.97 Ulaanbaatar Semi-presidential system Tögrög Mongolian North Korea 120,540 25,368,620 212.0 Pyongyang Juche unitarian dictatorship Socialist Republic North Korean won Korean South Korea 100,363 51,446,201 507.0 Seoul Unitary presidential republic South Korean won Korean Taiwan [ 25 ] 36,197 23,577,271 650.0 Taipei Semi-presidential system New Taiwan dollar Chinese (Mandarin) Southeast Asia Brunei 5,765 417,200 72.11 Bandar Seri Begawan Absolute Islamic Sultanate Brunei dollar Malay and English Cambodia 181,035 16,245,729 81.8 Phnom Penh Constitutional monarchy Riel Khmer Christmas Island [ 26 ] 135 1,692 12.5 Flying Fish Cove External territory of Australia Australian dollar None [ 27 ] Cocos (Keeling) Islands [ 28 ] 14 593 42.4 West Island External territory of Australia Australian dollar None [ 29 ] Indonesia 1,904,569 261,115,456 138.0 Jakarta Presidential republic Rupiah Indonesian Laos 237,955 6,758,353 26.7 Vientiane Socialist Republic Kip Lao Malaysia 330,803 32,049,700 92.0 Kuala Lumpur Federal constitutional monarchy , Parliamentary democracy Ringgit Malay Myanmar (Burma) 676,578 53,582,855 76.0 Naypyidaw Unitary presidential constitutional republic Kyat Burmese Philippines 300,000 100,981,437 336.0 Manila Unitary presidential constitutional republic Philippine peso (Piso) Filipino and English Singapore 722.5 5,638,700 7,804.0 Singapore Parliamentary republic Singapore dollar Malay , English, Chinese (Mandarin) , and Tamil Thailand 513,120 68,863,514 132.1 Bangkok Constitutional monarchy , Parliamentary democracy Baht Thai Timor-Leste (East Timor) 15,410 1,167,242 78.0 Dili Parliamentary republic U.S. dollar / Centavo coins Tetum and Portuguese Vietnam 331,212 94,569,072 276.03 Hanoi One-party , Socialist Republic đồng Vietnamese Cities [ edit ] Further information: Cities of East Asia ; List of cities in East, South, and Southeast Asia by population ; and List of ports and harbors of the Pacific Ocean See also [ edit ] Look up far east in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Asia–Pacific Pacific Asia East Asia East Asian cultural sphere East–West dichotomy Far West , a term for Europe Four Asian Tigers – Hong Kong, Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere , Japanese idea from the 1930s–1940s Inner Asia List of Mongol states North Asia Russian Far East Siberia Ural (region) Northeast Asia Orient South Asia Southeast Asia Tropical Asia Turkic migration Organizations ASEAN+3 Comprehensive Economic Partnership for East Asia East Asian Community Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center References [ edit ] ^ "Oxford Dictionaries – Dictionary, Thesaurus, & Grammar" .

askoxford.com . Archived from the original on 29 September 2007.

^ "What is the Far East?" .

WorldAtlas . 1 August 2017 . Retrieved 9 June 2022 .

^ "Far East, Middle East, Near East" . 13 July 2011. Archived from the original on 15 July 2023 . Retrieved 15 July 2023 .

^ "Far East Definition" .

Law Insider . Archived from the original on 15 July 2023 . Retrieved 15 July 2023 .

^ Farrell, Brian P.; Long, S.R. Joey; Ulbrich, David, eds. (18 July 2022), "From Far East to Asia Pacific: Great Powers and Grand Strategy 1900–1954" , From Far East to Asia Pacific , De Gruyter Oldenbourg, doi : 10.1515/9783110718713 , ISBN 978-3-11-071871-3 , retrieved 10 August 2024 ^ "Where is the Middle East? The Near East? The Far East?" .

Dictionary.com . 24 February 2012 . Retrieved 19 October 2021 .

^ Fields, Larry.

"The Eurocentric Worldwiew: Misunderstanding East Asia" (PDF) .

asj.upd.edu.ph . p. 40.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 October 2015 . Retrieved 9 June 2022 .

^ "A menagerie of monikers" .

The Economist . 7 January 2010 . Retrieved 9 July 2011 .

^ a b Reischauer, Edwin and John K Fairbank, East Asia: The Great Tradition, 1960.

^ "East and Southeast Asia" .

ANDE . Retrieved 19 October 2021 .

^ Robert Sewell (1901).

A Forgotten Empire: Vijayanagar; A Contribution to the History of India . Asian Educational Services.

ISBN 9788120601253 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Menzies, R.G. (26 April 1939).

"73 Broadcast Speech" .

Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade .

Archived from the original on 20 March 2022 . Retrieved 13 October 2023 .

^ Continental regions as per UN categorisations (map) , except 12. Depending on definitions, various territories cited below (notes 6, 11–13, 15, 17–19, 21–23) may be in one or both of Asia and Europe, Africa, or Oceania.

^ Russia is a transcontinental country located in Eastern Europe and North Asia, but is considered European historically, culturally, and ethnically, and the vast majority of its population (78%) lives within its European part .

^ Asian part only.

^ Moscow is located in Europe.

^ The state is commonly known as simply "China", which is subsumed by the eponymous entity and civilisation (China) . Figures given are for mainland China only, and do not include Hong Kong, Macau, and Taiwan .

^ Includes PRC-administered area ( Aksai Chin and Trans-Karakoram Tract , both territories claimed by India).

^ Information listed is for mainland China only. The special administrative regions (i.e. Hong Kong and Macau) and the island territories under the control of the Republic of China (which includes the islands of Taiwan , Quemoy , and Matsu ) are excluded.

^ "Law of the People's Republic of China on the Standard Spoken and Written Chinese Language (Order of the President No.37)" . Chinese Government. 31 October 2000. Archived from the original on 24 July 2013 . Retrieved 21 June 2013 .

For purposes of this Law, the standard spoken and written Chinese language means Putonghua (a common speech with pronunciation based on the Beijing dialect) and the standardized Chinese characters.

^ Hong Kong is a special administrative region of the People's Republic of China ^ a b No specific variety of Chinese is official in the territory. Residents predominantly speak Cantonese , the de facto regional standard.

^ Japan's National Diet have not officially enacted a law stating that the official language is Japanese.

^ Macau is a special administrative region of the People's Republic of China.

^ Figures are for the area under the de facto control of the Republic of China (ROC) government, commonly referred to as Taiwan . Claimed in whole by the PRC; see political status of Taiwan .

^ Christmas Island is an external territory of Australia.

^ English does not have de jure status in Christmas Island and in Australia, but it is the de facto language of communication in government.

^ The Cocos (Keeling) Islands are an external territory of Australia.

^ English does not have de jure status in the Cocos (Keeling) Islands and in Australia, but it is the de facto language of communication in government.

Further reading [ edit ] Burghart, Sabine, Denis Park, and Liudmila Zakharova. "The DPRK's economic exchanges with Russia and the EU since 2000: an analysis of institutional effects and the case of the Russian Far East." Asia Europe Journal 18.3 (2020): 281–303. on North Korea Clyde, Paul Hibbert, and Burton F. Beers.

The Far East: A History of Western Impacts and Eastern Responses, 1830–1975 (1975).

online Crofts, Alfred.

A history of the Far East (1958) online Fairbank, John K., Edwin Reischauer, and Albert M. Craig.

East Asia: The great tradition and East Asia: The modern transformation (1960) [2 vol 1960] online, famous textbook.

Green, Michael.

By More Than Providence: Grand Strategy and American Power in the Asia Pacific Since 1783 (2019) excerpt Iriye, Akira.

After Imperialism; The Search for a New Order in the Far East 1921–1931.

(1965).

Keay, John.

Empire's End: A History of the Far East from High Colonialism to Hong Kong (Scribner, 1997).

online Louis, Wm Roger. "The road to Singapore: British imperialism in the Far East, 1932–42." in The fascist challenge and the policy of appeasement (Routledge, 2021) pp. 352–388.

Macnair, Harley F. & Donald Lach.

Modern Far Eastern International Relations.

(2nd ed 1955) 1950 edition online free, 780pp; focus on 1900–1950.

Norman, Henry.

The Peoples and Politics of the Far East: Travels and studies in the British, French, Spanish and Portuguese colonies, Siberia, China, Japan, Korea, Siam and Malaya (1904) online Paine, S. C. M.

The Wars for Asia, 1911–1949 (2014) excerpt Ring, George C.

Religions of the Far East: Their History to the Present Day (Kessinger Publishing, 2006).

Solomon, Richard H., and Masataka Kosaka, eds.

The Soviet Far East military buildup: nuclear dilemmas and Asian security (Routledge, 2021).

Stephan, John J.

The Russian Far East (Stanford University Press, 2022).

Vinacke, Harold M.

A History of the Far East in Modern Times (1964) online free Vogel, Ezra.

China and Japan: Facing History (2019) excerpt Woodcock, George.

The British in the Far East (1969) online.

Portals : Geography Asia China Indonesia Japan Malaysia North Korea Philippines Russia Singapore South Korea Taiwan Thailand Vietnam v t e Asia articles History Chronology Indian Ocean trade Silk Road Imperialism Decolonisation Cold War By topic Military conflicts Sovereignty Geography Cities metropolitan areas tallest buildings urban agglomerations Countries and territories by population Extreme points Islands Lakes Mountains Rivers Geopolitical Transcontinental regions Asia–Pacific Caucasus EMEA Mediterranean world MENASA Greater Middle East / Middle East and North Africa Middle East / Near East Indo-Mediterranean Indo-Pacific Indian Ocean world Pacific Rim Pacific Asia Intracontinental regions Anatolia/Asia Minor Arabia South Arabia Cyprus Far East / Pacific Asia Greater China China proper Taiwan Tibet Xinjiang Indochina Malay world Manchuria Northeast China Outer Manchuria Greater Mongolia Inner Mongolia Mongolia Japan Korea Russian Far East Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Greater Iran Greater Khorasan Global Southeast Greater India Levant / Syria Southern Levant Mesopotamia Siberia South Caucasus Turkestan Afghan Turkestan Chinese Turkestan Russian Turkestan Continental subregions Central Asia Soviet Central Asia East Asia Northeast Asia North Asia South Asia Subregions Southeast Asia Mainland Southeast Asia Maritime Southeast Asia West Asia Cultural Austronesia Indosphere Sinosphere Nanyang Northern and southern China Physical Supercontinents Afro-Eurasia Afro-Asia Eurasia Subcontinents Arabian subcontinent Indian subcontinent Plateaus Anatolian plateau Deccan Plateau Iranian plateau Mongolian Plateau Tibetan Plateau Peninsulas Anatolian Peninsula Arabian Peninsula Indian Peninsula Indochinese Peninsula Malay Peninsula Korean Peninsula Leizhou Peninsula Liaodong Peninsula Shandong Peninsula Archipelagos Japanese Archipelago Ryukyu Islands Malay Archipelago Indonesian Archipelago Maluku Islands Sunda Islands Greater Sunda Islands Lesser Sunda Islands Philippine Archipelago Visayan Islands Mergui Archipelago Biogeographic Eastern Asia Indo-Pacific Malesia Tropical Asia Politics Heads of government Heads of state Elections political parties Democracy Human rights Law Military Pan-Asianism Intergovernmental Asia Cooperation Dialogue (ACD) Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Bay of Bengal Initiative (BIMSTEC) Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO) Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (CCASG / GCC) Mekong–Ganga Cooperation (MGC) Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP) South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) Economy Countries by average wage Countries by GDP (PPP) Countries by HDI Currencies Stock exchanges Technology renewable energy Transport airports high-speed rail Markets Property markets Society Demographics Education Etiquette Health Languages Life expectancy People ethnic groups Culture Art Cinema Cuisine Literature Music Philosophy Religion Sport Future Asian Century Chinese Century Indian Century Pacific Century Outline Index Category Portal Maps v t e Earth 's primary regions and subregions Worlds Down Under New World Old World Three/Four Worlds First World Second World Third World Fourth World Hemispheres Eastern Land Hemisphere Northern Southern Water Hemisphere Western Landmasses Africa-Eurasia Eurasia Americas Antarctica Australia Zealandia submerged Tectonic plates Continents Africa North Maghreb Sub-Saharan Central East Horn Great Lakes Southern West Antarctica East Antarctica Antarctic Plateau Transantarctic Mountains West Antarctica Antarctic Peninsula Asia East Northeast Southeast Mainland Maritime Central Aral Sea Aralkum Desert Caspian Sea North Siberia Ural Russian Far East Northeast South Indian subcontinent Subregions West Arabian Peninsula Caucasus South Caucasus Levant Dead Sea Levantine corridor Levantine Sea Near East Other regions Himalayan Himalayan states Indian region Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Europe Eastern Balkans Caucasus North Caucasus South Caucasus Southern Russia European Russia Southeastern Northern Baltic British Isles Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Southern Mediterranean Middle East Italy Italian peninsula South-eastern Balkan Peninsula South-western Iberian Peninsula Western Atlantic Low Countries Northwestern Other regions Central Europe By language Celtic Germanic Romance Slavic Macaronesia North America Northern America Greenland Great Lakes Pacific Northwest United States Appalachia Bible Belt Eastern East Coast Northern Southeast Southwest U.S. Census regions Northeastern New England Mid-Atlantic Midwest South Western Mountain Pacific Canada Atlantic Canadian Prairies Central Eastern Northern Western Middle America Aridoamerica Greater Caribbean Caribbean West Indies Central Am.

Mesoamerica Northern Mexico Oceania Australasia Australia Mainland Australia New Guinea Tasmania Zealandia Melanesia Island Melanesia Micronesia Near Oceania Polynesia Remote Oceania South America Amazon Plain Amazon Basin Amazon Rainforest Andean States Brazilian Highlands Caribbean South America The Guianas Southern Cone Patagonia Geopolitical regions Global East Heartland North Northeast Northwest South Southeast Southwest West Asia–Pacific Far East Pacific Asia Sinosphere Greater China Indosphere Greater India Europe, the Middle East and Africa Mediterranean Greater Middle East Middle East and North Africa Middle East Arab world Mashriq Maghreb Greater Iran Iranian plateau Americas Anglo Dutch French Latin America and the Caribbean Latin Ibero Hispanic Portuguese Islands By continent Africa Americas North America Caribbean Central America South America Antarctica Asia Europe by area by population Oceania Australia New Zealand By ocean Arctic Atlantic Baltic Sea Black Sea Caribbean Sea Irish Sea Mediterranean Sea Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Ionian Sea Indian Persian Gulf Pacific East China Sea South China Sea Southern Oceans Antarctic/Southern Antarctic Convergence Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Great Barrier Reef Mariana Trench Challenger Deep Ring of Fire World Ocean Other waterbodies Lakes lists Rivers Seas Rim Arctic Atlantic Indo-Mediterranean Indian Ocean Mediterranean Pacific Polar Antarctic Arctic Continents of Earth / List of seas / Physical Earth v t e Eastern world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Sinic world Iranic world Indic world Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Islamdom History Ancient history Silk Road Post-classical history (Middle Ages) Modern period Early modern period Industrial Revolution World War I Asian and Pacific Theatre Middle Eastern Theatre Interwar period World War II Pacific War Middle Eastern Theatre Cold War Post–Cold War era War on terror Culture Alphabet Hanzi Kanji Kana Hangul Hanja Brahmic Arabic Cyrillic Latin Architecture Art History Calendar Chinese Buddhist Hindu Cuisine Esotericism Folklore Chinese Japanese Korean Languages Literature Music Chant Folk Mythology Philosophy Religion Philosophy Chinese philosophy Japanese philosophy Korean philosophy Vietnamese philosophy Indian philosophy Iranian philosophy Buddhist ethics Islamic ethics Hindu philosophy Buddhist philosophy Jain philosophy Islamic philosophy Collectivism Values Japanese Philippine Religion Dharmic Buddhism Culture Southern/Eastern/Northern Theravada Mahayana Vajrayana Hinduism Culture Vaishnavism Shaivism Shaktism Smartism Sikhism Jainism Taoic Taoism Confucianism Shenism Shinto Muism Tengrism Iranian Zoroastrianism Yazidism Abrahamic Islam Culture Sunni Shia Christianity Culture Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Churches Judaism Culture Bábism Azali Baháʼí Druze Contemporary integration APEC Arab Customs Union Arab League ASEAN Asia and the Pacific Group Asia Cooperation Dialogue Asia Council BIMSTEC CAREC CAU CSTO CPTPP Eastern Bloc Easternization EAEU EAEU Customs Union ECO GCC OTS RCEP SAARC SCO SEATO TCS Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany Czech Republic Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Far_East&oldid=1303794031 " Categories : Regions of Asia Geographical regions Northeast Asia Southeast Asia East Asia Eastern culture Asia-Pacific Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2022 Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Burmese-language text Pages with Burmese IPA Articles containing Vietnamese-language text Articles containing Thai-language text Articles containing Korean-language text Articles containing Mongolian-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing Malay (macrolanguage)-language text Articles containing Indonesian-language text Articles containing Tagalog-language text Articles containing Uyghur-language text Articles containing Tamil-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Pages with Russian IPA Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Lao-language text Articles containing Khmer-language text Articles containing Tetum-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Polish-language text Articles containing Norwegian-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 02:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Far East 96 languages Add topic

