Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biopollution level 2 Biological Invasion Impact / Biopollution Assessment System (BINPAS) 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Biological pollution 4 languages العربية فارسی 한국어 Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Biological pollution ( impacts or bio pollution ) is the impact of humanity's actions on the quality of aquatic and terrestrial environment. Specifically, biological pollution is the introduction of non-indigenous and invasive species, [ 1 ] otherwise known as Invasive Alien Species (IAS). When the biological pollution is introduced to an aquatic environment, it contributes to water pollution .

Biopollution may cause adverse effects at several levels of biological organization : an individual organism (internal pollution by parasites or pathogens), a population (by genetic change, i.e. hybridization of IAS with a native species), a community or biocoenosis (by structural shifts, i.e. dominance of IAS, replacement or elimination of native species), a habitat (by modification of physical-chemical conditions), an ecosystem (by alteration of energy and organic material flow).

Biopollution may also cause decline in naturalness of nature conservation areas, adverse economic consequences and impacts on human health. The notion of "biological pollution" and "biological pollutants" described by Elliott (2003) [ 2 ] is generally accepted in invasion biology; it was used to develop the concept of biopollution level assessment (Olenin et al., 2007 [ 3 ] ) and criteria for a Good Ecological Status descriptor in the European Marine Strategy Framework Directive (Olenin et al., 2010) [ 4 ] The magnitude of the bioinvasion impact or biopollution level (Olenin et al., 2007 [ 3 ] ) may be quantified using a free online service BINPAS.

In 1991 The Indiana Academy of Science held a national cross disciplinary conference in Indianapolis (McKnight 1993), the first of its find dealing with the issue.

Biopollution level [ edit ] "Biopollution Level (BPL)" is a quantitative measure of the magnitude of the biological invasion impact, ranging from "no impact" (BPL=0) through "weak" (BPL=1), "moderate" (BPL=2), "strong" (BPL=3) and "massive" (BPL=4) impact.

Initially the method of calculation involves assessing the abundance and distribution range of a non-indigenous species (NIS) for a specific area (this can be, for example, an entire regional sea, bay, inlet, lagoon, pond, lake, marina, a sand bank, an aquaculture site etc.). Abundance of a NIS may be ranked as "low", "moderate" or "high"; and the distribution may be scored as "one locality" (when a NIS was found only at one locality within the assessment area), "several localities", "many localities" or "all localities" (found at all localities). Combination of the abundance and distribution scores gives five classes of the abundance and distribution range. Once obtained this value aids in calculating an impact on 1) native communities, 2) habitats and, 3) ecosystem functioning. The calculation is based on ecological concepts, e.g. "key species", "type specific communities", "habitat alteration, fragmentation and loss", "functional groups", "food web shift", etc. Calculations are for a stated time period to enable assessment of temporal changes.

The method can be used for a single species or for several species for a specific (assessment) area. The method was designed for species in aquatic ecosystems (Olenin et al., 2007 [ 3 ] ) but is currently being tested for terrestrial environments and there is a free on-line service BINPAS .

The biopollution level enables quantification of an impact in a robust manner in a standard and repeatable way. It makes it possible for comparison between different regions and taxonomic groups at different time intervals. The most impacting biota can be readily distinguished for a given region. It does not evaluate whether an impact effect is either good or bad, it states the change in an ecosystem due to an alien species invasion and measures the magnitude of this change. However, the method requires adequate information in order to obtain the magnitude of the impact, assessed at three levels of confidence (low, medium and high) according to the quality of the data available.

The method is simple to undertake and provide a means of quantifying impacts within any world region. Some assessments have been published (Olenina et al., 2010).

[ 5 ] Biological Invasion Impact / Biopollution Assessment System (BINPAS) [ edit ] This is a free online system that calculates the magnitude of the biological invasion impact or biopollution level (Narščius et al., 2012 [ 6 ] ).

BINPAS translates the existing data on miscellaneous invasive alien species impacts on population, community, habitat or ecosystem into uniform biopollution measurement units. The service is free of charge and available at for anyone interested in biological invasions. Experts willing to perform the assessment for their studied regions are welcome to register and compile the information as contributors.

References [ edit ] ^ Elliott, Michael (2003). "Abstract:Biological pollutants and biological pollution––an increasing cause for concern".

Marine Pollution Bulletin .

46 (3): 275– 280.

doi : 10.1016/S0025-326X(02)00423-X .

PMID 12604060 .

^ Elliott, M. (2003) Biological pollutants and biological pollution - an increasing cause for concern. Marine Pollution Bulletin 46, 275-280 ^ a b c Olenin S, Minchin D, Daunys D (2007). Assessment of biopollution in aquatic ecosystems. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 55 (7-9), 2007, 379-394 ^ European Commission. Joint Research Centre; International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) (2010).

Olenin S., Alemany F., A. Cardoso C., Gollasch S., Goulletquer P., Lehtiniemi M., McCollin T., Minchin D., Miossec L., Occhipinti Ambrogi A., Ojaveer H., Jensen K.R., Stankiewicz M., Wallentinus I. & Aleksandrov B. (2010). Marine Strategy Framework Directive - Task Group 2 Report. Non-indigenous species. EUR 24342 EN. DOI 10.2788/87092. Luxembourg: Office for Official Publications of the European Communities. 44 pp (PDF) . Publications Office.

doi : 10.2788/87092 .

ISBN 978-92-79-15655-7 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-07-10 . Retrieved 2010-12-21 .

^ Olenina, I., Wasmund, N., Hajdu, S., Jurgensone, I., Gromisz, S., Kownacka, J., Toming, K., Vaiciute, D., Olenin, S. 2010. Assessing impacts of invasive phytoplankton: The Baltic Sea case. Marine Pollution Bulletin, 60 (2010) 1691–1700 ^ Narščius A., S. Olenin, A. Zaiko, D. Minchin. 2012. Biological invasion impact assessment system: From idea to implementation. Ecological Informatics 7, 46–51 External links [ edit ] BINPAS (Biological Invasion Impact / Biopollution Assessment System) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biological_pollution&oldid=1298549812 " Categories : Ecology terminology Environmental terminology Invasive species Hidden category: Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 3 July 2025, at 05:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biological pollution 4 languages Add topic

