Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Notable staff 2 People associated with the Faculty Toggle People associated with the Faculty subsection 2.1 Academics and public intellectuals 2.2 Writers 2.3 Actors 2.4 Politicians 3 References Toggle the table of contents Faculty of English, University of Cambridge Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Research centre in the UK Faculty of English building, 9 West Road, Cambridge The Faculty of English is a constituent part of the University of Cambridge . It was founded in 1914 as a Tripos within the Faculty of Medieval and Modern Languages. It could be studied only as a 'Part I' of a degree course, alongside a 'Part II' either in medieval languages or from another Tripos.

[ 1 ] In 1926, the course became a distinct Faculty.

The undergraduate degree course of 'Cambridge English', as well as the Faculty as a whole, is known for its distinctive focus on close reading (called Practical criticism ), first championed by I. A. Richards and then later by William Empson and F. R. Leavis .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Since the course was founded in 1926, Practical Criticism, Tragedy and Shakespeare have been mandatory parts of the course; the English Moralists paper (now renamed the Ethical Imagination) has also remained as an optional paper.

[ 1 ] In the present day, its research focus is wide ranging: from Old English literature through to contemporary , and also associated themes such as digital humanities and the history of the book .

[ 4 ] One of its sub-divisions is the Department of Anglo-Saxon, Norse and Celtic , the only department in the world dedicated to the Early Middle Ages .

[ 5 ] Notable staff [ edit ] The faculty's senior teaching posts include a number of named professorships: Elrington and Bosworth Professor of Anglo-Saxon (currently Rosalind Love ) King Edward VII Professor of English Literature (currently Clair Wills ) Professor of Medieval and Renaissance English (Cambridge) (1954) (currently Anthony Bale ) English (2001) Professor (currently Jennifer Richards) Grace 2 Professor (currently Claire Pettitt) Other notable current academics: Priyamvada Gopal , Professor of Postcolonial Studies John Kerrigan , Professor of English Robert Macfarlane , Reader in Literature and the Geohumanities People associated with the Faculty [ edit ] Academics and public intellectuals [ edit ] Marshall McLuhan Arthur Quiller-Couch , the first holder of the King Edward VII Professorship F. R. Leavis C. S. Lewis M. C. Bradbrook Raymond Williams E. M. W. Tillyard Terry Eagleton Germaine Greer Eric Griffiths (critic) Writers [ edit ] J. B. Priestley J. H. Prynne Veronica Forrest-Thomson Sylvia Plath Ted Hughes Zadie Smith Peter Ackroyd Douglas Adams Howard Brenton Martin Crimp Emma Donoghue Margaret Drabble Sebastian Faulks Julian Fellowes Jez Butterworth Actors [ edit ] Sophie Winkleman Ian McKellen Miriam Margolyes Politicians [ edit ] Richard Burgon Andy Burnham References [ edit ] ^ a b Zeeman, Nicolette (Spring 2021).

"Things Go On..." (PDF) .

9 West Road . pp.

2– 4 . Retrieved 28 December 2022 .

^ Williams, Raymond (7 July 1983).

"Cambridge English and Beyond" .

London Review of Books . Vol. 05, no. 12.

ISSN 0260-9592 . Retrieved 28 December 2022 .

^ North, Joseph (2017).

Literary Criticism: A Concise Political History . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. pp.

47– 54.

ISBN 9780674967731 .

^ "Faculty Research Groups" .

Faculty of English . University of Cambridge . Retrieved 27 June 2021 .

^ "About ASNC" .

Department of Anglo-Saxon, Norse and Celtic . University of Cambridge . Retrieved 27 June 2021 .

v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Authority control databases ISNI Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Faculty_of_English,_University_of_Cambridge&oldid=1275310285 " Category : Faculties in the School of Arts and Humanities, University of Cambridge Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 This page was last edited on 12 February 2025, at 07:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Faculty of English, University of Cambridge Add languages Add topic

