Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Research 3 Selected publications 4 References Toggle the table of contents Zhe-Xi Luo 3 languages مصرى Polski 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American palaeontologist This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject , potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral .

Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent sources .

( June 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's notability guideline for academics .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "Zhe-Xi Luo" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Zhe-Xi Luo Alma mater Nanjing University 1982 University of California at Berkeley 1989 Harvard University 1991 Scientific career Institutions University of Chicago current Harvard University Zhe-Xi Luo (Chinese 骆泽喜; pinyin: Luò Zéxǐ) is an American paleontologist of Chinese origin, specializing in vertebrate paleontology, particularly mammal evolution , morphology , and systematics .

Background [ edit ] Luo gained his Bachelor's in Geology, Stratigraphy and Paleontology in 1982 from Nanjing University 's Department of Geology, before completing his PhD in Paleontology at the University of California at Berkeley , Museum of Paleontology in 1989. He then completed a postdoctoral fellowship in Mammalian Evolutionary Morphology at Harvard University , Museum of Comparative Zoology in 1991. He currently has a lab as Professor of Organismal Biology and Anatomy at the University of Chicago Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy.

[ 1 ] Research [ edit ] In 1983 Luo met Polish paleontologist Zofia Kielan-Jaworowska , and they co-authored many books and scientific publications. He has since published prolifically and is one of the leading experts in mammal evolution, particularly Mesozoic mammals .

[ 2 ] He has worked extensively on the origins of mammal ear and jaw anatomy, [ 3 ] [ 4 ] and has been involved in key research highlighting their unexpected ecological diversity.

[ 5 ] Luo is known recently for his work on new mammal specimens from China including Docofossor and Agilodocodon and Microdocodon , and the earliest eutherian mammal, Juramaia .

[ 6 ] He works in close collaboration with researchers around the world, including at the Beijing Museum of Natural History , and on specimens from around the world, including Haramiyavia .

Selected publications [ edit ] Luo ZX, Yuan CX, Meng QJ, Ji Q A. 2011. Jurassic eutherian mammal and divergence of marsupials and placentals.

Nature . 2011 Aug 24; 476(7361): 442–5.

Luo ZX, Ji Q, Yuan CX. 2007. Convergent dental adaptations in pseudo-tribosphenic and tribosphenic mammals.

Nature . 450(7166): 93–7.

Luo ZX, Ji Q, Wible JR, Yuan CX. 2003. An Early Cretaceous tribosphenic mammal and metatherian evolution.

Science . 302(5652):1934–40.

Luo ZX, Crompton AW, Sun AL 2001. A new mammaliaform from the early Jurassic and evolution of mammalian characteristics.

Science . 292(5521):1535–40.

References [ edit ] ^ "Zhe-Xi Luo, PhD" .

The University of Chicago .

^ Luo ZX. 2007. Transformation and diversification in early mammal evolution.

Nature . 450(7172):1011-9.

^ Luo ZX, Meng QJ, Grossnickle DM, Liu D, Neander AI, Zhang YG, Ji Q. 2017. New evidence for mammaliaform ear evolution and feeding adaptation in a Jurassic ecosystem.

Nature . 548(7667):326-329.

^ Luo ZX, Ruf I, Schultz JA, Martin T. 2011. Fossil evidence on evolution of inner ear cochlea in Jurassic mammals.

Proceedings of the Biological Sciences . 28-34.

^ Luo ZX, Meng QJ, Ji Q, Liu D, Zhang YG, Neander AI. 2015. Mammalian evolution. Evolutionary development in basal mammaliaforms as revealed by a docodontan.

Science . 347(6223):760-4.

^ Zhe-xi Luo on Jurassic Mothers from China and the Origins of Mammals - https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZWz3R4J4OZA Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National United States Poland Israel Academics ORCID Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zhe-Xi_Luo&oldid=1205749363 " Categories : 1958 births Living people American paleontologists Nanjing University alumni University of California, Berkeley alumni University of Chicago faculty Chinese emigrants to the United States Vertebrate paleontologists Harvard University alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from June 2020 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with topics of unclear notability from June 2020 All articles with topics of unclear notability Academics articles with topics of unclear notability Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use mdy dates from June 2020 Articles with hCards Place of birth missing (living people) Date of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 10 February 2024, at 10:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Zhe-Xi Luo 3 languages Add topic

