Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Advantages 2 Magnitude and phase 3 Types 4 Discrete frequency domain 5 History of term 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Frequency domain 21 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Português Русский Shqip Sunda Svenska Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Signal representation The Fourier transform converts the function's time-domain representation, shown in red, to the function's frequency-domain representation, shown in blue. The component frequencies, spread across the frequency spectrum, are represented as peaks in the frequency domain.

In mathematics , physics , electronics , control systems engineering , and statistics , the frequency domain refers to the analysis of mathematical functions or signals with respect to frequency (and possibly phase), rather than time, as in time series .

[ 1 ] While a time-domain graph shows how a signal changes over time, a frequency-domain graph shows how the signal is distributed within different frequency bands over a range of frequencies.  A complex valued frequency-domain representation consists of both the magnitude and the phase of a set of sinusoids (or other basis waveforms) at the frequency components of the signal. Although it is common to refer to the magnitude portion (the real valued frequency-domain) as the frequency response of a signal, the phase portion is required to uniquely define the signal.

A given function or signal can be converted between the time and frequency domains with a pair of mathematical operators called transforms .  An example is the Fourier transform , which converts a time function into a complex valued sum or integral of sine waves of different frequencies, with amplitudes and phases, each of which represents a frequency component.  The " spectrum " of frequency components is the frequency-domain representation of the signal.  The inverse Fourier transform converts the frequency-domain function back to the time-domain function. A spectrum analyzer is a tool commonly used to visualize electronic signals in the frequency domain.

A frequency-domain representation may describe either a static function or a particular time period of a dynamic function (signal or system). The frequency transform of a dynamic function is performed over a finite time period of that function and assumes the function repeats infinitely outside of that time period. Some specialized signal processing techniques for dynamic functions use transforms that result in a joint time–frequency domain , with the instantaneous frequency response being a key link between the time domain and the frequency domain.

Advantages [ edit ] One of the main reasons for using a frequency-domain representation of a problem is to simplify the mathematical analysis.  For mathematical systems governed by linear differential equations , a very important class of systems with many real-world applications, converting the description of the system from the time domain to a frequency domain converts the differential equations to algebraic equations , which are much easier to solve.

In addition, looking at a system from the point of view of frequency can often give an intuitive understanding of the qualitative behavior of the system, and a revealing scientific nomenclature has grown up to describe it, characterizing the behavior of physical systems to time varying inputs using terms such as bandwidth , frequency response , gain , phase shift , resonant frequencies , time constant , resonance width , damping factor , Q factor , harmonics , spectrum , power spectral density , eigenvalues , poles , and zeros .

An example of a field in which frequency-domain analysis gives a better understanding than time domain is music ; the theory of operation of musical instruments and the musical notation used to record and discuss pieces of music is implicitly based on the breaking down of complex sounds into their separate component frequencies ( musical notes ).

Magnitude and phase [ edit ] In using the Laplace , Z- , or Fourier transforms, a signal is described by a complex function of frequency: the component of the signal at any given frequency is given by a complex number . The modulus of the number is the amplitude of that component, and the argument is the relative phase of the wave.  For example, using the Fourier transform , a sound wave , such as human speech, can be broken down into its component tones of different frequencies, each represented by a sine wave of a different amplitude and phase.  The response of a system, as a function of frequency, can also be described by a complex function.  In many applications, phase information is not important.  By discarding the phase information, it is possible to simplify the information in a frequency-domain representation to generate a frequency spectrum or spectral density .     A spectrum analyzer is a device that displays the spectrum, while the time-domain signal can be seen on an oscilloscope .

Types [ edit ] Although " the " frequency domain is spoken of in the singular, there are a number of different mathematical transforms which are used to analyze time-domain functions and are referred to as "frequency domain" methods. These are the most common transforms, and the fields in which they are used: Fourier series – periodic signals, oscillating systems.

Fourier transform – aperiodic signals, transients.

Laplace transform – electronic circuits and control systems .

Z transform – discrete-time signals, digital signal processing .

Wavelet transform — image analysis, data compression .

More generally, one can speak of the transform domain with respect to any transform. The above transforms can be interpreted as capturing some form of frequency, and hence the transform domain is referred to as a frequency domain.

Discrete frequency domain [ edit ] A discrete frequency domain is a frequency domain that is discrete rather than continuous . 
For example, the discrete Fourier transform maps a function having a discrete time domain into one having a discrete frequency domain. The discrete-time Fourier transform , on the other hand, maps functions with discrete time ( discrete-time signals ) to functions that have a continuous frequency domain.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] A periodic signal has energy only at a base frequency and its harmonics; thus it can be analyzed using a discrete frequency domain. A discrete-time signal gives rise to a periodic frequency spectrum. In a situation where both these conditions occur, a signal which is discrete and periodic results in a frequency spectrum which is also discrete and periodic; this is the usual context for a discrete Fourier transform .

History of term [ edit ] The use of the terms "frequency domain" and " time domain " arose in communication engineering in the 1950s and early 1960s, with "frequency domain" appearing in 1953.

[ 4 ] See time domain: origin of term for details.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Bandwidth Blackman–Tukey transformation Fourier analysis for computing periodicity in evenly spaced data Least-squares spectral analysis for computing periodicity in unevenly spaced data Reciprocal space Short-time Fourier transform Time–frequency representation Time–frequency analysis Wavelet Wavelet transform – digital image processing , signal compression References [ edit ] ^ Broughton, S. A.; Bryan, K.

(2008).

Discrete Fourier Analysis and Wavelets: Applications to Signal and Image Processing . New York: Wiley . p. 72.

^ C. Britton Rorabaugh (1998).

DSP primer . McGraw-Hill Professional. p. 153.

ISBN 978-0-07-054004-0 .

^ Shanbao Tong and Nitish Vyomesh Thakor (2009).

Quantitative EEG analysis methods and clinical applications . Artech House. p. 53.

ISBN 978-1-59693-204-3 .

^ Zadeh, L. A. (1953), "Theory of Filtering", Journal of the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics , 1 : 35– 51, doi : 10.1137/0101003 ^ Earliest Known Uses of Some of the Words of Mathematics (T) , Jeff Miller, March 25, 2009 Goldshleger, N., Shamir, O., Basson, U., Zaady, E. (2019). Frequency Domain Electromagnetic Method (FDEM) as tool to study contamination at the sub-soil layer. Geoscience 9 (9), 382.

Further reading [ edit ] Boashash, B. (Sep 1988).

"Note on the Use of the Wigner Distribution for Time Frequency Signal Analysis" (PDF) .

IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing .

36 (9): 1518– 1521.

doi : 10.1109/29.90380 .

.

Boashash, B. (April 1992). "Estimating and Interpreting the Instantaneous Frequency of a Signal-Part I: Fundamentals".

Proceedings of the IEEE .

80 (4): 519– 538.

doi : 10.1109/5.135376 .

.

v t e Statistics Outline Index Descriptive statistics Continuous data Center Mean Arithmetic Arithmetic-Geometric Contraharmonic Cubic Generalized/power Geometric Harmonic Heronian Heinz Lehmer Median Mode Dispersion Average absolute deviation Coefficient of variation Interquartile range Percentile Range Standard deviation Variance Shape Central limit theorem Moments Kurtosis L-moments Skewness Count data Index of dispersion Summary tables Contingency table Frequency distribution Grouped data Dependence Partial correlation Pearson product-moment correlation Rank correlation Kendall's τ Spearman's ρ Scatter plot Graphics Bar chart Biplot Box plot Control chart Correlogram Fan chart Forest plot Histogram Pie chart Q–Q plot Radar chart Run chart Scatter plot Stem-and-leaf display Violin plot Data collection Study design Effect size Missing data Optimal design Population Replication Sample size determination Statistic Statistical power Survey methodology Sampling Cluster Stratified Opinion poll Questionnaire Standard error Controlled experiments Blocking Factorial experiment Interaction Random assignment Randomized controlled trial Randomized experiment Scientific control Adaptive designs Adaptive clinical trial Stochastic approximation Up-and-down designs Observational studies Cohort study Cross-sectional study Natural experiment Quasi-experiment Statistical inference Statistical theory Population Statistic Probability distribution Sampling distribution Order statistic Empirical distribution Density estimation Statistical model Model specification L p space Parameter location scale shape Parametric family Likelihood (monotone) Location–scale family Exponential family Completeness Sufficiency Statistical functional Bootstrap U V Optimal decision loss function Efficiency Statistical distance divergence Asymptotics Robustness Frequentist inference Point estimation Estimating equations Maximum likelihood Method of moments M-estimator Minimum distance Unbiased estimators Mean-unbiased minimum-variance Rao–Blackwellization Lehmann–Scheffé theorem Median unbiased Plug-in Interval estimation Confidence interval Pivot Likelihood interval Prediction interval Tolerance interval Resampling Bootstrap Jackknife Testing hypotheses 1- & 2-tails Power Uniformly most powerful test Permutation test Randomization test Multiple comparisons Parametric tests Likelihood-ratio Score/Lagrange multiplier Wald Specific tests Z -test (normal) Student's t -test F -test Goodness of fit Chi-squared G -test Kolmogorov–Smirnov Anderson–Darling Lilliefors Jarque–Bera Normality (Shapiro–Wilk) Likelihood-ratio test Model selection Cross validation AIC BIC Rank statistics Sign Sample median Signed rank (Wilcoxon) Hodges–Lehmann estimator Rank sum (Mann–Whitney) Nonparametric anova 1-way (Kruskal–Wallis) 2-way (Friedman) Ordered alternative (Jonckheere–Terpstra) Van der Waerden test Bayesian inference Bayesian probability prior posterior Credible interval Bayes factor Bayesian estimator Maximum posterior estimator Correlation Regression analysis Correlation Pearson product-moment Partial correlation Confounding variable Coefficient of determination Regression analysis Errors and residuals Regression validation Mixed effects models Simultaneous equations models Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) Linear regression Simple linear regression Ordinary least squares General linear model Bayesian regression Non-standard predictors Nonlinear regression Nonparametric Semiparametric Isotonic Robust Homoscedasticity and Heteroscedasticity Generalized linear model Exponential families Logistic (Bernoulli) / Binomial / Poisson regressions Partition of variance Analysis of variance (ANOVA, anova) Analysis of covariance Multivariate ANOVA Degrees of freedom Categorical / multivariate / time-series / survival analysis Categorical Cohen's kappa Contingency table Graphical model Log-linear model McNemar's test Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel statistics Multivariate Regression Manova Principal components Canonical correlation Discriminant analysis Cluster analysis Classification Structural equation model Factor analysis Multivariate distributions Elliptical distributions Normal Time-series General Decomposition Trend Stationarity Seasonal adjustment Exponential smoothing Cointegration Structural break Granger causality Specific tests Dickey–Fuller Johansen Q-statistic (Ljung–Box) Durbin–Watson Breusch–Godfrey Time domain Autocorrelation (ACF) partial (PACF) Cross-correlation (XCF) ARMA model ARIMA model (Box–Jenkins) Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) Vector autoregression (VAR) Frequency domain Spectral density estimation Fourier analysis Least-squares spectral analysis Wavelet Whittle likelihood Survival Survival function Kaplan–Meier estimator (product limit) Proportional hazards models Accelerated failure time (AFT) model First hitting time Hazard function Nelson–Aalen estimator Test Log-rank test Applications Biostatistics Bioinformatics Clinical trials / studies Epidemiology Medical statistics Engineering statistics Chemometrics Methods engineering Probabilistic design Process / quality control Reliability System identification Social statistics Actuarial science Census Crime statistics Demography Econometrics Jurimetrics National accounts Official statistics Population statistics Psychometrics Spatial statistics Cartography Environmental statistics Geographic information system Geostatistics Kriging Category Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Frequency_domain&oldid=1293464779 " Category : Frequency-domain analysis Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 21:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Frequency domain 21 languages Add topic

