Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Renaissance 2.2 Origins 2.2.1 Jakob Wimpfeling 2.2.2 John Colet 2.2.3 Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples 2.2.4 Erasmus 2.3 Contemporary 3 Criticism 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Christian humanism 17 languages العربية Asturianu Български Català Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית مصرى Português Српски / srpski Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of humanism Christian humanism refers to two related concepts. In one usage, the term is applied retrospectively to sixteenth century Chrisitian thinkers who were Renaissance humanists (medieval scholars involved in recovering the humanities traditions of Classical Antiquity ).

[ 1 ] Another is "modern" Christian humanism, which is 20th century coinage emphasising the importance of humanitarian principles within a Christian moral framework, such as human dignity, individual freedom , and the pursuit of happiness.

It is not to be confused with modern humanism , which refers to philosophies that assert the primacy of human values and frame of reference over gods, theology, or religion in general. It should also not be conflated with religious humanism , which refers to a nontheistic movement that practices humanism in congregational structures.

Terminology [ edit ] While the Renaissance humanist movement was largely about the rediscovery of pre-Christian literature and moral philosophy, scholars such as Charles Nauert argue that a subset of European humanist scholars were unafraid to discuss their own religious positions in relation to the classical literature, marking them out as "Christian humanists", in contrast from others in the movement "who just happened to be religious": made a connection between their humanistic teaching and scholarship on classical languages and literature, on the one hand, and on the other hand, their study of ancient Christianity, including the Bible and the Church Fathers... Even more important, they associated their scholarly work (classical as well as biblical and patristic) with a determination to bring about a spiritual renewal and institutional reform of Christian society. That connection between their scholarly efforts and their longing for spiritual and institutional renewal is the specific characteristic that distinguishes "Christian humanists" as a group from other humanists who just happened to be religious.

[ 2 ] Modern theological conceptions of Christian humanism are in part inspired by this view, although they differ on whether Christian humanism is a distinct movement within Christianity or a component aspect of Christianity in general. Theologians such as Jens Zimmerman make a case for the concept of Christian humanism as a cogent force throughout the history of Christianity. In Zimmerman's account, humanitarian and rights-oriented philosophies emerged organically from the Christian doctrine that God , in the person of Jesus, became human in order to redeem humanity, and from the further injunction for the participating human collective (the church) to act out the life of Christ.

[ 3 ] Renaissance historian Margaret Mann Phillips says that this subset of Renaissance scholars argued that the most appealing aspects of moral philosophy and art from pre-Christian Europe were in fact themselves a direct product of the Christian God. As such, the basis of Christian humanism was "the belief that all that is good comes from God, and the pre-Christian ages were inspired by Holy Spirit for his own purposes." [ 4 ] : 9 The term Christian humanism was popularised in the 20th century, after the emergence of the modern humanist movement , which is non-religious (sometimes referred to as " secular humanism " in the United States). This movement argues that humanism is the idea that human beings are the ultimate source of moral value and moral decisions, and therefore is incompatible with theistic beliefs or claims that moral rules are divinely ordained. To this end, humanist writers have opined that the term "Christian humanism" lacks coherence, or has in reality been used to unconvincingly arugue for the "exceptionalism" of Christianity in comparison with other religions or humanism, or even that it deliberately "co-opts" the appealing aspects of humanism (such as the fruits of modern social progress) in the name of Christianity.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] An example of this would be Zimmerman's claim that "common humanity, universal reason, freedom, personhood, human rights, human emancipation and progress, and indeed the very notion of secularity... are literally unthinkable without their Christian humanistic roots." [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] History [ edit ] Renaissance [ edit ] Main article: Renaissance humanism Giovanni Mirandola Erasmus Thomas More Scholars since the 18th century have agreed that some sort of change took place in Western European civilization in the period from 1300 to 1600. However, the extent and nature of this change have been widely debated. Some have seen the period as one in which a radically new sense of the world and humanity emerged, whereas others have seen instead the gradual development of ideas that had long been current. Nevertheless, there are elements in Renaissance thought that recur frequently in comparison to earlier centuries. In the Middle Ages, people typically yielded some of their identity to corporations—the church, the state, the feudal society, the guild, the university, and the monastic order. With the Renaissance came an increased sense of individuality and a celebration of uniqueness and individual self-determination. The literature of the period is filled with statements such as the following about the dignity, excellence, rationality, and power of individual human beings: [ 10 ] "Human beings are made in the image of God, meaning that each one has the possibility of being a person of creativity and moral excellence".

"Human beings are free; we are not enslaved by sin or psychological obstructions; we are able to set our own course, determine our own destiny".

"Human beings are actors on the human scene; we are creators, second only to God; we are the God-appointed governors of the world".

"Human beings have immortal souls, which is God's way of verifying the preciousness of humankind".

"Human beings may achieve fame—the personal glory attained by an individual who thrusts himself or herself forward in some important, heroic, or prominent way".

Renaissance humanism is linked to those who, following Pico della Mirandola , emphasized the dignity and potential of created humankind. And those, such as Petrarch and Thomas More , who believed the humanities could aid the precepts and study of divinity . And those such as Erasmus who also promoted human flourishing.

Origins [ edit ] Christian humanism originated towards the end of the 15th century with the early work of figures such as Jakob Wimpfeling , John Colet , and Thomas More ; it would go on to dominate much of the thought in the first half of the 16th century with the emergence of widely influential Renaissance and humanistic intellectual figures such as Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples and especially Erasmus , who would become the greatest scholar of the northern Renaissance .

[ 2 ] These scholars committed much of their intellectual work to reforming the church and reviving spiritual life through humanist education, and were highly critical of the corruption they saw in the Church and ecclesiastical life. They would combine the greatest morals in the pre-Christian moral philosophers, such as Cicero and Seneca with Christian interpretations deriving from study of the Bible and Church Fathers . The Waldensians have been viewed as a humanistic synthesis of Christianity.

[ 11 ] Jakob Wimpfeling [ edit ] Main article: Jakob Wimpfeling Although the first humanists did little to orient their intellectual work towards reforming the church and reviving spiritual life through humanist education, the first pioneering signs and practices of this idea emerged with Jakob Wimpfeling (1450–1528), a Renaissance humanist and theologian . Wimpfeling was very critical of ecclesiastical patronage and criticized the moral corruption of many clergymen; however, his timidity stopped him from converting his work from speech to action for fear of controversy. Although he loved reading many of the classics of the writings of classical antiquity, he feared introducing them to mainstream Christianity and sought to use the works of the Latin Church Fathers and a few Christian poets from the Late Roman Empire towards creating a new form of education that would provide church leaders educated in Christian religion, prominent Church authors and a few important classical writings and hence improve Christendom's condition.

[ 2 ] : 170–171 John Colet [ edit ] Main article: John Colet Portrait of John Colet John Colet (1467–1519) was another major figure in early Christian humanism, exerting more cultural influence than his older contemporary, Jakob Wimpfeling. Being attracted to Neoplatonic philosophers such as Marsilio Ficino and Pico della Mirandola and gaining an appreciation for humanistic methods of analyzing texts and developing detailed ideas and principles regarding them, he applied this humanistic method to the epistles of Paul the Apostle .

In 1505, he completed his doctorate in theology, and then became the Dean of St. Paul's Cathedral . From there, he used his fortune to found near the cathedral St Paul's School for boys. The school was humanistic, in its teaching of Latin, Greek and moral preparation of its students, as well as its recruitment of prominent humanists to recommend and compose new textbooks for it. The best Christian authors were taught, as well as a handful of pagan texts (predominantly Cicero and Virgil ), however, Colet's restrictions on the teaching of other classical texts was seen as anti-humanistic and quickly reverted by the school's headmasters. After his death, the school at St. Paul's become an influential humanistic institution.

[ 2 ] : 170–171 His notable convocation sermon urged his fellow priests to "return to the God of love and peace".

Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples [ edit ] Main article: Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples (1453–1536) was, alongside Erasmus , the first of the great Christian humanists to see the importance of integrating Christian learning, in both the patristics and biblical writings , with many of the best intellectual achievements of ancient civilizations and classical thought. He was educated in the University of Paris and began studying Greek under George Hermonymus due to his interest in contemporary cultural changes in Italy. He taught humanities as Paris and, among his earliest scholarly works, was writing an introduction to Aristotle 's Metaphysics . He would write many other works on Aristotle and promote the use of direct translations of Aristotle's work from the original Greek rather than the medieval Latin translations that currently existed.

His focus then began to shift to the Greek Church Fathers whom he personally considered abler sources for the pedagogy of spiritual life than medieval scholasticism, and his goal became to help revive spiritual life in Europe, retiring in 1508 to focus on precisely this. He began publishing various Latin texts of biblical books such as the Psalms and Pauline epistles and was keen to study textual variations between surviving manuscripts. According to Nauert, these "biblical publications constitute the first major manifestation of the Christian humanism that dominated not only French but also German, Netherlandish, and English humanistic thought through the first half of the sixteenth century".

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Erasmus [ edit ] Main article: Erasmus Portrait of Desiderius Erasmus of Rotterdam with Renaissance Pilaster Erasmus (1466–1536) was the greatest scholar of the northern Renaissance and the most widely influential Christian humanist scholar in history, becoming the most famous scholar in Europe in his day. He believed that "learning and scholarship were a powerful weapon both for the cultivation of personal piety and institutional church reform", which is called instrumentalism .

[ 14 ] : 153 One of the defining components of his intellectual success was his mastery of Greek.

[ 15 ] He had published his Handbook of a Christian Knight ( Enchiridion militis christiani ) in 1503, writing about his new intellectual direction, the philosophia christi ('Christ's philosophy'). It became incredibly popular with 29 Latin editions between 1519–1523 and receiving translations into English, Dutch, German, French, and Spanish.

[ 16 ] The popularity of Erasmus and his work was further amplified by the success of his literary works such as The Praise of Folly , published in 1511, and Colloquies , published in 1518. He also gained incredible success as a textual scholar, interpreting, translating and editing numerous texts of Greek and Roman classics, Church Fathers and the Bible. This textual success began when he discovered and published Lorenzo Valla 's Annotations on the New Testament in 1504–1505, and in a single year, in 1516, Erasmus published the first Greek edition of the New Testament, an edition of the works of the Roman philosopher Seneca , and a four-volume edition of St. Jerome 's letters. His satires and criticisms were widely popular and renowned for decades to come, and he succeeded in having "truly and fully" founded Christian humanism.

[ 2 ] : 180 Contemporary [ edit ] Literary critic Lee Oser has suggested that Christian humanism ended with Jonathan Swift and Alexander Pope ; however, it began again with G.K. Chesterton , T.S. Eliot and J.R.R. Tolkien .

[ 17 ] Personalism , an intellectual stance that emphasizes the importance of human persons, has been treated as a modern name for the Christian humanism associated with Pope John Paul II and John Henry Newman .

[ 14 ] : 157–164 Incarnational humanism is a type of Christian humanism which places central importance on the Incarnation , the belief that Jesus Christ was truly and fully human. In this context, divine revelation from God independent of the Incarnation is seen as untrustworthy precisely because it is exempt from the vagaries of human discourse.

Jens Zimmermann argues that "God's descent into human nature allows the humans ascent to the divine".

[ 18 ] [ dead link ] "If God speaks to us in the language of humanity, then we must interpret Gods speech as we interpret the language of humanity." [ 19 ] Incarnational humanism asserts a unification of the secular and the sacred with the goal of a common humanity. This unification is fully realized in the participatory nature of Christian sacraments , particularly the Eucharist . The recognition of this goal requires a necessary difference between the church and the world, where both "spheres are unified in their service of humanity". Critics suggest it is quite wrong to establish a separate theology of the incarnation, and that proponents tend to abstract Jesus from his life and message.

Criticism [ edit ] Andrew Copson refers to Christian humanism as a "hybrid term... which some from a Christian background have been attempting to put into currency". Copson argues that attempts to append religious adjectives such as Christian to the life stance of humanism are incoherent, saying these have "led to a raft of claims from those identifying with other religious traditions – whether culturally or in convictions – that they too can claim a 'humanism'. The suggestion that has followed – that 'humanism' is something of which there are two types, 'religious humanism' and 'secular humanism', has begun to seriously muddy the conceptual water." [ 5 ] Humanists UK 's educational website Understanding Humanism argues that narratives of humanism which try to draw a "neat, linear thread" between Renaissance scholarship and modern humanist thinking are faulty, as "modern humanism is not a descendant of Renaissance humanism or ‘religious humanism’." Rather, "the histories of non-religious humanism and alternative uses of the word are not one single story." While Christian humanism has "some similarities to, but also quite distinct differences" from humanism in the more prevalent sense, it says "it is perhaps better to avoid the label ‘Christian humanism’ for this outlook, and describe it as ‘humanistic Christianity’ (as it is a form of Christianity rather than humanism)." [ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Christian anthropology Christian existentialism Christian feminism Christian hedonism Christian materialism Christian Universalism Human Dignity Image of God Inward Light New Thought Personalism Religious humanism Renaissance humanism Religion of Humanity Sermon on the Mount Ubuntu theology References [ edit ] ^ Rummel, Erika; MacPhail, Eric (2024).

"Desiderius Erasmus" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ a b c d e Nauert, Charles, Rethinking "Christian Humanism" in Mazzocco, Angelo, ed.

Interpretations of Renaissance humanism . Brill, 2006, 155-180.

^ Zimmerman, Jens. "Introduction", in Zimmermann, Jens, ed.

Re-Envisioning Christian Humanism . Oxford University Press, 2017, 5.

^ Erasmus, Desideriushg (1978).

Literary and Educational Writings, 1 and 2: Volume 1: Antibarbari / Parabolae. Volume 2: De copia / De ratione studii, Volume 23-24 . Vol.

23– 24. University of Toronto Press.

doi : 10.3138/9781442676695 .

ISBN 978-0-8020-5395-4 .

JSTOR 10.3138/9781442676695 .

^ a b Copson, Andrew, and Anthony Clifford Grayling, eds.

The Wiley Blackwell handbook of humanism . John Wiley & Sons, 2015, 2-3. Chapter: What is Humanism?

^ a b " 'Humanism': A history of the word" .

Understanding Humanism . Humanists UK . Retrieved 28 July 2025 .

^ Zimmermann, 6-7.

^ Croce, Benedetto Croce.

My Philosophy and Other Essays on the Moral and Political Problems of Our Time (London: Allen & Unwin, 1949).

^ Zimmermann, Jens. Humanism and Religion: A Call for the Renewal of Western Culture. Oxford University Press, 2012.

^ Thompson, Bard (January 1, 1996).

Humanists and Reformers: A History of the Renaissance and Reformation . William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company. pp.

3– 4.

ISBN 978-0802863485 .

^ Bernholz, P.; Streit, M.E.; Vaubel, R. (2012).

Political Competition, Innovation and Growth: A Historical Analysis . Springer Berlin Heidelberg. p. 167.

ISBN 978-3-642-60324-2 . Retrieved 2023-03-05 .

^ Rice Jr, Eugene F. "The Humanist Idea of Christian Antiquity: Lefèvre d'Etaples and his Circle". Studies in the Renaissance 9 (1962): 126-160.

^ Nauert, 173-174.

^ a b Cunningham, Lawrence S. (1 March 2002).

The Catholic Heritage: Martyrs, Ascetics, Pilgrims, Warriors, Mystics, Theologians, Artists, Humanists, Activists, Outsiders, and Saints . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-57910-897-7 .

^ Erasmus to Batt, Orléans, 11 December 1500, Ep. 138 (CWE 1:294–300; Allen 1:320–24).

^ Anne M. O'Donnell, 'Rhetoric and Style in Erasmus'
Enchiridion militis Christiani', Studies in Philology 77/1 (1980), 26.

^ Blackstock, Alan (2009).

"Review of The Return of Christian Humanism: Chesterton, Eliot, Tolkien, and the Romance of History" .

Rocky Mountain Review .

63 (2): 266– 272.

ISSN 1948-2825 .

JSTOR 25594413 .

^ "Incarnational Humanism: A Philosophy of Culture for the Church in the World" .

University of Waterloo . Retrieved 5 April 2019 .

^ "The doctrine of the Incarnation By David Gibson" .

Commonweal . 29 December 2011 . Retrieved 5 April 2019 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bequette, John P.

Christian Humanism: Creation, Redemption, and Reintegration . University Press of America, 2007.

Erasmus, Desiderius, and Beatus Rhenanus.

Christian Humanism and the Reformation: Selected Writings of Erasmus, with His Life by Beatus Rhenanus and a Biographical Sketch by the Editor . Fordham Univ Press, 1987.

Jacobs, Alan.

The Year of Our Lord 1943: Christian Humanism in an Age of Crisis . Oxford University Press, 2018.

Oser, Lee. "Christian Humanism and the Radical Middle".

Law & Liberty . November 5, 2021.

https://lawliberty.org/christian-humanism-and-the-radical-middle/ Oser, Lee.

Christian Humanism in Shakespeare: A Study in Religion and Literature . Catholic University of America Press, 2022.

Oser, Lee.

The Return of Christian Humanism: Chesterton, Eliot, Tolkien, and the Romance of History . University of Missouri Press, 2007.

Shaw, Joseph et al.

Readings in Christian humanism . Fortress Press, 1982.

Zimmermann, Jens.

Humanism and Religion: A Call for the Renewal of Western Culture . Oxford University Press, 2012.

Zimmermann, Jens.

Re-Envisioning Christian Humanism . Oxford University Press, 2017.

External links [ edit ] No Christian humanism? Big mistake.

Archived 2019-02-18 at the Wayback Machine , Online Catholics , by Peter Fleming. (Accessed 6 May 2012) v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐pstrx
Cached time: 20250814220850
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.569 seconds
Real time usage: 0.693 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3380/1000000
Revision size: 24421/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 129973/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2162/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 73869/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.312/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15549020/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  506.036      1 -total
 24.80%  125.500      1 Template:Reflist
 18.12%   91.674      6 Template:Navbox
 15.61%   79.010      4 Template:Cite_web
 14.31%   72.432      1 Template:Catholic_philosophy_footer
 13.71%   69.370      2 Template:Lang
 10.85%   54.880      1 Template:Short_description
  8.30%   42.026      6 Template:Rp
  7.49%   37.900      6 Template:R/superscript
  5.91%   29.899      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1084026:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220850 and revision id 1304340241. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christian_humanism&oldid=1304340241 " Categories : Christian humanism Christian philosophy Christian theological movements Catholic theology and doctrine Philosophical schools and traditions Western Christianity Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with manual scaled images Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2025 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 12:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Christian humanism 17 languages Add topic

