Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Origins 3 Charter and policy 4 Rise of Thebes 5 Later history and disintegration 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Second Athenian League 19 languages العربية Български Català Ελληνικά Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Lietuvių Nederlands Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 4th-century BC maritime confederation of Aegean city-states Map of the states that joined the Second Athenian League The Second Athenian League was a maritime confederation of Greek city-states that existed from 378 to 355 BC under the leadership ( hegemony ) of Athens . The alliance represented a partial revival of the Delian League , which had been disbanded in 404 BC following the defeat of Athens in the Peloponnesian War . The new League was centered in the Aegean and included over 60 states, [ 1 ] among which were Kos , Mytilene , Rhodes , and Byzantium . It was primarily formed as a defensive alliance against Sparta and secondly the Persian Empire . The new League's main objective was to preserve peace in Greece and counterbalance Sparta's growing hegemony and aggression.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The League largely revived Athenian influence in the Greek world, reestablishing it as the strongest naval power in the eastern Mediterranean .

[ 1 ] This time, Athens made conscious efforts to avoid the strict terms that had eventually rendered the previous Delian League unpopular.

[ 1 ] The alliance lasted until 355 BC, when most of the allied cities became independent following the Social War that broke out in 357 BC.

[ 4 ] Background [ edit ] In 478 BC, Athens founded the Delian League to counter Persian influence during the Greco-Persian Wars . Athenian leadership became solidified over the next few decades, with many historians considering the league to be an Athenian Empire, especially after the treasury was moved from Delos to Athens in 454 BC. This league fought against the Peloponnesian League , dominated by Sparta, in the Peloponnesian War , which lasted from 431 to 404 BC. It ended after a siege of Athens in 404 BC, when Athens and Sparta struck a peace deal establishing Spartan hegemony over the Greek world. The Corinthians and Thebans, both Spartan allies, wanted to destroy Athens and enslave its citizens instead of a more lenient peace deal.

[ 5 ] The Spartans rejected this due to Athens being a major factor in holding up the balance of power in the Attica, Boiotia and Isthmos regions, and instead imposed the following terms: the Athenian walls and fortifications were to be destroyed, the Athenian fleet was to be decommissioned except for twelve ships, Athenian exiles were to be allowed back to the city, and Athens was to acknowledge Spartan leadership and join the Spartan alliance network, allowing Sparta to dictate its foreign policy.

[ 6 ] Sparta's former allies turned against it in 395 BC, with Thebes instigating a Spartan attack that would lead to the Corinthian War .

[ 7 ] This pit Sparta against a coalition of Athens, Thebes, Corinth, and Argos, which was backed by Persia. After a series of Athenian successes, Persia enforced the Peace of Antalcidas : it would take control of all Greek cities in Asia Minor as well as the island of Cyprus and guarantee the independence of all other Greek cities with the exceptions of Lemnos, Imbros, and Scyros, which would belong to Athens.

[ 8 ] This war empowered Athens for the first time since the end of the Peloponnesian War, allowing it to rebuild its previously decommissioned fortifications and its navy.

Origins [ edit ] The decree of Aristoteles , establishing the Second Athenian Sea League, IG II 2 43 The formation of the League was stimulated by three major events that caused relations between Athens and Sparta to deteriorate. The first event was Spartan intervention in a factional conflict within Thebes. In 382 BC, Sparta sent a force led by the general Eudamidas and his brother Phoebidas to combat the expansion of Olynthus in Chalkidiki , northern Greece.

[ 9 ] On the way to Olynthus Phoebidas stopped near Thebes, where the two polemarchs Ismenias and Leontiades were locked in a power struggle for control of Thebes. Ismenias was pro-democracy and anti-Sparta so Leontiades convinced Phoebidas, who is described by Xenophon as driven by desire to perform good deeds but lacking in reasoning capacity, [ 10 ] that it would be in Sparta's interest to help him take control of Thebes.

[ 11 ] Phoebidas agreed and helped him take the citadel and imprison Ismenias, [ 12 ] which led to about 300 of his supporters fleeing in exile to Athens.

[ 13 ] Although this Spartan interference in Thebes represented a flagrant violation of the Peace of Antalcidas, Leontiades argued that the Spartans should not punish Phoebidas because his actions had only served to help Sparta.

[ 14 ] The Spartans agreed, deciding to keep the Thebian citadel and put Ismenias to death.

[ 15 ] The second event was the outbreak of the Boeotian War , directly caused by the Spartan intervention in Thebes. In 378 BC, some of the exiles from this intervention returned to Thebes and assassinated Leontiades, overthrowing the pro-Spartan tyranny.

[ 16 ] The Spartan governor sent for reinforcements, but they were destroyed during their approach by Theban cavalry.

[ 17 ] The cavalry then stormed the Theban acropolis and restored a popular anti-Spartan government. This led to war between Sparta and Thebes.

The third event was the invasion of Piraeus , an Athenian port in Attica, by the Spartan general Sphodrias in winter of 378 BC.

Diodorus Siculus claims that the invasion was ordered by the Spartan king Cleombrotus , [ 18 ] while other historians like Xenophon argue that Sphodrias was bribed by Thebes as part of a plot to bring Athens to their side in the war against Sparta.

[ 19 ] The Spartan ambassadors stationed in Athens promised that Sphodrias would be convicted and punished in Sparta, but he was acquitted in what Siculus calls a "miscarriage of justice".

[ 20 ] This caused Athens to seek alliances against Sparta, so they reached out to Aegean cities under harsh Spartan control including Chios , Byzantium , Rhodes , and Mytilene . These cities sent representatives to Athens who signed the Decree of Aristoteles , which outlined the terms of the Second Athenian League.

[ 21 ] Charter and policy [ edit ] An inscribed prospectus for the League was found at Athens dating to 377 BC, detailing the aims of the new league. The terms of the league were as follows: meetings would be held in Athens, but every city would enjoy one vote no matter its size and would retain its independence.

[ 22 ] Unlike the terms of the Delian League , these terms did not include forced garrisons or tribute, and Athenian citizens were prohibited from owning property in other member states. Athens framed these terms as a departure from those of the Delian League, which had been unpopular among tribute states due to the ruthlessness of Athenian hegemony and the harsh punishments against states that rebelled. Athens also convinced foreign powers, including Sparta and Persia, that the charter was a way to enforce the Peace of Antalcidas instead of a subversion of it.

Many historians consider the Second Athenian League to be a resurgence of Athenian hegemony over Greece. Some, such as the historian of ancient Greece Jack Cargill, argue that this league was different from the Delian League and that it did not represent a new Athenian Empire.

[ 23 ] He argues that the main cause of defections was Thebes, which left the league in 371 BC and incited other states to leave.

[ 24 ] Rise of Thebes [ edit ] Thebes joined the league at its founding because one of the main points of the charter was opposition to Sparta. However, relations between Thebes and the rest of the league soon became difficult and Athens started to realize that Thebes was not necessarily to be trusted. For example, Thebes destroyed Plataea in 372 BC, which had only recently been re-founded. Athens started to think about negotiating peace with Sparta; it was while Athens was discussing this with Sparta that Thebes defeated the Spartan army decisively at the Battle of Leuctra (371 BC).

[ 25 ] This led to the end of the Beotian War and, with it, Spartan hegemony over Greece. Thebes soon left the league and established hegemony of its own.

Later history and disintegration [ edit ] After Sparta's defeat in 371 BC, Thebes seceded from the League and was able to violate the terms of the Peace of Antalcidas with impunity. Later, a series of revolts rocked the league, culminating with the Social War (357–355 BC) in which the states of Chios , Rhodes , Kos , and Byzantium went to war against Athens. This war ended in the disintegration of the Second Athenian League.

See also [ edit ] Athenian Grain-Tax Law of 374/3 B.C.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c Engen, Darel Tai (2010).

Honor and Profit: Athenian Trade Policy and the Economy and Society of Greece, 415–307 B.C.E.

University of Michigan Press. p. 58.

ISBN 978-0-472-11634-8 .

^ Armstrong, Jeremy (2016).

Circum Mare: Themes in Ancient Warfare . Brill. p. 173.

ISBN 978-90-04-28485-2 .

^ "Delian League" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 12 February 2024 .

^ Engen, Darel Tai (2010).

Honor and Profit: Athenian Trade Policy and the Economy and Society of Greece, 415–307 B.C.E . University of Michigan Press. p. 59.

ISBN 978-0-472-11634-8 .

^ Xenophon, Hellenica 2.2.19.

^ Xenophon, Hellenica 2.2.20.

^ Xenophon, Hellenica 3.3–5 ^ Xenophon, Hellenica 5.1.31.

^ Xenophon, Hellenica 5.2.20–24.

^ Xenophon, Hellenica 5.2.28.

^ Xenophon, Hellenica 5.2.26–27.

^ Xenophon, Hellenica 5.2.30.

^ Xenophon, Hellenica 5.2.31.

^ Xenophon, Hellenica 5.2.33–34.

^ Xenophon, Hellenica 5.2.35.

^ Xenophon, Hellenica 5.4.2–9.

^ Xenophon, Hellenica 5.4.10.

^ Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca Historia 15.29.5.

^ Xenophon, Hellenica 5.4.20.

^ Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca Historia 15.29.6.

^ Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca Historia 15.28.3.

^ Diodorus Siculus, Bibliotheca Historia 15.28.4.

^ Martin, Thomas R. (July 1984). "Reviewed Work: The Second Athenian League: Empire or Free Alliance? by Jack Cargill".

Classical Philology : 243– 247.

doi : 10.1086/366871 .

^ Martin, 245.

^ Xenophon, Hellenica 6.4.14–15.

Further reading [ edit ] Cargill, Jack.

The Second Athenian League: Empire or Free Alliance?

Berkeley: University of California Press, 1981.

ISBN 0-520-04069-4 Hamilton, Charles D. (1980). "Isocrates, IG II 2 43, Greek Propaganda and Imperialism".

Traditio .

36 : 83– 109.

doi : 10.1017/S0362152900009211 .

S2CID 151803902 .

Rhodes, P.J.

A History of the Classical Greek World, 478–323BC . Blackwell Publishing, 2005.

v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Second_Athenian_League&oldid=1306453452 " Categories : Athenian Empire Late Classical Greece 4th century BC in international relations 4th-century BC military history Ancient military alliances 4th century BC in Greece Greek city-state federations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 21:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Second Athenian League 19 languages Add topic

