Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Felidae Toggle Felidae subsection 1.1 Common animals 2 Reserves 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Fauna of Armenia 6 languages Eesti Español فارسی Հայերեն Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Native animals of Armenia The mouflon, ancestor of domesticated sheep Fauna in Armenia is diverse given the country's relatively small geographic size, owing to the varied habitats created by the area's mountainous terrain.

[ 1 ] Armenia is an important area for migratory animals ; about 350 different bird species were recorded in the country. Many of the world's domesticated animals originated in the area Armenia is located in, and the mouflon , the ancestor of domesticated sheep , is present there. Research suggests that about a quarter of the animal species in Armenia are internationally endangered . The mouflons are suffering a great population decline due to poaching and habitat loss , and the Sevan trout , which made up thirty percent of the fish in Lake Sevan , have virtually disappeared.

Felidae [ edit ] Caucasian Lynx stamp of Armenia Southern and south-western Armenia remain the last stronghold for survival of the Persian leopard in the whole Caucasus , in part due to its connectivity with Iran, where the main portion of the Persian leopard population exists. The total population size in Armenia numbers no more than 10-20 individuals, including adults, sub adults and cubs.

[ 2 ] Special calculations were not carried out. By fragmentary data, the population in Armenia is accounted not more than 25 individuals.

Before being hunted to extinction in the Trans-Caucasus in the 10th century, the Asiatic lion used to occur in the region of Yerevan and the Araks River.

[ 3 ] Common animals [ edit ] Armenian gull Armenian rock lizard Armenian mouflon Armenian Gampr Armenian Semicoarsewool African wildcat Brown bear Black stork Bearded vulture Beech marten Cinereous vulture Caucasian bear Caucasian grouse Caucasian squirrel Caucasian Shepherd Dog Caucasian badger Common spoonbill Eurasian brown bear Eastern imperial eagle Eumeces schneiderii Eremias pleskei Eurasian lynx Eurasian otter Eurasian griffon vulture European jackal European otter European wildcat Egyptian vulture Jungle cat Trumpeter finch Greek tortoise Golden jackal Golden eagle Karabakh horse Least weasel Long-eared hedgehog Little bustard Marbled polecat Natterer's bat Persian leopard Sevan khramulya Sevan trout Squacco heron Steppe wolf Steppe eagle Striped hyena Syrian brown bear Montivipera raddei Woodchat shrike White-tailed eagle White stork Wild goat Wild boar Vipera darevskii Raccoon Red deer Red fox Roe deer Levant sparrowhawk Peregrine falcon Phrynocephalus persicus Pelobates syriacus Marsh frog European green toad Reserves [ edit ] Main article: List of protected areas of Armenia Several reserves have been established in Armenia to preserve the fauna, flora and their ecosystems: Khosrov Forest State Reserve Shikahogh State Reserve Erebuni State Reserve See also [ edit ] Animals portal Ecology portal Climate of Armenia Geography of Armenia List of birds of Armenia List of mammals of Armenia Wildlife of Armenia References [ edit ] ^ "DA Tours: Fauna" . Archived from the original on 2006-10-08 . Retrieved 2006-09-22 .

^ Persian leopard research and conservation ^ Geptner, V. G., Sludskij, A. A. (1972).

Mlekopitajuščie Sovetskogo Soiuza.

Vysšaia Škola, Moskva. (In Russian; English translation: Heptner, V.G., Sludskii, A. A., Komarov, A., Komorov, N.; Hoffmann, R. S. (1992).

Mammals of the Soviet Union. Vol III: Carnivores (Feloidea).

Smithsonian Institution and the National Science Foundation, Washington DC).

Further reading [ edit ] Adamian, Martin S. and Daniel Klem Jr.

A Field Guide to Birds of Armenia . Oakland, CA : American University of Armenia, 1997.

Greppin, Mary E. H. "The Birds of the Hrazdan Gorge in Yerevan," Journal of Armenian Studies 2 (Spring/Summer 1985).

Krasnaya kniga Armyanskoi SSR, zhivotnye [The Red Book of Soviet Armenia: Fauna] Yerevan, Hayastan, 1987.

External links [ edit ] List of Freshwater Fishes for Armenia Extinct Armenian Animals Fauna in Armenia v t e Fauna of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Fauna of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fauna_of_Armenia&oldid=1242895198 " Category : Fauna of Armenia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 August 2024, at 09:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fauna of Armenia 6 languages Add topic

