Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 Cooperation 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Mashriq 51 languages العربية বাংলা Башҡортса Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kurdî Кыргызча Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 3 July 2025 .

Eastern part of the Arab world "Mashreq" redirects here. For the bank, see Mashreq (bank) .

This article is about a geographical region. For other uses, see Mashriq (disambiguation) .

Mashriq المشرق Countries and territories Bahrain Egypt Iraq Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Oman Palestine Qatar Saudi Arabia Sudan Syria UAE Yemen Major regional organizations Arab League , GCC , GAFTA , COMESA , Community of Sahel–Saharan States , Union for the Mediterranean Demonym Mashriqi Saracen (historical) Population 275,102,630 (2018) [ 1 ] Languages Arabic Nubian Kurdish French Armenian Urdu Hindi Persian Hebrew Religion Islam, Christianity and Judaism The Mashriq ( / m ə ˈ ʃ r iː k / ; Arabic : ْاَلْمَشْرِق , romanized : al-Mashriq , lit.

'the east'), also known as the Arab Mashriq ( Arabic : اَلْمَشْرِقُ الْعَرَبِيُّ , romanized : al-Mashriq al-ʿArabi , lit.

'the Arab east'), sometimes spelled Mashreq or Mashrek , is a term used by Arabs to refer to the eastern part of the Arab world , as opposed to the Maghreb (western) region, and located in West Asia and eastern North Africa .

[ 2 ] It is the Arabic equivalent for the term Middle East .

[ 3 ] Poetically the "Place of Sunrise", the name is derived from the verb sharaqa ( َشَرَق , "to shine, illuminate, radiate" and "to rise"), from the sh-r-q root ( ش-ر-ق ), referring to the east, where the sun rises.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The region includes the Arab-majority states of Bahrain , Egypt , Iraq , Jordan , Kuwait , Lebanon , Oman , Palestine , Qatar , Saudi Arabia , Sudan , Syria , the United Arab Emirates , and Yemen .

[ 3 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Geography [ edit ] Map depicting the area most conservatively known as the Mashriq [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] As the word Mashriq refers to Arab countries located between the Mediterranean Sea and Iran , it is the companion term to Maghreb ( Arabic : المغرب ), the western half of the Arab world comprising Algeria , Morocco , Tunisia , and Libya . Libya may also be regarded as straddling the two regions.

Cyrenaica in eastern Libya is considered part of the Mashriq, whereas Tripolitania in western Libya is considered part of the Maghreb. Therefore Sirtica or the Gulf of Sidra is considered the dividing point between the Maghreb and Mashreq within the Arab world.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] These geographical terms date from the early Islamic expansion. The Mashriq corresponds to the Bilad al-Sham and Mesopotamian regions combined.

[ 13 ] As of 2014 [update] , the Mashriq is home to 1.7% of the global population.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Cooperation [ edit ] Map of the Arab Mashreq International Road Network All of the countries located in the Arab Mashreq area are members of the Arab League , the Greater Arab Free Trade Area , and the United Nations . The region cooperates in several projects including the Arab Mashreq International Road Network and the Arab Mashreq International Railway . Several nations are also members of the GCC and others have tried to achieve political unity in the past, such as the United Arab Republic in the 1950s and 1960s, which originally included both Egypt and Syria .

See also [ edit ] Arabia Felix Arabian Peninsula Cradle of civilization Fertile Crescent Levant Maghreb , "Place of Sunset", which contrasts with Mashriq, "Place of Sunrise" Mashriqi Arabic Mashriqi Jews Nile Shaam (Greater Syria) References [ edit ] ^ "The World Factbook — Central Intelligence Agency" .

www.cia.gov . Archived from the original on June 13, 2007 . Retrieved 2018-08-06 .

^ "Economic interrogation in the mashriq" (PDF) .

world bank, siteresources .

^ a b Everett-Heath, John (2018).

The Concise Dictionary of World Place-Names (4th ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-186632-6 .

OCLC 1053905476 .

^ Alvarez, Lourdes María (2009).

Abu Al-Ḥasan Al-Shushtarī . Paulist Press. p. 157.

ISBN 978-0-8091-0582-3 .

^ Peek, Philip M.; Yankah, Kwesi (2003-12-12).

African Folklore: An Encyclopedia . Routledge. p. 442.

ISBN 978-1-135-94873-3 .

^ "Mashriq | geographical region, Middle East" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2021-08-16 .

^ a b "Libya - Geography" .

www.country-data.com . Retrieved 2023-06-12 .

^ a b Le Gall, Michel; Perkins, Kenneth (2010).

The Maghrib in Question: Essays in History and Historiography . University of Texas Press. p. 8.

ISBN 978-0-292-78838-1 .

^ "About ANPGR" .

www.aoad.org . Arab Network of Plant Genetic Resources. Archived from the original on September 23, 2015.

^ "Mashreq" .

www.aarinena.org . Association of Agricultural Research Institutions in the Near East & North Africa. Archived from the original on 2017-02-24 . Retrieved 2016-05-02 .

^ " "السلفية في المشرق العربي" من كتاب "الحركات الإسلامية في الوطن العربي" | مدونة جدران" .

www.judran.net . Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved August 19, 2015 .

^ "لماذا يستثنى الأردن من التقسيم؟ الوضع الداخلي هو العنصر الحاسم*فهد الخيطان" [Why is Jordan exempted from the division? The internal situation is a critical component * Fahd strings].

rasseen.com (in Arabic). Rasseen. 2014-07-13.

^ Clancy-Smith, Julia (2013-11-05).

North Africa, Islam and the Mediterranean World . Routledge. p. 98.

ISBN 978-1-135-31213-8 .

^ Official estimate of the Population of Egypt Archived May 25, 2013, at the Wayback Machine ^ UN estimate for Lebanon ^ "Official Jordanian population clock" . Archived from the original on January 17, 2012.

^ "National Main Statistical Indicators" . State of Palestine – Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics. Archived from the original on 2016-12-03 . Retrieved 2016-05-02 .

^ UN estimate for Syria ^ "Iraq" . The World Bank . Retrieved 2023-12-21 .

v t e Middle East Countries Bahrain Cyprus Egypt Iran Iraq Iraqi Kurdistan Israel Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Northern Cyprus Oman Palestine Gaza West Bank Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria Rojava Turkish occupation of northern Syria Turkey United Arab Emirates Yemen Society Climate change Democracy Economy Energy History Timeline Modern conflicts Human rights Water politics conflict Demographics Ethnic groups Genetics Metropolitan areas Religion Irreligion Culture Archaeology Cinema Cuisine Etiquette Music Dance Studies Related terms Eastern Mediterranean Fertile Crescent Greater Middle East Levant Mashriq Middle East and North Africa Near East Syria (region) West Asia v t e Earth 's primary regions and subregions Worlds Down Under New World Old World Three/Four Worlds First World Second World Third World Fourth World Hemispheres Eastern Land Hemisphere Northern Southern Water Hemisphere Western Landmasses Africa-Eurasia Eurasia Americas Antarctica Australia Zealandia submerged Tectonic plates Continents Africa North Maghreb Sub-Saharan Central East Horn Great Lakes Southern West Antarctica East Antarctica Antarctic Plateau Transantarctic Mountains West Antarctica Antarctic Peninsula Asia East Northeast Southeast Mainland Maritime Central Aral Sea Aralkum Desert Caspian Sea North Siberia Ural Russian Far East Northeast South Indian subcontinent Subregions West Arabian Peninsula Caucasus South Caucasus Levant Dead Sea Levantine corridor Levantine Sea Near East Other regions Himalayan Himalayan states Indian region Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Europe Eastern Balkans Caucasus North Caucasus South Caucasus Southern Russia European Russia Southeastern Northern Baltic British Isles Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Southern Mediterranean Middle East Italy Italian peninsula South-eastern Balkan Peninsula South-western Iberian Peninsula Western Atlantic Low Countries Northwestern Other regions Central Europe By language Celtic Germanic Romance Slavic Macaronesia North America Northern America Greenland Great Lakes Pacific Northwest United States Appalachia Bible Belt Eastern East Coast Northern Southeast Southwest U.S. Census regions Northeastern New England Mid-Atlantic Midwest South Western Mountain Pacific Canada Atlantic Canadian Prairies Central Eastern Northern Western Middle America Aridoamerica Greater Caribbean Caribbean West Indies Central Am.

Mesoamerica Northern Mexico Oceania Australasia Australia Mainland Australia New Guinea Tasmania Zealandia Melanesia Island Melanesia Micronesia Near Oceania Polynesia Remote Oceania South America Amazon Plain Amazon Basin Amazon Rainforest Andean States Brazilian Highlands Caribbean South America The Guianas Southern Cone Patagonia Geopolitical regions Global East Heartland North Northeast Northwest South Southeast Southwest West Asia–Pacific Far East Pacific Asia Sinosphere Greater China Indosphere Greater India Europe, the Middle East and Africa Mediterranean Greater Middle East Middle East and North Africa Middle East Arab world Mashriq Maghreb Greater Iran Iranian plateau Americas Anglo Dutch French Latin America and the Caribbean Latin Ibero Hispanic Portuguese Islands By continent Africa Americas North America Caribbean Central America South America Antarctica Asia Europe by area by population Oceania Australia New Zealand By ocean Arctic Atlantic Baltic Sea Black Sea Caribbean Sea Irish Sea Mediterranean Sea Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Ionian Sea Indian Persian Gulf Pacific East China Sea South China Sea Southern Oceans Antarctic/Southern Antarctic Convergence Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Great Barrier Reef Mariana Trench Challenger Deep Ring of Fire World Ocean Other waterbodies Lakes lists Rivers Seas Rim Arctic Atlantic Indo-Mediterranean Indian Ocean Mediterranean Pacific Polar Antarctic Arctic Continents of Earth / List of seas / Physical Earth Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mashriq&oldid=1298627419 " Categories : Mashriq Levant Regions of Asia Geography of the Middle East Geography of West Asia Geography of North Africa Historical regions Hidden categories: CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 3 July 2025, at 17:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mashriq 51 languages Add topic

