Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Methods 2 Philosophy 3 Rhetoric Toggle Rhetoric subsection 3.1 Aristotle’s text on pathos 3.2 Alternative views on pathos 3.3 Pathos before Aristotle 3.4 Contemporary pathos 3.4.1 Pathos in politics 3.4.2 Pathos in advertising 3.4.3 Pathos in research 3.4.4 Pathos in art 3.4.5 Pathos in music 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Pathos 31 languages العربية Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русиньскый Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greek rhetorical term for appeals to emotion For the film, see Pathos (film) . For the manga, see Pathos (manga) . For the web-storyline, see Pathos (Live with Yourself!) .

Not to be confused with Paphos , Pothos , or Bathos .

Pathos [ a ] [ b ] appeals to the emotions and ideals of the audience and elicits feelings that already reside in them.

[ 1 ] Pathos is a term most often used in rhetoric (in which it is considered one of the three modes of persuasion , alongside ethos and logos ), as well as in literature, film and other narrative art.

Methods [ edit ] Emotional appeal can be accomplished in many ways, such as the following: by a metaphor or storytelling , commonly known as a hook ; by passion in the delivery of the speech or writing, as determined by the audience; by personal anecdote .

Appealing to an ideal can also be handled in various ways, such as the following: by understanding the reason for their position avoiding attacks against a person or audience's personality use the attributes of the ideal to reinforce the message.

Pathos tends to use "loaded" words that will get some sort of reaction. Examples could include "victim", in a number of different contexts. In certain situations, pathos may be described as a "guilt trip" based on the speaker trying to make someone in the audience or the entire audience feel guilty about something. An example would be "Well, you don't have to visit me, but I just really miss you and haven't seen you in so long." Philosophy [ edit ] See also: Stoic passions In Stoicism , pathos refers to "complaints of the soul". Succumbing to pathos is an internal event (i.e., in one's soul) that consists in an erroneous response to impressions external to it. This view of pathos, and the accompanying view that all pathos is to be extirpated (in order to achieve the state of apatheia ), are related by Stoics to a specific picture of the nature of the soul, of psychological functioning, and of human action. A key feature of that picture is that succumbing to pathos is an error of reason – an intellectual mistake.

[ 2 ] Epicureanism interpreted and placed pathos in much more colloquial means and situations, placing it in pleasure, and studying it in almost every facet in regard to pleasure, analyzing emotional specificity that an individual may feel or may need to undergo to appreciate said pathos.

[ 3 ] Rhetoric [ edit ] Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e Aristotle’s text on pathos [ edit ] In Rhetoric , Aristotle identifies three artistic modes of persuasion , one of which is "awakening emotion (pathos) in the audience so as to induce them to make the judgment desired." [ 4 ] In the first chapter, he includes the way in which "men change their opinion in regard to their judgment. As such, emotions have specific causes and effects" (Book 2.1.2–3).

[ 5 ] Aristotle identifies pathos as one of the three essential modes of proof by his statement that "to understand the emotions—that is, to name them and describe them, to know their causes and the way in which they are excited (1356a24–1356a25).

[ 6 ] Aristotle posits that, alongside pathos, the speaker must also deploy good ethos in order to establish credibility (Book 2.1.5–9).

[ 5 ] Aristotle details what individual emotions are useful to a speaker (Book 2.2.27).

[ 7 ] In doing so, Aristotle focused on whom, toward whom, and why, stating that "[i]t is not enough to know one or even two of these points; unless we know all three, we shall be unable to arouse anger in anyone. The same is true of the other emotions." He also arranges the emotions with one another so that they may counteract one another. For example, one would pair sadness with happiness (Book 2.1.9).

[ 5 ] With this understanding, Aristotle argues for the rhetor to understand the entire situation of goals and audiences to decide which specific emotion the speaker would exhibit or call upon in order to persuade the audience. Aristotle's theory of pathos has three main foci: the frame of mind the audience is in, the variation of emotion between people, and the influence the rhetor has on the emotions of the audience. Aristotle classifies the third of this trio as the ultimate goal of pathos.

[ 8 ] Similarly, Aristotle outlines the individual importance of persuasive emotions, as well as the combined effectiveness of these emotions on the audience. Antoine Braet did a re-examination of Aristotle's text and in this he examined the speaker's goal of the effect on the audience. Braet explains there are three perspectives of every emotion that a speaker is trying to arouse from the audience: the audience's condition, who the audience is feeling these emotions for, and the motive.

[ 9 ] Moreover, Aristotle pointedly discusses pleasure and pain in relation to the reactions these two emotions cause in an audience member.

[ 8 ] According to Aristotle, emotions vary from person to person. Therefore, he stresses the importance of understanding specific social situations in order to successfully utilize pathos as a mode of persuasion.

[ 8 ] Aristotle identifies the introduction and the conclusion as the two most important places for an emotional appeal in any persuasive argument.

[ 10 ] In their interpretation of Aristotle's notion of pathos, the Danish rhetoricians Marie Lund and Carsten Madsen have applied the thought of Martin Heidegger on Aristotle's text.

[ 11 ] The study offers a departure from common notions of pathos, interpreting pathos not so much as an instrumental rhetorical device, but rather as a rhetorical processing of the emotional disposition of the audience towards the matter at hand.

[ 12 ] Alternative views on pathos [ edit ] Scholars have discussed the different interpretations of Aristotle's views of rhetoric and his philosophy. Some believe that Aristotle may not have even been the inventor of his famous persuasion methods. In the second chapter of Rhetoric , Aristotle's view on pathos changes from the use in discourse to the understanding of emotions and their effects. William Fortenbaugh pointed out that for the Sophist Gorgias , "Being overcome with emotion is analogous to rape." [ 13 ] Aristotle opposed this view and created a systematic approach to pathos. Fortenbaugh argues that Aristotle's systematic approach to emotional appeals "depends upon correctly understanding the nature of individual emotions, upon knowing the conditions favorable to, the objects of, and the grounds for individual emotions".

[ 14 ] Modern philosophers were typically more skeptical of the use of emotions in communication, with political theorists such as John Locke hoping to extract emotion from reasoned communication entirely.

George Campbell presents another view unlike the common systematic approach of Aristotle. Campbell explored whether appeals to emotion or passions would be "an unfair method of persuasion," identifying seven circumstances to judge emotions: probability, plausibility, importance, proximity in time, connection of place, relations to the persons concerned, and interest in the consequences.

[ 15 ] The 84 BC Rhetorica ad Herennium book of an unknown author theorizes that the conclusion is the most important place in a persuasive argument to consider emotions such as mercy or hatred, depending on the nature of the persuasion.

[ 16 ] The "appeal to pity", as it is classified in Rhetorica ad Herennium , is a means to conclude by reiterating the major premise of the work and tying while incorporating an emotional sentiment. The author suggests ways in which to appeal to the pity of the audience: "We shall stir pity in our hearers by recalling vicissitudes of future; by comparing the prosperity we once enjoyed with our present adversity; by entreating those whose pity we seek to win, and by submitting ourselves to their mercy." [ 16 ] Additionally, the text impresses the importance of invoking kindness, humanity and sympathy upon the hearer. Finally, the author suggests that the appeal to pity be brief for "nothing dries more quickly than a tear." [ 16 ] Pathos before Aristotle [ edit ] The concept of emotional appeal existed in rhetoric long before Aristotle's Rhetoric .

George A. Kennedy , a well-respected, modern-day scholar, identifies the appeal to emotions in the newly formed democratic court system before 400 BC in his book, The Art of Persuasion in Greece .

[ 17 ] Gorgias , a Sophist who preceded Aristotle, was interested in the orator's emotional appeal as well. Gorgias believed the orator was able to capture and lead the audience in any direction they pleased through the use of emotional appeal.

[ 17 ] In the Encomium of Helen , Gorgias states that a soul can feel a particular sentiment on account of words such as sorrow and pity. Certain words act as "bringers-on of pleasure and takers-off of pain.

[ 18 ] Furthermore, Gorgias equates emotional persuasion to the sensation of being overtaken by a drug: "[f]or just as different drug draw off different humors from the body, and some put an end to disease and other to life, so too of discourses: some give pain, others delight, others terrify, others rouse the hearers to courage, and yet others by a certain vile persuasion drug and trick to soul." [ 18 ] Plato also discussed emotional appeal in rhetoric. Plato preceded Aristotle and therefore laid the groundwork, as did other Sophists, for Aristotle to theorize the concept of pathos. In his dialogue Gorgias , Plato discusses pleasure versus pain in the realm of pathos though in a (probably fictional) conversation between Gorgias and Socrates. The dialogue between several ancient rhetors that Plato created centers around the value of rhetoric, and the men incorporate aspects of pathos in their responses. Gorgias discredits pathos and instead promotes the use of ethos in persuasion.

[ 19 ] In another of Plato's texts, Phaedrus , his discussion of emotions is more pointed; however, he still does not outline exactly how emotions manipulate an audience.

[ 20 ] Plato discusses the danger of emotions in oratory. He argues that emotional appeal in rhetoric should be used as the means to an end and not the point of the discussion.

[ 20 ] Contemporary pathos [ edit ] George Campbell , a contributor to the Scottish Enlightenment, was one of the first rhetoricians to incorporate scientific evidence into his theory of emotional appeal.

[ 21 ] Campbell relied heavily on a book written by physician David Hartley , entitled Observations on Man . The book synthesized emotions and neurology and introduced the concept that action is a result of impression. Hartley determined that emotions drive people to react to appeals based on circumstance but also passions made up of cognitive impulses.

[ 21 ] Campbell argues that belief and persuasion depend heavily on the force of an emotional appeal.

[ 22 ] Furthermore, Campbell introduced the importance of the audience's imagination and will on emotional persuasion that is just as important as basic understanding of an argument.

[ 22 ] Campbell, by drawing on the theories of rhetoricians before him, drew up a contemporary view of pathos that incorporates the psychological aspect of emotional appeal.

Pathos in politics [ edit ] Pathos has its hand in politics as well, primarily in speech and how to persuade the audience. Mshvenieradze states that "Pathos is directly linked with an audience. Audience is a collective subject of speakers on which an orator tries to impact by own argumentation." [ 23 ] Similarly, to how Aristotle discusses how to effectively utilize pathos in rhetoric, the way in which one appeals to the reader is similar in appealing to an audience of voters. In the case of politics and politicians, it is primarily more argumentative writing and speaking. In Book II of Aristotle's writings in Rhetoric, in essence knowing people's emotions helps to enable one to act with words versus writing alone, to earn another's credibility and faith.

[ 24 ] As Aristotle's teachings expanded, many other groups of thinkers would go on to adopt different variations of political usage with the elements of pathos involved, which includes groups such as the Epicureans [ 25 ] and Stoics.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] Pathos in advertising [ edit ] The contemporary landscape for advertising is highly competitive due to the sheer amount of marketing done by companies. Pathos has become a popular tool to draw consumers in as it targets their emotional side. Studies show that emotion influences people's information processing and decision-making, making pathos a perfect tool for persuading consumers to buy goods and services.

[ 29 ] In this digital age, "designers must go beyond aesthetics and industrial feasibility to integrate the aspect of 'emotional awareness'".

[ 30 ] Companies today contain current culture references in their advertisement and oftentimes strive to make the audience feel involved.

[ 31 ] In other words, it is not enough to have a pleasant looking advertisement; corporations may have to use additional design methods to persuade and gain consumers to buy their products. For example, this type of advertising is exemplified in large food brands such as Presidents Choice's "Eat Together" campaign (2017), and Coca-Cola's "Open-happiness" campaign (2009). One of the most well-known examples of pathos in advertising is the SPCA commercials with pictures of stray dogs with sad music.

Pathos in research [ edit ] Pathos can also be also used in credited medical journals, research and other academic pieces of writing. The goal is to appeal to the readers' emotion while maintaining the necessary requirements of the medical discourse community. Authors may do so, by using certain vocabulary to elicit an emotional response from the audience. “God-terms” are often used as a rhetorical technique. It is imperative that authors still preserve the standard of writing within the medical community by focusing on factual and scientific information without use of personal opinion.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Pathos in art [ edit ] It can be argued that most artwork falls under the realm of pathos. Throughout history artists have used pathos within their work by utilizing colors, shape, and texture of the artwork to draw out feelings within their audience. Political cartoons are but one example of artists using pathos to persuade or bring to light issues within the world centering around the government. Most times, the designs are blown out of proportion and are greatly exaggerated, but this adds to the raw feeling the artist tries to evoke within the viewer.

Pathos in music [ edit ] In The Birth of Tragedy Out of the Spirit of Music the 19th century German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche argues that, for the ancient Greeks, tragedy was a dramatic form of pathos (ecstatic or "primal suffering") which transcended language and could only be communicated through music .

[ 34 ] Drawing on Nietzsche's celebrated work, the British theorist and professor of philosophy Jason Barker argues that the same preoccupation with "musicality" as pathos, or "primal suffering", is the defining feature of contemporary popular music . Barker cites the example of the 1985 USA for Africa charity single " We Are the World ", which he describes as "the birth of postmodern tragedy" and "marks the beginning of the so-called Disaster Appeal." [ 35 ] See also [ edit ] Bread and circuses Catharsis Dukkha Pathetic fallacy Pathology Sensibility Sentimental novel Notes [ edit ] ^ UK : / ˈ p eɪ θ ɒ s / PAY-thos , US : / ˈ p eɪ θ oʊ s / PAY-thohs ; pl.

pathea , pathe or pathoses ^ Ancient Greek : πάθος , romanized : páthos , lit.

' suffering or experience ' References [ edit ] ^ Walker, Robyn (2010-03-01).

Strategic Management Communication for Leaders . Cengage Learning.

ISBN 978-0-538-45134-5 .

^ P.N. Singer, Galen's Psychological Writings , 2013 p 209 ^ Warren, James.

"Epicureans and Cyrenaics on pleasure as a pathos" .

Forthcoming in S. Marchand and F. Verde Eds. Épicurisme et Scepticisme, Rome: Sapienza Università Editrice: 127–44 .

^ Aristotle, and George Alexander Kennedy. (1991) Aristotle On Rhetoric: A Theory of Civic Discourse.

New York: Oxford UP. p. 119.

^ a b c Aristotle; Bizzell, Patricia; Herzerberg, Bruce. (2001).

On Rhetoric (Second ed). New York: Bedford/ St. Martin's.

^ Lee, Irving. (1939). "Some Conceptions in Emotional Appeal in Rhetorical Theory."Speech Monographs. 6(1):66–86.

^ Fortenbaugh, W. (1974).

Aristotle's Rhetoric on Emotions.

Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow. p. 232.

^ a b c Aristotle; Bizzell, Patricia; Herzberg, Bruce (2001).

On Rhetoric (Second ed.). New York: Bedford/ St. Martin's.

^ Braet, Antoine C. "Ethos, pathos and logos in Aristotle's Rhetoric: A re-examination." Argumentation 6.3 (1992): 307–320.

^ Lee, Irving (1939). "Some Conceptions on Emotional Appeal in Rhetorical Theory".

Speech Monographs .

6 (1): 66– 86.

doi : 10.1080/03637753909374862 .

^ Lund, Marie & Madsen, Carsten (2018): “Retorisk forhandling af følelse og stemning”; in: RhetoricaScandinavica 78, 41-52 ^ ibid.

^ Mshvenieradze, T. (2013). Logos ethos and pathos in political discourse.

Theory and Practice in Language Studies , 3 (11), 1939+.

^ Fortenbaugh, W. (1974) Aristotle's Rhetoric on Emotions.

Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow. p. 232.

^ Campbell, George, and Lloyd F. Bitzer.

The Philosophy of Rhetoric . Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1963. pp. 81–89.

^ a b c Anonymous; Bizzell, Patricia; Herzberg, Bruce (2001).

Rhetorica ad Herennium . Bedford/ St.Martins.

^ a b Kennedy, George (1963).

The Art of Persuasion in Greece . Princeton University Press.

^ a b Gorgias; Bizzell, Patricia; Bruce, Herzberg.

The Rhetorical Tradition (Second Edition). Encomium of Helen .

^ Plato; Bizzell, Patricia; Herzberg, Bruce.

The Rhetorical Tradition (Second Edition). Gorgias . Bedford/ St. Martin's.

^ a b Plato; Bizzell, Patricia; Herzberg, Bruce (2001).

The Rhetorical Tradition (Second Edition). Phaedrus . New York: Bedford/ St. Martin's.

^ a b Gardiner, Norman (1937).

Feeling and Emotion: A History of Theories . New York: American Book Co.

^ a b Golden, James; Corbett, Edward (1990).

The Rhetoric of Blair, Campbell, and Whately . SIU Press.

^ Brecher, N. D. (2017). Persuasive presentations: Leading people to rally to your call takes preparation. Journal of Property Management, 82(3), 37.

^ Budzyńska-Daca, A., & Botwina, R. (2015). Pre-election TV debates–persuasive games between ethos, logos, and pathos. Persuasive Games in Political and Professional Dialogue, 26, 39.

^ "Author and Citation Information for "Epicurus" " .

plato.stanford.edu .

^ O'Gorman, Ned (April 15, 2011).

"Stoic Rhetoric: Prospects of a Problematic" .

Advances in the History of Rhetoric .

14 (1): 1– 13.

doi : 10.1080/15362426.2011.559395 .

S2CID 145115243 – via Taylor and Francis+NEJM.

^ "Author and Citation Information for "Epicurus" " .

plato.stanford.edu . Retrieved 2023-09-07 .

^ O'Gorman, N. (2011). Stoic rhetoric: Prospects of a problematic. Advances in the History of Rhetoric, 14(1), 1–13.

doi : 10.1080/15362426.2011.559395 ^ Amic G. Ho & Kin Wai Michael (2012). "Emotion Design, Emotional Design, Emotionalize Design: A Review on Their Relationships from a New Perspectiv".

The Design Journal .

15 (1): 9– 32.

doi : 10.2752/175630612X13192035508462 .

S2CID 145665443 .

^ Robinson, M. (2004).

The comprehension shift HMI of the future—designers of the future. In McDonagh, D. & Hekkert, P. Design and emotion: the experience of everyday things . London, USA, and Canada: Taylor & Francis.

^ Higgins, Colin, and Robyn Walker. "Ethos, logos, pathos: Strategies of persuasion in social/environmental reports." Accounting Forum . Vol. 36. No. 3. Taylor & Francis, 2012.

^ Varpio, Lara (2018-06-01).

"Using rhetorical appeals to credibility, logic, and emotions to increase your persuasiveness" .

Perspectives on Medical Education .

7 (3): 207– 210.

doi : 10.1007/s40037-018-0420-2 .

ISSN 2212-277X .

PMC 6002292 .

PMID 29736855 .

^ Gusfield, Joseph (1976). "The Literary Rhetoric of Science: Comedy and Pathos in Drinking Driver Research".

American Sociological Review .

41 (1): 16– 34.

doi : 10.2307/2094370 .

ISSN 0003-1224 .

JSTOR 2094370 .

^ Nietzsche, Friedrich, The Birth of Tragedy Out of the Spirit of Music (Trans. Shaun Whiteside), Penguin Books, 1993: p. 35.

^ Barker, Jason (March 7, 2025).

" 'Lost In Music" .

Communis . Retrieved March 24, 2025 .

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of pathos at Wiktionary Literary Devices and Literary Terms – The Complete List Examples of Pathos in Literature, Rhetoric and Music v t e Ancient Greek philosophical concepts Adiaphora (indifferent) Aletheia (truth) Apeiron (infinite) Aporia (problem) Arche (first principle) Arete (excellence) Ataraxia (tranquility) Cosmos (order) Diairesis (division) Doxa (opinion) Episteme (knowledge) Ethos (character) Eudaimonia (flourishing) Hesychia (stillness) Logos (reason) Mimesis (imitation) Monad (unit) Nous (intellect) Ousia (substance) Pathos (passion) Phronesis (prudence) Physis (nature) Sophia (wisdom) Sophrosyne (temperance) Sophós (sage) Techne (craft) Telos (goal) Thumos (temper) v t e Emotions ( list ) Emotions Acceptance Admiration Adoration Aesthetic Affection Agitation Agony Amusement Anger Angst Anguish Annoyance Anticipation Antipathy Anxiety Apathy Arousal Attraction Awe Belongingness Boredom Calmness Comfort Compassion Confidence Confusion Contempt Contentment Courage Cruelty Curiosity Defeat Depression Desire Disappointment Disgust Distrust Doubt Ecstasy Embarrassment vicarious Emotion work Empathy Emptiness Enthrallment Enthusiasm Envy Euphoria Excitement Faith Fear Flow Frustration Fun Gratification Gratitude Greed Grief Guilt Happiness Joie de vivre Hatred self-hatred Hiraeth Homesickness Hope Horror Hostility Humiliation Hygge Hysteria Ikigai (sense of purpose) Indulgence Infatuation Insecurity Insignificance Inspiration Interest Irritation Isolation Jealousy Joy Kindness Loneliness Love at first sight limerence obsessive parental passionate and companionate Lust Mono no aware Neglect Nostalgia Outrage Panic Passion Pity self-pity Pleasure Pride grandiosity hubris insult vanity Rage Regret Rejection Relaxation Relief Remorse Resentment Revenge Sadness melancholy Saudade Schadenfreude Sehnsucht Sentimentality Shame Shock Shyness Solitude Social connection Sorrow Spite Stress chronic Suffering Surprise Suspense Suspicion Sympathy Trust Wonder sense of wonder Worry Zest Worldviews Cynicism Defeatism Fatalism Misanthropy Nihilism Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Related Affect consciousness in education measures in psychology Affective computing forecasting neuroscience science spectrum Affectivity positive negative Appeal to emotion Amygdala hijack Emotion and art and memory and music and sex and sleep classification circumplex EmojiGrid Lövheim PAD Plutchik evolution expressed functional accounts group homeostatic in animals perception recognition in conversation regulation interpersonal work Emotional aperture bias blackmail competence conflict contagion detachment dysregulation eating exhaustion expression and gender intelligence and bullying Empathy quotient intimacy isolation lability labor lateralization literacy prosody reasoning responsivity security symbiosis thought method well-being Emotionality bounded Emotions and culture history in decision-making in the workplace in virtual communication moral self-conscious social social sharing sociology Feeling Group affective tone Interactions between the emotional and executive brain systems Jealousy in art Mental state Meta-emotion Pathognomy Pathos Social emotional development Stoic passions Theory affect affect as information appraisal Cannon-Bard constructed emotion discrete emotion James-Lange somatic somatic marker two-factor Italics indicate emotion names in foreign languages Category Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐gbjzw
Cached time: 20250814220344
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.715 seconds
Real time usage: 0.885 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3847/1000000
Revision size: 23588/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 119673/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6998/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 112385/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.451/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16536603/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  726.438      1 -total
 29.20%  212.144      2 Template:Reflist
 23.02%  167.192      2 Template:Efn
 18.29%  132.869     10 Template:Cite_book
 16.97%  123.245      1 Template:Langx
 14.78%  107.392      1 Template:Rhetoric
 14.43%  104.815      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.59%   84.187      2 Template:Navbox
  8.93%   64.903      1 Template:Ancient_Greek_philosophical_concepts
  8.44%   61.335      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1009030:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220344 and revision id 1304033305. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pathos&oldid=1304033305 " Categories : Philosophy of Aristotle Emotion Epicureanism Rhetoric Stoicism Writing Concepts in ancient Greek aesthetics Concepts in ancient Greek ethics Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Welsh-language text Articles containing Danish-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 15:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pathos 31 languages Add topic

