Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Ethnocentrism 3 Antichronocentrism 4 Applications 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Chronocentrism 2 languages Deutsch Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Viewing certain time-periods more favorably "Recentism" redirects here. For recency bias (which overlaps), see Recency bias . For the Wikipedia guideline supplement, see Wikipedia:Recentism .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article provides insufficient context for those unfamiliar with the subject .

Please help improve the article by providing more context for the reader .

( April 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may lack focus or may be about more than one topic .

Please help improve this article , possibly by splitting the article or organising a disambiguation page . There might be further discussion about this on the talk page .

( April 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Chronocentrism is the assumption that a certain time-period (typically the present) is better, more important, or a more significant frame of reference than other time periods, either past or future. The perception of more positive attributes such as morality, technology, and sophistication to one's own time may lead people as member of a collectivity to impose their forms of time on others and to impede efforts towards more homogeneous temporal commons.

[ 1 ] [ need quotation to verify ] History [ edit ] Chronocentrism (from the Greek chrono- meaning "time") was coined by sociologist Jib Fowles in an article in the journal Futures in February 1974. Fowles described chronocentrism as "the belief that one's own times are paramount, that other periods pale in comparison".

[ 2 ] A critical view described it as the belief that only the present counts and that the past is irrelevant except to serve as a reference to a few basic assumptions about what went before.

[ 3 ] More recently, it has been defined as "the egotism that one's own generation is poised on the very cusp of history".

[ 4 ] The term had been used earlier in a study about attitudes to ageing in the workplace. Chronocentricity: "...only seeing the value of one's own age cohort...described the tendency for younger managers to hold negative perceptions of the abilities or other work-related competencies of older employees." [ 5 ] This type of discrimination is a form of ageism .

Ethnocentrism [ edit ] Chronocentrism as ethnocentrism is the perceiving and judging of a culture's historical values in terms of the standards of one's own time period.

Antichronocentrism [ edit ] The Long Now Foundation is an organization that encourages the use of 5-digit years, e.g. "02024" instead of "2024," to help emphasize how early the present time is in their vision of the timeline of humanity.  The use of two-digit years before Y2K was an example of chronocentrism (in the early years of computing, the years 2000 and 1899 were believed to be too far in the future or the past, and thus of less importance than being able to save two digits in computerizing and typing out years).

Applications [ edit ] The "Copernican time principle" is a temporal analog of the Copernican principle for space, which states that no spatial location is any more or less special of a frame of reference than any other spatial location (i.e., that our physical universe has no center). Some authors have extended this to also include that no point in time is any more or less special than any other point in time (e.g., in outdated steady-state theories ), though this cannot be universally applied (e.g., the Big-Bang singularity is a special point in time that can be logically used as a frame of reference to date later events).

[ 6 ] Until the twentieth century, chronocentrism was the norm in musical performance because musicians assumed that playing styles survived largely unchanged from previous centuries. For instance, Romantic musicians used contemporary styles when performing earlier repertoire.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Ageism Anthropocentrism Chronological snobbery Copernicanism End of history Geocentrism Philosophy of history Presentism (historical analysis) Rosy retrospection References [ edit ] ^ Roe, Robert; Waller, Mary; Clegg, Steart (2008).

Time in Organizational Research . Routledge. p. 279.

ISBN 978-0203889947 .

^ Fowles, Jib (February 1974). "On Chronocentrism".

Futures .

6 (1): 249.

doi : 10.1016/0016-3287(74)90008-1 .

^ Thorne, Tony (1 November 2007).

Shoot the Puppy: A Survival Guide to the Curious Jargon of Modern Life . Penguin UK.

ISBN 9780141963990 .

^ Standage, Tom (2007).

The Victorian Internet: The Remarkable Story of the Telegraph and the Nineteenth Century's On-line Pioneers . Walker & Company. p. 256.

ISBN 978-0-8027-1604-0 .

^ Lyon, Phil; Pollard, D (1 January 1997). "Perceptions of the older employee: is anything really changing?".

Personnel Review .

26 (4): 249.

doi : 10.1108/00483489710172051 .

^ Adams, Fred (1999).

The five ages of the universe : inside the physics of eternity . Greg Laughlin. New York: Free Press.

ISBN 0-684-85422-8 .

OCLC 40754822 .

^ Haynes, Bruce (2007).

The End of Early Music: A Period Performer's History of Music for the Twenty-First Century . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 26.

ISBN 9780195189872 .

v t e Ethnocentrism Regional variants Afrocentrism Americentrism Asiacentrism Indocentrism Sinocentrism Little China Eurocentrism Anglocentrism Germanocentrism Hellenocentrism Related phenomena Anthropocentrism Chronocentrism Colonial mentality Exceptionalism Template Geocentrism Religiocentrism Sentiocentrism Xenocentrism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chronocentrism&oldid=1303799466 " Categories : 1974 neologisms Philosophical theories Time Historical eras Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing context from April 2014 All Wikipedia articles needing context All pages needing cleanup Wikipedia articles lacking focus from April 2014 All Wikipedia articles lacking focus Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from August 2025 Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from July 2025 This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 03:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chronocentrism 2 languages Add topic

