Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Synopsis 2 Reviews 3 References Toggle the table of contents Why Liberalism Failed Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2018 book by Patrick Deneen Why Liberalism Failed First edition Author Patrick Deneen Language English Subject 20th century history, Political philosophy , Liberalism Published January 2018 Publisher Yale University Press Pages 248 ISBN 978-0300223446 Why Liberalism Failed is a 2018 book by Patrick Deneen , a professor of political science at the University of Notre Dame .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It criticizes both forms of American liberalism: " classical liberalism ," typically called in America " libertarianism ," and " progressive / modern liberalism ," often called simply "liberalism." [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Synopsis [ edit ] Why Liberalism Failed is a critique of political, social, and economic liberalism as practiced by both American Democrats and Republicans . According to Deneen, "we should rightly wonder whether America is not in the early days of its eternal life but rather approaching the end of the natural cycle of corruption and decay that limits the lifespan of all human creations." [ 1 ] The book argues that liberalism has exhausted itself, leading to income inequality , cultural decline, atomization, nihilism , the erosion of freedoms, and the growth of powerful, centralized bureaucracies.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The book also argues that liberalism has replaced old values of community, religion and tradition with self-interest.

[ 5 ] Reviews [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e In a review for The New York Review of Books , Robert Kuttner described the book as "convenient for conservatives looking to blame all ills on liberals" to oppose globalization and market fundamentalism and to perceive liberalism as "a dangerous betrayal of deeper sources of culture and civilization such as the family, the tribe, the nation, and the church," Kuttner also argued that Deneen engaged in "exaggerations, omissions, and misrepresentations of liberalism" and added that "the acclaim his book initially received is startling, even scandalous." [ 2 ] Writing in The Week , Damon Linker described it as "the most electrifying book of cultural criticism published in some time." He added that Deneen argues that liberalism failed because it succeeded. But Linker wrote that he did not find "especially persuasive" the claim made in the book that the Western liberal world was nearing its end.

[ 4 ] US President Barack Obama wrote in 2018 that while he disagrees with many of the conclusions of the book, Why Liberalism Failed "offers cogent insights into the loss of meaning and community that many in the West feel, issues that liberal democracies ignore at their own peril." [ 6 ] Jennifer Szalai for The New York Times wrote that it "speaks to a profound discontent with the political establishment" and that Deneen echoes the popular 2016 election sentiment that both parties were the same. She adds that the book attributes liberalism not to only one side but mostly to political elites orthodoxy dating to 500 years ago. She describes the book as "a deeply exasperating volume that nevertheless articulates something important in this age of disillusionment." Deneen proposes a more traditional society in which "preferably religious communities tend to the land and look after their own" and is critical of a women's liberation that pushed them into capitalism.

[ 3 ] In its review of the book, The Economist argued that Deneen "does an impressive job of capturing the current mood of disillusionment, echoing left-wing complaints about rampant commercialism, right-wing complaints about narcissistic and bullying students, and general worries about atomisation and selfishness" but criticized him for failing to actually convince that the only way to solve the problem is abandoning liberalism. The magazine concludes that "the best way to read Why Liberalism Failed is not as a funeral oration but as a call to action: up your game, or else." [ 7 ] Park MacDougald wrote for New York that Deneen criticizes liberalism not because of its materialist failures but from a philosophical standpoint and "what he sees as a liberal redefinition of the ancient and medieval concept of freedom, or libertas" [ clarification needed ] and that "liberalism's big innovation was to reject this classical understanding as unrealistic, unscientific, and oppressive." He concludes that " Why Liberalism Failed is a polemic, if an elegantly argued one, and it contains some of the drawbacks of the genre." [ 1 ] The paleoconservative Paul Gottfried wrote in The Independent Review that, while he agrees with much of the criticism of liberalism, he also finds several idiosyncrasies in the book, describing it as "an anti-modernist Catholic polemic that has elicited praise and support from unexpected admirers." [ 8 ] Writing for the National Review , Christian Alejandro Gonzalez was critical of the book, arguing that "Deneen's critique of liberalism exhibits an undue nostalgia for the past and ingratitude for the virtues of the present." He added that the book "combines Marxist economic protestations with social-conservative moral sensibilities to produce a critique of the classical liberal project." [ 9 ] Writing for Newsweek , Jonah Goldberg agreed with Deneen: "There are a myriad downsides to radical individualism. America's troubles today are inextricably linked with the breakdown of the family, local institutions, communities, organized religion and social trust." However, Goldberg concluded, "An illiberal order that allows people to say and think what they want, innovators to create what they want and citizens to maintain loyalties to things other than the perpetuation of the regime is an oxymoron. Which is why I would rather live in a society that often fails to live up to its Liberal ideals than in one that succeeds in forcing me to bow down to illiberal ones." [ 10 ] In a review for The Washington Times , Aram Bakshian Jr.

wrote that the book "lucidly explains how liberalism has trapped itself in its own labyrinth" but fails to offer a credible alternative to it. Bakshian is particularly critical towards Deneen's propositions for a new post-liberal society. Bakshian argues that such visions "totters on the edge of New Age absurdity" and compares them to Jean-Jacques Rousseau 's ideal of the " noble savage ." [ 11 ] Writing for Jacobin , Lyle Jeremy Rubin said that the book is "a bold, seasonable, and at times, welcome estimation of the liberal status quo — yet one that nonetheless suffers from the significant blind spots and prejudices of its author." He argued that the book's "anticapitalist conservatism" comes "far short of liberation." [ 12 ] The conservative political journal American Affairs has published commentaries on the book by Polish philosopher Ryszard Legutko and Harvard University Law professor Adrian Vermeule .

[ 1 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Jackson Lears and Cornel West have praised the book.

[ 12 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d New York Magazine , Has the Operating System for the Western World Crashed?

, February 27, 2018 ^ a b c Robert Kuttner, Blaming Liberalism , New York Review of Books, November 21, 2019 ^ a b New York Times , 'If Liberalism is Dead, What Comes Next?

, January 17, 2018 ^ a b Damon Linker, An ominous prophecy for liberalism , The Week , January 22, 2018.

^ a b Burns, Nick (April 8, 2020).

"The new intellectuals of the American right" .

New Statesman . Retrieved August 10, 2023 .

^ Foran, Clare (June 16, 2018).

"Here's what's on Barack Obama's reading list" .

CNN .

^ "Liberalism is the most successful idea of the past 400 years" .

The Economist . January 27, 2018.

ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved January 9, 2022 .

^ "Book Review | Why Liberalism Failed, by Patrick J. Deneen" .

The Independent Institute . Retrieved January 9, 2022 .

^ "We Still Need Liberalism" .

National Review . June 22, 2018 . Retrieved January 9, 2022 .

^ Goldberg, Jonah (July 8, 2020).

"Liberalism Has Not Failed" .

Newsweek . Retrieved August 11, 2023 .

^ "BOOK REVIEW: 'Why Liberalism Failed' by Patrick J. Deneen" .

The Washington Times . Retrieved January 9, 2022 .

^ a b Jeremy Rubin, Lyle (July 2, 2018).

"Why Anticapitalist Conservatism Fails" .

Jacobin . Retrieved August 11, 2023 .

^ Ryszard Legutko, Can Democracy Save Us?

, American Affairs Journal, February 2018 ^ Adrian Vermeule, Integration from Within , American Affairs Journal, February 2018.

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐zth28
Cached time: 20250817053619
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.487 seconds
Real time usage: 0.620 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2693/1000000
Revision size: 10984/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 90613/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5598/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 46618/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.255/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7068513/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  474.885      1 -total
 29.12%  138.307      1 Template:Conservatism_US
 27.30%  129.623      1 Template:Infobox_book
 23.23%  110.320      1 Template:Infobox
 16.66%   79.138      1 Template:Reflist
 13.49%   64.065      1 Template:Short_description
 12.63%   59.985      1 Template:ISBNT
  9.43%   44.771      5 Template:Cite_web
  7.67%   36.447      1 Template:Clarify
  7.49%   35.578      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:64037808:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817053619 and revision id 1266998232. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Why_Liberalism_Failed&oldid=1266998232 " Categories : 2018 non-fiction books English-language non-fiction books Books about liberalism Yale University Press books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from August 2021 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2024 This page was last edited on 3 January 2025, at 04:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Why Liberalism Failed Add languages Add topic

