Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Location 2 Evolution of the basin 3 Bauxite deposits 4 References Toggle the table of contents Amazon Basin (sedimentary basin) 3 languages Cebuano Español Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sedimentary basin This article is about the geological feature. For the drainage basin, see Amazon basin .

Amazon Basin Bacia do Amazonas The basin is located in the center and center-right of the picture.

Coordinates 2°29′47″S 57°3′25″W ﻿ / ﻿ 2.49639°S 57.05694°W ﻿ / -2.49639; -57.05694 Etymology Amazon River Location South America Region North Country Brazil State(s) Amazonas , Pará Cities Manaus Characteristics On/Offshore Onshore Boundaries Guiana Shield , Gurupá Arch ; Marajó Basin , Brazilian Shield , Púrus Arch ; Solimões Basin Part of Amazon basins Area 620,000 km 2 (240,000 sq mi) Hydrology River(s) Amazon River Geology Basin type Continental rift basin Plate South America Age Cambrian - recent Amazon alluvium deposit The Amazon Basin is a large sedimentary basin (620,000 square kilometres (240,000 sq mi)) located near the middle and lower course of the Amazon River , south the Guiana Shield and north of the Central Brazilian Shield . The basin developed on a rift that originated about 550 million years ago during the Cambrian .

Location [ edit ] The Amazon Basin is located south of the Guiana Shield , north of the Central Brazilian Shield , east of the Solimões Basin, and west of the Marajó Basin. It is bound to the west by the Púrus Arch and in the east by the Gurupá Arch. The basin has an elongated shape with a WSW-ENE orientation. Its long axis runs from the vicinity of Manaus to the area near the confluence of Xingu River with the Amazon River.

Evolution of the basin [ edit ] The Amazon Basin was developed on a rift , called the Sub-Amazonal Rift, that originated about 550 million years ago during continental collision of the West African Craton .

[ 1 ] Parts of the rift were reactivated during the opening of the South Atlantic .

[ 1 ] The Amazon Basin evolved through tectonic activity including continental collision , subduction , and distortion of parts of the Andes Mountain Range .

[ 2 ] Bauxite deposits [ edit ] The Amazon basin hosts large deposits of the aluminum-rich sedimentary rock bauxite .

[ 3 ] The discovery of bauxite deposits approximately 70 years ago [ 3 ] made Brazil one of the most important countries in terms of both production and possession of bauxite deposits.

References [ edit ] ^ a b Burke, Kevin C.; Lytwyn, Jennifer (1993). "Origin of the Rift Under the Amazon Basin as a Result of Continental Collision During Pan-African Time".

International Geology Review .

35 (10): 881– 897.

doi : 10.1080/00206819309465563 .

^ Latrubesse, Edgardo M.; Cozzuol, Mario; da Silva-Caminha, Silane A. F.; Rigsby, Catherine A.; Absy, Maria Lucia; Jaramillo, Carlos (2010).

"The Late Miocene paleogeography of the Amazon Basin and the evolution of the Amazon River system" .

Earth-Science Reviews .

99 (3): 99– 124.

doi : 10.1016/j.earscirev.2010.02.005 .

ISSN 0012-8252 .

S2CID 129666624 .

^ a b Grubb, P. L. C. (1979).

"Genesis of bauxite deposits in the lower Amazon Basin and Guianas coastal plain" .

Economic Geology .

74 (4): 735– 750.

doi : 10.2113/gsecongeo.74.4.735 .

ISSN 0361-0128 .

v t e Major South American geological features Tectonic plates Antarctic Caribbean Cocos Coiba Malpelo Nazca North Andes Scotia South American Cratons and shields Amazonian Craton Arequipa-Antofalla Craton Atlantic Shield Central Brazilian Shield Guiana Shield Paranapanema Block Río Apa Craton Río de la Plata Craton São Francisco Craton Uruguayan Shield Structures undergoing subduction Antarctic plate Carnegie Ridge Chile Rise Juan Fernández Ridge Malpelo Ridge Nazca plate Nazca Ridge Faults and shear zones Atacama Boconó Bucaramanga-Santa Marta Cochabamba Cordillera Blanca Córdoba Dolores-Guayaquil Domeyko Eastern Frontal Gastre Huincul Liquiñe-Ofqui Magallanes-Fagnano Meta Morón Oca-Ancón Pernambuco El Pilar Romeral San Ramón Sarandí del Yí Sierra Ballena Sobral El Tigre Trans-Brazilian Rifts and grabens Aguapeí Amazon Rift Asunción Rift Cuyo Rift Espino Neuquén Rifts Paramirim Salta Rifts Sedimentary basins Altiplano Amazon Andean foreland Central Brazil Chaco Colorado Cuyo Eastern Venezuela Golfo San Jorge Magallanes Malvinas Neuquén Pantanal Paraíba Paraná Salta Solimões Orogenies Andean Brasiliano Cariri Velhos Chonide Famatinian Gondwanide Juruá Pampean San Rafael Sunsás Terra Australis Tilcarian Metallogenetic provinces Andean copper belts Bolivian Tin Belt Chilean Iron Belt Deseado Massif El Indio Gold Belt El Mutún Iron Quadrangle Lithium Triangle Maricunga Gold Belt Pampean Pegmatite Province Volcanism Volcanic provinces Andean North Central South Austral Caribbean Central Atlantic Paraná and Etendeka Hotspots Ascension Noronha hotspot Galápagos Juan Fernández San Felix Trindade v t e Sedimentary basins of Brazil Onshore Amazon Acre Basin Madre de Deus Basin Solimões Basin Tacutu Basin Amazon Basin Marajó Basin Central Alto do Tapajós Basin Bananal Basin Parecis-Alto Xingu Basin Parnaíba Basin São Luís-Grajaú Basin São Francisco Basin Northeastern Araripe Basin Jatobá Basin Recôncavo Basin Tucano Basin Southern Itaboraí Basin Pantanal Basin Paraná Basin Bauru Basin Taubaté Basin Offshore Foz do Amazonas Basin Pará-Maranhão Basin Barreirinhas Basin Ceará Basin Potiguar Basin Pernambuco-Paraíba Basin Sergipe-Alagoas Basin Camamu-Almada Basin Jequitinhonha Basin Cumuruxatiba Basin Espírito Santo Basin Campos Basin Santos Basin Pelotas Basin Source Souza Lima, Wagner; Hamsi Junior, Gilvan Pio (2003).

"Bacias sedimentares brasileiras" .

Phoenix .

49 : 1 . Retrieved 4 September 2017 .

Category • Images This sedimentology article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Amazon_Basin_(sedimentary_basin)&oldid=1291886136 " Categories : Geology of Brazil Sedimentary basins of Brazil Paleozoic rifts and grabens Sedimentology stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2022 Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All stub articles This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 00:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Amazon Basin (sedimentary basin) 3 languages Add topic

