Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Executive Order 10450 2.2 Association of communism with "subversives" 2.3 Subcommittee on Investigations 2.4 Sexuality 2.5 Contemporaneous views of homosexuality 2.6 Experiences of men and women 3 Resistance 4 Legacy 5 Documentary 6 In popular culture 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Citations 8.2 General and cited references 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Lavender Scare 15 languages العربية Asturianu Català Čeština Español Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia עברית Nederlands Русский Српски / srpski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Lavender scare ) Mid-20th century U.S. government discrimination against homosexuals For the lavender scare in the state of Florida, see Florida Legislative Investigation Committee .

Joseph McCarthy and Roy Cohn during the Army–McCarthy hearings Part of a series on LGBTQ people LGBTQ Lesbian Gay Bisexual Transgender Queer Sexual orientation and gender Aromantic Asexual Gray asexual Aegosexual Demisexual Biology Bisexual Pansexual Demographics Environment Fictosexual Gender fluid Gender identity Gender role Gender modality Gender nonconforming Homosexual Intersex Non-heterosexual Non-binary Queer Queer heterosexual Questioning Sexual identity Sex–gender distinction Trans man Trans woman Transgender Transsexual Two-spirit History General Timeline Same-sex marriage Homosexuality Movements Gay liberation Same-sex unions Stonewall riots Identities Lesbian Bisexual Transgender Intersex Culture Business Coming out Community African-American Dyke March Events Awareness periods Largest events Gay village Media Bury your gays Films New queer cinema Periodicals LGBTQ culture in New York City Pride Pride Month Parade Queer art QPR and QPP Same-sex relationship Cross-sex relationship Slang Polari Socialization Subcultures Transgender in NYC Symbols Flags Takatāpui Moe aikāne Tourism Rights Adoption Civil union Decriminalization Gender self-identification Intersex Legal recognition of non-binary gender Marriage Military service Parenting Rights by country or territory Sexuality Trans rights Yogyakarta Principles Health MSM and Blood donation restrictions / HIV LGBTQ medical organizations Reproduction Mental health Transgender health care Gender-affirming hormone therapy Gender-affirming surgery Gender transition Legal status of gender-affirming healthcare Misinformation Suicide Societal attitudes Allonormative amatonormative Cisnormative Heteronormative Comphet Opposition to LGBTQ rights 21st century UK anti-trans 2020s US anti-LGBTQ Grooming conspiracy theory Media portrayal Religion & LGBTQ Homosexuality Trans people Sexual diversity Stereotypes Issues Acephobia Arophobia AIDS stigma Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric Biphobia Bullying Censorship Closeted Outing Criminalization Domestic violence Erasure Straightwashing Bisexual Lesbian Trans Gay bashing Gayphobia Heteropatriarchy Heterosexism Homophobia Liberal Intersex discrimination Legality of conversion therapy Lesbophobia Suicide Youth vulnerability Migration Mixed-orientation marriage Racism Sexualism Transphobia Non-binary people Trans men Trans women Violence Trans people Academic fields and discourse Communism & LGBTQ rights Gender studies Lesbian feminism Lavender linguistics LGBTQ conservatism In the US Queer anarchism Queer studies Queer theory Social construction of gender Socialism & LGBTQ rights Transfeminism Transgender studies Travesti LGBTQ portal v t e Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e The Lavender Scare was a moral panic about homosexual people in the United States government which led to their mass dismissal from government service during the mid-20th century. It contributed to and paralleled the anti-communist campaign which is known as McCarthyism and the Second Red Scare .

[ 1 ] Gay men and lesbians were said to be national security risks and communist sympathizers, which led to the call to remove them from state employment.

[ 2 ] It was thought that due to the stigma around homosexuality, gay people were vulnerable to blackmail , which could lead to a breach in national security.

[ 3 ] Lesbians were at less risk of persecution than gay men, but some lesbians were interrogated or lost their jobs.

The Lavender Scare normalized persecution of homosexuals through bureaucratic institutionalization of homophobia. Former U.S. Senator Alan K. Simpson wrote: "The so-called 'Red Scare' has been the main focus of most historians of that period of time. A lesser-known element and one that harmed far more people was the witch-hunt McCarthy and others conducted against homosexuals." [ 4 ] Etymology [ edit ] The term for this persecution was popularized by David K. Johnson 's 2004 book which studied this anti-homosexual campaign, The Lavender Scare . The book drew its title from the term "lavender lads", used repeatedly by Senator Everett Dirksen as a synonym for homosexual males. In 1952, Dirksen said that a Republican victory in the November elections would mean the removal of "the lavender lads" from the State Department .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The phrase was also used by Confidential magazine, a periodical known for gossiping about the sexuality of politicians and prominent Hollywood stars.

[ 7 ] History [ edit ] Well before the congressional investigations of 1950, U.S. institutions had already developed an intricate and effective system of regulations, tactics, and personnel to uncover homosexuals that would become enforcement mechanisms during the Lavender Scare.

[ 8 ] Naoko Shibusawa states this system was related to a general expansion of the bureaucratic state during the late nineteenth century, with institutions that increasingly systematically categorized people as unfit or fit, including homosexuals in the unfit category along with people who were designated as "criminally insane" or "morally depraved", even though they did not consistently take regulatory action on this until later.

[ 3 ] Margot Canaday and Michael S. Sherry have stated that Cold War homophobia (as well as a "moral sex panic" that dates back to the Great Depression) occurred in a context of "perceived shifts in gender relations, race relations, the ongoing dislocations of late capitalism, continuing urbanisation, economic and foreign crises, post-war adjustment, and the entrenchment of a consumer society and culture allegedly dominated by women." [ 3 ] Despite this, exclusion of gays from the civil service, on the other hand, did not seem to be considered prior to the Cold War. In contrast to the military, the State Department was unconcerned about gays in war. The issue was not on the public's radar, either, except perhaps in the sense of perceptions of the diplomatic corps as consisting of effete, privileged types.

[ 3 ] In 1947, at the beginning of the Cold War and the heightened concern about internal security, the State Department began campaigns to rid the department of communists and homosexuals, and they established a set of "security principles" that went on to inspire the creation of a dual loyalty -security test which became the model for other government agencies, as well as the basis for a government-wide security program under President Dwight D. Eisenhower 's administration.

[ 9 ] Under the criteria of the State Department's security principles, "disloyal" persons included communists, their associates, and those guilty of espionage, along with persons known for "habitual drunkenness, sexual perversion, moral turpitude, financial irresponsibility or criminal record," and were to be denied federal employment.

[ 9 ] With the inclusion of "sexual perversion" among those considered unsuitable for federal employment, discrimination against homosexuals was implicitly built into State Department policy, and it was grandfathered into federal governmental protocol and procedure. Between 1947 and 1950, over 1700 applicants to federal jobs were denied the positions due to allegations of homosexuality.

[ 10 ] The language of the Lavender Scare was purposely vague as instead of being referred to directly, homosexuals and perverts were often called "moral weaklings," "sexual misfits," "moral risks," "misfits," "undesirables," or persons with "unusual morals." The euphemistic term "security risk" was thought by many people at the time and many historians since assumed to be simply a lesser version of a Communist — someone with Communist sympathies but no outright party connections.

[ 11 ] "Loyalty risk" and "security risk" were considered very similar or essentially different terminology for the same thing. But 'when defining the difference between a loyalty risk and a security risk, government officials typically explained that "loyalty" involved a current state of mind, a willful desire to betray secrets, while "security" involved behaviors or associations that might lead one inadvertently or unwillingly to betray secrets in the future.

[ 11 ] Thus, the government and state department gave themselves the ability to expel government officials without any evidence of them being a communist, but by purely the risk they might be due to inadvertent tendencies and possibilities.

Even before the 1947 establishment of State Department security principles, the United States military had developed discriminatory policies targeting gay men and lesbians. In 1940, President Roosevelt and his Selective Service advisers were convinced by psychiatrists of the need to implement screening programs to determine the mental health of potential soldiers as to reduce the cost of psychiatric rehabilitation for returning veterans.

[ 12 ] Although the initial plan for psychiatric screenings of military recruits included no direct references to homosexuality, within a year, direct references were added – this development in military bureaucratic processes contributed towards the momentum of the military's preoccupation with homosexuality during World War II.

[ 13 ] The new psychiatric screening directives and procedures introduced to the military the idea that homosexuals were unfit to serve in the armed forces because they were mentally ill: a change from the military's traditional way of approaching homosexuality as a crime.

[ 14 ] During World War I , punishment of homosexual soldiers was first codified in American military law, and during World War II, final regulations were declared and homosexuals were banned from all branches of the military in 1943.

[ 15 ] Despite all of the regulations, the need for troops allowed for loopholes regarding the acceptance/rejection of homosexuals to fight in war. Around 4,000–5,000 out of 18 million men that had been in consideration were turned away.

[ 3 ] Those serving in the military were ordered to report homosexual acts by other soldiers that were serving. Between two thousand and five thousand soldiers were suspected to be homosexuals in the military, where women were discharged at a higher rate than men.

[ 16 ] If the influx of people into Washington, D.C. during the New Deal created the urban and professional environments that allowed a gay and lesbian subculture to flourish, then World War II accelerated the process: for many lesbians and gay men, the war was a national coming out experience.

[ 17 ] Mobilization for World War II and the war experience gave birth to a new addition to the American social urban landscape – the lesbian and gay community. To many Americans, this visible homosexual subculture seemed to prove their suspicions that the war had loosened puritanical moral codes, broadened sexual mores and certainly represented a viable threat to ideals of puritanical gender roles , heterosexuality, and the nuclear family . After the war, as families were united and as Americans struggled to put their lives back together, a national narrative rigorously promoted and propagated idealized versions of the nuclear family, heterosexuality, and traditional gender roles in the home and the workplace.

[ 18 ] In February 1950, Senator Joseph McCarthy claimed 205 communists were working in the State Department, Undersecretary of State John Peurifoy said that the State Department had allowed 91 homosexuals to resign.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Only two of these were women.

[ 21 ] Following this, the administration of President Harry Truman was accused of not taking the "threat" of homosexuality seriously enough. In June 1950, an investigation by the Senate began into the government's employment of homosexuals. The results were not released until December, but in the meantime federal job losses due to allegations of homosexuality increased greatly, rising from approximately 5 to 60 per month.

[ 10 ] On April 19, 1950, the Republican National Chairman Guy George Gabrielson said that "sexual perverts who have infiltrated our Government in recent years" were "perhaps as dangerous as the actual Communists".

[ 22 ] The danger was not solely because they were gay, however. Homosexuals were considered to be more susceptible to blackmail and thus were labeled as security risks.

[ 23 ] McCarthy hired Roy Cohn as chief counsel of his Congressional subcommittee. Together, McCarthy and Cohn – with the enthusiastic support of the head of the FBI , J. Edgar Hoover – were responsible for the firing of scores of gay men and women from government employment, and strong-armed many opponents into silence using rumors of their homosexuality.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] In 1953, during the final months of the Truman administration, the State Department reported that it had fired 425 employees for allegations of homosexuality.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] While the Secretary of State Dean Acheson reportedly defended the employees of the State Department, calling McCarthy's antics a "filthy business", the department as a whole responded to the allegations against it with a concentrated effort to remove homosexuals from its ranks.

[ 30 ] McCarthy often used accusations of homosexuality as a smear tactic in his anti-communist crusade, often combining the Second Red Scare with the Lavender Scare. On one occasion, he went so far as to announce to reporters, "If you want to be against McCarthy, boys, you've got to be either a Communist or a cocksucker ." [ 31 ] At least one recent historian has argued that, by linking communism and homosexuality with psychological imbalance, McCarthy was employing guilt-by-association when evidence for communist activity was lacking.

[ 32 ] Political rhetoric at the time often linked communists and homosexuals, and common beliefs among the public were similar, stating that both were "morally weak" or "psychologically disturbed," along with being godless and undermining traditional families.

[ 33 ] For example, McCarthy spoke on the Senate floor about two individual people, "Case 14" and "Case 62," as communists who were "unsafe risks" which he directly linked to their homosexuality.

[ 33 ] He said a top intelligence official had told him "every active communist is twisted mentally or physically," and he implied that these people were vulnerable to recruitment by communists because of their "peculiar mental twists" of homosexuality.

[ 33 ] Due to the image of the State Department now being tainted with homosexuality, many male employees became self-conscious about the possibility of being perceived as homosexual. They often refused to be seen in pairs, and made statements confirming their heterosexuality when introducing themselves. For example, one unnamed employee often said at parties, "Hi, I'm so-and-so, I work for the State Department. I'm married and I have three children." [ 34 ] Executive Order 10450 [ edit ] In 1953, President Eisenhower signed Executive Order 10450 , which set security standards for federal employment and barred homosexuals from working in the federal government. The restrictions set in place were cause for hundreds of gay people to be forcibly outed and fired from the State Department.

[ 35 ] The executive order was also the cause for the firing of approximately 5,000 gay people from federal employment; this included private contractors and military personnel. Not only did the victims lose their jobs, but also they were forced out of the closet and thrust into the public eye as lesbian or gay.

Specifically, Truman's loyalty program had been extended through this executive order: "sexual perversion" was added to a list of behaviors that would keep a person from holding a position in government. There were many new regulations and policies put into place to detect and remove gay, lesbian, and bisexual people. The new procedures to search out homosexuals were frequently used to interview and look for signs of sexual orientation. They also looked at places these individuals frequently visited, such as gay bars, and they even found people guilty by association. If their friends or family showed signs of being homosexual, they might also be suspected.

[ 36 ] By the mid-1950s, similar repressive and oppressive policies had gone into effect in state and local governments which extended the prohibitions on the employment of lesbians and gay men to cover twelve million workers – more than twenty percent of the United States labor force – who now had to sign oaths attesting to their moral purity to get or to keep their jobs.

[ 35 ] During the Vietnam War draft , men sometimes attempted to exploit Executive Order 10450 in order to avoid national military service - often by claiming to be homosexual, lying about being homosexual, adopting exaggerated stereotypical mannerisms of gay men , or providing letters from psychiatrists. While this was sometimes successful, other times men were sometimes drafted in spite of their proclaimed homosexuality. This was likely from a demand to fill draft quotas and out of concern that they were attempting to fraudulently dodge the draft.

[ 37 ] In 1973, a federal judge ruled a person's sexual orientation could not be the sole reason for termination from federal employment, [ 38 ] and, in 1975, the United States Civil Service Commission announced that they would consider applications by gays and lesbians on a case-by-case basis. Executive Order 10450 stayed partly in effect until 1995 when President Bill Clinton rescinded the order and put in place the " don't ask, don't tell " policy for admittance of gays into the military.

[ 39 ] In 1998, the order's language concerning employment and sexual orientation was also repealed when Clinton signed Executive Order 13087 . And, in 2017, the order was explicitly repealed when President Barack Obama signed Executive Order 13764.

[ 40 ] Association of communism with "subversives" [ edit ] See also: Communism and LGBT rights § Association of communism with homosexuality by anti-communists Both homosexuals and Communist Party members were seen as subversive elements in American society who all shared the same ideals of antitheism , rejection of bourgeois culture and middle-class morality, and lack of conformity. They were also seen as scheming and manipulative and, most importantly, would put their own agendas above others in the eyes of the general population.

[ 41 ] McCarthy also associated homosexuality and communism as "threats to the 'American way of life'." [ 42 ] [Homosexuals and communists] were perceived as hidden subcultures with their own meeting places, literature, cultural codes, and bonds of loyalty. [They] were thought to recruit the psychologically weak or disturbed [and] many believed the two were working together to undermine the government.

[ 1 ] David K. Johnson notes that without an idealized traditional American moral fiber, any citizen could succumb to immoral temptations such as homosexuality; and they could ultimately be seduced by communism.

[ 43 ] The association of homosexuality with communism proved to be a convenient political tool to develop and implement homophobic discriminatory policy throughout the federal government. It was easy to convince a Congress dictated by a communist containment policy to respond to the perceived homosexual menace because they were already viewed to be not only subversive social elements of American culture, but subversive political elements. Homosexuality was directly linked to security concerns, and more government employees were dismissed because of their homosexual sexual orientation than because they were left-leaning or communist. George Chauncey noted that: "The specter of the invisible homosexual, like that of the invisible communist, haunted Cold War America," and homosexuality (and by implication homosexuals themselves) were constantly referred to not only as a disease, but also as an invasion, like the perceived danger of communism and subversives.

[ 44 ] According to Naoko Shibusawa, visions of the larger world and America's role in it played into the heightened fear and loathing of gays during this period.

[ 3 ] Shibusawa states that the supposed threat in the rise of homosexuality utilised by competing political economies was compounded by an ideological element to the wave of homophobia that produced the Lavender Scare in post-war America with its connection to empire. Notions about sexuality were part of the narratives that shaped worldviews, defined relationships, and guided action; [ 3 ] agitation about potentially traitorous gays, moreover, derived also from efforts to distinguish American civilization or modernity, not only from the Soviets, but also from the "masses" of the decolonizing world.

[ 3 ] According to Shibusawa, Americans had been convinced that moral decline was inevitable since the Enlightenment period and thought that the narrative of a successful advance toward progress and modernity always ended badly; since the country's earliest days, Americans looked for signs of "overcivilization," and increase in homosexuality was seen as a sign of overcivilization.

[ 3 ] Shibusawa states that sexuality was an elemental way in which hierarchies of power were rationalized in an imperialist framework: who was civilized/uncivilized or worthy/unworthy, and that, by the mid-twentieth century, these rationalizations were deeply informed by a Freudian theory that was ideological but taken and implemented as if it were purely objective science.

[ 3 ] Because of this, states Shibusawa, many domestically believed the United States now played a vital role "stabilising" the global arena formerly controlled by the European imperial powers, and such became a recurring theme in the larger public discourse. He states this was evident not only in the Luce media, but also in another widely read publication: the magazine Reader's Digest, which served pedagogical, nationalist, and internationalist purposes during the Cold War.

[ 3 ] Senator Kenneth Wherry similarly attempted to invoke a connection between homosexuality and anti-nationalism . He said in an interview with Max Lerner : "You can't hardly separate homosexuals from subversives." Later in that same interview, he drew the line between patriotic Americans and gay men: "But look, Lerner, we're both Americans, aren't we? I say, let's get these fellows [closeted gay men in government positions] out of the government." [ 45 ] The term "Homintern" was coined in the 1930s, possibly by Cyril Connolly, W. H. Auden, or Harold Norse, as a camp term playing off of "Comintern" ( Communist International ). It was first used to describe an imagined group of gay men who controlled the art world, and later used in reference to "a fantastical gay international that sought to control the world". In 1952, an article written by R. G. Waldeck argued that this conspiracy was a real and important reason to expel homosexual people from the State Department, even more important than the possibility of blackmail, and this article was read into the Congressional Record and cited by others.

[ 3 ] While the Mattachine Society was founded by Harry Hay , a former member of the Communist Party USA, Hay resigned from the society when the membership condemned his politics as a threat to the organization he had founded.

[ 46 ] Subcommittee on Investigations [ edit ] The Subcommittee on Investigations was a subcommittee of the Committee on Expenditures in Executive Departments . This subcommittee chaired by Democratic Senator Clyde R. Hoey from 1949 to 1952 investigated "the employment of homosexuals in the Federal workforce." [ 47 ] A related report, known as the Hoey Report, stated that all of the government's intelligence agencies "are in complete agreement that sex perverts in Government constitute security risks." [ 48 ] The congressional Wherry-Hill and Hoey Committee investigation hearings were held between March and May, and July and September 1950 respectively. Republican Senator Kenneth Wherry and Democratic Senator Lester Hill formed a subcommittee to make preliminary investigations into the "Infiltration of Subversives and Moral Perverts into the Executive Branch of the United States Government." [ 49 ] No records of the Wherry-Hill investigation survive beyond press coverage and two published reports.

[ 33 ] One such report contained the statements of the head of the DC Metropolitan Police Department vice squad, Lieutenant Roy Blick, who testified that 5,000 homosexuals lived in Washington, D.C., and that around 3,700 were federal employees.

[ 33 ] Lt. Blick's comments, which were speculative at best, further fueled the media storm surrounding the gays-in-government controversy; the Wherry-Hill preliminary investigation convinced the Senate to launch a full-scale congressional exploration.

The recommended investigation was assigned to the Committee on Expenditures in Executive Departments, led by Senator Clyde Hoey, and the full Senate unanimously authorized the investigation into sexual perversion in the federal workforce; with outrage mounting to astronomical heights, no Senator dared speak out against it lest they risk their political career.

[ 50 ] Investigating the "Employment of Homosexuals and Other Sex Perverts in Government," the subcommittee came to be known as the Hoey Committee and while the White House under President Truman was heavily involved in managing its methodology and processes, the driving force behind the congressional investigation of homosexuals was its chief counsel, former FBI agent Francis Flanagan.

[ 51 ] The Hoey Committee consulted with and heard testimony from law enforcement, judicial authorities, military and governmental security officers, and medical experts. Rather than uncovering any evidence of any federal employee being blackmailed into revealing state secrets on account of their homosexuality, the investigation uncovered considerable differences of opinion, even within the government, over federal policy of homosexual exclusion and over whether foreign government agents had ever attempted to blackmail homosexuals.

[ 48 ] The Hoey Committee's conclusive report, released in mid-December that year, ignored the ambiguities of testimony and deemed authoritatively that there was "no place in the United States Government for persons who violate the laws or the accepted standards of morality," especially those who "bring disrepute to the Federal service by infamous or scandalous conduct," stating that lesbians and gay men were "unsuitable" for federal employment because they were "security risks" as well as people engaged in illegal and immoral activities.

[ 52 ] The committee recommended that the military's policy and procedure should be used as the model; in the areas of explicit policies, standardized procedures, uniform enforcement, constant vigilance, and coordination with law enforcement agencies regarding homosexuals, the armed services set the precedent. Further, the Hoey Committee report stated that in the past, the federal government "failed to take a realistic view of the problem of sex perversion," and that to adequately protect the "public interest," the federal government must "adopt and maintain a realistic and vigilant attitude toward the problem of sex perverts in the Government." [ 53 ] The authoritative findings of the Wherry-Hill and Hoey Committee congressional investigations directly helped the Lavender Scare move beyond a strictly Republican rhetoric towards bipartisan appeal, and purging lesbians and gay men from federal employment quickly became part of standard, government-wide policy.

[ 53 ] The major purpose and achievement of the Wherry-Hill and Hoey Committees was the construction and promotion of the belief that homosexuals in the military and federal government constituted security risks who, as individuals or working in conspiracy with members of the Communist Party, threatened the safety of the nation.

[ 54 ] Sexuality [ edit ] When Cohn brought on G. David Schine as chief consultant to the McCarthy staff, speculation arose that Schine and Cohn had a sexual relationship.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] During the Army–McCarthy hearings, Cohn denied having any "special interest" in Schine or being bound to him "closer than to the ordinary friend." [ 56 ] Joseph Welch , the Army's attorney in the hearings, made an apparent reference to Cohn's homosexuality. After asking a witness, at McCarthy's request, if a photo entered as evidence "came from a pixie", he defined "pixie" as "a close relative of a fairy".

[ 56 ] Though "pixie" was a camera-model name at the time, the comparison to "fairy," a derogatory term for a homosexual man, had clear implications. The people at the hearing recognized the slur and found it amusing; Cohn later called the remark "malicious," "wicked," and "indecent." [ 56 ] McCarthy's allegiance to Cohn also raised suspicions that the relation between the senator and his chief counsel was not merely professional, or that McCarthy was blackmailed by Cohn.

[ 57 ] Earlier in 1952, Nevada publisher Hank Greenspun wrote that McCarthy "often engaged in homosexual activities" and was a frequent patron at the White Horse Inn, a Milwaukee gay bar. McCarthy's FBI file also contains numerous allegations, including a 1952 letter from an Army lieutenant who said, "When I was in Washington some time ago, [McCarthy] picked me up at the bar in the Wardman [Hotel] and took me home, and while I was half-drunk he committed sodomy on me." J. Edgar Hoover conducted a perfunctory investigation of the senator's alleged sexual assault of the young man; his approach was that "homosexuals are very bitter against Senator McCarthy for his attack upon those who are supposed to be in the Government." [ 58 ] [ 59 ] Additionally, Kinsey Institute author and researcher C. A. Tripp writes about McCarthy in his book The Homosexual Matrix , describing him as "predominantly homosexual". Tripp compares McCarthy's (and Cohn's) motivation behind the Lavender Scare to the anti-Semitism of certain Jews.

Contemporaneous views of homosexuality [ edit ] Washington, D.C., had a fairly large and active gay community before McCarthy launched his campaign against homosexuals, but as time went on and the climate of the Cold War spread, so too did negative views of homosexuals.

[ 60 ] Because social attitudes toward homosexuality were overwhelmingly negative and the psychiatric community regarded homosexuality as a mental disorder , gay men and lesbians were considered susceptible to blackmail, thus constituting a security risk. U.S. government officials assumed that communists would blackmail homosexual employees of the federal government to provide them classified information rather than risk exposure.

[ 61 ] The 1957 Crittenden Report of the United States Navy Board of Inquiry concluded that there was "no sound basis for the belief that homosexuals posed a security risk" and criticized the prior Hoey Report: "No intelligence agency, as far as can be learned, adduced any factual data before that committee with which to support these opinions" and said that "the concept that homosexuals necessarily pose a security risk is unsupported by adequate factual data." [ 62 ] The Crittenden Report remained secret until 1976. Navy officials claimed they had no record of studies of homosexuality, but attorneys learned of its existence and obtained it through a Freedom of Information Act request.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] As of September 1981, the Navy claimed it was still unable to fulfill a request for the Report's supporting documentation.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] Shibusawa states that the Lavender Scare's logic was circular: homophobia supposedly made gays vulnerable and potential victims of blackmail, but the era's policies of increasing homophobia theoretically made gays even more vulnerable to blackmail. Reducing the social opprobrium directed at gays as a solution to their potential disloyalty appears never to have been seriously considered. He states that this did not seem to matter because of the factual precedent of a gay U.S. government employee or military man being blackmailed into betraying his nation by the Soviet enemy—or even by the recent Axis enemies—had not actually occurred; it was the association between homosexuality and potential disloyalty which meant distinction between the two became blurred.

[ 3 ] According to Shibusawa, in other words, if one could see who the traitor was, then the traitor could not commit treason, and so to cope with this paradox, the federal government's security regulations thus tried "to localise treason as a surreptitious evil by making it a function of other patent evils." Thus, states Shibusawa, the State Department followed the logic of categorising together those with putatively undesirable traits - however illogical such categorizations might have actually been.

[ 3 ] Outside of government circles, the attitude to homosexuality was somewhat more relaxed, although no less negative. Amongst the general public, jokes about the perceived rampant homosexuality within the state department flourished, aided by satirical writers such as Westbrook Pegler .

[ 11 ] [ page needed ] These jokes made the very name of the state department synonymous with homosexuality, and reflected wider American fears that the state department was becoming emasculated and weak.

Significant to wider views of homosexuality in America during the lavender scare were the attempts to "clean up" public spaces from the supposed moral threat of gay people. This manifested in the 'Pervert Elimination Campaign'. The U.S. Park Police on October 1, 1947, began the initiative to arrest gay men in known cruising areas across District of Columbia parkland.

[ 67 ] While most of the men could not be brought before a judge, most were kept long enough to be profiled and documented into their own "pervert file", officiating the process somewhat.

[ 67 ] This practice impacted men from across all walks of life—by 1950, two hundred men had been arrested and more than five hundred apprehended without arrest as a result of the 'Pervert Elimination Campaign'.

[ 68 ] While this did have clear links to the idea that homosexual people in government were a threat to national security - the typical detainee was a young government clerk—this also demonstrates how the Lavender Scare went beyond purely concern with government workers and into the public lives of Americans.

[ 68 ] This practice demonstrates the impact of the Lavender Scare upon the wider contemporary LGBT community and how homophobic attitudes were able to enter government organisations beyond just the federal government.

According to John Loughery, author of a study of gay identity in the 20th century, "few events indicate how psychologically wracked America was becoming in the 1950s ... than the presumed overlap of the Communist and the homosexual menace." [ 41 ] The research of Evelyn Hooker , presented in 1956, and the first conducted without a polluted sample (gay men who had been treated for mental illness) dispelled the illusory correlation between homosexuality and mental illness that prior research, conducted with polluted sampling, had established. Hooker presented a team of three expert evaluators with 60 unmarked psychological profiles from her year of research. She chose to leave the interpretation of her results to others, to avoid potential bias. The evaluators concluded that in terms of adjustment, there were no differences between the members of each group. Her demonstration that homosexuality is not a form of mental illness led to its eventual removal from the American Psychiatric Association 's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders .

[ 69 ] Experiences of men and women [ edit ] Johnson argues that lesbians were at less risk of persecution than gay men because "lesbians have traditionally had less access to public space than men and therefore were less vulnerable to arrest and prosecution for their homosexuality." [ 70 ] However, women in governmental positions, such as Madeleine Tress , who worked for the Department of Commerce , were subject to an intense interrogation in April 1958 surrounding her sexuality which was subsequently followed by a confession of homosexual activity in her youth. Tress was forced to resign from her job.

[ 71 ] This continued in places of lower positions such as public servant units, most notably to Helen G. James . James faced intense examinations into her private and personal life on and off base by the OSI (Office of Special Investigation). Following her arrest, OSI investigators threatened to tell James' relatives and friends and forced her to sign her removal from the Air Force with an "undesirable" discharge.

[ 72 ] Gay men and lesbians were forced into an underground community due to investigations by the government into anyone suspected of being a homosexual. "Gay men and lesbians would serve as discreet character references for one another on security clearance checks." [ 73 ] "An unknown number of gay men and lesbians, stripped of their livelihoods, facing embarrassment and unemployment, took their own lives." [ 74 ] This highlights the impact this persecution had on individuals' psychological well-being.

Resistance [ edit ] Frank Kameny One of the first and most influential members of the gay rights movements, Frank Kameny , was thrust into unemployment because of his sexual orientation in 1957. He was working as an astronomer for the United States Army Map Service, but was fired as a result of the Lavender Scare and could never find another job in the United States federal government again. This led to Kameny devoting his life to the gay rights movement . In 1965, four years before the Stonewall Riots , Kameny picketed the White House on the grounds of gay rights.

[ 75 ] Kameny was also integral to setting up the Mattachine Society of Washington (MSW) in 1960.

[ 76 ] Distinct from the other Mattachine Societies established in California and other parts of the U.S. in the 1950s, Kameny's MSW held more militant values beyond assimilation into heterosexual culture.

[ 76 ] These values, in part, stemmed from Kameny's experiences of discrimination from Lavender Scare era policies.

[ 76 ] Accompanying Kameny in his activism was his co-founder for the MSW - Jack Nichols . Nichols was particularly interesting as he was the son of an FBI agent of the same name - Douglas Charles has written in depth on their relationship and how the potential embarrassment that Nichols' sexuality could have caused the FBI destroyed the relationship between the pair.

[ 76 ] This demonstrates the oppositional nature of governmental organisations and gay rights organisations at this time and how this animosity clearly seeped into the personal lives of those it affected - even those such as Nichols who did not fall victim to the Lavender Scare in losing his occupation.

[ 76 ] According to Lillian Faderman , the LGBT community formed a subculture of its own in this era, constituting "not only a choice of sexual orientation, but of social orientation as well." [ 77 ] The Mattachine Society and the Daughters of Bilitis , which formed the homophile movements of the U.S., were in many ways defined by McCarthyism and the Lavender Scare.

[ 41 ] They were underground organizations that maintained the anonymity of their members.

[ 41 ] A group of eight lesbians in San Francisco formed a group called Daughters of Bilitis in September 1955. It was initially set up as way 'to meet and interact with other lesbians in a safe environment.' [ 78 ] They later sought to change laws criminalising homosexuality.

The homophile movement, including the Daughters of Bilitis and the Mattachine Society, has been considered the predecessor to the lesbian and gay liberation movement of the late 1960s and early 1970s.

[ 79 ] Changes in popular culture also led to a rise in resistance against the homophobic nature of society. Fiction by authors including John Horne Burns , Truman Capote , Charles Jackson, Carson McCullers , Thomas Hal Phillips , Jo Sinclair , Tereska Torrès , and Gore Vidal led readers to question the nation's collective hostility to homosexuality. Homoeroticism became mainstream with the publication of physique photography magazines . In 1949, Cosmopolitan featured an article called "The Unmentionable Minority", which was about the struggle faced by homosexuals.

[ 10 ] Legacy [ edit ] Though the main vein of McCarthyism ended in the mid-1950s when the 1956 Cole v. Young ruling severely weakened the ability to fire people from the federal government for discriminatory reasons, [ 80 ] the movement that was born from it, the Lavender Scare, lived on. One such way was that Executive Order 10450, which was not rescinded until 1995, continued to bar gays from entering the military.

[ 39 ] Another form of the Lavender Scare that persisted was the Florida Legislative Investigation Committee , also referred to as the FLIC and the Johns Committee. The FLIC was founded in 1956 and was not disbanded until 1964. The purpose of the committee was to operate within Florida continuing the work of the Lavender Scare by investigating and firing public school teachers who were gay. During its active years the FLIC was responsible for more than 200 firings of alleged gay teachers. The FLIC was disbanded following the release of the Purple Pamphlet due to public outrage over its explicit and pornographic nature.

[ 81 ] It has also been suggested that contemporary attitudes towards LGBT people in America have been shaped by the Lavender Scare. The 'Pervert Elimination Campaign' and the criminalisation of gay men existing in public spaces demonstrates how attitudes towards LGBT people during the Lavender Scare shifted towards intolerance in public spaces.

[ 82 ] Brandon Andrew Robinson has suggested that this criminalisation of LGBT people in public spaces has impacted how LGBT people now exist within America.

[ 83 ] Robinson has said that acceptance of LGBT people depends on their ability to assimilate as far as possible into American ' heteronormative institutions', in part due to the intolerant attitudes that developed towards LGBT people within public life during the years of the Lavender Scare.

[ 83 ] In January 2017, the State Department formally apologized following suggestion by Senator Ben Cardin . Cardin also noted that investigations by the state department into homosexuality of federal employees continued as late as the 1990s.

[ 84 ] Documentary [ edit ] The Lavender Scare , directed by Josh Howard and narrated by Glenn Close , is a documentary film that recounts the events of the Lavender Scare. David K. Johnson is part of the project, as the film is based on his book. To help with funding, Josh Howard created a Kickstarter that met its goal in donations. The film was completed, screened at more than 70 film festivals around the world, and opened at theaters in New York City and Los Angeles in 2019.

PBS televised the film on June 18, 2019.

[ 85 ] In popular culture [ edit ] The 2016 opera Fellow Travelers , based on the 2007 novel by Thomas Mallon , is set in McCarthy-era Washington D.C. and centers on the love affair between two men working for the federal government during the Lavender Scare.

The 2019 alternate history series For All Mankind features two NASA employees who pose as a couple to evade the Lavender Scare.

The 2023 mini-series Fellow Travelers , also based on the 2007 novel by Thomas Mallon, centers on the decades-long romance between two men who first meet during the height of McCarthyism.

See also [ edit ] Sissy villain Advise and Consent Joseph Alsop Newton Arvin Blue discharge Boise homosexuality scandal Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 Executive Order 11478 Fellow Travelers (opera) Fellow Travelers (miniseries) Fruit machine (homosexuality test) Gay Purges (Canada) Gays and Lesbians in Foreign Affairs Agencies Honey trapping Homosexual seduction Is Homosexuality a Menace?

Walter Jenkins Last Night at the Telegraph Club LGBT history in the United States LGBT rights in the United States Martin and Mitchell Defection R. W. Scott McLeod Helen G. James Carmel Offie Samuel Reber Seduction of the Innocent Sexual orientation and the United States military Charles W. Thayer Arthur H. Vandenberg, Jr.

Wright Commission on Government Security Lester C. Hunt References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b "An interview with David K. Johnson author of The Lavender Scare: The Cold War Persecution of Gays and Lesbians in the Federal Government" . The University of Chicago Press. 2004.

Archived from the original on 2019-04-28 . Retrieved 2017-12-16 .

The Lavender Scare helped fan the flames of the Red Scare. In popular discourse, communists and homosexuals were often conflated. Both groups were perceived as hidden subcultures with their own meeting places, literature, cultural codes, and bonds of loyalty. Both groups were thought to recruit to their ranks the psychologically weak or disturbed. And both groups were considered immoral and godless. Many people believed that the two groups were working together to undermine the government.

^ Johnson 2004 , pp. 1–2 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Shibusawa, Naoko (September 2012). "The Lavender Scare and Empire: Rethinking Cold War Antigay Politics".

Diplomatic History .

36 (4): 723– 752.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-7709.2012.01052.x .

JSTOR 44376170 .

^ McDaniel, Rodger (2013).

"Prologue: 'Have You Considered My Servant Lester?' " .

Dying for Joe McCarthy's Sins: The Suicide of Wyoming Senator Lester Hunt . Cody, WY: WordsWorth. pp.

xiii– xxi.

ISBN 9780983027591 .

OCLC 839278347 .

^ Stephen J. Whitfield , The Culture of the Cold War , 2nd ed. (Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996), p. 44 ^ Byron C. Hulsey, Everett Dirksen and His Presidents: How a Senate Giant Shaped American Politics (University Press of Kansas, 2000), 48–49 ^ Samuel Bernstein, "Lavender Lads Bartone Babes", The Advocate , February 27, 2007. On the association of a variety colors with homosexuality, see Venetia Newall, "Folklore and Male Homosexuality", Folklore , vol. 97, no. 2, 1986, 126 ^ Johnson 2004 , p. 63 ^ a b Johnson 2004 , p. 21 ^ a b c Stein, Marc (2012).

Rethinking the Gay and Lesbian Movement . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-1-280-77657-1 .

OCLC 796932345 .

^ a b c Johnson 2004 .

^ Bérubé 1990 , p. 10 ^ Bérubé 1990 , p. 11 ^ Bérubé 1990 , p. 33 ^ Shilts, Randy (1994).

Conduct Unbecoming: Gays and Lesbians in the U.S. Military . New York: Fawcett Columbine Books. pp.

15– 17.

^ Swenson, Kyle (January 11, 2018).

"The Air Force expelled her in 1955 for being a lesbian. Now, at 90, she's getting an honorable discharge" .

The Washington Post .

ProQuest 1988830718 .

Archived from the original on 2019-11-06 . Retrieved 2019-10-31 .

^ Johnson 2004 , p. 51 ^ Bérubé 1990 , p. 258 ^ Representative Miller ( NE ).

"Homosexuals in Government" Archived 2018-06-30 at the Wayback Machine .

Congressional Record 96:4 (March 29, 1950), H4527 ^ "Thailand: Smiling Jack" .

Time . August 22, 1955.

Archived from the original on June 30, 2016 . Retrieved February 4, 2015 .

^ Johnson 2004 , p. 12 ^ "Perverts Called Government peril" .

The New York Times . April 19, 1950.

Archived from the original on May 14, 2016 . Retrieved June 3, 2022 .

^ "Today in history: State Department reveals purge of 91 homosexuals" .

Daily Kos .

Archived from the original on 2016-04-01 . Retrieved 2016-03-21 .

^ Johnson 2004 , p. 22 ^ McDaniel, Rodger (2013).

"Prologue: 'Have You Considered My Servant Lester?' " .

Dying for Joe McCarthy's Sins: The Suicide of Wyoming Senator Lester Hunt . Cody, WY: WordsWorth.

ISBN 9780983027591 .

OCLC 839278347 .

^ White, William S. (May 20, 1950).

"Inquiry by Senate on Perverts Asked" (PDF) .

The New York Times . Retrieved December 29, 2014 .

^ "The Legacy of Discriminatory State Laws, Policies, and Practices, 1945–Present" (PDF) . Williams Institute, UCLA. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2014-12-26 .

^ "126 Perverts Discharged" .

The New York Times . March 26, 1952.

Archived from the original on February 4, 2015 . Retrieved December 29, 2014 .

^ Berard, Lauren B., "Something Changed: The Social and Legal Status of Homosexuality in America as Reported by The New York Times " (2014). Honors Theses. Paper 357.

Archived 2014-09-14 at the Wayback Machine ^ Johnson 2004 , p. 71.

^ Cuordileone, K. A. (September 2000). " 'Politics in an Age of Anxiety': Cold War Political Culture and the Crisis in American Masculinity, 1949–1960".

The Journal of American History .

87 (2): 515– 545.

doi : 10.2307/2568762 .

JSTOR 2568762 .

^ Damousi, Joy; Plotkin, Mariano Ben (2012).

Psychoanalysis and Politics: Histories of Psychoanalysis Under Conditions of Restricted Political Freedom . Oxford University Press. p. 221.

ISBN 978-0-19-992316-8 .

^ a b c d e Adkins, Judith (Summer 2016).

" 'These People Are Frightened to Death': Congressional Investigations and the Lavender Scare" .

Prologue . Vol. 48, no. 2. pp.

6– 20.

Archived from the original on 2018-01-16 . Retrieved 2019-10-31 .

^ Johnson 2004 , p. 68 ^ a b Bérubé 1990 , p. 269 ^ "The Lavender Scare: The Cold War Persecution of Gays and Lesbians in the Federal Government" .

outhistory.org • It's About Time .

Archived from the original on 2019-11-01 . Retrieved 2019-10-31 .

^ "Psychiatry and Homosexuality Draft Exemptions during the Vietnam War" .

Nursing Clio . 2020-08-04.

Archived from the original on 2023-12-14 . Retrieved 2023-12-14 .

^ " Singer v. United States Civil Service Com'n | 530 F.2d 247 | 9th Cir. | Judgment" . CaseMine.

Archived from the original on 2021-06-24 . Retrieved 2021-06-19 .

^ a b "Clinton Issued Order Letting Gays Get Security Clearances 16 Years Ago Today" .

ThinkProgress .

Archived from the original on 2015-09-07 . Retrieved 2016-03-21 .

^ "Executive Order 13764: Amending the Civil Service Rules, Executive Order 13488, and Executive Order 13467 To Modernize the Executive Branch-Wide Governance Structure and Processes for Security Clearances, Suitability and Fitness for Employment, and Credentialing, and Related Matters" (PDF) .

Federal Register .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-07-20 . Retrieved 2017-08-05 .

^ a b c d Prono, Luca.

"McCarthyism" (PDF) .

glbtq.com .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-05-17 . Retrieved 2016-11-25 .

^ Carlson, Dennis. "Gayness, multicultural education, and community." Beyond black and white: New faces and voices in the U.S. Schools (1997): 233–256.

^ Johnson 2004 , p. 95 ^ Field, Douglas, ed. (2005).

American Cold War Culture . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 9780748619238 .

^ Lerner, Max, The Unfinished Country: A Book of American Symbols . Simon and Schuster, 1959 pp. 313–316.

^ Lillian Faderman; Stuart Timmons (2006).

Gay L.A.: A History of Sexual Outlaws, Power Politics, and Lipstick Lesbians . Basic Books. p.

113 .

ISBN 978-0-465-02288-5 . Retrieved May 8, 2015 .

^ Executive Session Hearing of the Subcommittee on Investigations . Series: Committee Papers, 1789–2015. 1950.

Archived from the original on 2022-08-31 . Retrieved 2016-06-16 – via National Archives and Record Administration.

^ a b Johnson 2004 , p. 114 ^ Bérubé 1990 , p. 264 ^ Johnson 2004 , p. 99 ^ Johnson 2004 , p. 103 ^ Charles 2015 , p. 94 ^ a b Charles 2015 , p. 95 ^ Bérubé 1990 , p. 267 ^ Wicker, Tom (2006).

Shooting Star: The Brief Arc of Joe McCarthy (1st ed.). Orlando, Fla.: Harcourt.

ISBN 015101082X .

OCLC 61204327 .

^ a b c d Miller, Neil (2005). "Chapter 18".

Out of the Past: Gay and Lesbian History from 1869 to the Present . Los Angeles, California: Advocate Books.

ISBN 978-1-55583-870-6 . Archived from the original on September 2, 2009.

^ Nichols, David A. (2017).

Ike and McCarthy: Dwight Eisenhower's Secret Campaign Against Joseph McCarthy . Simon & Schuster. p. 277.

^ "Joseph McCarthy FBI File, part 3 of 56 (part 2 of 28)" .

FBI Records: The Vault .

Archived from the original on 2022-02-14 . Retrieved 2022-02-14 .

^ Oshinsky, David (2019).

A Conspiracy So Immense: The World of Joe McCarthy . Free Press.

^ Johnson 2004 , p. 2 ^ Ayyar, Raj (January 1, 2004).

"Historian David K. Johnson: Exposes the U.S. Government's Anti-Gay Crusades" .

Gay Today .

Archived from the original on November 27, 2017 . Retrieved May 8, 2015 .

^ Bérubé 1990 , p. 282, The Report is dated December 21, 1956, to March 15, 1957.

^ Gibson 1978 , pp. 356–367 ^ Bérubé 1990 , p. 278 ^ Bérubé 1990 , p. 283 ^ Haggerty 2003 , p. 45, note 38 ^ a b Johnson, David K. (2009).

The Lavender Scare: The Cold War Persecution of Gays and Lesbians . University of Chicago Press. p. 59.

ISBN 9780226401966 .

^ a b Johnson, David K. (2009).

The Lavender Scare: The Cold War Persecution of Gays and Lesbians . University of Chicago. pp.

59– 60.

ISBN 9780226401966 .

^ "Evelyn Hooker, Ph.D.: September 2, 1907 – November 18, 1996" . UC Davis. Archived from the original on January 20, 1998 . Retrieved April 23, 2011 .

^ Johnson 2004 , p. 155 ^ Johnson 2004 , pp. 147–49 ^ "Viewing page 4 of 30 for project 36902 | Smithsonian Digital Volunteers" .

transcription.si.edu .

Archived from the original on 2024-01-27 . Retrieved 2024-01-27 .

^ Johnson 2004 , p. 153 ^ Johnson 2004 , p. 158 ^ "The Gay Civil Rights Movement Turns to Public Picketing" . The Rainbow History Project. Archived from the original on May 17, 2011 . Retrieved January 9, 2011 .

^ a b c d e Charles, Douglas M. (2017). " "A Source of Great Embarrassment to The Bureau": Gay Activist Jack Nichols, his FBI Agent Father, and the Mattachine Society of Washington".

The Historian (Kingston) .

79 (3): 504– 522.

doi : 10.1111/hisn.12585 .

S2CID 149293617 .

^ Faderman, Lillian (2012).

Odd Girls and Twilight Lovers: A History of Lesbian Life in Twentieth-Century America . United Kingdom: Columbia University Press. p. 157.

ISBN 9780231530743 .

^ Marino, M. M. (2009-06-01).

"Different Daughters: A History of the Daughters of Bilitis and the Rise of the Lesbian Rights Movement" .

Oral History Review .

36 (2): 296– 298.

doi : 10.1093/ohr/ohp077 .

ISSN 0094-0798 .

Archived from the original on 2021-06-02 . Retrieved 2021-05-31 .

^ Esterberg, Kristin G. "From Accommodation to Liberation: A Social Movement Analysis of Lesbians in the Homophile Movement".

Gender & Society .

8 (3): 424.

doi : 10.1177/089124394008003008 .

S2CID 144795512 .

^ " Cole v. Young , 351 U.S. 536 (1956)" . justia.com.

Archived from the original on 27 March 2019 . Retrieved 21 March 2018 .

^ "The Committee Documentary" . riches.cah.ucf.edu. Archived from the original on 2016-03-29 . Retrieved 2016-03-21 .

^ Johnson 2004 , pp. 59–64.

^ a b Robinson, Brandon Andrew. "The Lavender Scare in Homonormative Times: Policing, Hyper-incarceration, and LGBTQ Youth Homelessness".

Gender & Society .

34 (2): 213– 215 – via SAGE Journals.

^ "State Department Apologizes for the "Lavender Scare" Archived 2018-09-01 at the Wayback Machine , Jason Daley.

Smithsonian . January 10, 2017. Retrieved 5 February 2017 ^ "The Lavender Scare – Premieres Tuesday, June 18 on PBS" . PBS. May 14, 2019 . Retrieved June 21, 2019 .

General and cited references [ edit ] Bérubé, Allan (1990).

Coming Out Under Fire: The History of Gay Men and Women in World War Two . New York: The Free Press.

ISBN 9780743210713 .

OCLC 964232213 .

Charles, Douglas M. (2015).

Hoover's War on Gays: Exposing the FBI's "Sex Deviants" Program . Lawrence, KS: The University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 9780700621194 .

OCLC 935871924 .

Gibson, E. Lawrence (1978).

Get Off My Ship: Ensign Berg vs. the U.S. Navy . Vernon E. Berg III (illustrations). New York: Avon.

ISBN 9780380400713 .

OCLC 4457943 .

Haggerty, Timothy (2003).

"History Repeating Itself: A Historical Overview of Gay Men and Lesbians in the Military Before 'Don't Ask, Don't Tell' " . In Belkin, Aaron; Geoffrey Bateman (eds.).

Don't Ask, Don't Tell: Debating the Gay Ban in the Military . Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, Publishers. pp.

9– 49.

ISBN 9781588261212 .

OCLC 493627688 .

Johnson, David K.

(2004).

The Lavender Scare . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226401904 .

OCLC 921180945 .

Further reading [ edit ] Dean, Robert D. (2003).

Imperial Brotherhood: Gender and the Making of Cold War Foreign Policy . Culture, Politics, and the Cold War. Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts Press.

ISBN 978-1-55849-414-5 .

Gallo, Marcia M. (2006).

Different Daughters: A History of the Daughters of Bilitis and the Rise of the Lesbian Rights Movement (1st ed.). New York: Carroll & Graf, Publishers.

ISBN 9780786716340 .

OCLC 760125421 .

Gallo, Marcia M. (2007).

Different Daughters: A History of the Daughters of Bilitis and the Rise of the Lesbian Rights Movement (Reprint ed.). Emeryville, Calif.: Seal Press.

ISBN 9781580052528 .

OCLC 849670631 .

Kirchick, James (2022).

Secret City: The Hidden History of Gay Washington . New York: Henry Holt and Company.

ISBN 9781627792325 .

OCLC 1293451114 .

Excerpt .

Sherry, Michael S.

(2007).

Gay Artists in Modern American Culture: An Imagined Conspiracy . Chapel Hill, NC: The University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 9780807831212 .

OCLC 493592803 .

Montanarelli, Lisa (25 November 2007).

"They're Here, Queer and Art Pioneers in Sherry's 'Gay Artists' " .

San Francisco Chronicle . Retrieved 3 June 2022 .

Book review.

External links [ edit ] Longernecker v. Higley , December 22, 1955 The Lavender Scare , official website for documentary film Uniquely Nasty: The U.S. Government's War on Gays , Yahoo! News documentary film (2015) v t e LGBTQ people ( topic outline ) Academic fields Discourse LGBTQ topics in education Gender studies Lesbian feminism Linguistics Literature Gay Lesbian Transgender Psychology Queer studies Queer theory Transfeminism Community Culture Anthems Awards Literary Bars Gay Lesbian Bisexual community Businesses Coming out Community centers Cross-dressing Drag king Drag queen Events Awareness periods Film festivals Gay village Gay-friendly Icons Literature Music Media Bury your gays Films New queer cinema Periodicals Portrayal Organizations People Pets Pride Pride Month Pride parade Queerplatonic relationships Religious groups Rodeos Same-sex relationships Slang Slogans Sports Pride Nights Takatāpui Theatre Companies Tourism Symbols Black triangle Gaysper Labrys Lambda Pink triangle Rainbow plaque Pride flags Aromantic Asexual Bear Bisexual Gay flag of South Africa Gay men Intersex Leather Lesbian Non-binary Pansexual Rainbow Rainbow crossing Transgender Gender identities Sexual identities Sexual diversities Gender identity Androgyny Boi Cisgender Gender bender Gender nonconformity Khanith Man Non-binary / genderqueer Queer heterosexuality Theyby Transgender Akava'ine Trans man Transsexual Trans woman Mak nyah Woman Womxn Womyn Xenogender Third sex / Third gender Bakla Balkan sworn virgins Bissu Faʻafafine Fakaleitī Femminiello Hijra Kathoey Köçek Māhū Mukhannath Muxe Travesti Two-spirit Winkte Sexual identities Sexual orientations Asexual Bisexual Homosexual Aromanticism Asexuality Gray asexuality Demisexuality Aegosexuality Attraction to transgender people Banjee Bi-curious Fictosexuality Gay Gay men Heteroflexible Lesbian Monosexual Non-heterosexual Pansexual Queer Questioning Romantic orientation Same gender loving Sexual minority Tom / Dee Related Acronyms LGBTQ Detransition Effeminacy Erotic target location error Ex-gay Ex-ex-gay Female Gender and sexual diversity Gender assignment Gender binary Gender essentialism Gender expression Gender modality Gender neutrality Gender roles Gender transition Health Organizations Hermaphrodite Human female sexuality Human male sexuality Intersex Androgynos Tumtum Legal status of transgender people Male Men who have sex with men / Sexual practices between men Sex–gender distinction Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures Social construction of gender Straight ally Tomboy Transgender health care Misinformation Women who have sex with women / Sexual practices between women History LGBTQ history History of homosexuality History of gay men in the United States History of lesbianism Transgender history Timeline of transgender history Timeline of asexual history LGBTQ history timeline Migration Social movements Students History of Christianity and homosexuality History of same-sex unions Pederasty Category:LGBTQ history Pre-modern era Adelphopoiesis Ancient Egypt Ancient Greece pre-Columbian Peru Ancient Rome Medieval Europe 16th to 19th century Molly house Section 377 First homosexual movement 20th century Dance of the Forty-One Institut für Sexualwissenschaft Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany Cadet scandal Florida Legislative Investigation Committee Sea queens Compton's Cafeteria riot Stonewall riots Gay Liberation Front Handkerchief code Festival of Light action White Night riots Front homosexuel d'action révolutionnaire Florida orange juice boycott Operation Soap Epidemiology of HIV/AIDS ACT UP Section 28 Tasty nightclub raid Bar Abanicos police raid 21st century Timeline of same-sex marriage Lawrence v. Texas Russian anti-LGBTQ law Anti-Homosexuality Act, 2014 Rainbow wave Rainbow Night 2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States Rights and legal issues LGBTQ rights by country or territory Africa Americas Asia Europe Oceania List of LGBTQ rights articles by region LGBTQ rights topics Capital punishment for homosexuality Censorship of LGBTQ issues Civil unions and partnerships Criminalization of homosexuality decriminalization Hate crime laws Intersex human rights Military service Same-sex parenting Adoption Assisted reproduction Same-sex marriage Timeline Socialism Legal status of transgender people Transgender rights movement United Nations / Yogyakarta Principles La Francophonie Commonwealth of Nations LGBTQ rights movements Homophile Gay liberation LGBTQ rights groups LGBTQ rights activists Rainbow capitalism Separatism Gay Lesbian Sexual orientation — Medicine, science and sexology Autism and LGBTQ identities Biology Birth order Demographics Disability and LGBTQ identities Environment Homosexuality and psychology Homosexuality in the DSM Kinsey scale Klein Grid Life expectancy Neuroscience Prenatal hormones Sexual inversion Conversion therapy Split attraction model Sexual orientation identity Timeline of sexual orientation and medicine Societal attitudes Prejudice Violence Societal attitudes Amatonormativity Heteronormativity Heteropatriarchy Homonationalism Pinkwashing Gay panic defense Opposition to LGBTQ rights Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric LGBTQ stereotypes Suicide among LGBTQ people list Monuments and memorials Queerbaiting Homosexuality and religion Transgender people and religion Prejudice and discrimination Arophobia Acephobia Anti-gender movement AIDS stigma Biphobia Gayphobia Grooming conspiracy theory Heterosexism Homophobia Liberal homophobia Discrimination against lesbians Discrimination against non-binary people Racism Riddle scale SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Transmisogyny Transphobia Violence against LGBTQ people Corrective rape Capital punishment for homosexuality Gay bashing Violence against LGBTQ people History in the UK in the US Transgender people Unlawful killings Persecution of homosexuals in Nazi Germany Stop Murder Music LGBTQ portal Category v t e LGBTQ rights in the United States By entity Federal One, Inc. v. Olesen (1958) Executive Order 12968 Romer v. Evans (1996) Executive Order 13087 Lawrence v. Texas (2003) Matthew Shepard and James Byrd Jr. Hate Crimes Prevention Act Don't Ask, Don't Tell Repeal Act of 2010 Violence Against Women Act United States v. Windsor (2013) Executive Order 13672 Obergefell v. Hodges (2015) Pavan v. Smith (2016) Masterpiece Cakeshop v. Colorado Civil Rights Commission (2018) Bostock / Harris Funeral Homes / Altitude Express (2020) G.G. v. Gloucester County School Board (2020) Executive Order 13988 Respect for Marriage Act 303 Creative LLC v. Elenis (2023) Repealed or overturned federal laws Immigration Act of 1917 Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 Executive Order 10450 Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 Bowers v. Hardwick (1986) DoD Directive 1304.26 ("Don't ask, don't tell") Defense of Marriage Act Presidential Memorandum of August 25, 2017 States Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Federal district District of Columbia Tribal nations Navajo Nation Unincorporated territories American Samoa Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico U.S. Virgin Islands By type Adoption Age of consent Conversion therapy bans Hate crimes Housing discrimination Intersex rights Military Transgender Intersex Sexual orientation Employment discrimination by municipality State bans on local anti-discrimination laws Immigration Anti-LGBTQ curriculum laws Florida Parental Rights in Education Act Public accommodations Religious exemptions Same-sex unions Civil unions Domestic partnerships by municipality Marriage Transgender rights voting Bathroom bill Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Repealed or overturned U.S. state constitutional amendments banning same-sex unions Same-sex marriage law in the United States by state Sodomy laws in the United States Movements LGBTQ movements in the United States LGBTQ history in the United States History of violence against LGBTQ people in the United States 2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States Related Congressional Equality Caucus Lavender Scare Save Our Children LGBTQ people in prison Arnold Schwarzenegger and LGBT rights LGBT protests against Donald Trump Disney and Florida's Parental Rights in Education Act LGBTQ portal Category v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lavender_Scare&oldid=1298991981 " Categories : 1950s in LGBTQ history Aftermath of World War II in the United States Anti-communism in the United States Censorship of LGBTQ issues Conspiracy theories involving communism Discrimination against LGBTQ people in the United States History of LGBTQ civil rights in the United States Homophobia in the United States LGBTQ history in the United States LGBTQ-related conspiracy theories McCarthyism Moral panic Political history of the United States Anti-LGBTQ purges Socialism and LGBTQ topics Scares Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2024 This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 00:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lavender Scare 15 languages Add topic

