Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Notable people 2 Twin towns 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Villajoyosa 46 languages العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Bislama Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Interlingua Italiano ქართული Қазақша Ladin Lombard Magyar Malagasy مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Shqip Српски / srpski Svenska Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська Vèneto Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°30′19″N 0°13′58″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.50528°N 0.23278°W ﻿ / 38.50528; -0.23278 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about the town in Alicante. For the municipality in Zaragoza, see La Joyosa .

Not to be confused with Gioiosa .

Municipality in Valencian Community, Spain Villajoyosa La Vila Joiosa ( Valencian ) Villajoyosa ( Spanish ) Municipality Villajoyosa / La Vila Joiosa (official) Flag Coat of arms Nickname: La Vila Location of La Vila Joiosa Villajoyosa Show map of Valencian Community Villajoyosa Show map of Spain Villajoyosa Show map of Europe Coordinates: 38°30′19″N 0°13′58″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.50528°N 0.23278°W ﻿ / 38.50528; -0.23278 Country Spain Autonomous community Valencian Community Province Alicante / Alacant Comarca Marina Baixa Judicial district Villajoyosa / La Vila Joiosa Government • Mayor Marcos Enrique Zaragoza Mayor [ 1 ] ( PPCV ) Area • Total 20.45 km 2 (7.90 sq mi) Elevation 27 m (89 ft) Population (2018) [ 2 ] • Total 33,969 • Density 1,700/km 2 (4,300/sq mi) Demonym(s) viler , - a ( Val.

) vilero , - a ( Sp.

) jonense (locally, in disuse) Time zone UTC+1 ( CET ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC+2 ( CEST ) Postal code 03570 Official language(s) Valencian Spanish Website www.villajoyosa.com Villajoyosa ( Spanish: [biʎaxoˈʝosa] ), in Valencian : La Vila Joiosa ( [la ˈvila dʒoˈjoza] ), meaning "The Joyful Town", and officially Villajoyosa / La Vila Joiosa , [ 3 ] is a coastal town and municipality in the south of the Valencian Community , Spain , by the Mediterranean Sea . It is the historic and administrative capital of Marina Baixa county, and is located in the province of Alicante . The town is known locally simply as La Vila .

[ 4 ] It is the historic and administrative capital of the comarca of Marina Baixa and is located 32 km from the city of Alicante , in the coastal area known as Costa Blanca ( White Coast ). It has over three kilometers of beaches, including the Platja Centre (Central Beach), close to the town centre. The river of La Vila (incorrectly also known as Amadòrio) runs through the town.

The area is famous for its chocolate industry and tourism. One of the most popular tourist attractions is its Gothic Catholic church of the Assumption, with a Baroque altar piece. Another popular destination, the Royal Palm Casino (formerly Casino Costa Blanca), is now closed. The town's festival of Moros i Cristians , [ 5 ] celebrated at the end of July, was declared an International Tourist Interest Festival. Currently, this festivity commemorates a boat landing from the Berber pirates that was repelled by the population of the town.

[ 6 ] Platja del Paradís in La Vila Joiosa, by the Mediterranean Sea.

Notable people [ edit ] Marta Baldó , rhythmic gymnast and Olympic Champion (1996, Atlanta) José Catalá , footballer Lucía Cortez Llorca , tennis player Maisa Lloret , rhythmic gymnast Felipe Orts , road and cyclo-cross cyclist Maxim Kuzminov , Russian defector and helicopter pilot found dead in Villajoyosa Anthony Jung , footballer who was born in Villajoyosa, Spain, to a German mother and Spanish father. He emigrated at the age of three with his divorced mother to Germany.

Twin towns [ edit ] Vitré, Ille-et-Vilaine , France, since 1989 Quesada, Spain , since 2006 Bullas , Spain, since 2006 References [ edit ] ^ "Equipo de Gobierno Local de Villajoyosa" .

villajoyosa.com (in Spanish) . Retrieved 21 March 2024 .

^ Municipal Register of Spain 2018 .

National Statistics Institute .

^ "Villajoyosa mantiene su topónimo en castellano al retirarse la propuesta para eliminarlo del pleno" .

lasprovincias.es (in Spanish).

Las Provincias . 19 November 2020 . Retrieved 4 March 2024 .

^ Lonely Planet Costa Blanca Miles Roddis – 2002 – Page 216 La Vila Joiosa (Villajoyosa) postcode 03570 • pop 23,700 La Vila Joiosa ('Joyful Town') is, in fact, a fairly staid place for most of the year. Its patron saint is Saint Martha. Known to the locals simply as La Vila , it perks up in summertime, dons its glad rags and has a ...

^ Villajoyosa Moors and Christians Fiesta Archived 12 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine , alicante-spain.info ^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : "CRISTIÀ – Moros & Cristianos Villajoyosa 2017" – via YouTube.

External links [ edit ] Media related to La Vila Joiosa at Wikimedia Commons Official website Articles related to Villajoyosa / La Vila Joiosa v t e Municipalities of Marina Baixa L'Alfàs del Pi Altea Beniardà Benidorm Benifato Benimantell Bolulla Callosa d'En Sarrià Confrides Finestrat El Castell de Guadalest La Nucia Orxeta Polop Relleu Sella Tàrbena Villajoyosa / Vila Joiosa v t e Municipalities of the province of Alicante Agost Agres Aigües Albatera Alcalalí Alcocer de Planes Alcoleja Alcoy/Alcoi Alfafara Algorfa Algueña Alicante Almoradí Almudaina Altea Aspe Balones Banyeres de Mariola Benasau Beneixama Benejúzar Benferri Beniarbeig Beniardà Beniarrés Benidoleig Benidorm Benifallim Benifato Benigembla Benijófar Benilloba Benillup Benimantell Benimarfull Benimassot Benimeli Benissa Benitaxell Biar Bigastro Bolulla Busot Callosa d'en Sarrià Callosa de Segura Calp Campo de Mirra Castalla Castell de Castells Catral Cañada Cocentaina Confrides Cox Crevillent Daya Nueva Daya Vieja Dolores Dénia El Campello El Ràfol d'Almúnia El Verger Elche Elda Els Poblets Fageca Famorca Finestrat Formentera del Segura Gaianes Gata de Gorgos Gorga Granja de Rocamora El Castell de Guadalest El Fondó de les Neus Guardamar del Segura Hondón de los Frailes Ibi Jacarilla Jalón Jijona/Xixona L'Alfàs del Pi L'Alqueria d'Asnar L'Atzúbia La Nucia La Romana La Torre de les Maçanes La Vall d'Alcalà La Vall de Laguar Llíber Lorcha Los Montesinos Millena Monforte del Cid Monòver Murla Muro de Alcoy Mutxamel Novelda Ondara Onil Orba Orihuela Orxeta Parcent Pedreguer Pego Penàguila Petrel Pilar de la Horadada Pinoso Planes Polop Quatretondeta Rafal Redován Relleu Rojales Sagra Salinas San Fulgencio San Isidro San Miguel de Salinas San Vicente del Raspeig / Sant Vicent del Raspeig Sanet y Negrals Sant Joan d'Alacant Santa Pola Sax Sella Senija Teulada Tibi Tollos Tormos Torrevieja Tàrbena La Vall d'Ebo Vall de Gallinera Villajoyosa/La Vila Joiosa Villena Xàbia Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Israel Geographic MusicBrainz area Other IdRef Yale LUX This article about a location in the Valencian Community, Spain, is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Villajoyosa&oldid=1261255135 " Categories : Villajoyosa Seaside resorts in Spain Valencian Community geography stubs Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links Use dmy dates from December 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Valencian-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using infobox settlement with possible demonym list Pages with Spanish IPA Pages with Valencian IPA Articles containing Catalan-language text Commons category link from Wikidata All stub articles Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 5 December 2024, at 02:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Villajoyosa 46 languages Add topic

