Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Catholic usage Toggle Catholic usage subsection 1.1 Papal use 2 Anglican usage 3 Important Eastern Orthodox encyclicals 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Encyclical 45 languages Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Latina Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Vèneto 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Papal encyclical ) Doctrinal document in Christian churches An encyclical was originally a circular letter sent to all the churches of a particular area in the ancient Roman Church . At that time, the word could be used for a letter sent out by any bishop . The word comes from the Late Latin encyclios (originally from the Latin encyclius , a Latinization of Greek ἐγκύκλιος ( enkyklios ), meaning "circular", "in a circle", or "all-round", also part of the origin of the word encyclopedia ).

[ 1 ] The term is now primarily associated with papal encyclicals .

The term has been used by Catholics , Anglicans and the Eastern Orthodox Church .

Catholic usage [ edit ] Although the term "encyclical" originally simply meant a circulating letter, it acquired a more specific meaning within the context of the Catholic Church. In 1740, Pope Benedict XIV wrote a letter titled Ubi primum , which is generally regarded as the first encyclical. The term is now used almost exclusively for a kind of letter sent out by the pope.

[ 2 ] For the modern Catholic Church , a papal encyclical is a specific category of papal document, a kind of pastoral letter concerning Catholic doctrine, sent by the pope and usually addressed especially to patriarchs, primates, archbishops and bishops who are in communion with the Holy See . The form of the address can vary widely and may concern bishops in a particular area, or designate a wider audience.

[ 2 ] Papal encyclicals usually take the form of a papal brief because of their more personal nature as opposed to the formal papal bull .

Like most papal documents the title of the encyclical is usually taken from its first few words (its incipit ). They are usually written in Latin unless particularly addressed to the Bishops or the church of one region. Papal encyclicals not in Latin include the 1931 Italian Non abbiamo bisogno against Italian fascist suppression of groups like Catholic Action , and the 1937 German Mit brennender Sorge against the Nazi idolization of race and nation.

Papal use [ edit ] See also: Lists of papal encyclicals In the encyclical Humani generis , Pope Pius XII held that papal encyclicals, even when they are of ordinary magisterium , can nonetheless be sufficiently authoritative to end theological debate on a particular question: It is not to be thought that what is set down in Encyclical letters does not demand assent in itself, because in this the popes do not exercise the supreme power of their magisterium.  For these matters are taught by the ordinary magisterium, regarding which the following is pertinent: "He who heareth you, heareth Me." (Luke 10:16); and usually what is set forth and inculcated in Encyclical Letters, already pertains to Catholic doctrine.  But if the Supreme Pontiffs in their acts, after due consideration, express an opinion on a hitherto controversial matter, it is clear to all that this matter, according to the mind and will of the same Pontiffs, cannot any longer be considered a question of free discussion among theologians.

[ 3 ] Catholic social teaching has advanced 19 encyclicals. On social issues, Pope Leo XIII promulgated the encyclical Rerum novarum (1891), which was followed by Quadragesimo anno (1931) of Pius XI and Centesimus annus (1991) of John Paul II .

Pope Pius XII issued ten encyclicals , mostly after 1945, three of them protesting against the Soviet invasion of Hungary which suppressed the Hungarian Revolution in 1956: Datis nuperrime , Laetamur admodum and Luctuosissimi eventus .

Pope Paul VI published an encyclical Humanae vitae on the topic of birth control .

Anglican usage [ edit ] Amongst Anglicans the term encyclical was revived in the late 19th century. It is applied to circular letters issued by the English primates .

Important Eastern Orthodox encyclicals [ edit ] Encyclical of the Eastern Patriarchs (1848) Patriarchal encyclical of 1895 Patriarchal encyclical of 1920 Patriarchal encyclical of 2012 [ 4 ] [ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Apostolic letter (disambiguation) References [ edit ] ^ Rice, Doyle (16 June 2015).

"The papal encyclical: What is an 'encyclical'?" .

USA Today .

^ a b "Encyclical" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

^ Humani generis ^ Simon as, Marlise (3 December 2012).

"Orthodox Leader Deepens Progressive Stance on Environment" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 30 August 2017 .

^ "Message by H.A.H. Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew upon the Day of Prayer for the Protection of Creation (01/09/2012)" . Archived from the original on 29 May 2015.

Sources [ edit ] The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (3rd. ed.), p. 545.

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Encyclical ".

List of papal documents at the Theology Library Papal Encyclicals at GCatholic www.papalencyclicals.net , texts of most of the encyclicals from recent centuries v t e Papacy Episcopate of the bishop of Rome Jurisdiction Holy See ( full communion ) Pope Leo XIV as bishop of the Diocese of Rome primacy history Vatican City ( index , outline ) Enclaved in Rome , Italy Lateran Treaty , 1929 along with extraterritorial properties of the Holy See Headquarters Vatican City : Apostolic Palace papal apartments Sistine Chapel Italy : Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran ( cathedra ) Major basilicas Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran St. Peter's Basilica Basilica of Saint Mary Major Basilica of Saint Paul Outside the Walls Titles ( Papal names ) His Holiness Bishop of Rome Vicar of Jesus Christ Successor of the Prince of the Apostles Supreme Pontiff of the Universal Church Patriarch of the West Primate of Italy Archbishop and Metropolitan of the Roman Province Sovereign of the Vatican City State Servant of the servants of God Symbols Coats of arms Coat of arms of the Holy See Cross Keys of Heaven Regalia and insignia Rota Umbraculum Proclamations Infallibility Apostolic constitution Bull list Encyclical Apostolic exhortation Ecclesiastical letter Interdict Activities Arbitration deposition Blessing " pontifical " Urbi et Orbi Conclave list Coronation Consistory Diplomacy Inauguration Mass High Mass Travel Vestments Camauro Falda Fanon Ferula Flabellum Mantle Mitre Mozzetta Pallium Ring of the Fisherman Shoes slippers Subcinctorium Tiara list Zucchetto Transportation Popemobile Sedia gestatoria Shepherd One Household Camerlengo Commander of the Swiss Guard Chaplain Palatinus papal majordomo Gentlemen Preacher Prefect Prelate of Honour Prince assistant Theologian Staff College of Cardinals cardinals list Roman Curia Apostolic Camera commissions for Vatican City State councils congregations dicasteries Synods Cappella Giulia Sistine Chapel Choir Related Antipope Western Schism Canonised popes Fat pope, thin pope Gammarelli Legends Orders, decorations, and medals Papabile Papal nobility " Black " Pontifical academy Pontifical colleges in Rome Major Seminary Pontifical university in Rome Popes by country Sexually active popes St. Peter's Square Swiss Guard Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Spain Latvia 2 Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Encyclical&oldid=1305328221#Catholic_usage " Categories : Papal encyclicals Christian literary genres Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 12:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Encyclical 45 languages Add topic

